CHRONOLOGY; OR, THE Historian's Vade-Mecum.

WHEREIN EVERY REMARKABLE OCCURRENCE IN ENGLISH HISTORY, WITH THE Principal
EVENTS of other HISTORIES, both Ancient and Modern, are alphabetically
recorded, and the Dates affixed;

TOGETHER WITH A Chronological List of the most EMINENT MEN in all Ages of the
World.

By the Rev. Dr. JOHN TRUSLER.

This Work gives a more enlarged View of ENGLISH HISTORY than can be comprised
in the smaller Edition; exhibits the Dates of Creation of all the PEERAGES; the
Invention and Progress of the several ARTS; and also a List of the KINGS of
every Country. etc. and the STATE-OFFICERS, BISHOPS, etc. for many Years back.

VOL. II.

For the LIBRARY and the USE of SCHOOLS.

THE TENTH EDITION, With the Additions of Five Years close reading.

LONDON: Printed for the AUTHOR, and sold by R. BALDWIN, No. 47,
Paternoster Row; where may be had, Price 1s. 6d.

The Pocket Edition.

[Price of the Two Volumes ^s. sewed.]

THE HISTORIAN's VADE-MECUM.
REMARKABLE OCCURRENCES, That could not be so well ranged Alphabetically.
Before Christ.
4004. ON the 4th day of the creation, at noon, according to Kennedy, the earth
first received its diurnal motion.

3015. Universal corruption overspread the world. Destruction of men resolved
on.

1921. The number of false divinities multiplying, gave occasion to the
vocation of Abraham.

604. By order of Necho, king of Egypt, some Phoenicians sailed from the Red
Sea round Africa, and returned by the Mediterranean.

331. A great many Roman ladies poisoned their husbands; 170 of them suffered
death for it. This was the first example of such a crime.

After Christ.
26. Nine hundred Roman soldiers taking shelter in a wood, having been cut to
pieces, after a noble defense, by the Frisians, a people beyond the Rhine, it
had such an effect on the Roman army in general, that 400 other soldiers that
had retreated within a house, fearing they should be betrayed, killed each
other to a man.

47. A new island appeared in the Aegean sea.

48. On enquiry, there was found to be 1,544,000 citizens in Rome.

70. After Jerusalem was taken, Fle^ defended a strong fortress with 960 of his
most desperate followers. When the battering ram had made a breach, they turned
their swords against their wives and children, and then against their own
breasts. They died to the last man.

74. On examination, several persons at Rome were found to be 100, 120, 130,
131, 1^2, 138, and 140 years old, and two were advanced to 150.

195. About this time, Plautianus, the favorite minister of Severus, emperor
of Rome, that his daughter, in her marriage with the oldest son of the emperor,
might be attended with a train of eunuch^, worthy of an Eastern queen, ordered
100 free Romans, some of them married and fathers of families, to be castrated.

200. About this period, it was the universal opinion both of the church and
the heretics, that the fallen angels, or demons, were the authors, the
patrons, and the objects of idolatry.

291. There was a darkness at Rome at noon day.

389. At Rome, a pillar of fire was seen in the air during 30 days.

424. The Persian army, fearing they should be cut off by the Romans, threw
themselves into the Euphrates, where upwards of 100,000 perished.

770. Constantine IV. sent for a great number of friars and nuns to Ephesus,
ordered them to change their black habits for white, and to destroy their
images; and, on their refusal, he commanded their eyes to be put out, banished
them, and sold their monasteries.

800. About this time, Charlemagne, emperor of Rome and Germany, instituted the
ceremony at Easter, of a Christian's giving a Jew a box on the ear, which was
afterward carried to that excess, as to destroy the Jew by the blow. This
custom, about the beginning of the 12th century, was changed into a tax, and
appropriated to the canons of St. Sernin.

996. Otho III. emperor of Germany, having beheaded an Italian count, on a
false accusation of his empress, that he had made an attempt upon her honor,
ordered her to be burnt alive, and condemned himself in a great fine, which he
paid to the count's widow.

998. Kyrie-cle^ and Paralipomenon were accounted two eminent saints of the
church, and he who could read Greek passed for a sorcerer.

1057. The custom for the lord to lie the first night with the bride of his
tenant, was very common in Scotland and the North of England; but it was
abrogated by Malcolm III. at the instance of his queen, and a mark was paid to
the lord in lieu of it. This custom was called Marcheta. The maiden rents paid
at Builth, in Radnorshire, are of the same kind. It was common in France, 1280.

1113. The water of the river Medway failed so much, that the smallest boats
could not float in the channel: also, the Thames was so low, between the Tower
and the bridge, that women and children waded it over; owing to so great an ebb
in the ocean, that laid the sands bare several miles from the shore, which
continued a whole day.

1114. During this year, several bridges in England, being then of timber, were
broken down by the ice, when it thawed, after a severe frost.

1120. One hundred and fifty nobles and the king's son lost at sea, in coming
from Normandy.

1140. In the civil wars in Germany, when the emperor Conrade had besieged the
town of Weinsberg, the wife of Guelpho, duke of Bavaria, solicited, as an
article of capitulation, a safe conduct to her and the other women in the town;
which being complied with, each woman took her husband on her back, and so
marched out of the place; the emperor was so pleased with the thought, that he
entertained them splendidly about his tent.

1160. Thirty German heretics came to England, to propagate their opinions.
They said they were Christians, but denied baptism, the Lord's supper, and
matrimony; for which they were condemned by a council of bishops at Oxford, and
delivered over to the secular arm. Accordingly, they were marked in the
forehead with a red-hot iron, whipped and thrust out of doors naked, in the
midst of winter, where, none daring to relieve them, an order having been
published to the contrary, they died of hunger and cold.

1179. At Christmas, at a place called Oxen-hall, near Darlington, in the
bishopric of Durham, the earth raised itself up like a lofty tower, and
remained several hours in that posture; on a sudden, it sunk down again, with a
horrid noise, and the earth so sucked it in, that it made there a deep pit,
which continues to this day. Mr. Camden supposes it to be the wells that are
now called Hell-kettles.

1189. The emperor of Germany, the kings of England, France, and Flanders, and
vast numbers of all ranks of people took the cross, and ran in shoals to the
Holy Land. Another expedition took place in 1204, under the comte de Montfort,
when the utmost barbarities were practiced: 30,000 heretics, inhabitants of
Beziers, were put to the sword; after the taking of Lavaur, the survivors were
thrown into the jakes of that city, the throats of 80 gentlemen were cut in
cold blood, and 400 heretics were committed to the flames, while the clergy
chaunted the hymn to the Holy Ghost.

1201. The custom of ringing a bell before the sacrament, when carried to the
sick, that all who heard might bow themselves, instituted.

1250. So great and so extravavant was the ostentation of the French nobility
about this time, that when Raymond V. count of Toulouse, held a full court, in
order to reconcile two contending powers; the environs of the castle were
ploughed and sewed with silver deniers, to the amount of 7500l. of the present
sterling money; victuals were dressed by wax lights, and Raymond de Venons
caused 30 of his horses to be burnt before the assembly.

1262. The two companies of goldsmiths and tailors of London fought, and
several were killed on both sides. The sheriffs appeased the tumult, and
thirteen of the most mutinous of them were hanged, as were thirty citizens of
Norwich, for quarrelling and fighting with the monks of that city. See Justs.

1267. The king's half brother killed a chief justice in Westminster Hall.

1293. October 14. Baliol, king of Scotland, appeared in Westminster Hall, in
person, by summons, to answer a complaint against him, of the earl of Fife,
where he pleaded his own cause.

1300. About this time, there was not an absolute prince in Europe.

1309. Elizabeth, daughter and heiress of the king of Bohemia, promised in
marriage to the emperor of Germany's son, but whose marriage was delayed, owing
to some suspicion of her virginity, came to the Diet at Spire, and there
presented herself to the emperor, etc. undressed to her shift, and in a noble
speech, offered to undergo an examination by any midwives or matrons his
majesty should appoint; insisting on having her innocence cleared. Such an
examination took place; the report was, she was innocent, and she was
immediately married in the presence of the whole diet.

1315. Perpetual rains and cold weather having not only destroyed the harvest,
but produced a mortality among the cattle, the parliament endeavored to
moderate the prices of provisions. The rates established were, of our present
money, as follows: for the best ox not corn fed, 2l. 8s. corn fed, 3l. 12s. a
fat hog two years old, 10s. a fat wether unshorn, 5s. shorn, 3s. 6d. a fat
goose, 7d. fat capon, 6d. Hen, 3d. two chickens, 3d. four pigeons, 3d. and
twenty-four eggs, 3d.

1327. Raw skins of cattle, suspended on stakes, were made use of, instead of
kettles, to boil meat, in the North of England and in Scotland.

1330. The rains were so violent, that the harvest did not begin till
Michaelmas. At Christmas, a westerly wind overthrew several houses and public
edifices, tore up trees by the roots, and did a vast deal of mischief.

1338. It rained almost continually, from the beginning of October to the
beginning of December, and then came a frost upon it, which lasted twelve
weeks; yet, though the corn was destroyed by it in a great measure, the war
with Scotland made money so scarce, that all sorts of grain were sold at a
reasonable rate.

1340. There were 30,000 students in the university of Oxford.

Parliamentary grants to the king were in kind: this year 30,000 sacks of wool
were in the grant.

1348. It rained from Midsummer to Christmas, so that there was not one day or
night dry together. This wet season caused great floods, and a pestilence,
which raged a whole year. The earth was at the same time barren, and even the
sea did not produce such plenty of fish as formerly. The mortality was so
great, that in the city of London two hundred bodies were buried every day in
the Charter-house-yard, besides those interred in other common burying places:
this lasted from Candlemas to Easter.

1351. The parliament joined the king in resisting papal encroachments, from
motives of interest; thus securing their own presentations to benefices, when
they happened to be in lay hands. This sewed the seeds of freedom and
independency in the church, and prepared the mind for the Reformation.

1353, was remarkable for the scarcity of corn and provisions in England and
France, occasioned by a great drought. It was called the dear summer; rye was
brought out of Zealand to support the poor, who otherwise must have perished
for want of sustenance.

1364. April 8, died at the Savoy, London, John, king of France.

1371. February 22, died at London, David, king of Scotland.

1380. About this time, in France there was a mode of emblazoning apparel. The
women wore their husbands' shields on the right side of their gowns, and their
own on the left. This fashion lasted near a century.

1381. When Richard IId's first wife came from Bohemia, she had no sooner set
foot on shore, than such a tempest immediately arose, as had not been seen in
many years. Several ships were dashed in pieces in the harbor, and the ship in
which the queen came over, was shattered and broken; which was the more
observable, because his second wife brought a storm with her to the English
coasts, in which the king's baggage was lost, and many ships of his fleet cast
away.

1392. A dolphin was taken near London Bridge ten feet long.

1407. Assassinations so much prevailed among the French and Scots, that the
duke of Orleans, only brother of the king of France, was murdered publicly in
the streets of Paris, and an eminent lawyer was allowed to plead in behalf of
it, before the peers of France, and maintain the lawfulness of assassination.
See anno 1414 below; Orleans, Duke of.

1414. It required all the eloquence and authority of the famous Gerson to
prevail on the council of Constance to condemn this proposition, That there are
some cases, in which assassination is a virtue more meritorious in a knight
than in an esquire, and more meritorious in a king than in a knight. See anno
1407 above.

1422. In the time of Henry VI. the king's palace was surrounded with little
barber's shops, which were under the direction of the barber of the household,
and the clerk of the ewry. There being then no carriages, and the streets being
dirty, it is probable, that those who went to court were first shaved and
dressed in these stalls or shops. A considerable see is also given to this
barber for shaving every knight of the bath, on his creation, as well as 40s.
from every baron, 100s. from every earl, and 10l. from every duke on the like
occasion.

1446. There were two unusual combats within lists appointed. The first was by
the prior of Kilmain, in Ireland, who impeached the earl of Ormond of high
treason, and the place of trial was in Smithfield; but the quarrel was taken up
by the king, and so decided without combat. The second was by one John David,
an armourer, who impeached his master, William Catur, of treason; but the
latter being, with his neighbors, intoxicated with wine, before he came to
fight, he was unhappily slain, without any just suspicion of guilt; but the
servant lived not long after him; for the next assize, he was hanged for felony.

1453. John Norman, mayor of London, the first that went to be sworn at
Westminster Hall by water.

1456. There were taken at Erith, within 12 miles of London, four wonderful
fishes, viz. two whales, one sword-fish, and one called Mors Marina.

1467. The people had an extravagant way of adorning their feet. They wore the
beaks or peaks of their shoes so long, that they incumbered themselves in their
walking, and were forced to tie them up to their knees; the fine gentlemen did
theirs with chains of silver, or silver gilt, and others with laces. This
ridiculous custom was in vogue ever since the year 1382, but now it was
prohibited, on the forfeiture of 20s. and the pain of cursing by the clergy.

The king concluded a league with the king of Castile, by which he allowed
certain Cotswold sheep to be transported into Spain, where the breed so
increased, that their fine wool has since proved very detrimental to England.

1477. June 16. George Nevil, duke of Bedford, was degraded by act of
parliament, and his titles taken from him, for not having sufficient fortune to
support the dignity.

1479. Robert Byfield, one of the sheriffs of London, was fined fifty pounds by
the court of aldermen, for affronting the lord mayor, which it seems was only
by kneeling too near him at prayers, at St. Paul's church.

1486. John Percival drank to by the lord mayor for sheriff, the first time of
this method of election.

1492. Pope Alexander VI. who began to reign this year, divided the whole
undiscovered world between the kings of Spain and Portugal.

1494. The body of one Alice Hackney, which had been buried 175 years, was
accidentally dug up in the church of St. Mary Hill, London; the skin was whole,
and the joints of the arms pliable. See anno 1772.

1505. Philip, king of Castile, in his voyage to Spain, was driven by a storm
on the coast of England, where he was detained till he had seer king Henry,
which he did, at Windsor.

1508. Sir Thomas More opposed a subsidy, with success, which is the first
opposition of this kind in the House of Commons.

About this time, it was customary to give the same title to clergymen not
graduates, as we do now to knights, to distinguish them from such as took a
master's degree, and were called Master, or Mr. Batchelors of Arts, in the
university of Cambridge, have, at this time, the addition of "Sir" prefixed to
their sirnames, for the same reason. See Knighthood.

1515. Dec. 14. Francis I. of France, signed the memorable contract with the
pope, by which he granted him the first year's income of the bishoprics and
other great benefices, and in consequence of this, obtained the right of
nomination to them.

1521. Francis I. of France, being wounded in the head, by something thrown
from a window, was obliged to cut off his hair, which, till that time, was worn
very long, and the beard close shaven; however, willing to gain on one side
what he lost on the other, he suffered his beard to grow long; and from thence,
it became a fashion to wear the hair short and the beard long, as may be
observed in many of our old pictures.

1531. One Roose, for poisoning 17 of the bishop of Rochester's family, two of
which died, was, by an act of parliament, made guilty of high treason, and put
to death, by being thrown into boiling water.

1540. By the Roman law, persons guilty of high treason might be tried even
after death, to punish their heirs, and this practice was now adopted by the
Scots; and as it was a maxim, that none could be tried if absent, the corpse or
bones were presented at the bar.

1541. The emperor Charles V. in an expedition against Algiers, having landed
part of his men, a most dreadful tempest arose, and in less than an hour, 15
ships of war and 140 transports, with 8000 men perished.

1544. Read, alderman of London, was pressed and sent for a common soldier, for
refusing to pay an arbitrary benevolence, assessed on the city by Henry VIII;
men being never pressed at that time, unless obnoxious to law.

1546. One Foxley, of the mint, slept 14 days and 15 nights, and could not be
waked.

1553. During the reign of queen Mary, a woman big with child was burnt at
Guernsey, for heresy; when, from the violence of the flames, the infant sprang
forth at the stake, and was preserved by the bye-standers; after some
deliberation of the priests, who assisted at the sacrifice, they cast it again
into the fire as a "young heretic."

1558. By act of parliament, the citizens' wives of London, not being
gentlewomen by descent, nor the wives of aldermen, were obliged to wear white
knit woollen three-cornered caps, with the peaks projecting three or four
inches beyond their foreheads: aldermen's wives made theirs of velvet.

1567. There were found, on enquiry, to be 4851 strangers of all nations in
London, of whom 3838 were Flemings, and only 58 Scots.

1571. About this time, the poor increased so fast, owing to no civil wars of
any consequence for a century before, and no drain to the colonies, that a poor
man was not suffered to marry till 30, nor a woman till 25 years of age.

1580. Queen Elizabeth issued a proclamation, prohibiting any new houses to be
built within three miles of the gates of the city of London.

1581. John Stubbs, of Lincoln's End, and one William Page, had their right
hands cut off, for publishing a book against queen Elizabeth's marriage with
the duke of Anjou.

1585. At this time, any peer might have as many proxies in the House of Lords
as he could procure; the earl of Leicester had ten at this time, and the duke
of Buckingham, in Charles Ist's time, had, in one parliament, twenty, which
occasioned a vote, that no peer should have above two proxies.

1597. One Dominique de Gourges, a private gentleman of Gascony, in France (the
Spaniards having massacred a colony of Frenchmen settled at Florida, and
declaring, they did not put them to death "as Frenchmen, but Lutherans"),
fitted out three ships at his own expense, made a descent at Florida, took
three forts, and hung up 800 Spanish soldiers and officers on trees, with this
inscription, "not as Spaniards, but as traitors, robbers, and assassins." Queen
Elizabeth offered this man the command of her fleet, but he died soon after.

1629. Claude Guillon, a poor gentleman, was beheaded at St. Claude, in
Burgundy, for eating a morsel of horseflesh on a fish day, not being able to
buy fish or other meat.

1634. The gentlemen of the four inns of court presented a masque to their
majesty's at Whitehall.

1649. April 16. The earl of Pembroke was returned for knight of the shire for
Bucks, prima impressionis, and his lordship was accordingly admitted into the
house with great respect.

1649. A very hot summer, with much thunder and lightning, which did great
mischief in Guienne, Bourdeaux, and other provinces in France, firing hay
ricks, granaries, etc. and destroying harvests. Several members of the
parliament of Aix were found dead in their beds, after a tempestuous night of
lightning, and the next day, the roof of the house where they assembled fell
down, and killed several. The people supposed it to be a judgment on those
provinces, for taking arms against their sovereign.

1654. July 11. Don Pantaleon de Sa, one of the Portuguese ambassadors,
beheaded, for shooting Mr. Greenaway.

1660. Oct. 10. Ten of the regicides were tried, and executed soon after.

1661. Jan. The carcases of Oliver Cromwell, Ireton, and Bradshaw, hanged at
Tyburn, buried under the gallows, and their heads set on Westminster hall.

Sept. 3. At a public entry of the Swedish ambassador, happened a rencounter
between the French and Spanish ambassadors, for precedence, and many of their
retinue were killed on Tower Hill; but the Spanish ambassador's coach at length
had the good fortune to get first.

1665. The clergy voluntarily gave up their right of taxing themselves in
convocation, which lessened the consequence of convocations.

1679. An act passed, for issuing new writs to elect members, in the room of
such as were preferred to any place under government.

About this time, the people had as large a portion of real liberty, as is
consistent with a state of society; and sufficient power in their own hands to
assert and preserve that liberty, if invaded by the royal prerogative.

1682. Messrs. Pilkington and Shute, sheriffs of London, sent to the Tower, for
continuing a poll after the lord mayor had adjourned it.

1683. The lord mayor and sheriffs arrested, at the suit of two pretended
sheriffs, April 24.

1686. The bishop of London suspended, for refusing to suspend Dr. Sharp, of
St. Giles's, afterward archbishop of York, at the king's desire.

1688. Mass ordered to be celebrated on board the fleet, which occasioned a
tumult, and the priests narrowly escaped being thrown overboard.

1690. Nov. 7. Twelve thousand Irish catholics transported themselves to France.

1707. An island, five miles round, rose in the Archipelago, from the bottom of
the sea.

1712. The doctrines of the Jacobite faction were chiefly favored by those in
power.

1716. Aug. 5. Two soldiers were whipped almost to death, and turned out of the
service, for wearing boughs in their hats on the 29th of May.

1717. George I. at the request of the university of Cambridge, suppressed the
ridiculous custom of burning in effigy the pope, the pretender, the earl of
Mar, the devil, and the duke of Ormond.

1719. This year gave birth to a very premature genius at Candiac, in France,
John Lewis Candiac, who knew the letters at 13 months old; read latin, either
in print or MS. at three years of age; translated it, at four; and at six, read
Greek and Hebrew, and was master of the principles of arithmetic, history,
geography, heraldry, and the science of medals, and had read the best authors
in almost every branch of literature. He died at Paris of a complication of
disorders, 1726, aged seven.

1720. Major Johnson, an officer on half pay at Dublin, went into his parlour,
gave his two sons (one ten years old, the other twelve) each a pistol, loaded
with ball, and ordered them to fire at each other, or he would run them through
with his sword; they shot each other dead upon the spot; their mother coming
into the room, on the report of the pistols, he stabbed her to the heart, and
then himself.

1727. The common council of London entertained at St. James's palace, by
George I.

1732. In April, Richard Smith, a bookbinder, prisoner in the King's Bench,
persuaded his wife to follow his example, and make away with herself, after
they had murdered their infant. They were found hanging in their chamber, and
the infant dead in the cradle. They left a paper, intimating they did it to
avoid the distresses of life.

Mariners of ships registered in the ports of London were in number 21,797.

1734. Above 100 captives, redeemed from slavery in Morocco by the king's
bounty, landed at Whitehall.

1746. The prizes taken from the French and Spaniards, in two years after the
commencement of the war in 1744, were estimated at 9,483,000l.

1758. Jan. 31. The Turkish caravan was attacked by the Arabs, and 60,000
persons were killed.

1760. Till this time, there was no such thing as a privy in Madrid: it was
customary to throw the ordure out of the window into the street at night, which
was removed by scavengers the next day. On an order from the king, that every
householder should build one, the people violently opposed it, as an arbitrary
proceeding, and the physicians remonstrated against it, alleging, that the
filth imbibed the unwholesome particles of the air, which otherwise would be
taken into the human body; his majesty, however, prevailed; but many of the
citizens, to keep their food wholesome, have erected their privies by the
kitchen fire.

1764. At Ashton, Gloucestershire, 16 acres of land, near 20 feet in depth,
slipped from the side of Breedon-hill, and entirely covered several pasture
grounds at the bottom.

1767. The grand jury of London found a bill against count Guerchy, the French
ambassador, for endeavo^ring to persuade M. de Vergy to assassinate the
chevalier D'Eon, and though he tried to obtain a noli prosequi, the attorney
and solicitor general overruled it. The chevalier was discovered afterward to
be a woman.

1771. March. The lord mayor and alderman Oliver sent to the Tower by the House
of Commons, for committing their messenger.

The Polly, Capt. Walsh, a Guineaman, struck on the bar of Bonny, and was soon
afterward attacked by the negroes. The captain finding he could not save his
ship, sent his crew off, shut himself up in his cabin, and when the king of
Bonny and all his people were got on board, to the number of 1500 and upwards,
he set fire to the powder-room, and thus, Sampson like, at his death, punished
the treachery of his assailants.

1772. February. Near Manheim, Germany, a mountain sunk twenty feet below the
surface of the surrounding land.

The body of Thomas Beaufort, duke of Exeter, uncle to Henry V. being found in
the ruins of the abbey at St. Edmunds Bury, having been buried 345 years, the
leaden coffin was opened, and the flesh, hair, toe and hand nails were perfect
and sound, as though he had not been dead six hours. On an incision being made
in the breast, the flesh cut as firm as in a living subject, and there was even
an appearance of blood. See anno 1494.

June. Trade had nearly received a fatal blow by the failure of several capital
houses.

1776. May 10. One Ellen Ellis, of Beaumaris, aged 72, was delivered of a
child. She had not had one for 25 years before.

1777. Two clergymen of the church of England, Dr. Dodd and Mr. Russen, were
this year hanged at Tyburn: the former, for a forgery; the latter, for a rape.
Another was hanged the year following, for murder. See Hackman, Dodd, Russen.

October 1. The first attempt to deliver a woman of an obstructed birth, by
cutting the symphisis, was made, with success, by Mons. Sigault, surgeon of
Paris. This happy mode of delivery in difficult cases being first discovered by
him, Dec. 1, 1768.

October 15. General Burgoyne, with an army of 6000 men, being surrounded by
16,000 Americans, near Albany, were obliged to surrender prisoners of war.

1780. The counties in general petitioned parliament, to make a reform in the
expenditure of the public money; and established associations, or committees of
correspondence, to attempt at lessening the power of the crown.

VULGAR HISTORICAL ERRORS, In which there is no TRUTH.
1. THAT surgeons and butchers may be challenged as jurors, on account of the
barbarity of their professions. See Surgeons, in Chronology. 2. That the old
statutes have prohibited the planting of vineyards, and the use of saw-mills.
3. That it is forbidden to marry in Lent. 4. That it is penal to open a
coal-mine, or to kill a crow within five miles of London, or to shoot with a
wind-gun, or carry a dark-lanthorn 5. That the king signs the death warrant (as
it is called) for the execution of a criminal. 6. That there is a statute, to
oblige the owners of asses to crop their ears, lest the length of them should
frighten the horses upon the road. 7. That a woman's marrying a man under the
gallows, will save him from execution. 8. That such as are born at sea, belong
to Stepney parish, London. 9. That any one may be put into the crown office,
for the most trifling injury. 10. That a man's taking his wife from the hands
of the priest, clothed only in her shift, when the marriage ceremony is
performing, exempts him from being liable to her engagements. 11. That there
was no land tax before William III. 12. That a negro, being baptized, becomes
immediately free.
A CHRONOLOGICAL LIST OF EMINENT PERSONS.
[ For such persons whose NAMES cannot be found here, look in VOLUME I.]

A.
AALST, Everard, Dutch painter (fruit and flowers), born, 1602; died, 1658.
Aaron born, 1575; died, 1453 before Christ. Abbot, archbishop of Canterbury,
shooting at a buck, at Bramshill Park, Hampshire, accidentally killed the
keeper, for which he was deemed incapable of any longer performing the
functions of a bishop, 1621, died August 3, 1633, aged 71. Abdalla, son of
Omar, flourished, 625. Abel born, in the third year of the world; killed by
Cain, 129, ditto, 3874 before Christ. Abelard, Peter, died, 1143, aged 62.
Abernethy, John, the dissenting minister, died, 1740, aged 60. Abu Bekr,
Mahomet's successor, died, 634, aged 63. Abulfeda, prince and geographer, died,
1345, aged 72. Accius, the poet, flourished, 143 before Christ. Achilles, the
Grecian general, died, 1184 before Christ. Adam created, Friday, October 28,
4004; died, 3034 before Christ, aged 930. Addison, Joseph, born, 1671, died,
June 17, 1719. Ado, the historian, died, 874. Agamemnon, the Grecian general,
died, after 904 before Christ. Agathias, the Greek historian, flourished, 565.
Agesilaus, king of Sparta, 400; died, 360 before Christ. Agis IV. king of
Lacedemon, put to death, 241 before Christ. Agricola, the Roman general, died
in 93, aged 56. Agricola, Rod. died, 1485, aged 43. Agrippa, king of Judea,
died in 44, aged 54, having reigned 24 years. Agrippa, Cornelius, the writer,
died, 1534, aged 48. Ahab killed at Ramoth Gilead, 897 before Christ. Ahaz
died, 726 before Christ. Ajax, son of Teucer, flourished, 1154 before Christ.
Ajax, son of Telamon, flourished, 1149 before Christ. Akenside, Dr. Mark, died,
June 23, 1770, aged 35. Alban, St. the first English martyr, suffered, 286.
Albani, Francis, Italian painter, died, 1660, aged 82. Alberoni, Cardinal,
prime minister of Spain, died, 1752, aged 88. Albertus Magnus, archbishop of
Ratisbon, born, 1205; died, 1280. Albinus, the anatomist, died, 198. Albumazer,
the Arabian astrologer, flourished, 841. Alceus, the lyric poet, flourished,
607 before Christ. Alceus, the tragic poet, flourished, 378. Alcibiades,
Athenian general, died, 404 before Christ, aged 46. Alcman, the Greek lyric
poet, flourished, 672 before Christ. Alexander ab Alexandro, a civilian of
Venice, flourished, about 1475. Alexander the Great born, 356; succeeded
Philip, 336; defeated Darius at the river Granicus, when all lower Asia
submitted to him, 334; founded the Grecian empire, 331; died at Babylon, March
21, 323 before Christ, aged 32. See Amazons. Alphonsus X. king of Castile,
author of the Alfonsine tables, died, 1284, aged 67. Alva, Duke of, governor of
the Low Countries, died, 1582, aged 74. Ambrose, St. born, 333; made bishop of
Milan, 374; died, 397. Ambrosius Aurelius chosen king of the Britons, 465;
crowned at Stonehenge; died, 508. Amos began to prophesy, 787 before Christ, in
the 37th year of Jeroboam II. king of Israel. Amphion. See Linus. Amyot, bishop
of Auxerre, born, 1514; died, 1595. Anacharsis, Scythian philosopher, lived,
about 554 before Christ. Anacreon, the Greek poet, died, 474 before Christ,
aged 85. Anastasius I. emperor of the East, died, 518, aged 87. Anaxagoras, the
Rhodian philosopher, died, 428 before Christ, aged 70. Anaxandrides, the comic
poet, flourished, 378 before Christ. Anaxarchus, the Greek philosopher,
flourished, 340 before Christ. Anaximander, the Greek philosopher, died, 547
before Christ, aged 64. Anaximenes, the Greek philosopher, lived, about 556
before Christ. Andre, Major, hanged by the Americans, charged with being a spy,
Oct. 2. 1780. Andrew, St. martyred, Nov. 30, 69; festival instituted, 359.
Andrews, bishop of Winton, born, about 1555; died, 1626. Andrews, St.
archbishop of, hanged at Stirling, 1571. Andronicus, peripatetic philosopher,
flourished, 100 before Christ. Angelo, Michael, Italian painter, died, 1564,
aged 89. Anhault, Rev. George, prince of, born, 1507; died, 1557. Anna Comnena,
daughter of Alexius, emperor of Constantinople, and authoress, born, 1083;
died, after 1118. Annibal, senior, Carthagenian general, died, 404 before
Christ. See Hannibal. Anselm, archbishop of Canterbury, died, 1109, aged 76.
Anson, Admiral lord, died, 1762. Anthony, Marc, the Roman general, died, 30
before Christ, aged 53. Anthony, St the Great, institutor of the monastic life,
died in a desert, Feb. 14, 356, aged 105. See Monkery. Antipater, the general,
died, 319 before Christ. Antisthenes, the Greek philosopher, lived, 395 before
Christ. Antoninus. See Caracalla. Antonius, Marc, the Roman orator, died, 87
before Christ, aged 56. See Octavia. Antony, of Messina, the first Italian who
painted in oil, died, about 1493. Anvari, the Persian poet, died, 1201.
Apelles, the chief of a sect called Apellites, appeared, 175. He was a disciple
of Marcion, and taught, that Christ's body was made up of all the heavens,
through which he passed, and which he returned at his ascension. Apelles, the
Greek painter, flourished, 334 before Christ. Apollinarius, the heresiarch,
bishop of Laodicea, flourished, 370. He taught, that the godhead and manhood in
Christ were so united, that his divinity suffered on the cross, equally with
his body. Apollodorus, of Damas, the architect, flourished, 104. Apollonius,
the geometrician, lived, 242 before Christ. Appian, the Roman historian,
flourished, in 143. Apuleius, of Medaura, the Platonic philosopher, flourished,
about 200. Aquapendente, the Italian physician, died, 1603. Aquila, who
translated the Old Testament into Greek, flourished, 128. Aquinas, St. Thomas,
the divine, died, 1274, aged 50. Aratus, the Greek poet, flourished, 278 before
Christ. Arbuthnot, Dr. born, 1681; died, 1735. Arcesilaus, the academic, died,
300 before Christ, aged 75. Archelaus, king of Macedon, patron of learning, 913
before Christ. Archias, the Greek poet, flourished, about 60 before Christ.
Archilochus, the Greek poet, inventor of Iambic verse, flourished, 686 before
Christ. Archimedes, of Syracuse, the mathematician, killed, 212 before Christ.
Aretin, Leonard, the Italian historian, died, 1443, aged 74. Aretine, Peter,
the satyrist, of Arezzo, died, 1556, aged 65. Arion, the Greek musician,
flourished, 620 before Christ. Ariosto, the Italian poet, born, 1474; died,
1533. Aristarchus, the tragic poet, alive, 453 before Christ, aged 100.
Aristarchus, the astronomer, died, about 280 before Christ, aged 81.
Aristaenetus, the Greek author, flourished, about 358. Aristeus, the Greek
poet, flourished, about 556 before Christ. Aristides, the Athenian general,
lived, 488 before Christ. Aristides, the Greek orator, flourished, about 120.
Aristippus, the Cyrenian philosopher, flourished, 392 before Christ.
Aristonicus strangled at Rome, by order of the senate, 126 before Christ.
Aristophanes, the Greek actor, died, 200 before Christ, aged 80. Aristotle,
prince of philosophers, died at Chalcide, 322 before Christ, aged 63. Arius.
See Arians, Vol. I. Arminius, a Dutch divine, died, 1608. From him the
Arminians took their name. Armstrong, John, M. D. the poet, died, Sept. 30,
1779. Arne, Mich. Mus. Dect. died, March 5, 1778, in years. Arnobius, the
rhetorician, flourished, 303. Arrian, the Roman historian, flourished, 150.
Arfaces I. king of the Parthians, who rescued Parthia from the Macedonian yoke,
died, 245 before Christ. See Artabanus, Parthia. Artabanus IV. last king of the
Parthians, conquered by Artaxerxes; died, 229. Artaxerxes, first king of
Persia, 229; died, 229 before Christ. Artemidorus, who wrote on auguries,
flourished, 146 before Christ. Artemisia, queen of Caria, who built the
mausoleum, a tomb to the memory of her husband Mausolus, flourished, 480 before
Christ. Arthur, king of Britain, died, 542, aged 70. See Salute, Vol. I.
Arviragus, a British king, flourished, in 80. Asaph, St. died, 590. Ascham, the
commonwealth's envoy at Madrid, murdered by the banished royalists, 1655.
Ascham, Roger, secretary to Mary and Elizabeth, born, about 1515; died 1568.
Ashmole, Elias, the antiquarian, born, 1617; died, 1692. Aspasia flourished at
Athens, 448 before Christ. Astruc, John, the French physician, born, 1684;
died, 1766. Athanasius, St. the first christian clergyman, made bishop of
Alexandria, 326; died, May 2, 373, aged 73. See Monkery, St. George. Athaeneus,
of Naucrates, the critic, flourished, 190. Athenagoras, the Athenian
philosopher, flourished, about 177. Atherton, bishop of Waterford, hanged at
Dublin, for bestiality, Dec. 5, 1640, aged 42. Atkins, Sir Robert, chief baron,
and writer, died, 1709, aged 88. Atterbury, bishop of Rochester, banished, for
conspiring, with the Pretender, against George I. June 18, 1723; died, 1732,
aged 69. Aubrey, John, the antiquary, born, 1626; died, about 1700. Augustine,
St. father of the Latin church, born, 354; baptized, 387; died, 431. Augustus,
king of Poland, died, 1733. Aulus Gellius, the Latin gramarian, flourished,
112. Aurengz^be, the Great Mogul, died, 1707, aged 90. Ausonius, the Latin
poet, died, after 392.
B.
BACCHUS was one of the earliest improvers of husbandry in India, and as such,
deified, about 1600 before Christ. See Wine. Bacchylides, the Greek poet, died,
480 before Christ. Bacon, Roger, called Friar, the astronomer, born, 1214;
died, 1292; his study at Oxford built in Stephen's reign. Bacon, Sir Francis,
lord chancellor, sent to the Tower, on a charge of bribery, 1622; died, April
9, 1626, aged 66. Bajazet defeated by Tamerlane, 1402; died, 1403. See
Constantinople, Vol. I. Baker, Sir Richard, author of the Chronicle, born,
1584; died, 1645. Balbinus. See Maximus. Balchen, Admiral, cast away in the
Victory, October, 1744. A thousand persons perished with him. Baldwin, emperor
of the East, died, 1206. Bale, bishop of Ossory, the historian, born, 1495;
died, 1563. Balsamon, canon law writer, died, 1214. Baltzar, Thomas, the
musician, flourished, 1658. Balzac, French writer, born, 1594; died, 1654.
Bancroft, a Lord-mayor's officer, died worth 30,000l. 1729, which is, by his
will, disposed of to charitable uses by the Draper's company. Barbarossa, the
famous corsair, flourished, 1535. Barclay, John, polite writer, died, 1621,
aged 37. Barclay, Robert, the quaker, born, 1648; died, 1690. Bardesanes, the
Syrian heresiarch, a disciple of Valentin, who added new errors, appeared, 163.
Barnabas, St. stoned, about 50. Barnard, Sir John, Lord Mayor of London, 1738;
died, 1764, aged 80. Barocci, of Urbin, history painter, born, 1528; died,
1612. Baronius, Cardinal, died, 1607, aged 69. Barrow, Rev. Dr. Isaac, died,
1677, aged 46. Barthius, Gaspar, a learned writer, born in Saxony, 1587; died,
1658. Bartholemew, St. martyred, August 24, 71; feast instituted, 1130.
Bartolomeo, Dutch painter (landscapes and animals), born, 1620; died, 1660.
Bartolomeo, French painter, born, 1469; died, 1517. Basil, St. founded his
order, 354; died, 378, aged 51. Basilides, the heresiarch, appeared, 105, who
taught, that there were 365 heavens peopled by God; that Christ had not a real
body, and was not really crucified. Basilius. See Bulgarians. Bassano, Italian
painter (landscapes and animals), born, 1510; died, 1592. Bautru, William,
French writer, born, 1588; died, 1665. Baxter, Reverend Richard, born, 1615;
died, 1691. Baxter, William, the grammarian, born, 1650; died, 1723. Bayard,
Chevalier, a French general, slain in battle, 1524, aged 48. Bayer, the
mathematician, died, 1627. Bail, Peter, author of the dictionary, died, 1706,
aged 59. Beamont, Francis, dramatic writer, born, 1585; died, 1615; Sir John,
the poet, his brother, died, 1628, aged 35. Beaton, Cardinal, archbishop of St.
Andrews, murdered by the disciples of Wishart, whom the cardinal had condemned
to the flames for heresy, May 28, 1546. Bid, the historian, died, 735, aged
70. Bedford, Duke of, regent and uncle to Henry VI. died at Rouen, Sept. 14,
1435. Bedford, J. duke of, died, 1771. Behmen, Jacob, the visionary, born in
Germany, 1575; died, 1624. Behn, Aphara, the poetess, died, 1689. Bek, the
Dutch portrait painter, died, 1656. Belidor, of Catalonia, military writer,
died, 1765, aged 70. Bellai, Cardinal du, died, 1560. Bellarmin, Cardinal, born
in Italy, 1542; died, 1621. Belleau, the French poet, born, 1528; died, 1577.
Belleisle, Marshal, and his brother, brought prisoners to Windsor castle, 1745.
The marshal died, 1761, aged 78. Bellin, the Italian painter, born, 1421; died,
1501. Bellisarius, the general, deprived of all his dignities, and imprisoned
by the emperor Justinian, for conspiring against his life, 561; died, 565.
Bembo, cardinal of Venice, the historian, died, 1547, aged 68. Benedict XIV.
Pope, a voluminous writer, born, 1675; died, 1758. Benedict, St. founder of the
Benedictines, died, 546, aged 66; the order instituted, 548. Bennari,
Genedetto, Italian painter, born, 1597; died, 1667. Benoit, Elias, French
historical writer, born, 1640; died, 1728. Benserades, the French poet, born,
1612; died, 1691. Bentivoglio, Cardinal, Italian historian, died, 1644, aged
65. Bentley, Reverend Dr. Richard, the critic, born, 1662; died, 1742.
Berenger, a French divine, died, 1088, aged 90. See Sacramentarians. Berille
bishop of Bosra, in Arabia, an heresiarch, who denied the divinity of Christ,
flourished, 241. Berkeley, bishop of Cloyne, died, 1753, aged 73. See Tar Water
Berkenhead, Sir John, political writer, born, 1615; died, 1679. Bernard, St. a
Latin writer, died, 1153, aged 62. Bernard, Reverend Dr. Edward, the
astronomer, born, 1638; died, 1696. Beroseus, the Chaldean historian,
flourished, 268 before Christ. Bertin, Nich. French painter, born, 1664; died,
1736. Betterton, the player, born, 1635; died, 1710. See Theater, Vol. I.
Beveridge, bishop of St. Asaph, the antiquarian, born, 1638; died, 1707. Beza,
Theod. who translated the Testament, born at Vezelai, 1519; died, 1605. Biddle,
John, the Socinian writer, born, 1615; died, 1662. Bidloo, the Dutch anatomist,
born, 1649; died, 1713. Birch, Reverend Dr. learned writer, killed by a fall
from his horse, 1768, aged 78. Blackmore, Sir Richard, physician and poet, died
in years, 1729. Blackstone, Sir William, judge, died, Feb. 14, 1780. Blaize,
Bishop, patron of the woolcombers, having invented the card for combing of
wool, suffered martyrdom in the reign of Dioclesian. Blake, Admiral, born,
1598; died, 1657. Blanchard, French painter, born, 1600; died, 1638. Bloemart,
Dutch painter, born, 1567; died, 1647. Blois, Peter, the historian, died, 1200.
Blount, Sir Thomas Pope, born, 1649; died, 1697. Blow, John, the musician,
born, 1648; died, 1708. Boccace, Italian poet, born, 1313; died, 1375.
Boerhave, Dr. Dutch physician, died, September 23, 1738, aged 69. Boethius,
Roman poet, beheaded, 524. Boileau, French poet, born, 1630; died, 1712.
Bolingbroke, Lord, the author, died, 1751, aged 73. Bolonese, Italian painter,
born, 1606; died, 1680. Bonarelli, Italian poet, born, 1563; died, 1608. Booth,
Barton, the player, born, 1682; died, May, 1733. Borgia, Caesar (the bastard
son of pope Alexander VI.), whose whole life was a scene of villainy, killed,
March 12, 1508. Borlase, Edmund, historical writer, died, after 1682. Boscawen,
Admiral, died, 1761. Bossu, Rene le, French writer, died, 1680. Bossuet, bishop
of Meaux, born, 1627; died, 1704. Both, Dutch painter (landscapes and animals),
born, 1600; died, 1650. Bouchard, bishop of Worms, died, 1022; one of the most
learned prelates of his time: his worldly effects consisted only of a hair
shirt, an iron chain, which served him for a belt, and three deniers in money.
Boufflers, Lewis, marshal de, died, 1711, aged 67. Bourdeloue, Lewis, French
preacher and writer, born, 1632; died, 1704. Bourdon, Sebastian, French
painter, born, 1616; died, 1671. Bourignon, Mad. the enthufiast, born, 1616;
died, 1680. Boursalt, Edme, French dramatist, born, 1638; died 1701. Bowmaker,
the Scotch historian, flourished, 1415. Boyer, the lexicographer, born, 1664;
died, 1729. Boil, Charles, earl of Orrery, writer and statesman, born, 1676;
died, 1731. See Orrery. Boil, John, earl of Orrery, critic and poet, born,
1707; died, 1762. Boil, Richard, earl of Cork, born, 1566; died, after 1643;
Roger, his fifth son, first earl of Orrery, soldier and writer, born, 1621;
died, 1679; Robert, his seventh son, the mathematician, born, 1627; died, 1691.
Braccelli, Genoese historian, flourished, 1435. B^^ddock, General, killed at Du
Quesne, July 9, 1755. Brady, Reverend Dr. Nicholas, born, 1659; died, 1726.
B^^^e, Tycho, the Danish astronomer, born, 1546; died, 16^1. B^y, Reverend Dr.
Thomas, born, 1656; died, 1741. B^^rewood, Edward, the mathematician, born,
1565; died, 1613. B^^gel, Peter, Dutch painter (rural sports), born, 1505;
died, after 1576; John, his son, painter (^^^dscape.), born, 1575; died, 1642.
B^^l, James de, French historian, born, 1528; died, 1614. Brewer, Anthony,
dram. poet, flourished, in the reign of Charles the First. Brook, Sir Robert,
law writer, died, 1558. Brook, Fulke Greville, lord, stabbed by an old
servant, September 30, 1628, aged about 70; he having shown this servant his
will, and not leaving him a legacy therein. Brown, Rev. Dr. political writer,
killed himself, Sept. 23, 1766, aged 50. Brown, Robert, founder of the
Brownists, 1580; died, 1630, aged 80. Brown, Thomas, humorous writer, died,
1704. Brown, William, the poet, born, 1590; died, 1645. Brown, Sir Thomas, a
learned writer, born, 1605; died, 1682. Brouwr, the Dutch painter (rural
sports), born, 1608; died, 1638. Brun, Charles le, French history painter,
born, 1618; died, 1691. Brutus, Lucius Junius, slain, 509 before Christ.
Brutus, Marcus Junius, who slew Caesar, killed at his own request, by his
friend Strato, 24 before Christ, aged 43. Bruyere, French writer, died, 1696,
aged 56. Bucer, Martin, the reformer, born, 1491; died, 1551. Buchannan,
George, Scots historian, born, 1506; died, 1582. Buck, Sir George, the
antiquarian, flourished, 1612. Buckingham, George Villiers, duke of, the poet,
born, 1627; died, 1688. Buckingham, John Sheffield, duke of, writer and
statesman, born, 1649; died, Feb. 24, 1721. Buckland, Ralph, died, 1612.
Budaeus, William, a learned writer, born at Paris. 1476; died, 1540. Budgell,
Eustace, polite writer, born, about 168^; drowned himself, 1736. Bunyan, John,
author of Pilgrim's Progress, born, 1628; died, 1688. Burkitt, Reverend
William, the commentator, born, 1650; died, 1703. Burleigh, Capt. murdered at
Winton, Feb. 10, 1648. Burleigh, or Burghley, Cecil, lord, the statesman, born,
1521; died, 1^98. Burnet, bishop of Sarum, born, 1643; died, 1715. Busby, Rev.
Dr. Richard, born, 1606; died, 1695. Butler, Samuel, author of Hudibras, born,
1612; died, 1680. Byng, Admiral George, shot at Spithead (for not engaging the
French flee^), March 14, 1757. Byrom, John, the poet, born, 1691; died, 1763.
C.
CADMUS, first king of Thebes, 1094 before Christ. Cadmus Milesius, first Greek
historian in prose, flourished under Cyrus, 544 before Christ. Caietano,
Scipio, co-temporary with Raphael, died, 1534. Caligula, the Roman emperor,
died, 41, aged 29. Callari, Gabriel, Italian painter, born, 1568; died, 1631.
Callimachus, the Greek architect, inventor of the Corinthian order, flourished,
540 before Christ. Callimachus, the Greek poet, died, 244 before Christ.
Callisthenes, the philosopher, died, 328 before Christ. Calli^tus, the
historian, died, 1327. Callot, James, French engraver, born, 1593; died, 1635.
Calmet, the learned French Benedictine, died, Oct. 25, 1757, aged 86.
Calprenede, French writer, died, 1663. Calvin, John, the reformer, and leader
of the Calvinists, who hold the same doctrine with the Prespyterians; he died
at Geneva, May 27, 1554, aged 45. Cambray, Fenelon, archbp. of, died, 1716,
aged 64. Camden, the historian, died, Nov. 9, 1623, aged 72. Camoens,
Portuguese poet, died, 1579, aged 50. Campanella, Thomas, the Italian
philosopher, born, 1568; died, 1639. Candaules, king of Lydia, 735 before
Christ. Cantacuzenus, emperor of Constantinople, and learned historian,
crowned, 1342; died, 1411, aged upwards of 100. Capriari, the Genoese
historian, died, 1646. Caracalla, alias Antoninus, assassinated, 217, aged 43.
Caracci, Annib. Italian painter (hist. and portraits), died, 1609, aged 40.
Caracci, Antonio, the painter, died, 1618, aged 35. Caracci, Augustino,
Bolognese painter, born, 1557, died, 1602. Caracci, Ludovico, Bolognese history
painter, died, 1619, aged 64. Caractacus, general of the Britons, defeated in
Wales, by Ostorius, a Roman general, and carried in Chains to Rome, 50.
Caradoc, the Welsh historian, died, after 1157. Caranus, first king of Macedon,
814 before Christ. Carausius born at St. David's; declared here emperor of Rome
288; killed, May, 295. Caravaggio, Polidoro de, Italian painter, born, 1495;
died, 1543. Caravaggio, Italian painter, died, 1609, aged 40. Cardan J^rom,
physician, and whimsical writer, born at Paris, 1501; died, 1575. Carew,
Thomas, the poet, died, 1639. Carinus, Roman emperor, murdered by a tribune,
May, 285. C^rlone, Genoese history painter, died, 1630. C^^^des, the Greek
philosopher, died, 128 before Christ, aged 85. Ca^pocrates, the heresiarch,
appeared, 125. He adopted the principles of Semin Magus, and the Nicolaites.
Carte, Thomas, English historian to 1654, born, 16^6; died, 1724. Cartwright,
William, the poet, born, 1611; died, 1644. Carry, Robert, universal chronologist
to 1677; died, 1688. Cassander, king of Macedon, flourished, 298 before Christ.
Cassandra flourished, 1149 before Christ. Casaubon, Isa^^, the critic, born at
Geneva, 1559; died in London, 1614; Merric, his son, born, 1599; died, 1671.
Casimir III. king of Poland, died, 1370, aged 60. Cassini, the astronomer, born
at Piedmont, 1625; died, 1712. Castagno, Tuscan painter, born, 1410; died,
1480. Castelvetro, Lewis, the critic, born at Modena, 1505; died, 1571.
Castiglione, Benedict, Italian painter, born, 1616; died, 1670. Cato killed
himself, February 5, 45 before Christ, aged 48. Catullus, Latin poet, born at
Verona, 87; died, 11 before Christ. Caxton, William, first English printer,
died, 1494, aged 82. Cazes, French painter, born, 1676; died, 1754. Cecrops,
first king of Athens, 1556 before Christ. See Athens, Areopagus. Celsus, the
physician, flourished, 20. Centlivre, Susan, dram. writer, died, December 1,
1723. Ceres, the heathen goddess of plenty, flourished, 1030 before Christ.
Cervantes, Michael de, Spanish writer, baptized at Alcala of Henares, Oct. 9,
1547; died, April 23, 1616. Caesar. See Julius, Vol. I. Chambers, Ephraim,
author of the dictionary, died, 1740. Chapman, George, the poet, born, 1557;
died, 1633. Chares of Lindus, sculptor, who erected the Colossus at Rhodes,
flourished, 288 before Christ. See Rhodes. Charles XII. of Sweden, killed in
battle, 1718, aged 36. Charron, Pierre, French writer, born, 1541; died, 1603.
Chartres, Colonel, convicted of a rape, 1730. Chatham, William, earl of, born,
Nov. 15, 1708; died, May 11, 1778. Chatterton, Thomas, the poet, an
extraordinary genius, born at Bristol, Nov. 1752; poisoned himself, August 24,
1770. Chaucer, the poet, born, 1328; comptroller of the port of London, 1399;
died, 1400. Cheke, Sir John, Latin writer, born, 1514; made Greek professor at
Cambridge, 1540; died, 1557. Cherilus, the Greek poet, flourished, 479 before
Christ. Chesterfield, Philip, earl of, political writer, born, 1695; died,
1774. Chiabrera, the Italian poet, born, 1552; died, 1638. Chillingworth, Rev.
William, controversial writer, born, 1602; died, 1644. Chilo, one of the seven
sages of Greece, flourished, 556 before Christ. Chiras, the chemist,
flourished, 1680. Christopher, St. suffered martyrdom, 254. Chrysippus, the
Stoic philosopher, died, 207 before Christ, aged 73. Chrysostom, St. made
archbishop of Constantinople, 398; banished, 404; died, Sept. 14, 407, aged 53.
Chubb, Thomas, polemical writer, born, 1679; died, 1747. Chudleigh, Lady Mary,
the poetess, born, 1656; died, 1710. Churchhill, Reverend Charles, the
satyrist, born, 1731; died, 1764. Churchyard, Thomas, the poet, died, about
1570. Cibber, Colley, the laureat, born, 1671; died, 1757. Cibber, Mrs. the
actress, died, 1766, aged 57. Cicero born, 107; made an oration against Verres,
70; made his second oration against the Agrarian law, 65; banished Rome, April,
58; assassinated, 43 before Christ. Cignani, Car. Italian history painter,
born, 1628; died, 1719. Cimabue, Italian painter, died, 1300, aged 69. Cimon,
the Athenian general, died, 449 before Christ, aged 51. Cincinnatus Quinctius
made dictator of Rome, from the plough, born, 485; died, 376 before Christ.
Cinna, the Roman consul, murdered, 84 before Christ. Cinnamus, Greek historian
of the Eastern empire, from 1118 to 1143; died, after 1183. Clarendon, Hyde,
earl of, lord chancellor, the historian, banished for mal-administration,
November 12, 1667; died, Dec. 7, 1674. Clarke, Reverend Dr. Samuel, polemical
writer, born, 1675; died, 1729. Claude of Lorraine, landscape painter, born,
1600; died, 1682. Claudian, the Latin poet, born at Alexandria, about 395.
Cleanthes, the Stoic philosopher, died, 240 before Christ, aged 99. Clearchus,
the Greek historian, flourished, 323 before Christ. Clemens Alexandrinus,
father of the church, flourished, 192. Clemens Romanus, father of the church,
cotemporary with St. Paul, martyred, 100. Cleomedes, Greek mathematician,
flourished, 540 before Christ. Cleopatra, queen of Egypt, 50; killed herself,
30 before Christ, aged 41. Cleophontes, painter of Corinth, flourished, 654
before Christ. Clerc, Sebastian le, French engraver, died, 1724. Clerc, John
le, Dutch philosopher, died, 1736, aged 79. Clive, Robert, lord, killed
himself, Nov. 1774. Cobham. See Oldcastle. Cockburne, Catherine, the writer,
died, May 11, 1749. Codrington, Christopher, writer, and founder of All Souls
library, Oxon, born at Barbados, 1668; died, 1701. Codrus, the last Athenian
king, voluntarily gave his life for the good of his country, after reigning 21
years, 1095 before Christ. Cohorn, the Dutch engineer, born, 1632; died, 1704.
Cokaine, Sir Aston, born, 1608; died, 1683. Coke, Lord chief justice, born,
1549; died, 1634. Coals, Elisha, the grammarian, born, 1640; died, 1680. Colet,
Dr. John, founder of St. Paul's school, born, 1466; died, 1519. Coligny,
Admiral de, of France, born, 1516; wounded treacherously, August 22, 1572;
killed at the massacre of Paris the same year. Which see. Collier, Jeremy, the
historian, born, 1650; died, 1726. Coluthus, the Greek poet, flourished, about
518. Commandine, Frederic, the mathematician, born at Urbino, 1509; died, 1575.
Commines, philosopher of Flanders, died, 1509, aged 63. Commodus, Roman
emperor, wounded by an assassin, 183; murdered, Dec. 31, 192. Conca, Sebastian,
Italian painter, born, 1676; died, 1764. Conde, The great prince of, killed in
cold blood, after the battle of Jarnac, 1569, aged 39: Henry, his son, poisoned
at St. John D'Angeli, 1588, aged 35. Confucius, Chinese philosopher, born, 551;
died, 479 before Christ. Congreve, William, dram. author, born, 1672; died,
1729. Conon, of Samos, Greek historian, flourished 300 before Christ.
Constantin, tyrant of Gaul, died, 411. Constantine the Great born, some say, at
York, 274; was the first christian emperor, and died at Constantinople, 337.
See Maxentius, Constantinople. Constantius, emperor of Rome, died at York, 360.
Copernicus, of Thorn, Prussia, died, 1543, aged 60. Corelli, the musician,
died, 1733. Coriolanus, the Roman general, banished from Rome, 491 before
Christ. Corlobasus, the heresiarch, flourished, 150. He was a disciple of
Valentin, and added to the doctrine of his master. Cornaro, Lewis, the writer,
died at Padua, 1565, aged above 100. Corneille, Peter, the French poet, died,
1684, aged 78; Thomas, his brother, died, 1709. Cornelius Nepos, Latin
historian, died, about 25 before Christ. Cornish, Alderman, executed, on a
charge of conspiring, with Russel, against Charles II. Oct. 23, 1685. Cornwall,
Richard, earl of, elected king of the Romans, 1255; died, 1272. Corregio,
ceiling painter, born, 1472; died, 1513. Cortes, Fer. died, 1547, aged 62. See
Montezuma. Cortona, Pet. da, Italian painter, born, 1596; died, 1699. Coryate,
Thomas, the traveller, born, 1577; died, 1617. Cotton, Sir Robert, the
antiquarian, died, 1631, aged 60. Cowley, Abraham, the poet, born, 1618; died,
1667. Cranmer, archbishop of Canterbury, burnt for heresy, March 21, 1557.
Cratinus, the comic poet, died, 431 before Christ. Cratippus, of Mytelene,
peripatetic philosopher, flourished, 53 before Christ. Creech, Rev. Thomas, the
poet, born, 1659; killed himself, 1701. Cremonen, Nic. Amatus, violin maker,
flourished, 1624. Crichton, James, born at Clunie, 1551; killed at Mantua,
1583. Croesus, king of Lydia, 562 before Christ. See Lydia, Vol. I. Croxal,
Rev. Dr. Samuel, died in years, 1751. Ctesias, the Greek historian, died, after
384 before Christ. Cudworth, Rev. Ralph, learned writer, born, 1617; died, 688.
Cujas, James, French civilian, born, 1520; died, 1590. Cumberland, Prince
William, duke of, died, September 30, 1765, aged 45. Curtius, M. rode into a
gulf at Rome, 362 before Christ. Curtius, Quintus, the Latin historian, lived
in 64. Cyprian, St. bishop of Carthage, a father of the church, martyred, 258.
Cyril, patriarch of Jerusalem, died, 386. Cyril, patriarch of Alexandria, died,
444. Cyrus I. founder of the Persian empire, took Babylon, 544; died, 529
before Christ.
D.
D'ABLANCOURT, French writer, born, 1606; died, 1664. Dacier, Madame, French
writer, born, 1651; died, 1720. Dacres, Lord, hanged for murder, 1541.
Daedalus. See Statuary, Vol. I. Danchet, the French poet, born, 1671; died,
1748. Danckerts, a Dutch painter, born, 1561; died, 1634. D'Ancre, Marshall,
killed by the mob in France, 1617. Daniel, Father, the French historian, born,
1649; died, 1728. Dante, Italian poet, born, 1265; died, 1321. Darius, the last
king of the Persian empire, slain, 330 before Christ. See Alexander. D'Arpino,
Gios. Italian painter, born, 1570; died, 1640. D'Aubigne, French writer, born,
1550; died, 1630. Daurat, the French poet, born, about 1507; died, 1588.
Davenant, Sir William, the poet, died, Dec. 1668, aged 62; Charles, his son, a
commercial writer, born, 1656; died, 1714. David, St. alive in 577. Davies, Sir
John, lawyer and poet, died, 1626; aged 56. Day, John, the printer, who first
introduced into England the Greek and Saxon characters, died, 1584. Death,
captain of the Terrible privateer, killed in an engagement with a French
vessel, Dec. 23, 1757. De Champagne, Philip, the painter, born at Brussels,
1602; died, 1674. Decker, Thomas, cotemporary with Ben Johnson. Defoe, Daniel,
the writer, died, 1731. De la Fosse, French painter, born, 1640; died, 1719.
Delius, the architect, flourished, 987 before Christ. Demetrius Phalareus,
governor of Athens, 317; died in prison, 294 before Christ. Democritus, the
Thracian philosopher, died, 361 before Christ, aged 109. Dem^ivre, the French
mathematician, died in England, 1754. Demosthenes, the Athenian orator,
recalled from banishment, 322; poisoned himself, 313 before Christ, aged 60.
Denham, Sir John, the poet, born, 1615; died, 166^. Dennis, John, the critic,
born, 1656; died, 1733. Derham, Rev. Dr. William, the philosopher, born, 1657;
died, April 1735. Deri^g, Sir Cholm. killed in a duel with Mr. Thornhill, May
9, 1711. Desaguliers, the philosophical writer, died, 1749. Descartes, the
mathematician, born at Touraine, 1596; died, 1650. D'Ewes, Sir Symonds, the
antiquary, born, 1602; died, 1650. Diagoras, the Melian, condemned at Athens
for atheism, 414 before Christ. Didius Julianus, Roman emperor, purchased the
empire by auction of the Praetorian guards, Apr. 13, 193; beheaded by order of
the senate, June 21, following. Dido flourished, 1183 before Christ. Digby, Sir
Kenelm, philosophical writer, born, 1603; died, 1665. Diocletian, born of
servile parents, 245; was the first Roman emperor that assumed kingly state,
303. Till this time, the emperor was little more than the first of the senate.
He was the first prince that resigned his empire, May 1, 305; died, 313.
Diodorus, Sic^lus, the historian, lived, 45 before Christ. Diogenes, the cynic,
died, 324 before Christ. Diogenes Laertius, Greek historian, flourished, 200.
Diogenes, the stoic philosopher, flourished, 155 before Christ. Dion Cassius,
the Roman historian, flourished, 229. Dionysius Halicarnasseus, the historian,
lived 30 before Christ. Dionysius, the Elder, tyrant of Syracuse, died, 386
before Christ. Dionysius the Little, who introduced the use of the present
Christian era, about 516; died, 540. Dodd, Rev. William, LL.D. hanged for
forgery, June 27, 1777. See Rem. Occur. anno 1777. Dodderidge, Dr. dissenting
minister, died, Oct. 26, 1752, aged 50. Dodwell, Henry, learned writer, born,
1641; died, 1711. Dolci, Carlo, Italian painter, born, 1616; died, 1636.
Dominichino, Italian history painter, born, 1574; died, 1641. Domitian, Roman
emperor, assassinated, 96, aged 45. Done, Rev. Dr. John, the poet, died, 1631,
aged 58. Donnellan, Captain, hanged at Warwick, for poisoning Sir Theodosius
Boughton, April 2, 1781. Doria, Andrew, a Genoese, admiral to Charles V. of
Spain, the greatest admiral of the age he lived in, the restorer of the
independency of Genoa, when under the French yoke, died. 1560, aged 84. Dorset,
Thomas Sackville, earl of, statesman and poet, born, 1536; died, 1608. Dorset,
Charles Sackville, earl of, the poet, born, 1637; died, 1706. Draco,
established his laws at Athens, 624 before Christ. Draiton, Michael, the poet,
born, 1563; died in 1631. Drake, Francis, the antiquarian, died, 1770, aged 75.
Drelincourt, Charles, the French writer, born at Sedan, 1595; died, 1669.
Drummond, William, the Scotch poet, born, 1585; died, 1649. Drusius, John,
learned divine, born at Oudenard, 1550; died, 1616. Dryden, John, the poet,
born, 1631; died, May 1, 1700 Duck, Reverend Stephen, the poet, drowned
himself, 1756. Dugdale, Sir William, the historian, born, 1605; died, Feb.
1685. Duncan, king of Scots, murdered by Macbeth and Banquo, 1040. See Banquo,
Macbeth. Duns Scotus, a voluminous writer, died studying, 1308, aged 33.
Dunstan, St. archbishop of Canterbury, 960; died, 988, aged 63. Durer, Albert,
the German painter, born, 1471; died, 1528. D'Urfey, Thomas, the songster, died
in years, Feb. 1724. Dyer, Rev. John, the poet, born, 1700.
E.
EACHARD, Rev. Laurence, the historian, died, 1730, aged 59. Eckhout, Vand.
Dutch painter, born, 1621; died, 1674. Egialeus, king of Sycion, 2089 before
Christ. Eginhart, the German historian, died, 842. Ehud, second judge of
Israel, killed Eglon, king of Moab, 1325 before Christ. Elagabalus, Roman
emperor, murdered by his soldiers, 222. Eleazar. See Rem. Occur. anno 70.
Elfrida. See Edgar, Vol. I. Eli, the eleventh judge of Israel, on hearing the
ark was taken, fell down and broke his neck at Shiloh, 1116 before Christ, aged
98. Elias. See Elijah. Elijah prophesied, 911, in the 13th year of Ahab's
reign; supported by the widow of Sarepta, whose son he raised from the dead,
910; brought rain from heaven, 908; taken up into heaven in a fiery chariot,
896 before Christ. Elisha died, 838 before Christ, having prophesied 60 years.
Elzevirs, Dutch printers: Lewis began to be famous, 1595; Daniel died, 1681.
Empedocles, poet and historian, died in prison, 440 before Christ, aged 77.
Eneas, Trojan general, died, about 1177 before Christ. Ennius, Quintus, the
Latin poet, born, 239 before Christ; died, aged 70. Epaminondas, the Theban
general, slain in battle, 363 before Christ. Ephraim Syrus, a Christian writer,
flourished, 370. Epictetus, the Stoic philosopher, died, about 161. Epicurus,
the philosopher, born, 342; died, 271 before Christ. Epimenides, the Cretan
philosopher, flourished, 596 before Christ. Epiphanius, father of the church,
born in Palestine, about 332; died, about 403. Erasistratus, the Greek
physician, flourished, 294 before Christ. Erasmus, English divine and Latin
writer, born at Roterdam, 1467; died, 1536. Erastothenes, the philologer,
measured the earth, 250; died, 194 before Christ. Erostratus. See Diana, Vol.
I. Eschines, the Greek philosopher, died, about 330 before Christ. Eschylus,
the Athenian poet, died, 456 before Christ, aged 69. Esculapius, the Greek
physician, died, about 927 before Christ. Esdras, the sacred historian,
flourished, 452 before Christ. Esop, the Phrygian fabulist, put to death, 556
before Christ. Esther, Queen, who married Ahasuerus, flourished, 465 before
Christ. Estrees, Cardinal de, died, 1714. Etheridge, Sir George, dram. author,
born, about 1638; died, after 1688. Etmuller, Michael, of Leipsick, medical
author, born, 1646; died, 1683; his son, Michael-Ernest, a medical writer,
died, 1732, aged 86. Eubulus, the Athenian comic poet, flourished, 375 before
Christ. Euclid, the mathematician, died, about 300 before Christ, aged 74.
Eudosia, wife of the emperor Theodosius the Younger, of Constantinople, heroic
poetess, born, 400; died 460. Eudoxus, of Cnidos, the geometrician, died, 350
before Christ. Eugene, Prince, died, April 10, 1736, aged 72. Eumenes, king of
Pergamus, began to reign, 263 before Christ. Eumolpus, the Greek poet,
flourished, 1398 before Christ. Euripides, the Greek poet, killed by dogs, 407
before Christ, aged 77. Eusebius, bishop of Nicomedia, the Arian, flourished,
326. Eusebius Pamphili, sacred historian, bishop of Caesarea, died, 331, aged
about 46. Eustachius, archbishop of Thessaly, the Greek critic, flourished,
about 1170. Eustachius, Barth. anatomist at Rome, flourished, 1550. His
anatomical plates were discovered 1712, and published 1714. Eutropius, Latin
historian, flourished, 356. Eutychius, patriarch of Alexandria and
chronologist, born, 876; died, after 900. Evagoras, king of Cyprus, murdered by
Nicocles, 373 before Christ. Evagrius, eccles. historian, in Greek, born, 536;
died, after 595. Evagrius, patriarch of Antioch, flourished, 380. Evander, an
Arcadian chief, brought a colony of his people into Italy, and is supposed to
have founded Padua, 1269 before Christ. Evelyn, John, learned writer, born,
1620; died, 1706. Evremond, St. the writer, died, Sept. 9, 1703, aged 90.
Ezekiel taken captive with Jehoiakim, 599; began to prophecy, 504 before
Christ. Ezra, the prophet, flourished, 447 before Christ.
F.
FABIUS Rusticus, the Roman historian, flourished, 50. Fairclough, Daniel,
born. 1582; died, 1645. Fairfax, Edward, the poet, lived in the reign of James
I. Falkland, Lucius, lord, born, 1610; killed at the battle of Newbury,
September, 1643. Fallopius, an Italian physician, who discovered the Fallopian
tubes, born, 1523; died, 1562. Fanshaw, Sir Richard, the poet, born, 1607; died
at Madrid, 1666. Faria, Emanuel, Portugueze historian, died, 1649. Farquhar,
George, dram. writer, born, 1678; died, 1707. Faulkner, George, alderman of
Dublin, died, Aug. 28, 1775. Faust or Faustus, John, one of the earliest
printers, who, from concealing his art, was supposed to deal with the devil;
hence 'the devil and Dr. Faustus.' He died at Mentz. Fayette, Madame de la,
French novelist, died, 1693. Fenelon. See Cambray. Fenoillet, bishop of
Montpelier, in the 17th century. Fenton, Elijah, the poet, died, July 13, 1730.
Ferrars, George, historian and poet, born, 1512; died, 1579. Feti, Domen.
Italian painter, born, 1590; died, 1624. Fielding, Henry, dram. writer, died,
1754, aged 47; Sir John, his brother, died, Sept. 4, 1780. Fingal, alias Finn,
the Caledonian chief, died, 283. See Militia. Fitzherbert, Sir Anthony, lord
chief justice, died, 1538. Flamel, Nicholas, died, 1409. Flaminius, the Latin
poet, died, 1550. Flamstead, John, the astronomer, born, 1646; died, 1719.
Flechier, bishop of Nimes, historian, born, 1632; died, 1710. Fletcher, John,
dramatic writer, born, 1576; died, 1625. Fleury, Claude, French writer, born,
1640; died, 1723. Fleury, Cardinal, French statesman, born, 1655; died, 1743.
Florence of Worcester, the historian, died, about 1119. Florus, Lucius, Roman
historian, flourished, about 120. Florus, Franc. painter, the Raphael of
Flanders, born, 1520; died, 1570. Folks, Martin, the mathematician, born,
1690; died, 1754. Fontaine, John de la, French poet, born, 1621; died, 1695.
Fontenelle, French writer, died, 1756, aged 100. Foot, Samuel, dram. writer
and player, died, Oct. 21, 1777, aged 55. Ford, John, dramatic writer, died,
about 1561. Fordun, John, Scotch historian, died, 1308. Forest, John, French
landscape painter, born, 1636; died 1712. Fortescue, Sir John, made lord
chancellor, about 1461. Foster, Dr. James, anabaptist preacher, born, 1696;
died, 1753. Fouquieur, James, Flemish painter, flourished, about 1600. Fox,
John, martyrologist, born, 1517; died, April, 1587. Fox, George, founder of the
Quakers, born, 1624; appeared in 1655. Francischini, Italian painter, born,
1648; died, 1729. Frederic, Prince, George IIId's youngest brother, died,
December 29, 1765, aged 16. Fresne, Charles de, French historian, born, 1610;
died, 1665. Frobisher, Sir Martin, the navigator, killed at a siege, 1594.
Froissard, John, French poet, born, 1337; died, about 1402.
G.
GABBIANI, Anthony, Italian history painter, born, 1652; died, 1726. Gaddi,
Italian painter, died, 1312, aged 73; his son Jaddeo died, 1350, aged 50.
Galba, a Roman general, proclaimed emperor after Nero's death, but
assassinated, 69, aged 73. Gale, Roger, the antiquary, died, 1744. Galen, the
Greek physician, born at Pergamus, about 131; died, 201. Galeon, William, died
in years, 1507. Galileo, the astronomer, born in Italy, 1564; died, 1642.
Gallus, joint emperor of Rome, put to death, by order of his colleague
Constantius, Dec. 354. Gama, Vasco de, Portugueze navigator, died, 1525.
Gamaliel, chief of the synagogue, died in 53. Gardener, bishop of Winton, died,
1555; Blair says, 1557. Garrick, David, the player, died, Jan. 20, 1779, aged
62. Garth, Sir Samuel, the poet, died, January, 1719. Gascoigne, George,
English poet, died, 1577. Gassendi, Peter, French mathematician, born, 1592;
died, 16^6. Gay, John, the poet, born, 1688; died, 1732. Gaza, Theodore, Greek
writer, born, 1398; died, 1475. Geber, the Arabian physician, flourished, about
900. Geminiani, the musician, died, 1762, aged 96. Genghi^kam, conqueror of
Asia, died, 1226, aged 72. Gentilis, Albericus, law writer, born in Italy,
1551; died, 1611. Geoffrey of Monmouth, the historian, flourished, 1152.
George, St. the tutelar St. of England, supposed to be George archbishop of
Alexandria, who established arianism on the fall of Athanasius (the fancied
dragon), in the reign of Julian, 356; but who was afterward massacred by the
people, Dec. 24, 361, when Athanasius was restored; suffered martyrdom, under
the emperor Dioclesian. Germanicus, the Roman general, his ashes brought to
Rome, and received with great marks of grief, 20. He died aged 33. See Piso.
Gervase, of Canterbury, the historian, wrote in 1202. Gesner, Conrad, the Pliny
of Germany, born, 1516; died, 15^5. Geta, joint emperor of Rome, murdered, and
above 20,000 persons of both sexes, called his friends, were put to death, by
order of his brother Antoninus, Feb. 27, 212. Ghent, Henry of, died, 1293, aged
76. See Gaunt, Vol I. Gibson, Edmund, bishop of London, born, 1669; died, 1748.
Gideon, fourth judge of Israel, routed the Midianites with only 300 men, 1245
before Christ. Gildon, Charles, poet and critic, born, about 1666; died, 1724.
Gildas, the historian, died, 570. Gilpin, Rev. Bernard, the reformer, died,
March 4, 1583, aged 65. Giordano, Luc. Italian painter, born, 1632; died, 1705.
Giorgione, Italian history painter, born, 1478; died, 1511. Gioseppino, Italian
battle painter, born, about 1560; died 1640. Giotto, Italian painter, born,
1276; died, 1336. Glanvil, Joseph, the writer, born, 1636; died, 1680. Glauber,
the German chemist, died, 1500. Glendower, Owen, died, after 1416. Gob^lin, a
famous French dyer, flourished, 1632; in whose house, at Paris, the tapestry
manufactory was erected, 1666. Godeau, Bishop, French historian, born, 1605;
died, 1672. Godfrey, Sir Edmondbury, an active justice of the peace against the
Papists, murdered October 17, 1678. Godfrey of Bologne. See Jerusalem, Vol. I.
Godolphin, Sidney, earl of, the statesman, died, 1712. Goldsmith, Oliver, the
poet, born, 1731; died, April 4, 1774. Gombauld, John de, French poet, died,
1666, aged 90. Gordian III. emperor of Rome, murdered, 244. Gordon, Sir John,
son to earl Huntley, beheaded, for rebelling against Mary queen of Scots, Oct.
31, 1562; his brother George condemned for the same act, but pardoned, on
account of his youth. Gorgias flourished, 436 before Christ. Gortz, Baron, the
Swedish minister, beheaded, 1719. Gower, Sir John, the first English poet, died
in years, 1402. Gracchus, Tiberius, the Roman Tribune, assassinated, 133 before
Christ. Graevius, J. Geo. the critic, born in Germany, 1632; died, 1703.
Graham, George, the watchmaker, died, 1751. Gratian finished the canon law,
after 24 years labor, 1151. Gratius, the Latin poet, cotemporary with Ovid.
Gray, Thomas, the poet, born, Dec. 26. 1716; died, July 31, 1771. Greatrakes,
that healed by stroking, born in Ireland, 16^9; died after 1666. See Impostors.
Gregory, Dr. John, professor of physic, Edinburgh, born, 17^5; died, Feb. 10,
1773. He was the fifteenth descendant of the family that had held a
professorship. Gregory Nazianzen, the theologian, father of the Greek church,
born, 324; archbishop of Constantinople, 380; died, 389. Gregory XIII. Pope,
died, 1585, aged 83. He altered the calendar. See Style. Gregory, Thaumaturgus,
died, 270, after 30 years episcopacy. Greville, Fulk, lord Brook, statesman and
author, born, 1554; killed by his servant, Sept. 30, 1628. Grierson,
Constantia, poetess of Ireland, died, 1733, aged 27. Griffier, John, Dutch
landscape painter, born, 1658; died, 1718. Grimaldi, John, Italian landscape
painter, born, 160^; died, 1680. Grimston, Sir Harbottle, master of the rolls
and law writer, born, 1584; died, 1683. Gronovius, James, the antiquarian, born
at Daventer, 1645; died, 1716. Grotius, Hugo, Dutch philosopher, born, 1583;
died, 1645. Gruter, John, the philologer, born at Antwerp, 1560; died, 1627.
Guercino, Italian history painter, born, 1590; died, 1666. Guesclin, the famous
high constable. of France, died, about 1379. Guicciardini, Franc. Italian
historian, died, 1540, aged 58. Guido, Reni, Italian history painter, born,
1574; died, 1642; Lewis his nephew, the historian, died, 1583. Guise, Francis,
duke of, assassinated by Poltrot, 1563; Henry, duke of, son to the former, with
his brother the cardinal, assassinated, for his turbulency, by order of Henry
III. of France, 1588, aged 37. Gunter, Reverend Edmund, the mathematician,
died, 1626, aged 46. Gustavus, Vasa, king of Sweden, died, 1560, aged 70. See
Sweden. Gustavus II. Adolphus, king of Sweden, lost part of his helmet by a
musket ball, at the battle of Nuremberg, 1632; slain at the battle of Lutzen,
Nov. 6, 1^33, aged 37. Guthrie, William, English historian died, 1770.
Guttemberg, John, of Stratsburg, the first printer, died after 1466. Guy,
Thomas, a bookseller, died, December. 27, 1724, aged 79; and left 200,000l. for
building an hospital. Guy, earl of Warwick, flourished, before 1316. Guyon,
Mary, of France, the prophetess, born, 1648; died, 1717.
H.
HABAKKUK, the prophet, flourished, 731 before Christ. Habington, William, poet
and historian, born, 1603; died, 1654. Hacket, William. See Impostors. Hackman,
Rev. Mr. hanged, for shooting Miss Raay, through love, April 19, 1779. Haggai,
the prophet, flourished, 520 before Christ. Hale, lord chief justice, died,
Dec. 25, 1676, aged 66. Hales, Rev. Dr. Stephen, died, January 4, 1761. See
Ventilators. Hall, bishop of Norwich, called the English Saneca, born, 1574;
died, 1656. Hall, one of the murderers of the duke of Gloucester, hanged at
Tyburn, 1399. Haller, Dr. died at Berne, 1778, aged 75. Halley, Edmund, the
astronomer, born, 1656; died, 1742. Hallifax, Charles, earl of, born, 1661;
died, 1715. Hallifax, George, marquis of, statesman and author, born, 1630;
died, 1695. Haman hanged, by order of Ahasuerus, 509 before Christ. Hamel, John
Baptist du, French mathematician, born, 1624; died, School. Hamilcar, the
Carthagenian general, who conquered Spain, slain in battle, 227 before Christ.
See Barcelona. Hammond, Rev. Dr. Henry, the theologian, born, 1605; died, 1660.
Hampden, John, the English patriot, born, 1594; killed in battle, June 24,
1643. Handel, George Fred, the musician, died, April 14, 1759, aged 75.
Hannibal, the Carthaginian general, died, 183 before Christ. See Annibal.
Hann^, Carthaginian general, flourished, 403 before Christ. Harding John, the
chronologer, died, 1461, in years. Hardwicke, Earl of, lord chancellor, died,
1763, aged ^3. Hare, bishop of Chichester, polemical writer, died, 1740.
Harrington, Sir John, the poet, died, about 1620. Harrington, James, political
writer, born, 1611; died, 1677. Harris, James, esquire. learned writer, died, Dec.
22, 1780 Harvey, Dr. William, the physician, born, 1578; died, 1657. See Blood.
Hastings, earl of Pembroke, died, 1375. Hawes, Stephen, the poet, flourished,
1506. Hawkesworth, Dr. John, philosophical writer, born, 1719; died 1774. Hay,
William, the poet, died, 1755. Hayward, Sir John, the historian, died, June
1627. Head, Richard, cast away at sea, 1678. Hearne, Rev. Thomas, the
antiquary, born, 1678; died, 1735. Hector, the Trojan general, slain by
Achilles, 1184 before Christ. Heinfius, Daniel, the Flemish critic, died, 1655,
aged 74. Helen carried off by Paris, which occasioned the Trojan war, 1198
before Christ. Heliodorus, the father of Romances, flourished, about 398.
Helmont, John Bapt. Van, the Flemish philosopher, born, 1577; died, 1644.
Heloisa died, 1163, aged about 63. Helvetius, the physician, died at Paris,
Jan. 7, 1727, aged 64. Hemskirk, Dutch painter, styled the Raphael of Holland,
born, 1498; died, 1574. Henley, John, an English clergyman, amused the the
public for many years with a medley of deism, politics, and satire, from a
pulpit, under the pretense of religious worship, and was called Orator Henley.
He died 1756. Henry of Huntingdon, the historian, died, 1168. Hephestion, the
Macedonian general, died, 325 before Christ. Heraclides of Pontus, a Greek
philosopher, flourished, 336 before Christ. Heraclitus, Greek philosopher,
died, about 500 before Christ, aged 59. Heraclius, emperor and heresiarch,
flourished, 630. Herbelot, Bath. de, French writer, born, 1636; died, 1696.
Herbert, Edward, lord, the historian, born, 1511; died, 1648; Rev. George, his
brother, the poet, born, 1593; died, about 1635. Hercules, a Theban hero, whose
birth and exploits are the subjects of fabulous history, flourished, 900 before
Christ. Hermanric, king of the Ostrogoths, flourished, 375. Hermogenes, a
disciple of Praxeas, appeared, 207. He taught also, that matter is eternal. See
Praxeas. Herodian, Roman historian, flourished, 254. Herodotus, the historian,
born, 484; died, after 413 before Christ. Hervey, Rev. James, author of
Meditations, etc. born, 1714; died, 1758. Hesiod, the Greek poet, lived, 944
before Christ. Hesychius, the Greek Grammarian, flourished, 499. Hetherington,
Rev. William, who left a considerable sum of money to the blind, died, Dec.
1778. Heylin, Rev. Peter, the historian, born, 1599; died, 1662. Heywood, John,
reputed to be the first English dram. writer, died, 1565. Heywood, Thomas,
dram. writer, died, about 1615. Hicks, William, esquire. who left ^00l. per annum
to the Marine Society, died, 1763. Hierax, the Egyptian philosopher, who
believed Melchisedech to be the Holy Ghost, and denied the resurrection,
appeared, 286. His proselytes were called Hieracians. Hierocles, governor of
Alexandria, and persecutor of the Christians, flourished, about 300. Hill,
Aaron, miscellaneous author, born, 1685; died, Feb. 8, 1750. Hill, Sir John,
the botanist, died, 1775, aged about 60. Hillary, St. died, 367, aged 80.
Hipparchus, the astronomer, flourished, between 160 and 125 before Christ. He
first described the fixed stars. Hippias, the Greek architect, flourished, 436
before Christ. Hippocrates, the Greek physician, died, 361 before Christ, aged
98. Hiram of Tire, who assisted in building Solomon's temple, died, 990 before
Christ. Hoadley, bishop of Winton, controversial writer, died, 1761, aged 84;
Dr. Benjamin, his son, physician, and dram. author, born, 1706; died, 1757.
Hobbes, Thomas, philosophical writer, died, 1679, aged 90. Hogarth, William,
painter of humor, died, 1764, aged 64. Holbein, Hans, German portrait painter,
born, 1498; died of the plague at London, 1554. Holinshed, Ralph, historian,
died, 1580. Hollar, the painter, died, 1667, aged 60. Hollar, Wenceslaus,
German engraver, born, 1607; died, 1677. Holofernes killed by Judith, 668
before Christ. Holt, lord chief justice, died, March 6, 1710, aged 67. Homer,
the Greek poet, flourished, about 908 before Christ. Hooker, Rev. Richard, the
author, born, 1553; died, 1600. Hooper, bishop of Gloucester, burnt in his
diocese, for heresy, in queen Mary's reign, 1555. Horace, the Latin poet, born
at Venusium, 65 before Christ; died, 8 before Christ. Horrox, Jeremiah, the
astronomer, born, about 1619; died 1641. Hosea prophesied, 785 before Christ.
Hotman, Francis, the French civilian, born, 1524; died, 1590. Hoveden, Roger
de, the historian, died, about 1210. Howard, Mr. justice, stabbed in
Westminster Hall, November 21, 1640. Howard, Sir Robert, historian and poet,
died, soon after 1692. How, Lord viscount, slain, 1758, aged 34. Hudson, John,
a learned critic, born, 1662; died, 1719. Hughes, John, the poet, born, 1677;
died, 1719. Hume, David, philosophical writer, born, April 26, 1711; died,
August 25, 1776. Humphreys, Lawrence, Latin author, died, 1590. Huss, John, the
Bohemian reformer, burnt, for his faith, July 15, 1415. Hutcheson, Rev.
Francis, philosophical writer, born, 1694; died, 1748. Hutchinson, John,
philosophical writer, born, 1674; died, 1737. Huygens, the Dutch astronomer,
born, 1629; died, 1693. Hyde, Rev. Thomas, learned writer, born, 1636; died,
1703. Hypatia, the female geometrician, massacred by the populace of
Alexandria, about 415.
I.
ICTINUS, the Greek architect, flourished, about 430 before Christ. Ignatius
made a bishop by St. Peter and St. Paul; torn to pieces in the amphitheatre by
lions, by order of the emperor Trajan, 107. Ignatius Loyola, founder of the
Jesuits, born, 1491; died, 1556, canonized by Paul V. 1609. Inachus, first king
of Argos, 1859 before Christ. Ingulphus, abbot of Croyland, monastic historian,
died, 1109, aged 79. Innocent XI. Pope, died, August 2, 1689. Irenaeus, a Greek
bishop of Lions, France, a theological writer, put to death under the emperor
Severus, in the fifth persecution of the Christians, 202, aged 82. Isaac,
Abraham's son, born, 1896; married Rebecca the daughter of Bethuel, the Syrian,
1856; died, 1717 before Christ. Ishmael born, 2010 before Christ. Isidorus
Hispalensis, the historian, flourished, about 620. Isocrates, the Athenian
orator, died, 338 before Christ, aged 89. Isodorus Characenus, the Greek
historian, died, after 35.
J.
JAMES, St. the less, bishop of Jerusalem, wrote his epistle, 59; martyred, 62;
feast of, instituted, 1090. James, St. put to death, 41. Jansenius, Corn.
bishop of Ipres, author of Jansenism, born, 1585; died, 1638. Janus, an ancient
king of Latium, esteemed the father of the other deities. See Latium, Saturn,
Agriculture. Jason, the Greek hero, who undertook the Argonautic expedition,
flourished, about 937 before Christ. Jefferies, George, lord, made lord
chancellor, Oct. 1685; committed to the Tower by the Lordmayor, Dec. 12, 1688,
where he destroyed himself, April 18, 1689. Jefferys, George, dram. poet, died,
1755, aged 77. Jehoiakim, king of Judah, began his reign three months after the
death of Josiah; carried captive to Babylon, 597 before Christ. Jekyl, Sir
Joseph, master of the rolls, a law author, died, 1738. Jenkins, Henry, of
Yorkshire, died, Dec. 1670, aged 169. Jephtha, seventh judge of Israel, took
his rash vow, 1187; died, 1182 before Christ. Jeremiah began to prophecy, 629;
wrote his Lamentations, 610; imprisoned, 609; foretold the Jewish captivity,
607, and died about 577 before Christ. Jerome, St. a father of the church, born,
329, died, 420. Jerome, of Prague, a disciple of Huss, burnt for heresy, May
30, 1416. Jesus, the son of Sirach, lived, 247 before Christ. Joan d'Arc, the
maid of Orleans, who undertook the command of a general, in favor of the king
of France, burnt by the English at Rouen, for pretending to magical power, June
14, 1431. Joan of Navarre, Henry IV th's widow, died, 1437. Joan, Pope, in 856.
This female pope was merely fabulous, being introduced by writers to depict the
effeminate manners of Benedict III. Job died, 1553 before Christ, aged 189.
Joel prophesied, 800 before Christ. John, St. the apostle, wrote his Epistles,
92. John, St. the Evangelist, put into a cauldron of boiling oil, but taken out
unhurt, 93; wrote his Revelations, 96; his Gospel, 97; died, Dec. 27, 99, aged
91. John the Baptist preached repentance in the wilderness, 28; imprisoned, 30;
beheaded, 32, aged 37; feast of St. John instituted by pope Felix III. 487.
John of Salisbury, the antiquary, died, 1181. John of Wallingford, the
historian, flourished, 1231. Johnny Armstrong, the Scotch thief of Hol-house,
executed, 1528. Johnson, Ben, dram. writer, died, 1637, aged 62. Jonas preached
to Nineveh, 806, in the reign of Sardanapalus, who burnt himself alive in his
palace with his wives, rather than fall into the hands of his rebellious
subjects, 761 before Christ. See Niniveh. Jones, Inigo, English architect,
born, about 1572; died, 1652. Jortin, Rev. Dr. the theologian, died, 1770.
Josephus, the Jewish historian, died, 93, aged 56. Joshua died, 1426 before
Christ, aged 110. See Israelites. Josiah, king of Juda, slain at Megiddo in the
spring, 608 before Christ. Jouvenet, the French painter, born, 1644; died,
1717. Judas Maccabaeus flourished, 165 before Christ. Jude, St. the apostle and
brother of Christ, wrote his epistle in 71; suffered martyrdom, about 80.
Julian, the apostate emperor, sent a vicar into Britain, 358; died, 363, aged
31. Justin, the martyr, the platonic philosopher, suffered for christianity
under Marcus Aurelius, 167. Justin, the Latin historian, flourished, 250.
Justinian I. the Roman emperor, reigned, in 527; died, 566, aged 84. See Laws.
Juvenal, the Roman satyrist, born, 45; died, 127.
K.
KEIL, John, of Edinburgh, the astronomer, born, 1671; died, 1721. Keith,
James, earl marshal of Scotland, having taken arms in 1715, in favor of the
pretender, went into the service of Russia, and having distinguished himself
against the Turks, was made field marshal to the king of Prussia, but slain at
the battle of Hochkerchen, 1758. Kempis, Thomas, a learned divine, died, 1471,
aged 91. Ken, Thomas, bishop of Bath, theologian and poet, born, 1647; died,
1711. Kennet, Rev. Basil, the theologian, died, 1714. Kennet, White, bishop of
Peterborough, the historian, born, 1660; died, 1728. Kepler, John, the German
astronomer, born, 1571; died, 1630. Khondamir, the Persian historian,
flourished, about 1508. Kidder, bishop of Bath, polemical writer, born, 1649;
killed in his bed, by the fall of a stack of chimnies, in the great storm, Nov.
26, 1703. Killegrew, Sir William, dram. writer, born, 1605; died, 1639. King,
archbishop of Dublin, polemical writer, born, 1650; died, 1729. King, Sir
Peter, died, 1729, aged 76. King, William, political writer, born, 1685; died,
1763. Kneller, Sir Godfrey, portrait painter, died, 1723, aged 76. Knolles, Sir
Robert, died, 1407. Knox, John, the Scotch reformer, born, 1515; died, 1572.
Koempfer, a German physician, historian and botanist, died, 1716. Kouli Khan
usurped the Persian throne, March 11, 1732; assassinated by one of his
generals, June 8, 1747, aged 60. See Mogul Empire.
L.
LABADIE. John, the sectarist, who caused great disturbances in France and
Holland, died, 1674. Lactantius, a father of the christian church, died, 325.
Laertius lived in 183. Lally, Count de, French general, beheaded, 1766.
Lanfranco, Giov. Italian history painter, born, 1581; died, 1647. Lansdown,
Geo. lord, the poet, born, about 1667; died, 1736. Lardner, Nathaniel,
dissenting minster and author, born, 1684; died, 1719. Latimer, bishop of
Worcester, burnt at Oxford for heresy, in queen Mary's time, 1555, aged 85.
Laud, archbishop of Canterbury, adressed as his "holiness", by the university
of Oxford, 1636; beheaded, Jan. 10, 1645, aged 71, for striving to bring in
arbitrary power. Lauderdale, Duke of, died, August 24, 1682. Lauro, Filip.
Italian painter, born, 1623; died, 1694. Lee, Nathaniel, dram. poet, died,
1690, aged 33. Legate burnt in Smithfield for Arianism, 1612. Leibnitz, the
philosopher, born at Leipsic, 1646; died, 1716. Leicester, Dudley, earl of,
statesman and general, born, 1532; died, 1588. Leicester, Sir Peter, the
antiquary, born, 1613; died, 1678. Leicester, Simon de Montfort, earl of,
married Eleanor, sister of Henry III. 1238; gained the battle of Jews, 1264;
defeated and slain at the battle of Evesham, 1265. Leland, John, the antiquary,
died, 1552, aged about 45. Leland, Dr. the Irish historian, died, Jan. 16,
1766, aged 75. Lelv, Sir Peter, history and portrait painter, of Westphalia,
born, 1617; died, 1080. Le Motte, Mons. French spy, executed at Tyburn, July
17, 1781. Lenox, Earl of, father to lord Darnley, restored to his honors,
1564; made regent of Scotland, July 12, 1570; murdered, 1571. Leofricus, the
first bishop of Exeter, died, 1073. Leonidas I. king of Sparta, slain, 480
before Christ. Lestock. See Matthews. L'Estrange, Sir Roger, the writer, born,
1617; died, 1705. See Newspapers. Leucippus, the Greek-philosopher, flourished,
about 428 before Christ. Leuwenhoek; Anth. Dutch physician, died, 1723.
Lightfoot, Rev. Dr. John, Latin writer, born, 1601; died, 1675. Ligonier, John,
earl, field marshal, died, 1770, aged 91. Lilburne, John, whipped for a libel,
Feb. 19, 1638; died, August 1657, aged 38. Lillo, George, dram. writer, born,
1693; died, Sept. 3, 1739. Lilly, Wm. the astrologer, born, 1602; died, 1681.
Lilye, Wm. the grammarian, died, 1523, aged 55. Linnaeus, the Swedish botanist,
died, January 10, 1778, aged 70. Linus, the most ancient Greek musician,
cotemporary with Amphion, flourished, 1490 before Christ. Linus, the Greek
poet, flourished, 950 before Christ. Lisle, Lady, beheaded at Winchester,
September 2, 1685, for harboring two rebels Littleton, Reverend Adam, the
lexicographer, born, 1627; died, 1694. Littleton, Sir. Thomas, law writer,
died, 1481, aged 79. Livy, the Latin historian, died, in 17, aged 76. Lloyd,
Robert, the poet, died, 1764, aged about 32. Llewellin, Martin, died, 1682,
aged 65. Lock, John, the philosopher, died, 1704, aged 72. Lombard, Peter,
archbishop of Paris, the theologian, died, 1164. Long, Rev. Dr. Robert, the
astronomer, died, 1770, aged about 80. Longinus, the orator, born, about 213;
put to death, by order of the emperor Aurelian, for being of Zenobia's party,
273. Longland, bishop of Lincoln, died, 1547. Lovat, Lord, beheaded on
Tower Hill, 1747, for joining the rebels in 1745. Louis IX. of France, St.
canonized, for warring against the Turks. Louis XIV. of France, died, 1715,
aged 77. Love, Rev. Christopher, beheaded, 1651, aged 33. Loyer, Peter le, born
in Anjou, 1540; died, 1634. Lucan born at Cordova, Spain, Nov. 11, 37;
condemned for a conspiracy against the emperor Nero, and bled to death in a hot
bath, April 30, 64. Lucas, de Leyden, the painter, died, 1533, aged 40. Lucas,
Dr. Charles, of Dublin, the patriot, died, Nov. 5, 1771. Lucas, Rev. Dr.
Richard, theological writer, born, 1648; died blind, 1715. Lucian, the Greek
satyrist, died, 180, aged 90. Lucilius, the Latin poet. died, 103 before
Christ. Lucius, the first Christian king of Britain. He reigned 77 years;
founded the first Christian church in London, St. Peter's, Cornhill, which was
made the sea of an archbishop, till removed to Canterbury, 179. See
Sanctuaries. Lucius Florus, the Roman historian, flourished, 98. Lucretia
ravished by Sextus, and killed herself, 505 before Christ. See Rome, City of.
Lucretius, the Latin poet, born at Rome, 95; put an end to his life in a raging
fit, in 52 before Christ. Luke, St. wrote his Gospel, 55; died, about 70, aged
80. Luther, Martin, the author of Lutheranism, appeared, 1518; died, 1546. The
Lutherans are Protestants, but believe in consubstantiation, i. e. that the
sacramental bread consists of bread and the body of Christ in union. Lycon, the
Greek peripatetic philosopher, flourished, 273 before Christ. Lycophron, the
Greek tragic poet, flourished, 303 before Christ. Lycurgus born, 926;
established his body of laws in Lacedemon, 884; died in Crete, 872 before
Christ. Lydgate, John, the poet, flourished, 1430. Lysander, the Lacedemonian
admiral, slain in battle, 336 before Christ. Lysimachus, the Maccdonian
general, slain in battle, 281 before Christ, aged 80. Lyttleton, George, lord,
the historian, died, 1773; his brother, bishop of Carlisle, the antiquary,
died, 1768.
M.
MABILLON, John, French theologian, born, 1632; died, 1707. Macarius
flourished, 373. Macbeth, the usurper of the Scotch crown, slain in battle,
1054. See Edward the Confessor, Duncan, Banquo. Macedonius, the heresiarch, who
denied the divinity of the second and third persons in the Trinity, flourished,
360. Machiavel, Nicholas, a political writer, died, 1527, aged 57. Mackenzie,
Sir George, a Scotch lawyer, born, 1612; died, 1691. Maclawrin, Colin, the
mathematician, born, School; died, 1746. Macrobius, the Latin author, died, about
415. Magellus, Fern. Portuguese navigator, discovered his streights called
Magellan, 1519; died, 1520. Magliabechi, the librarian, died, 1714, aged 81.
Mahomet, the false prophet, born at Mecca, May 5, 570; began to teach his
errors, 612; the era of his sect commenced, 622; died June 18, 631.
Maimonides, Moses, Spanish Jew writer, died, 1209, aged 70. Maintenon, Mad. de,
the wife of Scarron, the French poet, mistress, and afterward wife to Louis
XIV. of France, died, 1719, aged 84. Malachi, the last of the prophets,
flourished, 397 before Christ. Malbranche, Nich. the French metaphysician,
born, 1638; died, 1715. Malcolm, Sarah, remarkable murder by her in the Temple,
1733. Malherbe, the French poet, born, 1556; died, 1628. Mallet, David, dram,
author, died, 1765. Malmsbury, William of, the historian, wrote in 1140.
Malpighi, the anatomist, born in Italy, 1628; died, 1694. Manasseh chosen high
priest, 253 before Christ. Mandeville, Sir John, the traveller, died, 1372.
Mandeville, Bernard, of Holland, philosopher and poet, died, 1733, aged between
60 and 70. Manetho, the Egyptian historian, flourished, 261 before Christ.
Manlius, M. thrown down from the Tarpeian rock, 384 before Christ. Manning,
Cromwell's spy, put to death abroad, by order of Charles II. 1655. Maratti,
Carlo, Italian painter, born, 1625: died, 1713. Marca, archbishop of Paris,
born, 1594; died, 1662. Marcellinus, Ammianus, a Greek and Latin historian of
Rome, from 99, to 388; died about 390. Marcellus, the Roman emperor, slain, 207
before Christ. Marcion, who taught two divinities, one good, the other bad, and
worshipped a brazen serpent, began to spread his heresy, 140. Marcus Aurel.
Antoninus, emperor and philosopher, born, 161; died, 180. Margaritone, Italian
painter, flourished, 1265; died, aged 77. Mariana, the Spanish historian, died,
1624, aged 86. Marius, Caius, flourished, 107 before Christ. See Teutones.
Mark, St. first patriarch of Alexandria, wrote his Gospel in 44; suffered
martyrdom in 68; feast of, instituted, 1090. Marlborough, John, duke of,
English general, died, June 16, 1722, aged 72. Marloe, Christopher, dram.
writer, killed by his rival, 1593. Marot, Clement, French poet, born, 1495;
died, 1544. Marrow, an eminent lawyer, flourished, in Henry VIIth's reign.
Marsham, Sir John, the hist. born, 1602; died, 1685. Martial, the Latin
epigrammatist, born at Bilboa, 34; died, 109. Martin, St. bishop of Tours,
father of the christian church, died, about 402. Martyr, Peter, polemical
author, born, 1500; died, Nov. 12, 15^2. Marvel, Andrew, political writer,
born, 1620; died, 1678. Massillon, J. B. bishop of Clermont, French writer,
died, 1743, aged 79. Massinger, Philip, dram. poet, died, 1640, aged 55.
Matsys, Quintian, Dutch painter, died, 1529. Matthew, St. wrote his Gospel in
44; died in 65. Matthew, of Westminster, the chronologist, died, about 1380.
Matthias was high priest, 6 before Christ. Maupertuis, Peter de, French
mathematician, born, School; died, 1759. Mauritius, alias O'Fihely, archbishop of
Tuam, died, 1513. Maximian, Roman emperor, put to death, by order of
Constantine, 310. Maximin, Roman emperor, deposed, and, with his son, murdered,
237. Maximus, of Tire, the platonic philosopher, died, about 180. Maximus and
Balbinus, Roman emperors, murdered, 238. May, Tho. the poet, born, about 1594;
died, 1652. Mazarine, Cardinal, prime minister of France, died, 1661, aged 59.
Mead, Dr. Richard, medical writer, born, 1673; died, 1754. Mecaenas, poet, and
patron of learned men, died, 8 before Christ. Mecklenburg, Albert Winceslaus,
duke of, murdered by Gourdon, 1634. Melancthon, Phil. the reformer, died, 1560,
aged 63. Melece, bishop of Lycopolis, who sacrificed to idols, flourished, 305.
He formed a schism that continued 150 years. Memnon, or Amenophis, was the
person called in scripture Pharaoh. See Letters, Pharaoh. Menage, Giles, French
grammarian, born at Angers, 1613; died, 1692. Menander, the Athenian comic
poet, born, 342; died, 293 before Christ. Menander, the heresiarch, appeared,
68. He adopted the errors of Simon the magician, and taught that he (Menander)
was the only savior of the elect. Mercury, Tresmigestes, king, high priest,
and philosopher of Egypt, supposed to have flourished, about 1900 before
Christ. Merkes, Thomas, bishop of Carlisle, had the courage singly to oppose
the deposing of Richard II. 1399. Merlin, the poet and prophet, lived in 477.
Mersenne, French writer, born, 1588; died, 1648. Meulen, Vand. the painter,
born at Brussels, 1634; died, 1680. Mezeray, the French historian, born, 1610;
died, 1683. Micah, the prophet, flourished, 754 before Christ. Middleton,
Thomas, lived in the reign of Charles I. Middleton, Conyers, polemical writer,
born, 1683; died, 1750. Mieris, Francis, Dutch painter, died, 1683. Mile,
Francis, Dutch painter, born, 1643; died, 1680. Miller, Philip, the botanist,
died, Dec. 18, 1771, aged 80. Milo, a Roman knight, banished, for killing
Clodius, 52 before Christ. Milton, John, the poet, born, 1608; died blind,
1674. Minos, the lawgiver, reigned at Crete, 1432 before Christ. Mist, the
printer, imprisoned, June 1721. Moab born, 1897 before Christ, from whom sprung
the Moabites. Mola, Pier. Franc. Italian painter, born, 1609; died, 1665.
Moliere, the Fr. dramatist, born, 1620; died, 1672. Molina, Louis, Spanish
polemical author, died, 1600. Molyneux, William, Irish mathematician, born,
1656; died, School. Monk, General George, born, 1608; arbiter of England's fate,
1659; solicited by parliament to take the government of the kingdom, but
refused it, March 1660; made duke of Albemarle, July 12, 1660; he projected the
restoration of Charles II. died, 1670. Monmouth, Jeffrey of, the historian,
wrote in 1152. Monro, Dr. James, the anatomist, died, 1751. Alexander, M. D.
learned writer, born, Sept. 19, 1697; died, July 10, 1767. Montagne, Michael
de, French author, died, 1592, aged 59. Montanus, the heresiarch, who attacked
marriage, flourished, 184. His followers were called Montanists, Phrygians,
Cataphrygians, Eucratites, and Catarres. They were suppressed, about 255. They
maintained an enthusiastic succession of prophecy. Montesquieu, French
philosopher, born, 1689; died, 1755. Montezuma, the last king of Mexico,
conquered by Cortez; stoned to death by his own subjects, for his submission to
the Spaniards, 1541. Montfaucon, the French antiquarian, born, 1655; died,
1741. Montmorency, Duke of, beheaded in France, 1632. Montmorency, Matthew,
general and high constable of France, died, Nov. 24, 1230. Morant, Rev. Philip,
the historian of Essex, died, 1770. Morata, Olympia Fulvia, a Latin female
writer, died, 1555. More, Sir Thomas, lord chancellor, beheaded July 6, 1535,
aged 51, for denying the king's supremacy. See Chancery. Moreri, the French
biographer, born, 1643; died, 1680. Morgagni, the Italian anatomist, died,
1762. Morton, Earl of, regent of Scotland, beheaded, 1581. Moschus of Syracuse,
Greek pastoral poet, flourished, about 177 before Christ. Mosheim, the German
historian, died, 1755. Motteaux, Peter, dramatic writer, murdered, 1718, aged
58. Mountford, William, the dramatist, born, 1659; murdered, 1692. Mowbray,
Robert de, the historian, died, about 1125. Muncer, Thomas, a Saxon divine,
chief of the German anabaptists, and a leveller, who, at the head of 40,000
men, his followers, wrote to the sovereign princes, etc. of Germany, to resign
their authority. The Landgrave of Hesse defeated him, 7000 of the enthusiasts
fell in battle, and he was taken and beheaded, 1525. Munster, Sebastian, the
German mathematician, born, 1489; died, 1552. Muratori, the Italian antiquary,
born, 1672; died, 1750. Murillo, Bartol. Spanish painter, born, 1613; died,
1685. Musaeus, the Greek poet, flourished, 1180 before Christ. Musgrave, Dr.
William, the antiquary, died, 1721. Musgrave, Samuel, M. D. learned writer,
died, July 4, 1780.
N.
NABONASSER, king of the Chaldeans, died, 714 before Christ. See Era, Vol. I.
which commenced with his reign. Nahum, the prophet, flourished, 758 before
Christ. Napier. See Neper, Vol. I. Nash, Richard, master of the ceremonies at
Bath, died, Feb. 1761, aged 86. Navarre, Margaret, queen of, died, 1549. See
Spain. Nehemiah, the prophet, died, 430 before Christ. Nelson, Robert,
polemical writer, born, 1616; died, 1715. Nestorius, patriarch of
Constantinople, who denied the union of the two natures in Christ, appeared,
429. Newburgh, William de, the historian, wrote, 1197. Newcastle, Margaret,
duchess of, died, 1673. Newton, Sir Isaac, the mathematician, born Dec. 1642;
died, March 1727. Nicephorus, Gregoras, Greek historian, died, 1350. Nicias,
the Greek painter, flourished, 300 before Christ. Nicka, a Gothic demon, who
was supposed to inhabit the water, and strangle persons that were drowning.
Hence 'Old Nick.' Nicolle, Peter, French philosopher, born, 1625; died, 1695.
Nicomedes, the mathematician, flourished, about 220. Nimrod, the founder of
Babylon; he was the grandson of Ham, one of the sons of Noah. It was in his
time that the tower of Babylon was built. See Babel, Babylon. Noailles,
Marshal, French general, died, 1766, aged 88. Noetus, the he^esiarch,
flourished, 240. He called himself a new Moses, and allowed only one person in
God: his disciples were culled Monarchists. Nollet, L'Abbe, French philosopher,
born, 1700; died, 1770. Novatian, the heresiarch, first appeared, 254. He was
coadjutor with Novatus; which see. Novatus, a priest of Carthage, the chief of
a sect called Novatians, flourished, 250. He condemned repentance and second
marriages, and formed a schism against his bishop St. Cyprian.
O.
OATS, Dr. Titus, whipped, 1685. See Impostors, Vol. I. Obadiah prophesied,
587 before Christ. O'Connor, Roderic, last of the Irish monarchs, died, 1198,
very old. Octavia, wife of Marc Anthony, died, 100 before Christ. Odin. See
Woden. Oecolampadius, the reformer, died in 1531, aged 49. Oedipus, king of
Thebes, flourished, 1266 before Christ. Ogilby, John, the Scotch geographer,
born, 1600; died, 1676. Ogyges, king of Beotia. See Deluge, Vol. I. Oldcastle,
Sir John, lord Cobham, condemned in convocation, for heretically denying the
pope's supremacy, hanged and burnt without Templebar, 1416; he is said to be
the first protestant that suffered for that religion. See Lollard. Oldfield,
Anne, the actress, born, 1683; died, 1730. Oldham, John, the poet, born, 1653;
died, 1683. Oldmixon, John, dramatic writer, died, 1742. O'Nial, John, of
Ireland, killed, 1568. O'Nial, Sir Phelim, hanged in Ireland, 1652. See
Massacre, Vol. I. Orestes, king of Mycenae and friend to Pylades, died, about
1144 before Christ. Origin, a father of the Christian church, died, 253, aged
69. Orlando Furioso, the Italian warrior, died, 772. Orosius, the Spanish
historian, died, after 420. Orpheus, the epic poet of Crotona, flourished, 576
before Christ. Orpheus of Thrace, the Greek poet, flourished, 128 before
Christ. Ossian flourished as a poet, 300. Ossorius, Jerome, bishop of Sylves,
Portugal, a learned writer, died, 1580, aged 74. Otho, the Roman emperor,
hanged himself, 69, aged 37. Otway, Thomas, the tragic poet; born, 1615; died,
1685. Ovid, the Latin poet, born at Sulmo, 43 before Christ; died in 15. Ozell,
John, died, Oct. 1743.
P.
PACUVIUS, the tragic poet, flourished, 160 before Christ. Palladio, the
Italian architect, died, 1580. Pamphile, the Macedonian painter, flourished,
350 before Christ. Pan-Kou, the Chinese historian, flourished, 85 before
Christ. Par, Thomas, died, 1635, aged 153. He lived in ten reigns, and was
father of a child at 120 years of age. Para, king of Armenia, assassinated at a
banquet, by order of the emperor Valens, 374. Paracelsus, the Swiss physician,
died, 1541, aged 48. Pare, Ambrose, French anatomist, died, 1592. Paris,
Matthew, the historian, died, 1259. Parma, Pete, duke of, natural son to pope
Paul III. assassinated by conspirators, Sept. 10, 1547. Parmegiano, Italian
painter, born, 1504; died, 1540. Parmenides, the Greek philosopher, lived, 505
before Christ. Parnell, Rev. Thomas, the poet, born, 1679; died, 1718. Parocel,
Joseph, the history painter, born, 1648; died, 1704. Partridge, John, the
astrologer, born, 1644; died, 1715. Pascal, Blaise, French mathematician, born,
1623; died, 1662. Pasquier, Steph. French poet, died, 1615, aged 81.
Paterculus, Vell. Latin historian, flourished, about 30. Patrice, the
heresiarch, flourished, 195. who taught, with all the errors of the age, that
man was the production of the devil. Patrick, St. first bishop in Ireland,
carried captive there from Scotland at 16 years of age, died, 491, aged 122.
Patroclus, the Grecian general, slain by Hector, 1184 before Christ. Patru,
Oliver, French writer, born, 1604; died, 1681. Pavillion, Stephen, French
writer, died, 1705. Paul, Father. See Sarpi. Paul, of Thebais. See Monk, Vol.
I. Paul of Samosate, the heresiarch, who denied the divinity of Christ,
appeared, 262. Pausanias, the Greek historian, flourished, 160. Peck, Francis,
the antiquary, died, 1743. Pelagius called to account for his opinions, 415,
which were, that to confide in ones self is the only good. He denied original
sin. Pelham, Henry, the statesman, died, 1754, aged 60. Pelisson, Paul, French
writer, born, 1624; died, 1693. Penn, William, first proprietor of
Pennsylvania, born, 1644; died, 1718. Penruddock, Colonel, executed, 1655.
Percy, Henry, earl of Northumberland, died, 1046. Perdiccas, the Macedonian
general, died, 321 before Christ. Pergolesi, the Neapolitan composer, died,
1733. Periander, the Greek philosopher, died, 557 before Christ. Pericles, the
Athenian general, died, 429 before Christ, aged 70. Perrault, Cl. French
physician, born, 1613; died, 1688; Charles, his brother, French poet, born,
1633; died, 1703. Perrcaus, the two brothers, hanged for forgery, Jan, 17,
1776. Perron, Cardinal du, French statesman, born, 1556; died, 1618. Perseus,
who delivered and married Andromeda, first king of Mycene, 1313 before Christ.
Persius Flaccus, the Latin satyrist, born, Dec, 4, 42; died, 70. Pertinax,
Roman emperor, murdered by his people, March 28, 193, aged 66. Perugino, Peter,
painter of Perousa, died, 1524, aged 78. Pesaro, Simon da, Italian painter,
born, 1612: died, 1648. Petau, Dennis, French writer, born, 1583; died, 1652.
Petavius of France, Latin writer, died, 1652, aged 69. Peter, the hermit, who
stirred up princes to engage in the Holy War, flourished, 1100. Peterborough,
Charles, earl of, political writer and poet, died, 1735. Petrarch, Francis,
Italian peet, born at Arezzo, 1304; died, 1374. Petronius Arbiter, the critic,
died, 66 before Christ. Peyrere, Isaac le, French writer, died, 1677. Phaedrus,
the Latin fabulist, born, 47 before Christ; died, 31. Phalaris the Cruel,
tyrannized over Sicily, about 561 before Christ. Phaon. See Sappho. Pharamond,
first king of France, died, 428. See Salic. Pharaoh ordered all the male
children of the Hebrews to be destroyed, 1573; drowned, with his host, in the
Red Sea, Monday, May 11, 1491 before Christ. See Memnon. Pherecrates, the Greek
comic poet, flourished, 330 before Christ. Pherecydides of Athens, the Greek
historian, flourished, 500 before Christ. Phidias, the Athenian statuary,
lived, 486 before Christ. See Statuary, Vol. I. Philemon, the Greek comic poet,
flourished, 346 before Christ. Philetus of Coos, the Greek grammarian,
flourished, 280 before Christ. Philetus, the heresiarch, appeared, 55. He
denied the resurrection of the body. Philip II. of Macedon, began to reign,
360; murdered by Pausanias, 336 before Christ. Philips, Catherine, the poetess,
born, 1632; died, 1664. Philips, Ambrose, the dramatic poet, died, 1748.
Philips, John, the poet, died, 1708, aged 32. Philistes, of Syracuse, the Greek
historian of Sicily, died, 367 before Christ. Philiston, the Greek comic poet,
flourished, about 15. Philocles, the Greek comic poet, flourished, 434 before
Christ. Philo-Judaeus, the sacred historian, flourished, 40. Philostratus, the
Greek sophist, lived, about 200. Philoxenes, the Greek poet, died, 380 before
Christ. Phocas, emperor of the East, taken prisoner by Heraclius, who ordered
his arms, legs, and head to be cut off, and his trunk to be thrown into the
fire, Oct. 610. Photius, the heresiarch, who denied the divinity of Christ,
flourished, 342. Pibrac, Guy de, born, 1529; died, 1584. Picard, a native of
the Netherlands, who improved upon the errors of the Adamites, flourished,
1419. Pilkington, Laet. dram. poetess, born, 1712; died, August 29, 1750.
Pilpay, the Indian philosopher, flourished, earlier than 230 before Christ.
Pindar, Greek lyric poet, died, 435 before Christ, aged 80. Pisander, the Greek
poet, flourished, 648 before Christ. Pisistratus cotemporary with Solon. Piso
killed himself, on being called to an account for having poisoned Germanicus;
20. See Germanicus. Pitcairne, Dr. Archibald, medical author, born, 1652; died,
1713. Pithou, Pierre, French law writer, born, 1539; died, 1596. Pizzaro, the
Spanish admiral, that discovered Peru, killed, 1541, aged 63. Plato, the Greek
philosopher, died, 348 before Christ, aged 80. Plautus, the Roman comic poet,
died, 184 before Christ. Pletho, Geo. Gemistus, reviver of platonism in
Florence, died, 1490, aged 100. Pliny, the elder, killed by an eruption of
Vesuvius, 79, aged 56; Pliny, the younger, nephew to the former, died, 116.
Plot, Dr. Robert, the antiquary, died, 1696. Plotinus, the platonic
philosopher, died, 270. Plutarch, the Greek historian, died, 119, aged 69.
Pocock, Reverend Dr. Edward, the orientalist, born, 1604; died, 1691. Pole,
Cardinal, died, Nov. 18, 1558, aged 58. Polemburgh, Dutch painter, born, 1586;
died, 1660. Polignac, Cardinal, French writer, died, 1741. Polybius, the Greek
historian, born at Megelopolis, 205; died, 124 before Christ. Polycarpus,
father of the christian church, died, 167. Polycletus, the Greek sculptor,
flourished, about 432 before Christ. Pomfret, Rev. John, the poet, born, 1667;
died, 1709. Pompey the Great, killed in Egypt, 48 before Christ. Pope, Sir
Thomas, founder of Trinity college, Oxford, born, 1508; died, 1558. Pope,
Alexander, the poet, died, 1744, aged 55. Porphyry, of Tire, the platonic
philosopher, died, about 304, aged 71. Porta, Battista, Italian poet, etc.
died, 1615. Postel, William, French writer, born, 1505; died, 1581. Potter,
archbishop of Canterbury, the antiquary, died, 1747, aged 73. Pouch, Captain,
the leader of an insurrection in Northamptonshire, hanged, 1607. Poussin, Nich.
French landscape painter, born, 1594; died, 1665. Poussin, Gaspar, Italian
painter, born, 1613; died, 1673. Pratinas, Greek tragic poet, flourished, about
500 before Christ. Praxagoras, the Greek historian, flourished, about 345.
Praxeas, the Phrygian heresiarch, appeared, 207: he denied the Trinity. His
disciples were called Patropassians, from their holding, that God the Father
suffered on the cross. Praxilla, the Greek poetess, flourished, about 492
before Christ. Praxiteles, the Greek statuary, died, after 288 before Christ.
Priam, king of Troy, slain by Pyrrhus, 1184 before Christ. Prideaux, Rev. Dr.
Humphry, the critic, born, 1648; died, 1724. Prior, Matt the poet, died, Sept.
18, 1721, aged 56. Probus, Roman emperor, murdered by his soldiers, August 282.
Procaccini, Camillus, Italian painter, born, 1546; died, 1626; Julius, his
brother, the painter, born, 1548; died 1626. Procopius, the Greek historian,
flourished, 529. Prodicus, the Grecian sophist, flourished, 436 before Christ.
Prometheus struck fire from flints, about 1715 before Christ. He being the
first person, is said to have stolen it from heaven. Became author of all arts
among the Greeks, 1687 before Christ. Propertius, the Roman poet, died, 11
before Christ. Protagoras, the Greek philosopher, banished from Athens for
atheism, 434 before Christ. Protogenes, the painter, cotemporary with Apelles.
Prudentius, the christian poet, born, 348; died, 412. Prynne, William, a
barrister, and voluminous writer, born, 1600; sentenced by the star chamber to
stand twice in the pillory, and lose his ears, to pay 5000l. and be imprisoned
for life, for a libel against plays, and Laud's innovations in religious
worship, 1633; pilloried, May 1634, and June 1637; his sentence reversed, and
he took his seat in the long parliament, Nov. 28, 1640; died, Oct. 24, 1669.
See Bastwick. Psalmanazar, George, the pretended Formosan, died, 1763.
Ptolemais. See Acra. Ptolemy, the astrologer, died, 162, aged 78. Ptolemy,
Soter, king of Egypt, died, 284, aged 92; Ptolemy Philadelphus, his second son,
who established the Alexandrian library, died, 246 before Christ, aged 64.
Puffendorff, Baron de, the German philosopher, died, 1694, aged 62. Purbachius,
the mathematician, died, 1462. Purcell, Henry, musical composer, born, 16^8;
died, 1695. Pulcheria, empress of Rome, died, 453. Pyrrho, the Greek
philosopher, died, about 286 before Christ, aged 90. Pyrrhus began to reign at
Epirus, 295; wounded in a battle with the Romans, in which he lost 20,000 men,
they, 5000; killed, as he was sighting, by a woman's throwing a tile at his
head, 272 before Christ. See Epirus. Pythagoras, the philosopher, died, 497
before Christ, aged 80.
Q.
QUARLES, Francis, the poet, born, 1592; died, 1644. Quevedo, the Spanish poet,
born, 1570; died, 1647. Quin, James, the comedian, died, 1766, aged 73.
Quinault, Phil. French dramatist, born, 1635; died, 1688. Quincy, Marquis de
le, French engineer, died, about 1720. Quincy, Dr. John, medical writer, died,
1723. Quintillian, the Latin orator, died, about 95. Quintus Curtius. See
Curtius. Quiros, De, made his voyage into the South Seas, 1595.
R.
RAAY. See Hackman. Rabelais, Francis, the French satyrist, born, 1483; died,
1553. Rabutin, Count de Bussy, French poet, born, 1622; died, 1693. Racan,
Marquis of, French poet, born, 1589; died, 1670. Racine, John, French
dramatist, died, 1699, aged 59. Radcliff, Dr. John, born, 1650; died, Nov. 1,
1714; his library, Oxford, opened, Apr. 13, 1745. Raimond Lulle, the
enthusiast, appeared, 1287. Rainwell, John, mayor of London, 1426. Raleigh, Sir
Walter, for a conspiracy to set Arabella Stuart on the throne, was sentenced to
die, 1603, but reprieved; and after a long confinement in the Tower, was, at
his request, sent to the West Indies, with a fleet, in search of a gold mine,
that he pretended to know of; but not finding it, and wilfully burning a town
belonging to Spain, to satisfy the Spaniards, he was beheaded on his former
sentence, Oct. 29, 1618, aged 76. Ramsay, Andrew, polite writer, born, 1686;
died, 1743. Ramsey, William, the poet, died, 1180. Ramus, Peter, French writer,
born, 1515; died, 1573. Ranby, John, chirurgical writer, died, 1773, aged 73.
Randolph, Tho. the poet, born, 1605; died, 1634. Raphael, Italian painter,
born, 1483; died, 1520. Rapin, Nicholas, French poet, died, 1608, aged 68.
Rapin de Thoyras, the historian, died, May 16, 1725, aged 64. Rasis, or Rhases,
the Arabian physician, died, 932, aged 80. Ray, Rev. John, the botanist, born,
1628; died, 1706. Reamur, Rene, French mathematician, born, 1683; died, 1757.
Regiomontanus of Konisberg, the mathematician, died, 1476, aged 40. Regnier,
Mathurin, French satyrist, born, 1573; died, 1613. Rembrandt, Dutch painter,
born, 1606; died, 1668. Retz, Cardinal de, died, 1679. Rhases. See Rasis.
Rhees, the last king of South Wales, killed, 1094. Ricaut, Sir Paul, the
historian, died, 1700. Ricci, the Venetian painter, born, 1659; died, 1734.
Richardson, Samuel, the novel writer, died, 1761, aged 57. Richlieu, Cardinal,
prime minister of France, born, 1585; died, Dec. 4, 1642. Richmond, Countess
of, Henry VIIth's mother, died, 1509. Rigaud, Hyacinth. French painter, died,
1744. Rochefoucauld, Duke of, French writer, died, 1680, aged 68. Rochester,
Zachary, bishop, learned writer, died, 1774. Rochester, John Wilmot, earl of,
the poet, died, July 26, 1680, aged 32. Rollin, Charles, Fr. historian, died,
1741, aged 80. Romano, Julio, Italian history painter, died, 1546, aged 54.
Romanelli, Italian painter, born, 1612; died, 1662. Romulus. See Rome, Vol. I.
Ronsard, Peter, French poet, died, 1585, aged 60. Rooke, Admiral Sir George,
died, 1708, aged 47. Rosa, Salvat. Italian painter and poet, born, 1615; died,
1673. Roscius, the comedian, died, 61 before Christ. Roscommon, Earl of, the
poet, died, 1684. Rosso, Italian painter, born, 1496; died, 1541. Rotenhamer,
Dutch painter, born, 1564; died, 1604. Rotrou, French dramatic poet, born,
1609, died, 1650. Rousseau, John Baptist, French poet, born, 1669; died, 1741.
Row, Nicholas, the poet, died, Dec. 6, 1718, aged 44; Elizabeth, his wife, the
poetess, died, Feb. 20, 1737, aged 63. Rowley, William, cotemporary with
Shakespeare. Rubens, Sir Paul, the Flemish portrait painter, born, 1577; died,
1640. Rubilliac, the statuary, died, 1762. Rupert, Prince, the general, died,
Nov. 29, 1682, aged 62. Rushworth, John, the historian, born, 1607; died, 1690.
Russen, Rev. Benj. hanged for a rape, December 14, 1777. See Rem. occur. anno,
1777. Ruysch, Fred. the Dutch anatomist, born, 1638; died, 1731. Ruyter, the
Dutch admiral, died in 1676, aged 69. Ryer, Peter du, Fr. writer, born, 1605;
died, 1678. Rymer, Thomas, the antiquary, died, 1713. Rysbrack, John, the
sculptor, died, in 1762.
S.
SAADI, the Persian poet, flourished, about 1258. Sabellus, the Egyptian, who
taught no distinction in the Trinity, appeared, 263. Sacchi, And. Italian
painter, born, 1601; died, 1661. Sadler, John, law writer, born, 1615; died,
1674. St. Alban, the first English martyr, died, 303. Saladin, the Sultan of
Egypt, who supported himself against the united efforts of the christian
princes, who carried on against him the Crusades, or Holy Wars, died, 1192,
aged 57. Salambini, Italian painter, born, 1536; died, 1583. Salisbury, John
of, the historian, born, 1110; died, 1179. Salisbury, Sally, a noted
prostitute, died in Newgate, Feb. 25, 1724. Sallo, Dennis de, French writer,
born, 1626; died, 1669. Sallustius, the Latin historian, died, in 34 before
Christ, aged 51. Sambuc, John, the Hungarian physician and author, born, 1531;
died, 1584. Samuel, the 12th and last judge of Israel, born, 1139; ruled for 21
years, and anointed Saul first king of Israel; died, 1061 before Christ. See
Saul. Sanctorius, of Padua, medical writer, flourished, about 1610. Sanderson,
Sir William, the historian, died, 1676. Sandys, Sir Edwin, the patriot, born,
about 1561; died, 1629. Sanquir, Lord, hanged for murder, 1612. Santeuil, John
Bapt. French poet, born, 1630; died, 1697. Sanzio, Raphael, painter, born at
Urbin, 1483; died, 1520. Sappho, the Greek poetess, and mistress of Phaon,
lived 603 before Christ. Sarah, Abraham's wife, died, 1859 before Christ, aged
127. Sardanapalus. See Jonas, Nineveh, Vol. I. Sarpi, Father Paul, learned
writer, born at Venice, 1552; died, 1623. Sarrasin, John, French poet, born,
1604; died, 1654. Sarto, And. Del, Italian painter, born, 1478; died, 1520.
Sassa Ferrato, Italian painter, born, about 1600. Saturn, an ancient king of
the Aborigines, said to be the son of Janus. See Aborigines, Vol. I. Janus.
Saul, first king of Israel, began to reign, 1095; rejected of God for
disobedience, 1063; killed himself, 1055 before Christ. Saumaise, Claude de,
French writer, born, 1588; died, 1653. Saunderson, Dr. the mathematician, died,
1739, aged 57. Saurin, James, the Flemish theologian, born, 1677; died, 1730.
Sauvages, Francois, French medical writer, born, 1706; died, 1767. Savage,
Richard, the poet, born, School; condemned for murder, 1727; pardoned, 1728;
died, 1743. Savile, Sir Henry, the historian, born, 1549; died, 1622. Saxe,
Marshal count, son of Frederic king of Poland, died, 1750, aged 54. Scaliger,
Julius Caesar, the Italian critic, died, 1558, aged 75; Joseph, his son, French
writer, died, 1609, aged 69. Scanderbeg, the christian hero, died, 1467, aged
63. Scarron, Paul, French comic writer, born, 1610; died, 1660. See Maintenon.
Schidon^ Italian cieling painter, born, 1580; died, 1616. Schrevelius,
Cornelius, a learned Dutchman, died, 1667. Scipio Africanus, the Roman general,
died, 186 before Christ, aged 51. Scott, Rev. John, author of the christian
life, born, 1638; died, 1695. Scotus, John, died, 883. Scuderi, George, French
poet, born, 1603; died, 1667; Magdalen, his sister, French Romance writer,
born, 1607; died, 1701. Seaton, Rev. Thomas, who instituted the prize poems at
Cambridge, born, about 1684; died, 1750. Sedley, Sir Charles, the poet, born,
1639; died, 1701. Seldom, John, the antiquarian, born, 1584; died, 1654.
Serres, John de, the Calvinist, and French writer, died, 1598. Servetus born,
1509; burnt for opposing the Trinity, Oct. 27, 1553. See Unitarians. Sesostris,
or Rameses, began to reign in Egypt, 1485; died, 1416 before Christ. Settle,
Elkanah, dram. poet, born, 1648; died, 1724. Severus, Alexander, Roman emperor,
murdered 235. Severus, S. Roman emperor, died at York, 211, aged 65. Sevigne,
Marchioness de, the letter writer, born, 1626; died, 1696. Shadwell, Thomas,
poet laureat, born, 1640; died, Nov. 20, 1692. Shaftesbury, Ant. Ashley, earl
of, born, 1621; died, 1683. Shaftesbury, Cooper earl of, statesman and
chancellor, died, 1713, aged 61. Shakespere, William, born, April 23, 1564;
died, April 23, 1616. Sharp, archbishop of York, theological writer, born,
1644; died, 1714. Sharp, Rev. Dr. Gregory, theological writer, died, 1771.
Shem, son of Noah, died, 1846 before Christ, aged 600. Shenstone, William, the
poet, died, 1763. Shepery, John, the poet, died, 1542, aged 33. Shepherd,
John, executed at Tyburn, 1725. Sherburne, Sir Edward, born, 1618; killed in a
mutiny at Oxford, June 12, 1646. Sheridan, Rev. Dr. Thomas, the poet, born,
1685; died, 1738. Sherlock, William, dean of St. Paul's, theological writer,
born, 1641; died, 1707. Sherlock, bishop of London, controversial writer, born,
1^78; cied, 1761. Shirley, James, dramatic poet, born, 1594; died, 16^6.
Shovel, Sir Cloudsley, lost on the rocks of Scilly, Oct. 1707, aged 65. Shuter,
Edward, the comedian, died, Nov. 1776. Sidney, Sir Philip, born, 1554; killed
in battle, Sept. 22, 1586. Sidney, Algernon, beheaded, for being concerned in
the Rye-house plot, Dec. 17, 1683, aged 65. Sidonius Apollinaris, bishop of
Clermont, born, 430; died, 480. Sigebert, the historian, died, 1113. Simon
Magus came to Rome, 41. Simonides, the Greek poet, flourished, 503 before
Christ. Simpson, Thomas, the mathematician, died, 1761, aged 51. Sirani,
Elizabeth, Italian paintress, born, 1638; died, 1664. Sirmond, James, French
theologist, born, 1559; died, 1651. Sisyphus, first king of Corinth, 1504
before Christ. Sixtus, Quintus. See Pope. Skeleton, Rev. John, the poet,
flourished, 1489; died, 1529. Skinner, Stephen, the antiquary, born, 1622;
died, 1607. Sling^lanet, Peter, Dutch painter, born, 1640; died, 1691. Sloane,
Sir Hans, the naturalist; born, 1660; died, Jan. 11. 1752. His cabinet of
curiosities, and library of 50,000 books, purchased by parliament for 20,000l.
makes part of the British Museum. See Museum. Smith, Rev. Dr. Thomas, divine
historian, born, 1638; died, 1710. Smith, Robert, the mathematician, died,
1769. Smollet, Dr. the historian, died abroad, Sept. 1771. Snape, Rev. Dr.
Andrew, the theologian, died, 1742, aged 70. Snyders, Francis, Flemish battle
painter, born, 1587; died, 1657. Sobieski, John, king of Poland, died, 1696,
aged 72. Socrates, the Greek philosopher, put to death, on a false accusation
of atheism, 400 before Christ, aged 70. Solimeni, Italian painter and poet,
born, 1657; died, 1747. Somerville, William, the poet, died, 1742. Somner, Wm.
the antiquary, born, 1606; died, 1669. Sopater, the Greek comic poet, died, 406
before Christ, aged 91. Sophia, Princess. See Hanover, Vol. I. Sophocles, the
Greek poet, died, 406 before Christ, aged 90. Sophronia, a prefect's wife,
stabbed herself, to escape the violent embraces of the emperor Maxentius, about
312. Sorbiere, Sam. French writer, born, 1650; died, 1670. Sosigenes, the
Egyptian astronomer, who invented the Julian calendar, flourished, about 40
before Christ. South, Rev. Dr. Robert, born, 1633; died, 1716. Southern,
Thomas, dram. writer, born, 1660; died, May 26, 1746. Spanheim, Ezekiel. born at
Geneva, 1629; died, 1710. Spanheim, Fred. born at ditto, 1632; died, 1701.
Speed, John, the historian, died, July 1629, aged 76. Spelman, Sir Henry, the
antiquary, died, 1641, aged 80. Spenser, Edmund, the poet, born, 1510; died,
1598. Spinckes, Rev. Nathaniel, born, 1653; died, 1727. Spinoza, the atheist,
died at the Hague, 1677, aged about 44. Spotswood, archbishop of St. Andrews,
the historian, born, 1565; died, 1639. Stackhouse, Rev. Tho. sacred historian,
died, 1752. Stafford, Lord viscount, beheaded through the perjury of Oats,
etc. Dec. 1680. Stanislaus, the abdicated king of Poland, philosophical writer,
burnt to death by accident, 1766, aged 89. Statius, the Latin poet, born, about
41; died, 96. Steel. Sir Rich. dram. writer, born, 1676; expelled the House of
Common^, 1713; died, Sept. 1, 1729. Steiner, Isaac, violin-maker, flourished,
1674. Stefan^, of Florence, painter, died, 1350, aged 49. Stella, James, the
French pastoral painter, born, 1^96; died, 163^. Stephen, St. the first martyr,
stoned, Dec. 26, 33. Stephens, Robert, of Paris, a correct Latin printer, born,
1503; died, 1559; Henry, his son, equally famous in printing, born, 1528; died,
1598. Stern, Rev. Laurence, author of Tristram Shandy, born, 1713; died, March
1768. Sternhold, Thomas, the poet, died, 1549. Stillingfleet, bishop of
Worcester, polemical writer, born, 1635; died, 1699. Stilpo, of Megara, the
stoic philosopher, died, after 294 before Christ. Stirling, William, earl of,
died, Feb. 1641. Stone, archbishop of Armagh, the theologian, died, 1764.
Stourton, Lord, hanged for murder, 1557. Stow, John, the antiquary, died, April
5, 1605, aged 80. Strabo, the Greek historian, died, 25. Strada, or Rome, the
historian, died, 1649. Strype, John, the memorialist, born, 1643; died, Dec.
1737. Stukely, Dr. William, the antiquary, died, 1765, aged 78. Sturmius, the
German philosopher, born, 1507; died, 1589. Suckling, Sir John, the poet, born,
1613; died, 1642. Suetonius, the Roman historian, died, after 117. Sueur, E^st.
le, the French history painter, born, 1617; died, 1635. Suidas, the Greek
writer, lived, in 1087. The French say about 883. Sully, Duke of, French
historian, born, 1560: died, 1641. Sulpiclur, of Aquitaine, the Latin
historian, died, 420. Sunderland, Robert, earl of, died, Sept. 28, 1702.
Sutton, Thomas, founder of the charter house, born, 1532; died, 1611. Suze,
Madarne, countess de la, French poetess, died, 1673. Swammerdam, John, the
Dutch philosopher, born, 1637; died, 1681. Swanevelt, the painter, born, about
1620. Swift, Dean, poet, etc. died, Oct. 1745, aged 78. Swithin, bishop of
Winchester, died, 854. Sydenham, Dr. Thomas, medical writer, died, December 29,
1689, aged 65. Sylvester, Joshua, died, 1618, aged 55. Sylvius, Aeneas, died,
1464. Symachus, the Greek translator of the bible, flourished, 201. Sing,
archbishop of Tuam, theological writer, born, 1659; died, July, 4, 1741.
T.
TACITUS, the Roman historian, born, before 64; alive, 117. Talbot. lord
chancellor, died, 1737, aged 50. Tamerlane, conqueror of Asia, born at Keck,
1336; died, 1405. Tanner, bishop of St. Asaph, the antiquary, born, 1674; died,
1735. Tarquin the Proud, who was the last monarch of Rome, preceding the
republic, died, 493 before Christ, aged 90. Tassi, the Italian tempest painter,
born, 1580. Tasso, Torquatus, Italian poet, died, 1595, aged 5^. Tasso, Orland.
the musician, died, 1594. Tate, Nahum, poet laureat, died, 1716. Tatti, the
painter, of Florence, died, 1294, aged 81. Taverner, William, dram. writer,
died, 1731. Tailor, bishop of Down, theological writer, died, August 13, 1667.
Tailor, John, called the water poet, from being a waterman, died, 1654, aged
74. Tell, William. See Grisler, Vol. I. Temple, Sir William, political writer,
died, Jan. 1699, aged 69. Teniers, David, the Flemish rural painter, born,
1582; died, 1649. His son David, ditto, born, 1610; died, 1^94. Terence born at
Carthage; died, 159, aged 64; his comedies first acted, 154 before Christ.
Terpander, the Greek musician, lived about 706 before Christ. Tertullian,
father of the christian church, died, 196, aged 85. Tertullian, the heresiarch,
flourished, 205. He was a Montanist, taught that God was corporeal, and
condemned repentance and second marriages. Teucer, first king of Troy, 1502
before Christ. Thales, chief of the seven sages of Greece, born, 640; died, 552
before Christ. Thamiris, the poet, flourished, 1104 before Christ. Themistius,
the Greek orator, died, 386. Themistocles, the Athenian general, died, 449
before Christ, aged 65. Theobald, Lewis, wrote in George Ist's reign.
Theocritus, the Greek pastoral poet, flourished, 285 before Christ. Theodore I.
king of Corsica, 1736; confined many years in England for debt; died, 1757.
Theodoret, the ecclesiastical historian, died, 457, aged 70. Theodorus, the
Greek painter, flourished, 530. Theodorus, of Miletes, the mathematician,
flourished, 1284. Theodosius the Great, the last Roman emperor, made his entry
into Constantinople, 380; died, 39^, aged 60. Theodotion, of Ephesus, who
translated the bible into Greek, flourished, 175. Theodotus, the heresiarch,
that denied Christ's divinity, appeared, 196. Theon, of Alexandria, the
mathematician, flourished, about 385. Theophrastus, the Greek philosopher, born
at Lesbos, 322; died, about 288 before Christ. Theseus, who slew the Minotaur,
flourished, 1134 before Christ. Thespis, the Greek tragic poet, flourished,
about 536 before Christ. Thomas, Elizabeth, died, Feb. 1731, aged 55. Thomson,
James, the poet, died, August 29, 1748, aged 47. Thoresby, Ralph, the
antiquary, born, 1658; died, 1725. Thornhill, Sir Ja. the painter, died, 1734,
aged 57. Thornton, Bonnel, miscellaneous writer, died 1768. Thou, Jam. Aug de,
or Thuanus, French historian, born, 1553; died, 1617 Thrasybulus, the Athenian
general, slain by the Aspendians, 390 before Christ. Thrasyllus, the Greek
astrologer, flourished at Rome, about 30. Thuanus. See Thou. Thucydides, the
Greek historian, died, 391 before Christ. Thucydides, the Athenian general,
banished by Ostracism, 444 before Christ, aged 26. Thurlow, John, the statesman
under the Cromwells, born, 1616; died, 1668. Thynne, Thomas, esquire. shot in his
coach, in PallMall, Feb. 12, 1682. Tiberius Gracchus, consul of Rome, a famous
orator, flourished, 165 before Christ. Tibullus, the Latin poet, born, 43;
died, 11 before Christ. Tickel, Thomas, the poet, died 1740. Tillemont, the
French historian, born, 1637, died, School. Tillotson, archbishop of Canterbury,
theological writer, died, 1694, aged 65. Tilly, Count, the Imperial general,
flourished, 1631. Timanthe, the Greek painter, cotemporary with Pamphile.
Timeus, a Greek historian, flourished, 262 before Christ. Timoleon, of
Syracuse, the Corinthian general, died, 337 before Christ. Timon, of Athens,
the misanthrope, lived, 420 before Christ. Timotheus, the Greek musician and
poet, died, 357 before Christ, aged 90. Timotheus, St. disciple of St. Paul,
died, Jan. 25, 97. Tindal, Dr. Matthew, polemical writer, born, 1657; died,
1733. Tintoret, Italian history painter, born, 1512; died, 1594. Titian, the
Venetian history painter, born, 1477; died, 1576. Toland, Janus, the deist,
born, 1670; died, 1722. Tolet, Francis, the first Jesuit that was made a
cardinal, died, 1596. Tompion, Thom. the watchmaker died, 1669. Tonstall, Cuth.
bishop of Durham, polemical writer, born, about 1474; died, Nov. 28, 1559.
Torquatus, Manlius, the Roman general, caused his own son to be put to death,
for having fought contrary to his orders, 340 before Christ. Torricelli, the
Italian mathematician, born, 1608; died, 1647. Trap, Rev. Dr. Joseph, the poet,
born, 1679; died, Nov. 1747. Trapezuntius, George, Greek and Latin critic,
died, 1481, aged 83. Trenchand, John, political writer, born, 1669; died, 1723.
Tristran, Francis, French dramatist, born, 1601; died, 1655. Trumbull born,
1639; died, 1716. Trump, Van, the Dutch admiral, killed in an engagement, July
29, 1653. Tudor, Sir Owen, married Catherine, Henry Vth's widow, soon after
1422, which alliance raised that family to the throne; he was grandfather to
Henry VII.; beheaded, 1461, for taking part with the Lancastrians. Tuffi,
Andrew, Italian painter, died, 1294, aged 81. Turenne, Marshall, French
general, born, 1611; killed by a cannon-ball at Saltzbach, July 26, 1675. Tycho
Brahe, of Denmark, born, 1546; died, 1601. Tyndale, William, one of the early
reformers, suffered death at Antwerp as a heretic, 1536. Tyrrell, James, the
historian, born, 1642; died, 1718. Tyrtaeus, the Greek poet, flourished, about
630 before Christ. Tyssen^, Peter, of Antwerp, history painter, born, 1625;
died, 1692.
U.
ULYSSES, the Grecian hero, flourished, 1149 before Christ. Ulster, William,
earl of, killed by his servants, 1333. Usher, archbishop of Armagh, learned
writer, born, 1581; died, March 20, 1656. Uzziah, king of Juda, began to reign,
809 before Christ; reigned 52 years.
V.
VALENTIN, the heresiarch, appeared, 142. He admitted 32 divinites, produced
two by two, male and female, each couple producing another couple. Valerian,
Roman emperor, taken prisoner by Sapor, king of Persia, 260. Valerius Flaccus
the Roman poet, died, 104. Valerius Maximus, the Latin historian, flourished,
in the Augustan age, about 45 before Christ. Valesius, the Arabian philosopher,
flourished, 250. He taught that concupiscence destroyed the liberty of man, and
to be saved, they should make themselves Eunuchs. Valois, Henry de, French
historiographer, born, 1603; died, 1676. Van Balen, the Dutch painter, born,
about 1540. Van Huysom, John, Dutch painter (flowers and fruits), born, 1682;
died, 1749. Van Oort, Adam, Flem. history painter, born, 1557; died. 1641. Van
Oost, James, sen. Flemish history and landscape painter, died, 1671, aged 71.
Jun. ditto, born, 1637; died, 1713. Van Oostade, Adrian, German rural painter,
born, 1610; died, 1685. Isaac, his brother, ditto, born, 1617. Van Orlay, Bern.
Flemish history and landscape painter, born, 1490; died, 1560. Richard, the
history painter, born, 1632; died, 1732. Van Paris, a Dutchman, burnt for
Arianism, in Edward VIth's reign. Van Swieten, Baron, the physician, died, June
1772. Vanburgh, Sir John, dramatic writer, died, Mar. 26, 1726. Vandermeeren,
John, sen. Dutch landscape and battle painter, died, 1690, aged 63. John, jun.
landscape painter, died, 1688. Vandermeulen, Anth. Flemish history painter,
born, 1634; died, 1690. Vandervelder, Adrian, Dutch history painter, born,
1639; died, 1672. William, sen. Dutch sea-piece painter, born, 1610; died,
1693. William, jun. ditto, born, 1633; died, 1707. Vanderwerf, Adrian, Dutch
history painter, born, 1659; died, 1727. Peter, his brother, ditto, born, 1665;
died, 1718. Vandiest, Adrian, Dutch landscape painter, died, 1704, aged 49.
Vandyck, Sir Anthony, born at Antwerp, 1599; died, 1641, at London. Vanini died
at Thoulouse, a martyr to atheism, being burnt, Feb. 19, 1619, aged 33. Vanloo,
John, French history painter, born, 1684; died, 1745. Carlo, his brother,
ditto, born, 1705; died, 1765. Vanmander, Charles, Flemish history and
landscape painter, born, 1548; died, 1606. Vannius, Fran^. Italian history
painter, born, 1563; died, 1610. Vansommer, Paul, Dutch portrait painter, died,
1626. Vanuden, Dutch landscape painter, born, 1595; died, 1663. Vargas,
Ludovico de, Spanish history painter, born, 1528; died, 1590. Varro, Terentius,
the Roman general and grammarian, died, 28 before Christ, aged 88. Vasari,
George, Italian history painter, born, 1514; died, 1578. Vaugelas, Claude,
French critic, born, 1585; died, 1650. Vaux, Nicholas, lord, the poet, died,
1523. Vayer, Francis le, French writer, born, 1588; died, 1672. Vecchio, Palma,
Italian painter, born, 1508; died, 1556. Velleius Paterculus, the Lat.
historian, died, in 31. Verbruggen, Henry, Dutch history painter, born, 1588;
died, 1640. Verhaecht, Tobias, Flemish landscape painter, born, 1566; died,
1631. Vermeyen, John, Cornelius, Dutch history painter, born, 1500; died, 1559.
Veronese, Paul, Italian history painter, born, 1532; died, 1588. Veronese,
Paul, Ital. painter, born, 1600; died, 1670. Verrio, Anthony, Ital. cieling
painter, died, 1707. Verrochio, And. Italian painter, died, 1488, aged 56.
Verstegan, Richard, died, after 1625. Vertot, French historian writer, died,
1735, aged 80. Virtue, Geo. Engl. engraver, died, 1756, aged 72. Vida, Hieron.
the Latin poet, died, 1566, aged 96. Vieta, the French mathematician, born,
1540; died, 1603. Villars, Marshal, the French general, died, 1734, aged 79.
Vinci, Leon. da, Italian painter, born, 1545; died at Paris, in the arms of
Francis I. king of France, 1620. Viner, Mr. founder of the law lectures,
Oxford, died, June 1756. Virgil born, at Andes, near Mantua, 69; died at
Brundusium, in Italy, 18 before Christ. Virgil, Polydore, the historian, died,
1555, aged 80. Viterbes, Annius de, died, 1^92. Vitruvius, the Roman architect,
flourished, 44 before Christ. Vittori, Pietro, died, 1585. Voiture, Vincent,
French poet, born, 1598; died, 1648. Voltaire, miscellaneous writer, died, May
13, 1778, aged 85. Vossius, John, German Latin writer, born, 1577; died, 1649.
Isaac, his son, the critic, born, 1618; died, 1688. Vouet, Simon, French
history painter, born, 1582; died, 1641. Vroom, Henry Corn. Dutch sea-piece
painter, born, 1566.
W.
WADE, Marshal, English general, died, 1748, aged 75. Wager, Admiral Sir
Charies, died, 1743, aged 77. Wagstaffe, Rev. Thomas, polemical writer, born,
1645; died, 1712. Wake, archbishop of Canterbury, polemical writer, born, 1637;
died, 1737. Wales, Frederic prince of, father of George III. arrived in
England, Dec. 1729; married the princess of Saxe-Gotha, Apr. 27, 1736; died of
a pleurisy, March 30, 1751, aged 43; his princess died of a consumption, Feb.
8, 1772, aged 52. Wales, George prince of, born, Aug. 12, 1762. Waller, Edmond,
the poet, conspired against the House of Commons, 1643, for which he was tried
and condemned; but pardoned on paying 10,000l. died, 1687, aged 81. Walpole,
Sir Robert, earl of Orford, a statesman, expelled the House of Commons, and
committed to the Tower, for taking a bribe, 1712; died, 1745, aged 81. Walsh,
William, the poet, born, 1659; died, 1708. Walsingham, Sir Francis, secretary
of state to Elizabeth, died, 1590. Walsingham, Thomas, the historian,
flourished, about 1^22. Walter, of Hemingford, Engl. historian, died, 1347.
Walton, Brian, editor of the Polyglot bible, born, 1600; died, 1661. Ward,
bishop of Sarum, the mathematician, born, 1618; died, 1689. Ward, Dr. John, the
antiquary, born, 1679, died, 1758. Ware, Sir James, Irish historian, born,
1604; died, 1666. Warin, John, Flemish engraver, born, 1604; died, 1672.
Warren, Admiral Sir Peter, died, 1752, aged 49. Waterland, Rev. Daniel,
theological writer, born, 1683; died, 1740. Watson, Sir Charles, admiral, died,
1759, aged 44. Watteau, Anthony, French landscape painter, born, 1684; died,
1721. Watts, Isaac, the Independent minister, born, 1673; died, 1748. Wepfer,
John, the German anatomist, died, 1695. We^, Admiral, died, 1757, aged 43.
Westminster, Matthew of, the historian, died, about 1380. Wharton, Sir George,
the royalist, born, 1617; died 1681. Wharton, Philip duke of, died, about 1731.
Whichcot, Rev. Benj. the theological writer, born, 1609; died, 1683. Whiston,
Rev. William, the astronomer, born, 1667; died, 1752. Whitby, Rev. Daniel,
polemical writer, born, 1638; died, 1726. Whitehead, Paul, the poet, born,
1710; died, 1774. Whitelocke, Bulstrode, the politician, born, 1605; died,
1676. Whitfield, Rev. George, founder of the methodists, born, 1714; excluded
the church, May 10, 1739; died, 1770. See Methodism. Whittington, Sir Richard,
mayor of London, 1377. Whittington, Robert, the rhetorician, flourished, 1530.
Wickliffe, the reformer, the first of any eminence that opposed popery, born,
1324; preached against the pope's supremacy, 1377; died, 1385; and 48 years
after his bones were burnt for being a heretic. Wicks, Thomas, the historian,
flourished, 1290. W^cocks, Rev. Thomas, flourished, 1599. W^, Jo^than. hanged,
May 24, 1725. Wi^ens, John, Flem, landscape painter, born, 1600; died, 1644.
Wilkins, bishop of Chester, philosophical writer, born, 1582; died, 1672.
Wilks, the player, cotemporary with Betterton. William, of Spires, the
mathematician, flourished, 1081. William, archbishop of Tire, historian of the
Crusa^es, died, 1184. Willis, Brown, the antiquary, born, 1682; died, 1760.
Willis, Dr. Thomas, medical writer, born, 1621; died, 1675. Wilson, Samuel,
esquire. bequeathed 20,000l. to be lent out in small sums to industrious tradesmen,
1771. Wilson, Arthur, the historian, born, 1596; died. 1652. Winchelsea, Anne
countess of, died, 1720. Wingate, Edm. died, Dec. 16, 1656, aged 61. Winkelman,
Abbe, murdered at Trieste, 1768. Winslow, James, the Danish anatomist, born,
1669; died, 1760. Wishart, the reformer, burnt at St. Andrews, 1546. Witsius,
Herman, the Dutch historian, died, 1708. Witz, de, John, the Dutch statesman
and patriot, with his brother, murdered by the populace at the Hague, August
10, 1672. Woden, or Odin, was a leader of the Asiatic Goths, some few years
before Christ. By the Scandinavians he was styled a god. Woodward, Dr. the
philosopher, born, 1665; died, 1728. Wolf, General James, killed at the siege
of Quebec, 1759, aged 33. Wolfius died, 1580, aged 64. Wollaston, Rev. William,
the philosopher, born, 1659; died, 1724. Wood, Anthony, the biographer, born,
1632; died, 1695. Woolston, Rev. Thomas, polemical writer, born, 1669; punished
for blasphemy, 1720; died, 1733. Wormius, Olaus, the Danish historian, born,
1583; died, 1654. Christian, his grandson, the historian, died, 1737. Wotten,
Edward, natural philosopher, died, 1555, aged 63. Wotton, Sir Henry, statesman
and poet, born, 1568; died, 1639. Wotton, Rev. William, critic and philosopher,
born, 1666; died, 1726. Wouters, Francis, Flemish landscape painter, died,
1659. Wouvermans, Philip, Dutch landscape painter, born, 1620; died, 1688.
Wren, Sir Christopher, the surveyor, knighted, 1674; died, 1723, aged 90.
Wyatt, Sir Thomas, the poet, died, 1541, aged 37. Wycherly, William, the comic
poet, born, 1640; died, 1715. Wynants, John, Dutch landscape painter, born,
1600; died, 1670.
X.
XANTIPPUS, at the head of the Carthaginians, defeated the Romans, killed
30,000, and took 15,000 prisoners; the Romans lost, at the same time, by
shipwreck, 220 ships, 255 before Christ. Xavier, S. Francis, a Jesuit, one of
the earliest missionaries to the Indies, died, 1552. Xenocrates, the Grecian
philosopher, died, about 314 before Christ. Xenocrates, the Greek physician,
practiced at Rome, about 60. Xenophanes, the Greek poet, flourished, 580 before
Christ. Xenophen, the Athenian historian, died at Corinth, 359 before Christ,
aged about 90. Xer^, king of Persia, began his expedition against Gree^e, 481;
killed by Artabanes, 464 before Christ. Xime^es, Cardinal de, regent of Spain,
died, 1517, aged 80.
Y.
YALDEN, Rev. Dr. Thomas, political writer, died, 1736, aged 65. York, Edward,
duke of, elder brother to George III. died at Monaco, Sept. 17, 1767, aged 27.
York, Charles, lord chancellor, killed himself, Jan. 1770. Young, Dr. Edward,
the poet, died, 1765, aged S^.
Z.
ZAMET died, 1614. Zamolxis, the Greek philoscopher, flourished, 520 before
Christ. Zechariah flourished, 520 before Christ. Zeno, the Greek philosopher,
founder of the Stoics, died, 264, aged 98. Zeno, of Sidon, the epicurean
philosopher, flourished, 83. Zenobia, queen of Palmyra, 273; died, about 280.
Zenodotus, librarian at Alexandria, 287 before Christ. Zephaniah, the prophet,
flourished, 641 before Christ. Zeuxis, the Greek painter, flourished, 468
before Christ. Zinzendorf, Count, a German, chief of the Moravians, whom he
introduced into England, died, 1760, aged 70. See Moravians. Zoilus, the Greek
rhetorician, flourished, 259 before Christ. Zonaras, the Greek historian,
flourished, 1118. Zoroaster, the Persian philosopher, 2066 before Christ.
Zosimus, the Greek historian, flourished, 425. Zouche, Richard, the civilian,
died, 1660. Zucchero, Frederic, Italian history painter, born, 1543; died,
1609. Zuinglius, the reformer, killed in the Swiss war, 1531, aged 44.
A LIST of the KINGS of the SAXON HEPTARCHY.
I. KENT.
Reigned years. Pagans. 1. Hengist 31 2. Esca 24 3. Otta, or Octa 20 4. Immeric
29 Christians. 5. Ethelbert 56 6. Eadbald. 24 7. Ercombert 24 8. Edgbert 9 9.
Lothair 12 10. Edric 7 11. Withred 33 12. Edbert 23 13. Edilbert 11 14. Alric
34 15. Edilbert 3 16. Cuthred 8 17. Baldred 18 II. SOUTH SAXONS, or SUSSEX.
Pagans. 1. Ella 32 2. Cissa 75 3. Ethelwolf 25 4. Berthune 5. Authune III.
WEST SAXONY, or WESSEX.
Pagans. 1. Cerdic 16 2. Cynric 26 3. Ceaulin 31 4. Cebric 6 5. Ceolwalf 14
Christians. 6. Cinegils and Rinchelm 31 7. Kenewall and Sexburge 32 8. Esciwin
2 9. Kentwin 9 Pagan. 10. Cedwalla 2 Christians. 11. Ina 38 12. Ethelhard 14
13. Cuthred 14 14. Sigebert ^ 15. Kinewulf 29 16. Brithric 16 17. Edgbert 37
IV. EAST SAXONY, or ESSEX. The time these kings reigned are not mentioned,
because there is nothing certain of them.
Pagans. 1. Erkenwin. 2. Sleda. Christians. 3. Sebert. 4. Sexred, Seward, and
Sigebert, brothers. 5. Sigebert the Little. 6. Sigebert the Good. 7. Swithelm.
8. Sigher and Seba. 9. Sigheard and Senfred. 10. Offa. 11. Selred. 12.
Swithred. V. NORTHUMBERLAND.
Pagans. 1. Ida 12 2. Ella 30 3. Edelric 4 4. Edelfrid 24 Christians. 5. Edwin
17 6. Oswald 9 7. Oswy 28 8. Egfrid 15 9. Alfrid 19 10. Osred 11 11. Kenred 2
12. Osric 11 13. Ceolwulf 8 14. Egbert, alias Eaadbert 20 15. Osulf 1 16.
Ethelwald, alias Mollo 6 17. Alured 9 18. Ethelred, alias Ethelbert 4 19.
Alfwold 11 20. Osred; then Ethelbert again.

After Ethelred was slain, there was an Interregnum of 33 years, during which
time, the kingdom was in the possession of Edgbert, king of the West Saxons.

VI. EAST ANGLES.
Pagans. 1. Ussa 7 2. Titist 10 3. Redwald 44 4. Eorpwald 12 Christians. 5.
Sigebert. 6. Egric. 7. Anna 13 8. Ethelbert. 9. Ethelwald 9 10. Adulf 19 11.
Elfwald 7 12. Beorna 24 13. Ethelred 52 14. Ethelbert 5

When Ethelbert was slain by Offa, it was united to Mercia; yet St. Edmund
reigned afterward, and was murdered by the Danes, in 870.

VII. MERCIA.
Reigned years. Pagans. Cridda, Wibba, and Cheorl, petty kings. 1. Penda, Ann.
Dom. 625. Christians. 2. Peada and Oswy, dukes 3 3. Wulfer 16 4. Ethelred,
alias Aedired 30 5. Kenred 4 6. Ceolred 8 7. Ethclbald 41 8. Beornred 1 9. Offa
38 10. L^fer 1 11. Kenulf 2 12. Kenelm and Ceolulf 1 13. Beornulf 3 14. Ludecan
2 15. Withlaf 13 16. Bertulf 13 17. Burrhed 22 11. Ceolwulf.

See Heptarchy, in the Alphabet, Vol. I.

KINGS of SCOTLAND, and the Time they reigned.
The first King, FERGUS I. began to reign 328 before Christ.

began to reign. names. 1003, Malcolm II the 84th monarch. 1033, Duncan,
grandson to Malcolm. 1040, Macbeth, Tyrant, grandson to Malcolm II. 1057,
Malcolm III. son of Duncan. 1093, Donald VII. brother to Malcolm. 1094, Duncan
II. natural son to Malcolm III. 1096, Edgar, son of Malcolm III. 1106,
Alexander, brother to Edgar. 1124, David, brother to Alexander. 1153, Malcolm.
1165, William, brother to Malcolm. 12^, Alexander II. son to William. 124^,
Alexander III. son to Alexander. 1285. Interregnum. 1242, John Baliol,
descendant of David I. 1^26, Robert I. ditto. 1320, David II. (son to Robert)
and Edward. 1370, Robert II. the first of the Stuarts, nephew to David. 1390,
John Robert, son to Robert. 1423, James I. son to John. 1437, James II. son to
James. 1400, James III. son to James. 1488, James IV. son to James. 1533, James
V. son to James. 1542, Mary Stuart, daughter to James. 1567, James VI. son to
Mary.

The successors of James VI. became kings of England till 1707, when the two
kingdoms were united.

A LIST of the KINGS of FRANCE since WILLIAM the CONQUEROR.
died. Henry I. 1060 Philip I. son of Henry 1108 Lewis VI. son of Philip 1137
Lewis VII. son of Lewis 1180 Philip II. the August, son of Lewis 1223 Lewis
VIII. son of Philip 1226 Lewis IX. Saint, son of Lewis 1270 Philip III. the
Hardy, son of Lewis 1285 Philip IV. the Fair, son of Philip, 1314 Lewis X. son
of Philip 1316 Philip V. brother to Lewis 1323 Charles IV. the Fair, brother to
Philip 1327 Edward of England crowned. Philip V. the Courtier, nephew to
Charles IV. 1350 John, died in London, son to Philip 1364 Charles V. the Wise,
son to John 1380 Charles VI. the Well-beloved, son to Charles 1422 Charles VII.
the Victorious, son to Charles 1462 Henry VI. of England proclaimed. Lewis XI.
son to Charles 1482 Charles VIII. son to Lewis 1498 Lewis XII. cousin to
Charles 1515 Francis I. 1524 Henry II. son to Francis 1559 Francis II. son to
Henry 1560 Charles IX. brother to Francis 1574 Henry III. brother to Charles
1589 Henry IV. twenty-second cousin to Henry III. 1610 Lewis XIII. son to Henry
1643 Lewis XIV. son to Lewis 1715 Lewis XV. grandson to Lewis 1774 Lewis XVI.
ditto to Lewis.

KINGS of POLAND.
began to reign. Uladislaus I. the twentieth sovereign, brother to the last
king 1082 Boleslaus III. son of Uladislaus 1102 Uladislaus II. son of Boleslaus
1140 Boleslaus IV. son of Uladislaus 1146 Mieceslaus III. brother of Boleslaus
1173 Cassimir II. brother of Mieceslaus 1178 Lescus V. son of Cassimir 1194
Mieceslaus III. 1200 Uladislaus III. son of Mieceslaus 1203 Lescus V. again
1206 Boleslaus V. son of Lescus 1228 Lescus VI. nephew of Lescus V. 1279
Premislaus, duke of Great Poland 1295 Uladislaus IV. 1296 Wenceslaus 1300
Uladislaus IV. again 1306 Gassimir III. son of Uladislaus 1333 Lewis, king of
Hungary, nephew to Cassimir 1370 Hedwigis, married in 1385 to 1383 Uladislaus
V. husband of Hedwigis, and king of H^ngary 1385 Uladislaus VI. son of
Uladislaus and king of Hungary 1434 Boleslaus VI. duke of Massovia 1444
Cassimir IV. brother to Uladislaus VI. 1447 John, son of Cassimir 1492
Mexander, brother to John 1502 Sigismund I. brother of Alexander 1507 Sigismund
II. son of Sigismund 1548 Henry, brother to Charles VI. of France 1573 Stephen,
king of Transylvania 1576 Sigismund III. son of the king of Sweden 1583
Uladislaus VII. son of Sigismund 1632 John II. 1648 Michael, a Russian prince
1669 John Sobieski, grand marshal of Poland 1674 Frederick II. elector of
Saxony 1697 Stanislaus I. 1704 Frederick II. again 1710 Frederick III. son of
Frederick II. 1733 Stanislaus II. count Poniatowsky 1764

KINGS of SWEDEN.
began to reign. Ingo, sixth monarch 1060 Halstan, brother of Ingo 1064 Philip,
son of Halstan 1080 Ingo II. son of Philip 1100 Ragwald 1130 Magnus I. son of
Nich. king of Denmark 1133 Suercher II. 1144 Eric X. 1150 Charles VII. son of
Suercher II. 1162 Canute, son of Eric X. 1168 Suercher III. son of Charles VII.
1192 Eric XI. son of Canute 1211 John I. son of Suercher III. 1220 Eric XII.
son of Eric XI. 1223 Waldemar, nephew to Eric XII. 1250 Magnus II. brother to
Waldemar 1279 Birgir II. son to Magnus 1290 Magnus II. nephew to Birgir 1320
Albert 1365 Margaret, queen of Denmark and Norway 1394 Eric XIII. nephew to
Margaret 1411 Christopher, nephew to Eric 1441 Charles VIII. 1448 Christian I.
king of Denmark 1458 Charles VIII. again 1469 Christian I. again 1471 John II.
son of Christian 1497 Christian II. son of John. 1520 Gustavus I. Vasa, grand
nephew to Charles VIII. 1528 Eric XIV. son of Gustavus 1556 John III. brother
to Eric 1569 Sigismund I. king of Poland, son to John 1592 Charles IX. brother
to John III. 1606 Gustavus II. son to Charles 1611 Christiana, daughter to
Gustavus 1633 Charles X. cousin to Christiana 1654 Charles XI. son to Charles
1660 Charles XII. son to Charles 1699 Ulrique, sister to Charles 1718 Adolphus,
duke of Holstein 1751 Gustavus III. son of Adolphus 1771

KINGS of DENMARK.
began to reign. Canute II. nineteenth monarch, king of Engl. 1014 Hardicanute
II. king of Engl. son of Canute 1036 Magnus I. king of Norway, who united the
two crowns 1041 Suenon, nephew of Canute II. 1048 Harold IV. natural son of
Suenon 1079 Canute III. brother to Harold 1080 Olaus II. brother to Canute 1086
Eric III. brother to Olaus 1097 Nicholas, brother to Eric 1106 Eric IV. not.
son of Eric III. 1135 Eric V. nephew to Eric IV. 1138 Suenon III. not. son to
Eric III. 1147 The kingdom divided between him and Canute IV. Waldemar I. 1157
Canute V. son of Waldemar 1182 Waldemar II. son of Canute 1202 Eric VI. son of
Waldemar 1240 Abel I. brother to Eric 1250 Christopher I. brother to Abel 1252
Eric VII. son of Christopher 1259 Eric VIII. son of Eric 1286 Christopher II.
brother to Eric He divided the kingdom with his son Eric IX. 1319 Waldemar III.
1340 Olaus III. grandson to Waldemar 1375 Margaret I. mother to Olaus 1385 Eric
X. nephew to Margaret 1411 Christopher III. nephew to Eric 1439 Christian I.
1448 John, son to Christian 1481 Christian II. son to John 1513 Frederick I.
1523 Christian III. son of Frederic 1534 Frederic II. son of Christian 1559
Christian IV. son of Frederick 1588 Frederick III. son of Christian 1648
Christian V. son of Frederick 1670 Frederick IV. son of Christian 1699
Christian VI. son of Frederick 1730 Frederick V. son of Christian 1746
Christian VII. son of Frederick 1766

KINGS of SPAIN since the UNION of CASTILE and ARRAGON.
began to reign. Ferdinand and Isabella 1492 Joan, daughter of Isabella 1504
Philip, husband to Joan. Charles, afterward Emperor of Germany 1506 Philip II.
son of Charles, married to Mary I. of England 1556 Philip III. son of Philip
1598 Philip IV. son of Philip 1621 Charles II. son of Philip 1665 Philip V.
grandson to Lewis XIV. of France 1700 Lewis, son to Philip, 1724 Ferdinand VI.
son of Philip 1746 Philip V. again 1727 Charles III. half brother to Ferdinand
1759

Navarre was a separate kingdom till united to Spain in Philip III.

The kings of Spain were kings of Portugal from 1580 till the Revolution, under
the duke of Braganza, in 1640.

KINGS of PORTUGAL since the REVOLUTION under BRAGANZA, 1640.
began to reign. John IV. 1640 Alfonso VI. son of John 1646 Peter II. brother
to Aifonso 1683 John V. son of Peter 1706 Joseph, son of John 1750 Mary,
Daughter of Joseph 1777

KINGS of PRUSSIA.
began to reign. Frederick I. first king 1701 Frederick II. son to Frederick
1713 Frederick III. son to Frederick II. 1740

KINGS of HUNGARY and BOHEMIA.
began to reign. Solomon, seventh king 1063 Geiza I. son of the last king but
one 1073 St. Ladislaus, brother to Geiza 1076 Coloman, son of Geiza 1095
Stephen II. son of Coloman 1114 Bela II. son of Stephen's uncle 1131 Geiza II.
son of Bela 1141 Stephen III. son of Geiza 1161 Bela III. brother to Stephen
1173 Emeric, son to Bela 1191 Ladislaus II. son of Emeric 1200 Andrew II. son
of Bela III. 1201 Bela IV. son of Andrew 1235 Stephen IV. son of Bela IV. 1275
Ladislaus III. son of Stephen 1278 Andrew III 1291 Wenceslaus, son of the king
of Bohemia 1301 Otho, duke of Bavaria 1304 Charles 13^9 Lewis I. son of Charles
1342 Mary, daughter of Lewis 1383 Mary, and Sigismund her husband, emperor of
Germany 1389 Albert, son in law to Sigismund, and king of Bohemia 1437
Ladislaus IV. king of Poland 1440 Ladislaus V. posthumus son of Albert 1444
Matthias I. 1458 Ladislaus VI. king of Bohemia, and son of the king of Poland
1490 Lewis II. son of Ladislaus 1516 John 1526 Ferdinand I (brother in law to
Lewis II.) king of Bohemia, and afterward emperor of Germany 1527 John again
1534 John II. son of John 1539 Maximilian, son of Ferdinand I. and emperor of
Germany 1561 Rodolphus, son of Maximilian and emperor of Germany 1573 Matthias
II. brother to Rodolphus, and emperor of Germany 1609 Ferdinand II. brother to
Matthias, and emperor 1618 Ferdinand III. son of Ferdinand, and emperor of
Germany 1625 Ferdinand IV. son of Ferdinand III. 1647 Leopold, brother to
Ferdinand IV. and emperor of Germany 1656 Joseph, son to Leopold, and emperor
1687 Charles VI. brother to Joseph, and emperor 1711 Maria, daughter of
Charles, and married to Fran. I. emperor of Germany 1740 Joseph II. son of
Maria, and emperor 1780

EMPERORS of RUSSIA.
began to reign. John III. succeeded his father as Great Duke or Czar 1462
Demetrius, grandson of John 1504 Basile V. son of John III. 1504 John IV. son
of Basile 1534 Theodore I. son of John IV. 1584 Bovise, brother to Theodore's
wife 1598 Theodore II. son of Bovise 1605 Demetrius II. 1605 Chouski 1606
Michael, a relation of the preceding Czar's 1613 Alexis, son of Michael 1645
Theodore III. son of Alexis 1676 Peter I. brother of Theodore 1682 Catherine I.
wife of Peter I. crowned empress 1725 Peter II. son of Alexis 1727 Ann, niece
to Peter I. 1730 John V. son of Ann's niece, aged two months 1740 Elizabeth,
daughter of Peter I. 1741 Peter III. nephew to Elizabeth 1762 Catherine II.
wife of Peter III. 1763

EMPERORS of ROME, from the Foundation of ROME, 753 before Christ.
names. began to reign. Bef. Xt. Romulus, first king 753 Interregnum 716 Numa
Pompilius 715 Tullus Hostilius 672 Battle of the Horatii and Curatii 669 Ancus
Martius 640 Tarquin, the elder 616 Servius Tullius 578 Tarquin, the proud 534
Republic of Rome 500 Augustus first Romans Em. 31 Aft. Xt. Tiberius 14 Caligula
37 Claudius 41 Nero 54 L. Clodius Macer. Tyran. Galba 68 Otho 69 Vitellius 69
Vespasian 69 Titus 79 Domitian 81 Nerva 96 Trajan 98 Adrian 117 Antoninus Pius
138 M. Aurelius 161 L. Verus 161 M. Aurel. alone 170 Commodus 180 Pertinax 193
Didius Julianus 193 Pescenius Niger 193 Clodius Albinus S. Severus 193 M. A.
Antoninus 211 P. Sept. Geta 211 M. Apel. Sev. Macrinus 217 M. Aur. Ant.
Elagabalus 218 Alexander Severus 222 Uranius Tyran. C. Jul. Verus Maximus 235
M. Ant. Africanus, elder 237 M. Ant. Africanus, younger, 237 Pupienus and
B^lbinus 237 Gordian III. 238 Philippus, father 244 Philippus, son. T. Jul.
Mar. Pacatianus. P. Sarvil. Marinus. Decius 249 Herennius Etruscus. Hostilianus
251 L. Priscus Tyran. Jul. Valens, Tyr. M. Aufidius Perpenna, Tyran.
Trebonianus Gallus. Vibius Volusianus. C. Jul. Aemilianus 253 Licin.
Valerianus, father 253 Lic. Egnat. Gallienus, son of Valerianus alone 253 Lic.
Valerianus, son of Valor. Lic. Salonius, son of Gallien. Sulpicius Antoninus.
M. Aur. Cl Gothicus 268 Quintilius, brother of Claudius. Domet. Aurelianus 270
Firmius, Tyrant, in Egypt. Tetricus, Tyrant among the Gauls. Athenodorus.
Heroias Vabalathus. A. Septimius. Interregnum 275 Tacitus 275 Florianus 276
Probus 276 Saturnius, Proculus, Bonosius. M. Aurel. Carus 282 M. Aurel.
Carinus. Numerianus. M. Aur. Julian. Sabrinus 284 Dioclesian and Maxim.
Hercules. Selvius Amandus, Pomponius, Aelianus, Carausius, Allectus, Epideus
Achilleus, Domitius Domitianus, Tyran. Constable. Chlorus, and Galer. Val.
Maximinus 305 Flav. Val. Severus. C. Gal. Val. Maximinus. M. Aur. Val.
Maxentius. Alexander, Tyran. P. Val. Lic. Lycinius Caesar. Valerius Valens.
Martinianus. Constantine, the Gr. Constantine, the younger, died in 340 337
Constance 337 Saturninus 337 Constant 337 Magnentius, Nepotianus, Vetranion and
Sylvanus, Tyrants. Julian, the apostate 361 Jovian 363

After this time, the Roman Empire was divided into Western and Eastern; Rome
being the capital of the first, Constantino ple of the last. The Western ended
in 494; the Eastern in 1204.

WESTERN EMPIRE.
Seat, -- ROME.
began to reign. Valentinian I. 364 Gratian 375 Valentian II. 383 Honorius, son
of Theodosius the Great 394 John 423 Valentinian III. 425 Maximus 455 Avilus
455 Majorianus 457 Severus III. 461 Anthemius 466 Olybrius 473 Glycerius 474
Julius 474 Orestes 475 Romulus 476

The next emperor took the title of king of Italy, whose successors afterward,
in Charlemagne, became emperors of Germany, 800, and were crowned at Rome. See
Emperors of Germany.

EASTERN EMPIRE.
Seat, -- CONSTANTINOPLE.
began to reign. Valens 364 Theodosius the Great 379 Arcadius, son of
Theodosius the Great 395 Theodosius II. 408 Marcian 450 Leo I. 457 Leo II. 474
Zeno 474 Anastasius 491 Justin 518 Justinian 527 Justin II. 565 Tiberius 581
Mauritius 586 Phocas 602 Heraclius 610 Constantine III. 641 Constantine IV. 641
Constans II. 642 Metius 668 Constantine V. 668 Justinian II. 685 Leo III. 694
Absimaris 696 Justinian III. 703 Philippicus 711 Anastasius II. 713 Theodosius
III. 714 Leo IV. 716 Constantine VI. 741 Leo V. 775 Constantine VII. 780 Irene
797 Nicephorus 802 Saturacius 811 Michael 811 Leo VI. 813 Michael II. 821
Theophilus 829 Michael III. 842 Basilius 867 Leo VII. 886 Constantine IX. 910
Romanus II. 959 Nicephorus II. 963 Zemisees 970 Basilius II. and Constantine X.
975 Romanus III. 1028 Michael IV. 1033 Michael V. 1041 Constantine XI. 1041
Theodora 1054 Michael VI. 1056 Isaac 1057 Constantine XII. 1059 Michael VII.
1067 Romanus IV. 1068 Michael VIII. 1071 Nicephorus III. 1078 Alexius 1080 John
1118 Emanuel 1142 Alexius II. 1180 Andronicus 1183 Isaac II. 1185 Alexius III.
1195 Isaac III. 1203 Alexins IV. 1204

After this, the empire was divided into those of Adrianople and
Constantinople, till they were united again by conquest under Mahomet II.
emperor of Constantinople, May 29, 1448. See Emperors of Constantinople.

EMPERORS of CONSTANTINOPLE.
began to reign. Mahomet II. (Se Eastern Empire.) 1451 Corcutus, grandson to
Mahomet 1481 Zemin, father to Corcutus 1481 Bajazet II. brother to Zemin 1481
Selim, son to Bajazet 1512 Solomon II. son to Selim 1520 Selim II. son to
Solomon 1566 Amurath (...). son to Selim 1574 Maheme^ III. son to Amurath 1595
Athme^ (...) son to Mahomet 1604 Musta^ (...) brother to Achmet 1617 Osma^
^nephew to Mustapha 1617 Mustapha again 1622 Amu^ IV. grandson to Mustapha 1623
^ham, brother to Amurath 1640 M^ IV. son to Ibraham 1655 Soly^ III. brother to
Mahomet 1687 A^ (...) brother to Solomon 1691 Mu^ II. son to Mahomet IV. 1695
Achm^ III. brother to Mustapha 1703 Mahomet V. 1730 Osman III. brother to
Mahomet 1754 Mustapha III. brother to Osman 1757 Achmet III. or Adulhamed,
brother to Mustapha 1774

EMPERORS of GERMANY.
began to reign. Charlemagne, first emperor. (See Western Empire.) 800 Lewis I.
son of Charlemagne 814 Lotharius I. son of Lewis 840 Lewis II. son of Lotharius
845 Charles II. nephew to Lewis 875 Lewis III. son of Charles 878 Charles III^
brother to Lewis III. 880 Arnolph. bastard brother to Charles 888 Lewis IV. son
of Arnolph 900 Conrade I. duke of Hesse, first elected emperor 912 Henry, duke
of Saxony 920 Otho I. son of Henry 936 Otho II. son of Otho I. 974 Otho III.
son of Otho II 983 Henry II. duke of Bavaria, cousin german to Otho III. 1002
Conrade II. duke of Franconia, 1024 Henry III. son of Conrade 1040 Henry IV.
son of Henry III. 1056 Henry V. son of Henry IV. 1106 Lotharius II. 1125
Conrade III. nephew to Henry V. 1138 Frederick I. nephew to Conrade 1152 Henry
VI. son to Frederick 1190 Philip, brother to Henry 1197 Otho IV. son in law to
Philip 1208 Frederick II. son of Henry VI. 1215 Henry VII. 1245 William 1246
Conrade IV. son of Frederick II. 1250 Richard, brother to Henry III. of England
1257

INTERREGNUM, 1259.

Rodolph I. 1273 Adolph 1292 Albert I. son of Rodolph 1297 Henry VIII. 1308
Lewis V. and Frederick III. 1314 Lewis V. alone 1322 Charles IV. 1346
Wenceslaus, son of Charles 1378 Robert 1400 Sigismund, king of Hungary 1411
Albert II. king of Bohemia and son in law to Sigismund 1437 Frederick III. 1439
Maximilian I. son of Frederick 1493 Charles V. king of Spain, grandson to
Maximillian 1519 Ferdinand I. brother to Charles 1558 Maximilian II. son to
Ferdinand 1564 Rodolph II. son of Maximilian 1577 Matthias, brother to Rodolph
1613 Ferdinand II. cousin to Matthias 1620 Ferdinand III. son of Ferdinand II.
1638 Leopold I. son of Ferdinand III. 1658 Joseph I. king of Hungary and
Bohemia, son of Leopold 1705 Charles VI. brother to Joseph 1711 Charles VII.
1742 Francis I. married to the queen of Hungary and Bohemia, daughter of
Charles VI. 1745 Joseph II. king of Hungary and Bohemia, son of Francis 1765

See HUNGARY.

POPES.
began to reign. Alexander II. 164th pope 1061 Gregory VII. 1073 Vi^or III.
1086 Urban II. 1088 Paschal II. 1099 Gelasius II. 1118 Calixtus II. 1119
Honorius II. 1124 Innocent II. 1130 Caelestine II. 1143 Lucius IV. 1144
Eugenius III. 1145 Anastasius IV. 1153 Adrian IV. 1153 Alexander III. 1159
Lucius III. 1181 Urban III. 1185 Gregory VIII. 1187 Clement III 1187 Caelestine
III. 1191 Innocent III. 1198 Honorius III. 1216 Gregory IX. 1227 Caelestine IV.
1241 Innocent IV. 1243 Alexander IV. 1254 Urban IV. 1261 Clement IV. 1265
Gregory X. 1271 Innocent V. 1276 Adrian V. 1276 Vicedominus 1276 John XX. or
XXI. 1276 Nicholas III. 1277 Honorius IV. 1285 Nicholas IV. died, 1292 1288 See
vacant 2 years and 3 months. Caelestine V. 1294 Boniface VIII. 1294 Benedict
XI. 1303 Clement V. 1305 John XXI or XXII. 1316 Benedict XII. 1334 Clement VI.
1342 Innocent VI. 1352 Urban V. 1362 Gregory XI. 1370 Urban VI. 1378 Clement
VIII. antipope, died 1394. Boniface IX. 1389 Benedict XIII. antipope. Innocent
VII. 1404 Gregory XII. 1406 Alexander V. 1409 John XXIII. 1410 Martin V. 1417
Eugenius IV. 1431 Nicholas V. 1447 Calixtus III. 1455 Pius II. 1458 Paul II.
1464 Sextus IV. 1476 Innocent VIII. 1484 Alexander VI. 1492 Pius III. 1503
Julius II. 1503 Leo X. 1513 Adrian VI. 1522 Clement VII. 1523 Paul III. 15^4
Julius III. 1550 Marcellus V. 1555 Paul IV. 1555 Pius IV. 1559 Pius V. 1566
Gregory XIII. 1572 Sixtus V. 1585 Urban VII. 1590 Gregory XIV. 1590 Innocent
IX. 1591 Clement VIII. 1592 Le XI. 1605 Paul V. 1605 Gregory XV. 1621 Urban
VIII. 1623 Innocent X. 1644 Alexander VII. 1655 Clement IX. 1667 Clement X.
1670 Innocent XI. 1676 Alexander VIII. 1689 Innocent XII. 1691 Clement XI. 1700
Innocent XIII. 1721 Benedict XIII. 1724 Clement XII. 1730 Benedict XIV. 1740
Clement XIII. 1758 Clement XIV. 1769 Pius VI. Feb 15, 1775

A LIST of the REGIMENTS, with their DATES and RANK.
Horse Guards. 1st and 2d Troop, 1660 Horse Grenadier Guards. 1st Troop, 1685
2d Troop, 1702 Royal Horse Guards. Blues, 1661 Four Regiments of Horse. 1st,
2d, and 3d, 1685 4th, 1688 Three of Dragoon Guards. A^l. 1685 Fourteen of
Dragoons. 1st, 1680 2d, 1681 3d and 4th, 168^ 5th, 1688 6th, 1689 7th, 1690
8th, 1693 9th -- 14th, 1715 Nine of Light Dragoons. 1st, 2d, 3d, 4th, 1759 5th,
6th, 7th, 8th, 1779 9th, 1781 Three of Foot Guards. All, 1650 One Hundred and
Five of Foot. 1st Reg. 1633 2d, 1661 3d, 1665 4th, 1680 5th, 1674 6th, 1673 7th
-- 15th, 1685 16th and 17th, 1688 18th, 1684 19th and 20th, 1688 21st, 1678 22d
-- 27th, 1689 28th, 1694 29th -- 34th, 1702 35th and 36th 1701 37th -- 39th
1702 40th, 1717 41st, 1719 42d, 1739 43d -- 48th, 1741 49th, 1743 50th, 1753
51st -- 60th, 1755 61st -- 70th, 1758 71st 1775 72d -- 74th 1777 75th, 1778
76th -- 83d, 1777 84th 1775 85th -- 92d, 1779 93d -- 100th, 1780 101st --
105th, 1781 African corpse, 1765 Jamaica corpse, 1766 52 independ. comp. 1781
Artillery, Ireland, 1670 Artillery, England, 1705

The KINGS of each COUNTRY.
countries. began to reign. Constantinople. Abdul Hamed Jan. 21, 1774 Denmark.
Christian VII. born, Jan. 29, 1749. 1766 France. Lewis XVI. born, 1754. 1774
Germany. Joseph II. born, March 13, 1741. 1765 Holland. William V. prince of
Orange, born, March 5, 1748. 1766 Hungary and Bohemia. Joseph II. emperor of
Germany. (See Germany.) 1780 Modena. Francis Maria, duke of, born, July 2,
School. Sicily. Ferdinand IV. born, Jan. 12, 1751. 1759 Poland. Stanislaus^ born,
Jan. 17, 1732. 1764 Parma. Ferdinand, duke of, born, Jan. 20, 1752. Portugal.
Maria, born, Dec. 17, 1734. 1777 Prussia. Frederic III. born, Jan. 24, 1712.
1740 Rome. Pius VI. born, Dec. 27, 1717. Feb. 22, 1775 Russia. Catherine II.
born, May 2, 1729. 1762 Sardinia. Victor Amadeus Maria, born, June 26, 1726.
1773 Spain. Charles III. born, Jan. 20, 1716. 1759 Sweden. Gustavus II. born,
Jan. 24, 1746. 1770 Tuscany. Leopold, grand duke of, born, May 5, 1747. Venice.
Brizio Guistiniano. June 14, 1775

A View of the RELIGION and CAPITAL CITIES of the chief Countries in EUR^PE.
Countries. Religion. Capital Cities. Austrian Netherlands, Papists, Brussels.
Bohemia, ditto, Prague. Denmark, Protestants, Copenhagen. France, Papists,
Paris, Germany, Protestants and Papists, Vienna. Hungary, Papists, Presburg.
Italy, ditto, Rome. Norway, Protestants, Bergen. Poland, Papists, Warsaw.
Portugal, ditto, Lisbon. Prussia, Protedants, Berlin. Russia, Greek Church,
Petersburg. Sardinia, Papists, Turin. Sicilies, ditto, Naples. Spain, ditto,
Madrid. Sweden, Protestants, Stockholm. Switzerland, ditto and Papists, Bern.
Turkey, Mahometans, Christians and Jews, Constantinople. United Provinces,
Protestants, Amsterdam. Venice, Papists, Greeks, and Jews, Venice.

Comparative View of the FORCES, REVENUE, and POPULATION of EUROPE, in 1776.
Countries. Soldiers. Ann. Revenue. No. People. L. Great Britain, 40,000
12,000,000 10,000,000 Holland, 40,000 5,500,000 2,500,000 France, 200,000
15,000,000 24,000,000 Spain, 100,000 6,000,000 6,000,000 Portugal, 30,000
4,500,000 1,500,000 Sardinia, 70,000 2,500,000 2,500,000 Naples, 25,000
2,700,000 4,500,000 Rest of Italy, 85,000 5,000,000 13,000,000 Austria, 240,000
3,000,000 5,500,000 Prussia, 260,000 3,000,000 3,600,000 Germany, 200,000
7,500,000 12,000,000 Denmark, 60,000 2,200,000 2,000,000 Sweden, 80,000
3,000,000 2,500,000 Russia, 350,000 5,500,000 20,000,000 Poland, 3000 300,000
8,000,000 1,783,000 77,700,000 117,600,000

The ROYAL FAMILY of ENGLAND.
King George born, June 4, 1738 Queen Charlotte born, May 19, 1744 George,
prince of Wales born, Aug. 12, 1762 Frederic, bishop of Osnaburgh, born, Aug.
16, 1763 William Henry born, Aug. 21, 1765 Charlotte, princess royal, born,
Sept. 29, 1766 Edward born, Nov. 2, 1767 Augusta Sophia born, Nov. 8, 1768
Elizabeth born, May 22, 1770 Ernest Augustus born, June 5, 1771 Augustus
Frederic born, Jan. 27, 1772 Adolphus Frederic born Feb. 24, 1774 Mary born,
Apr. 2^, 1776 Sophia born, Nov. 3, 1777 Octavius born, Feb. 23, 1779 Alfred
born, Sept. 22, 1780
BROTHERS and SISTERS to His MAJESTY.
Princess Augusta born, August 11, 1737; married to the duke of Brunswick
Lunenburgh, Jan. 16, 1764. Prince William Henry, duke of Gloucester born, Nov.
25, 1743. Prince Henry Frederick, duke of Cumberland born, Nov. 7, 1745. GEORGE
II.'s ISSUE. Princess Amelia Sophia born, June 10, 1711.
LORD LIEUTENANTS of IRELAND since the UNION.
1707, April 17, Thomas, earl of Pembroke. 1708, Nov. 25, Thomas, lord Wharton.
1711, July 3, James, duke of Ormond. 1713, Oct. 27, Charles, duke of
Shrewsbury. 1717, August 7, Charles, duke of Bolton. 1721, August 28, Charles,
duke of Grafton. 1724, October 22, John, lord Carteret. 1731, September 11,
Lionel, duke of Dorset. 1737, September 7, William, duke of Devonshire. 1745,
August 31, Philip, earl of Chesterfield. 1747, September 13, William, earl of
Harrington. 1751, September 19, Lionel, duke of Dorset. 1755, May 5, William,
marquis of Hartington. 1757, September 25, John, duke of Bedford. 1761, October
6, Dunk, earl of Halifax. 1763, Sept. 22, Hugh, earl of Northumberland. 1765,
June 5, lord viscount Weymouth. 1765, October 18, Francis, earl of Hertford.
1766, October 6, Earl of Bristol. 1767, August 9, George, viscount Townshend,
the first who resided. 1772, Oct. 9, Simon, earl Harcourt. 1776, Nov. 2, John,
earl of Buckinghamshire. 1780, Oct. 13, Frederic, earl of Carlisle. 1782, April
10, William, duke of Portland.
A LIST of the LORD CHANCELLORS since WILLIAM the CONQUEROR.
In these dates the Old Style is preserved, till the alteration.
when made. Maurice, afterward bishop of London, died, Sept. 26, 1107, 1067
Osmund, afterward earl of Dorset, bp. of Sarum. Arfast, bishop of Helmstadt,
Germany, 1073 Herman, bishop of Sherborne. Rev. William Welson. W. Giffard, bp.
of Winton, died, July 21, 1128. Robert Bloet, afterward bishop of Lincoln,
died, Jan. 10, 1122, 1087 Roger, afterward bishop of Sarum, died, Dec. 4,
1139, after 1100 Geofrey Rufus, afterward bishop of Durham, Alexander, bishop
of Lincoln, died, Aug. 1147, after 1135 Pauper, natural son of Roger, bishop of
Sarum. Philip, 1153 Thomas a Becket, archbishop of Canterbury, murdered, Dec.
29, 1171, 1157 Rev. Geofrey Plantagenet, son of Henry II. by Rofamund, died,
1213, 1181 Walter de Bidun. W. Longchamp, bp. of Ely, died, Jan. 29, 1197, 1189
Hugh, afterward bishop of Lincoln, died, Feb. 7, 1234, 1204 Walter de Gray,
afterward archbishop of York, died, May, 1255, 1206 Rich. de Maris^, op. of
Durham, died, 1226, 1212 Ralph Neville, afterward bishop of Winton, died, Feb.
1, 1244, 1223 Simon Norman, 1238 Richard, afterward bishop of Chester, 1239
Ralph Neville, again, 1242 Ranulph Brito, Silvester de Everton, bishop of
Carlisle, 1246 John Lexington, Sept. 1247 John Mansel, chancellor of St. Paul's
London, 1248 Peter de Rievallis, and Rev. Will de Kilkenny, 1250 Peter
Chaseport, and J. de Lessington, May 1253 Will. de Kilkenny, afterward bishop
of Ely, 1253 Henry de Wengham, afterward bishop of London, died, July 13,
1261, 1255 Nicholas, archdeacon of Ely, 1259 Walter Merton, afterward bishop
of Rochester, died, Oct. 27, 1278, 1261 Nicholas, archdeacon of Ely, again,
afterward bishop of Winton, died, 1280, 1263 John de Chisul, afterward bp. of
London, about 1264 Thomas de Cantilupus, afterward bishop of Hereford, died,
Aug. 25, 1282, 1265 Walter Giffard, archbishop of York, died, April 25, 1279,
1265 Godfrey Giffard, afterward bishop of Worcester, died, 1302, 1267 John
Chiful, again, 1269 Richard Middleton, 1269 John Kirkby, afterward bp. of Ely,
died, Mar. 26, 1^90, 1272 Rob. Burnet, bp. of Bath and W^lls, died, 1292. 1274
Walter Langton, 1292 John Langton, afterward bishop of Chichester. 1293
William Greenfield, archbishop of York, died, Sept. 13, 1315, 1302 William
Hamilton, dean of York. 1305 Ralph Baldock, bishop of London, died, July 24,
1313, 1307 Walter Reynold, archbishop of Canterbury, 1311 John Sandale, bishop
of Winton, died, 1320, 1315 John Hotham, bp. of Ely, died, Jan. 25, 1336, 1318
John Salmon, bishop of Norwich, died, July 6, 1325, 1320 W. Ayermin, bishop of
Norwich, died, Mar. 28, 1337, 1323 Robert Baldock, bishop of Norwich, 1324 John
Hotham, again, 1324 Henry Cliff, keeper of the rolls, and William Herlaston,
Chancery-clerk, 1329 Henry Burwash, bishop of Lincoln, died, Dec. 1340, May
1329 John Stratford, afterward archbishop of Canterbury, died, April 9, 1392,
1331 Richard Bury, bishop of Durham, died, April 24, 1345, 1336 John Stratford,
again, 1336 Robert Stratford, brother to John. 1338 Richard Bintworth, bishop
of London, died, Dec. 8. 1339, July, 1339 John de St. Paul, keeper of the
rolls, Michael Worth, and Thomas Baumburg, 1340 John de St. Paul, alone, Feb.
1341 John Stratford, again, 1341 Robert Stratford, again, 1341 Sir Robert
Burgchiar, 1342 Robert Parnyng, Oct. 1342 Robert Sadington, Sept. 1344 John
Offord, Oct. 1346 John Thursby, archbishop of York, died, November 6, 1373,
July, 1347 Will. Edenton, bp. of Winton, died, 1366. Feb. 1357 Simon Langham,
archbishop of Canterbury, died, July 22, 1367, Feb. 1363 William of Wickham,
bishop of Winton, died, 1402, Sept. 1368 Sir Robert de Thorp, Mar. 1372 John
Knyvet, 1373 Adam Houghton, bishop of St. David's, died, April, 1389, Jan. 1377
Sir Richard de la Scrope, 1379 Simon Sudbury, archbishop of Canterbury, 1380
William Courtney, afterward archbishop of Canterbury, died, July, 1396, 1381
Sir Richard de la Scrope, again, 1382 Robert Baybroke, bishop of London, died,
1404, Sept. 1383 Michael de la Pool, earl of Suffolk, Mar. 1383 Thomas Arundel,
bishop of Ely, Oct. 1387 William of Wickam, again, May 1389 Thomas Arundel,
again, then archbishop of Canterbury, died, Feb. 20, 1413, Sept. 1392 Edmund
Stafford, bishop of Exeter, Nov. 1397 Sir John Searle, keeper of the rolls,
Nov. 1400 Pdmund Stafford, again, died, Sept. 1419, Mar. 1401 Henry Beaufort,
bishop of Winton, died, April 11, 1447, 1404 Thomas Langley, bp. of Durham,
died, 1437, 1404 John Wakering, clerk, keeper of the rolls. Jan. 1410 Sir John
Beaufort, d. of E^ter, died, 1425, Jan. 1410 Henry Beaufort, again, 1412 Simon
Garnstede, clerk, master of the rolls. Sept. 1417 Henry Beaufort, again, Oct.
1417 John Kemp, afterward archbishop of Canterbury, died, Mar. 22, 1453, Mar.
1425 John Stafford, afterward archbishop of Canterbury, died, July 6, 1452,
Feb. 1432 John Kemp, again, Jan. 1450 Richard Neville, earl of Sarum, beheaded,
1461, Apr. 1454 Thomas Bourchier, archbishop of Canterbury, died, 1486, Mar.
1455 William Wykham, bishop of Winton, died, August 11, 1486, Oct. 1457 George
Neville, afterward archbishop of York, died, 1476, aged 46, July, 1460 Robert
Stillington, bishop of Bath and Wells, died, a prisoner, in 1491, June, 1468
John Alcock, afterward bishop of Ely, died, Oct. 1, 1500, Sept. 1473 Laurence
Booth, afterward archbishop of York, died, 1483, June, 1474 Thomas Rotheram,
afterward archbishop of York, died, 1500, aged 76, 1475 John Russel, bishop of
Lincoln, died, July 30, 1490, Nov. 1484 John Morton, archbishop of Canterbury,
died, Oct. 1521, Aug. 1487 H. Deane, afterward archbishop of Canterbury, Oct.
1501 W. Warham, archbishop of Canterbury, died, 1522, Aug. 1502 Thomas Wolsey,
archbishop of York, Dec. 1516 Sir Thomas More, Oct. 1530 Sir Thomas Audley,
afterward baron Audley, died, April 30, 1544, May, 1533 Lord Wriothesley,
afterward earl of Southampton, 1545 Lord Paulet, afterward marquis of
Winchester, died, 1571, aged 97, July, 1547 Lord Rich, died, 1566, Nov. 1547
Thomas Goodrick, bishop of Ely, Jan. 1551 Stephen Gardener, bishop of Winton,
Sept. 1553 Nicholas Heath, archbishop of York, died about 1566, Jan. 1555 Sir
Nicholas Bacon, died, 1579, Dec. 1559 Sir Thomas Bromley, died, 1586, Apr. 1579
Sir Christopher Hatton, died, 1591, Apr. 1587 Sir John Puckering, May, 1592 Sir
Thomas Egerton, afterward viscount Brackley, died, 1617, 1596 Sir Francis
Bacon, afterward viscount St. Albans, Mar. 1616 John Williams, afterward
archbishop of York, died, Mar. 25, 1650, July, 1620 Lord Coventry, died, 1639,
Nov. 1625 Sir John Finch, Jan. 1639 Sir Edward Littleton, died, 1645, aged 56,
Jan. 1640 Sir Richard Lane, Aug. 1645 Sir Edward Herbert, died, 1660, 1653 Lord
Clarendon, Dec. 1657 Sir Orlando Bridgman, Aug. 1667 Earl of Shaftsbury, died,
Jan. 22, 1682, aged 61, Nov. 1672 Sir Heneage Finch, afterward earl of
Nottingham, died, Dec. 11, 1682, aged 60, 1673 Lord Guilford, died, Sept. 5,
1685, Dec. 1682 Lord Jeffreys, died, April 18, 1689, Oct. 1685 Sir John
Maynard, Anthony Kecke, and William Rawlinson, Mar. 1689 Lord Summers, died,
1716, aged 63, Mar. 1692 Sir Nathan Wright, May, 1700 Lord Cowper, first
chancellor of Great Britain, Oct. 1705 In commission. Aug. 1710 Lord Harcourt,
Apr. 1713 Lord Cowper, again, Sept. 1714 Lord Parker, afterward earl of
Macclesfield, May 1718 Lord King, died, 1734, aged 64, June, 1725 Lord Talbot,
died, Feb. 14, 1737, aged 52, Nov. 1733 Philip York, earl of Hardwicke, 1737
Lord Henley, afterward earl of Northington, Jan. 1761 Charles Pratt, Lord
Camden, July, 1766 Charles York, Jan. 1770 In commission, viz. Sir Sidney
Stafford Smythe, knt. Hon. Henry Bathurst, and Sir Richard Aston, knt. Jan.
1770 Hen. Bathurst, lord Apsley, now earl Bathurst, Jan. 1771 Lord Thurlow,
June 2, 1778

CHANCELLORS of the University of OXFORD.
When elected. 1552, Sir John Mason, knight. 1556, Cardinal Pole, archbishop of
Canterbury. 1558, Henry Fitzalen, earl of Arundel. 1559, Sir John Mason, again.
1564, Robert Dudley, earl of Leicester. 1588, Sir Christopher Hatton, lord
chancellor. 1591, Thomas Sackville, earl of Dorset. 1608, Richard Bancroft,
archbishop of Canterbury. 1610, Thomas Egerton, lord Ellesmere. 1616, William,
earl of Pembroke. 1630, William Laud, archbishop of Canterbury. 1641, Philip
Herbert, earl of Pembroke. 1643, William, marquis of Hertford. 1647, Philip,
earl of Pembroke, again. 1650, Oliver Cr^mwell, lord protecter of England, etc.
1657, Lord Richard Cromwell, protector. 1660, Edward Hyde, earl of Clarendon.
1657, Sheldon, archbishop of Canterbury. 1669, James, duke of Ormond. 1681,
James, duke of Ormond, grandson of the above. 1715, -- earl of Arra^ 1759,
John, earl of Westmoreland. 1762, George Henry, earl of Litchfield. 1772,
Fredtrick, lord North.
CHANCELLORS of the UNIVERSITY of CAMBRIDGE.
When installed. 1547, Edward Seymour, duke of Somerset, uncle to Edward IV.
1549, John Dudley, duke of Northumberland. 1553, Stephen Gardener, bishop of
Winchester. 1556, Reginald Pole, archbishop of Canterbury. 1558, Sir William
Cecil, afterward lord Burleigh. 1598, Robert Devereux, earl of Essex. 1600,
Sir Robert Cecil, afterward earl of Salisbury. 1611, Henry Howard, earl of
Northampton. 1614, Thomas Howard, earl of Suffolk. 1621, Thomas Bancroft,
archbishop of Canterbury. 1626, George Villiers, duke of Buckingham. 1628,
Henry Rich, earl of Holland. 1648, Edward Montague, earl of Manchester. 1671,
George Villiers, duke of Buckingham. 1674, James Scott, duke of Monmouth. 1682,
Christopher Monk, duke of Albemarle. 1688, Charles Seymour, duke of Somerset.
1748, Thomas Holles Pelham, duke of Newcastle. 1768, Augustus Fitzroy, duke of
Grafton.
A List of the ARCHBISHOPS of CANTERBURY, since the establishment of that SEE;
with the dates of their Translations.
This mark * implies, of honorable houses.
names. tran. 1, St. Austin, Years 569 2, St. Laurentius, 611 3, St. Mellitus,
619 4, St. Justus, 624 5, St. Honorius, 636 6, St. Deus-dedit, the first
Englishman, Vacant four Years. 654 7, St. Theodorus, a Grecian, 668 8, St.
Brithwaldus, 692 9, St. Tatwinus, 731 10, Nothelmus, 736 11, Cuthbert, 742 12,
Bregwinus, 759 13, Lambert, 764 14, Ethelardus, 793 15, Ulfredus, 807 16,
Theogildus, 832 17, Celnothus, 18, Ethelradus, 871 19, Pleimundus, 889 20,
Athelmus, 915 21, Wulselmus, Lord chancellor, 924 22, St. Odo, or Otho, 934 23,
St. Dunstan, Lord Treasurer, 961 24, Ethelgarus, 988 25, Siricius, 989 26,
Gosricus, 993 27, St. Elphegus, 1006 28, Livingus, 1013 29, St. Angelnothus, *
1020 30, St. Eadlinus, 1038 31, Robert, 1050 32, Stigand, 1052 33, Lanfranc, an
Italian, 1070 34, St. Anselm, 1093 35, Randulph, 1114 36, William Curbail, 1122
37, Theobald, 1138 38, St. Thomas a Becket, lord chancellor, 1162 39, Richard,
1171 40, Baldwin, 1184 41, Reginald, 1191 42, Hubert Walter, lord chancellor
and lord chief justice, 1193 43, Stephen Langton, cardinal, 1209 44, Richard
Wethershed, 1229 45, St. Edmund, chancellor of Oxford, 1234 46, Boniface,* 1244
47, Robert Kilwarby, cardinal, 1272 48, John Peckham, 1278 49, Robert
Winchelsey, chancellor of Oxford, 1294 50, Walter Reynolds, lord chancellor and
lord treasurer, 1313 51, Simon Mepham, 1327 52, John Stratford, lord
chancellor, 1333 53, Thomas Bradwardin, 1348 54, Simon Islip, 1349 55, Simon
Langham, cardinal and lord chanc. 1366 56, William Witlesey, 1367 57, Simon
Sudbury, lord chancellor, beheaded by the rebels of Wat Tyler, 1379 58, William
Courtney, chancellor of Oxford,* 1381 59, Thomas Arundel, lord chancellor,*
1396 60, Henry Chichely, cardinal,* 1414 61, John Stafford, cardinal, lord
chancellor and lord treasurer, 1443 62, John Kemp, cardinal, lord chancellor
twice, 1452 63, Thomas Bouchier, cardinal, lord chancellor and chancellor of
Oxford,* 1454 64, John Morton, the like, 1486 65, Henry Dean, 1502 66, William
Warham, lord chancellor and chancellor of Oxford, 1504 67, Thomas Cranmer, 1533
68, Reginald Pole, cardinal and chancellor of Oxford,* 1555 69, Matthew Parker,
1559 70, Edmund Grindal, 1575 71, John Whitgift, 1583 72, Richard Bancroft,
chancellor of Oxford, 1604 73, George Abbot, 1610 74, William Laud, chancellor
of Oxford, beheaded, 1644 See vacant sixteen years. 75, William Juxton, once
lord treasurer, Sept. 1660 76, Gilbert Sheldon, July, 1663 77, William
Sancroft, deprived, Feb. 1, 1691, Jan. 1677 78, John Tillotson, Apr. 1691 79,
Thomas Tennison, Dec. 1694 80, William Wake, Dec. 1715 81, John Potter, Mar.
1737 82, Thomas Herring, Dec. 1747 83, Matthew Hutton, May, 1757 84, Thomas
Secker, May, 1758 85, Frederick Cornwallis,* Oct. 1768

N. B. The figures before the names refer to the number of bishops since the
establishment of the sea.

Such bishops as follow Canterbury, are subject to Canterbury; such as follow
York, to York.

Bishops of St. ASAPH, since the Restoration. 37.
38, George Griffith, Oct. 1660 39, Henry Glemham, Oct. 1667 40, Isaac Barrow,
Mar. 1669 41, William Lloyd, Sept. 1630 42, Edward Jones, Dec. 1692 43, George
Hooper, Oct. 1703 44, William Beveridge, July, 1704 45, William Fleetwood, May,
1708 46, John Win, Nov. 1714 47, Francis Hare, Dec. 1727 48, Thomas Tanner,
Nov. 1731 49, Isaac Maddox, Sept. 1736 50, Samuel Lisle, Apr. 1744 51, Robert
Drummond,* Mar. 1748 52, Richard Newcombe, Aug. 1761 53, Jonathan Shipley,
June, 1769
BANGOR. 47.
48, William Roberts, died, 1665, 1737 49, Robert Morgan, June, 1666 50,
Humphrey Lloyd, Oct. 1673 51, Humphrey Humphreys, June, 1689 52, John Evans,
Jan. 1701 53, Benjamin Headley, Dec. 1715 54, Richard Reynolds, Nov. 1721 55,
William Baker, Aug. 1723 56, Thomas Sherlock, Feb. 1727 57, Charles Cecil, May,
1735 58, Thomas Herring, Feb. 1738 59, Matthew Hutton, Nov. 1743 60, Zachary
Pearce, Mar. 1747 61, John Egerton,^ July, 1756 62, John Ewer, Jan. 1769 63,
John Moore, 1775
BATH and WELLS. 55.
56, William Pierce, 1632 57, Robert Creighton, May, 1670 58, Peter Mew, Dec.
1672 59, Thomas Kenn, deprived, Feb. 1690, Feb. 1684 60, William Beveridge,
nominated, but refused it, Apr. 1691 61, Richard Kidder, June, 1691 62, George
Hooper, Mar. 1703 63, John Win, Nov. 1727 64, Edward Wills, Dec. 1743 65,
Charles Moss, 1774
BRISTOL. 13.
14, Gilbert Ironside, Dec. 1760 15, Guy Carlton, Dec. 1671 16, William
Gulston, Jan. 1678 17, John Lake, Aug. 1684 18, Jonathan Trelawney, Nov. 1685
19, Gilbert Ironside, Oct. 1689 20, Joseph Hall, Aug. 1691 21, John Robinson,
Nov. 1710 22, George Smalridge, Mar. 1714 23, Hugh Boulter, Oct. 1719 24,
William Bradshaw, Oct. 1724 25, Charles Cecil, Mar. 1733 26, Thomas Secker,
Feb. 1735 27, Thomas Gooch, June, 1737 28, Joseph Butler, Dec. 1738 29, John
Conybeare, Jan. 1751 30, John Hume, July, 1756 31, Philip Young, July, 1758 32,
Thomas Newton, Jan. 1762 33, Lewis Bagot,* Feb. 1782
CHICHESTER. 72.
73, Henry King, 1641 74, Peter Gunning, Feb. 1669 75, Ralph Brideoke, Mar.
1675 76, Guy Carlton, Jan. 1678 77, John Lake, Oct. 1685 78, Simon Patrick,
Oct. 1689 79, Robert Grove, Aug. 1691 80, John Williams, Dec. 1696 81, Thomas
Manningham, Aug. 1709 82, Thomas Bowers, Aug. 1722 83, Edward Waddington, Oct.
1724 84, Francis Hare, Dec. 1731 85, Matthias Mawson, Nov. 1740 86, Sir William
Ashburnham,* Apr. 1754
ST. DAVID'S. 92.
93, William Lucy, Oct. 1660 94, William Thomas, Nov. 1677 95, Laurence Womack,
Nov. 1683 96, John Lloyd, Oct. 1686 97, T. Watson, deprived, Aug. 3, 1699,
June, 1687 See vacant 5 years 8 months. 98, George Bull, Mar. 1705 99, Philip
Bisse, Nov. 1710 100, Adam Ottley, Feb. 1712 101, Richard Smalbroke, Jan. 1723
102, Elias Sydall, May, 1731 103, Nicholas Clagett, Feb. 1732 104, Edward
Wills, Jan. 1743 105, Richard Trevor, Apr. 1744 106, Anthony Else, Feb. 1753
107, Samuel Squire, June, 1761 108, Robert Lowth, June, 1766 109, Charles Moss,
Dec. 1766 110, James York,* 1774 111, John Warren, July, 1779
ELY. 39.
40, Matthew Wren, 1638 41, Benjamin Laney, May, 1667 42, Peter Gunning, Feb.
1674 43, Francis Turner, deprived, Feb. 1690. Aug. 1684 44, Simon Patrick, Apr.
1691 45, John Moore July, 1707 46, William Fleetwood, Nov. 1714 47, Thomas
Green, Sept. 1723 48, Robert Butts, July, 1738 49, Sir Thomas Gooch, Mar. 1748
50, Matthias Mawson, Apr. 1754 51, Edmund Keen, Jan. 1771 52, James York,*
July, 1781
EXETER. 41.
42, John Gauden, Nov. 1660 43, Seth Ward, July, 1662 44, Anthony Sparrow, Oct.
1667 45, Thomas Lamplugh, Oct. 1676 46, Jonathan Trelawney, Apr. 1689 47,
Offspring Blackall, Jan. 1707 48, Lancelot Blackburn, Jan. 1716 49, Stephen
Weston, Dec. 1724 50, Nicholas Clagett, Aug. 1742 51, George Lavington, Feb.
1746 52, Frederick Keppel,* Nov. 1762 53, John Ross, Jan. 1778
GLOUCESTER. 11.
12, William Nicholson, Nov. 1660 13, John Pritchard, Oct. 1672 14, Robert
Frampton, deprived, Feb. 1, 1690. Mar. 1681 15, Edward Fowler, Apr. 1691 16,
Richard Willis, Nov. 1714 17, Elias Sydall, Dec. 1731 18, Martin Benson, Feb.
1735 19, James Johnson, Jan. 1753 20, William Warburton, Feb. 1769 21, James
York,* July, 1779 22, James Hallifax, Sept. 1781
HEREFORD. 77.
78, Nicholas Monck, Dec. 1660 79, Herbert Croft, Jan. 1661 80, Gilbert
Ironside, May, 1691 81, Humphrey Humphreys, Dec. 1701 82, Philip Bisse, Feb.
1712 83, Benjamin Hoadley, Sept. 1721 84, Henry Egerton, Feb. 1724 85, Lord
James Beauclerk,* May, 1746
LANDAFF. 71.
72, Morgan Owen, 1639 73, Hugh Lloyd, Dec. 1663 74, Francis Davies, July, 1667
75, William Lloyd, Apr. 1675 76, William Beaw, Jan. 1679 77, John Tyler, June,
1706 78, Robert Clavering, Dec. 1724 79, John Harris, Apr. 1729 80, Matthias
Mawson, Feb. 1739 81, John Gilbert, Jan. 1741 82, Edward Cresset, Dec. 1748 83,
Edward Wills, Mar. 1749 84, Richard Newcombe, Apr. 1755 85, John Ewer, Oct.
1761 86, Jonathan Shipley, Jan. 1769 87, Shute Barrington,* June, 1769
LICHFIELD and COVENTRY. 74.
75, Accepted Frewen, 1643 76, John Hacket, Dec. 1661 77, Thomas Wood, June,
1671 78, William Lloyd, Oct. 1692 79, John Hough, Aug. 1699 80, Edward
Chandler, Nov. 1717 81, Richard Smalbroke, Feb. 1730 82, Frederick Cornwallis,*
Mar. 1749 83, John Egerton,* 1768 84, Brownlow North,* July, 1771 85, Richard
Hurd, Jan. 1775 86, James Cornwallis,* July, 1781
LINCOLN. 64.
65, Robert Sanderson Oct. 1660 66, Benjamin Laney, Mar. 1663 67, William
Fuller, Sept. 1667 68, Thomas Barlowe, May, 1675 69, Thomas Tennison, Nov. 1691
70, James Gardener, Mar. 1694 71, William Wake, July, 1705 72, Edmund Gibson,
Jan. 1717 73, Richard Reynolds, June, 1723 74, John Thomas, Apr. 1744 75, John
Green, Jan. 1762 76, Thomas Thurlow,* May, 1779
LONDON. 88.
89, William Juxon, 1633 90, Gilbert Sheldon, 1660 91, Humphrey Hinchman, Sept.
1663 92, Henry Compton,* Dec. 1675 93, John Robinson, Aug. 1713 94, Edmund
Gibson, Apr. 1723 95, Thomas Sherlock, Dec. 1748 96, Thomas Hayter, Oct. 1761
97, Richard Osbaldeston. Mar. 1762 98, Richard Terrick, June, 1764 99 Robert
Lowth Apr. 1777
NORWICH. 68.
69, Edward Reynolds, Nov. 1660 70, Anthony Sparrow, Aug. 1676 71, Will. Lloyd,
deprived Feb. 1, 1690. June, 1685 72, John Moore, Apr. 1691 73, Charles
Trimnel, Jan. 1707 74, Thomas Green, Aug. 1721 75, John Leng, Nov. 1723 76,
William Baker, Dec. 1727 77, Robert Butts, Mar. 1723 78, Thomas Gooch, Oct.
1738 79, Samuel Lisle, Apr. 1748 80, Thomas Hayter, Dec. 1749 81, Philip
Young,* Dec. 1761
OXFORD. 7.
8, Robert Skinner, 1640 9, William Paul, Nov. 1663 10, Walter Blandford, Nov.
1665 11, Nathaniel Crew, June, 1671 12, Henry Compton,* Nov. 1674 13, John
Fell, Jan. 1675 14, Samuel Parker, Oct. 1686 15, Timothy Hall, Oct. 1688 16,
John Hough, May, 1690 17, William Talbot, Sept. 1699 18, John Potter, Apr. 1715
19, Thomas Secker, June, 1737 20, John Hume, June, 1758 21, Robert Lowth, Oct.
1766 22, John Butler, Apr. 1777
PETERBOROUGH. 9.
10, Benjamin Laney, Nov. 1660 11, Joseph Henshaw, Apr. 1663 12, William Lloyd,
Mar. 1679 13, Thomas White, Aug. 1685 14, Richard Cumberland, May, 1691 15,
White Kenner, Oct. 1718 16, Robert Clavering, Feb. 1729 17, John Thomas, Oct.
1747 18, Richard Terrick, July, 1757 19, Robert Lamb, July, 1764 20, John
Hinchcliffe, Dec. 1769
ROCHESTER. 81.
82, John Warner, 1637 83, John Dolben, Nov. 1666 84, Francis Turner, Nov. 1683
85, Thomas Sprat, Nov. 1684 86, F. Atterbury, deprived, June, 1723. June, 1713
87, Samuel Bradford, July, 1723 88, Joseph Wilcocks, Jan. 1731 89, Zachary
Pearce, July, 1756 90, John Thomas, 1775
SALISBURY. 70.
71, Brian Duppa, 1641 72, Humphrey Hinchman, Oct. 1660 73, John Earl, Sept.
1663 74, Alexander Hyde, Dec. 1665 75, Seth Ward, Sept, 1667 76, Gilbert
Burnet, Mar. 1689 77, William Talbot, Apr. 1715 78, Richard Willis, Nov. 1721
79, Benjamin Hoadley, Oct. 1723 80, Thomas Sherlock, Nov. 1734 81, John
Gilbert, Jan. 1748 82, John Thomas, June, 1757 83, Robert Drummond,* June, 1761
84, John Thomas, Dec. 1761 85, John Hume, Sept. 1766
WINCHESTER. 70.
71, Brian Duppa, Sept. 1660 72, George Morley, Apr. 1662 73, Peter Mew, Nov.
1684 74, Sir Jonathan Trelawney, June, 1707 75, Charles Trimnel, July, 1721 76,
Richard Willis, Sept. 1723 77, Benjamin Hoadley, Oct. 1734 78, John Thomas,
June, 1761 79, Brownlow North,* Apr. 1781
WORCESTER. 84.
85, George Morley, Oct. 1660 86, John Gauden, May, 1662 87, John Earl, Nov.
1662 88, Robert Skinner, Oct, 1663 89, Walter Blandsord, June, 1671 90, James
Fleetwood, July, 1679 91, William Thomas, Aug. 1683 92, Edward Stillingfleet,
Oct. 1685 93, William Lloyd, Jan. 1699 94, John Hough, Sept. 1717 95, Isaac
Maddox, Nov. 1743 96, James Johnson, Nov. 1759 97, Brownlow North, * Jan. 1775
98, Richard Hurd, May, 1781
YORK. 70.
71, Accepted Frewen, Sept. 1660 72, Richard Stern, Apr. 1664 73, John Dolben,
July, 1683 74, Thomas Lamplugh, Nov. 1688 75, John Sharp, July, 1691 76, Sir
William Dawes, Mar. 1714 77, Lancelot Blackburn, Dec. 1724 78, Thomas Herring,
Apr. 1743 79, Matthew Hutton, Dec. 1747 80, John Gilbert, June, 1757 81, Robert
Drummond, * Oct. 1761 82, William Markham, Dec. 1776
CARLISLE. 40.
41, Richard Stern, Dec. 1660 42, Edward Rainbow, July, 1664 43, Thomas Smith,
June, 1684 44, William Nicholson, June, 1702 45, Samuel Bradford, Apr. 1718 46,
John Waugh, June, 1723 47, Sir George Flemming, Feb. 1734 48, Richard
Osbaldeston, Oct. 1747 49, Charles Lyttelton, * Apr. 1762 50, Edmund Law, Mar.
1769
CHESTER. 11.
12, Bryan Walton, Dec. 1660 13, Henry Fern, Feb. 1662 14, George Hall, May,
1662 15, John Wilkins, Nov. 1668 16, John Pearson, Feb. 1672 17, Thomas
Cartwright, Oct. 1686 18, Nicholas Stratford, Sept. 1689 19, Sir William Dawes,
Feb. 1707 20, Francis Gastrell, Apr. 1714 21, Samuel Peploe, Apr. 1726 22,
Edmund Keen, Mar. 1753 23, William Markham, Jan. 1771 24, Beilby Porteus, Dec.
1776
DURHAM. 68.
69, John Cousin, Dec. 1660 70, Nathaniel, Lord Crew, * Oct. 1674 71, William
Talbot, Sept. 1721 72, Edward Chandler, Nov. 1730 73, Joseph Butler, Nov. 1750
74, Richard Trevor, * Jan. 1753 75, John Egerton, * June, 1771
A LIST of IRISH BISHOPS.
ARCHBISHOPS. Promoted Armagh, Lord Rokeby, * 1765 Dublin, Robert Fowler, 1779
Cashel, Charles Agar, * 1779 Tuam Jemmet Brown, 1775 BISHOPS. Mead, Henry
Maxwell, * 1766 Kildare, Charles Jackson, 1772 Waterfor^, William Newcome, 1779
Clogher, John Hotham, 1782 Limerick, William Gore, 1772 Killala, William Cecil
Pery, 1781 Raphoe, James Hawkins, 1780 Elphin, Charles Dodgson, 1775 Down,
James Trail, 1765 Ossory, William Beresford, 1782 Derry, Frederick Hervey, *
1768 Cloyne, Richard Woodward, 1781 Killaloe, Thomas Barnard, 1780 Cork, Isaac
Mann, 1772 Clonfert, Walter Cope, 1772 Leighlin, Joseph Dean Bourke, 1772
Kilmore, George Lewis Jones, 1774 Dromore, Thomas Percy, 1782

BISHOP of SODOR and MAN.
George Mason, 1780
The LORD MAYORS of LONDON, since the UNION.
Sir R. Beddingfield, 1707 Sir Wm. Withers, 1708 Sir C. Duncombe, 1709 Sir Sam.
Gerard, 1710 Sir Gil. Heathcote, 1711 Sir R. Beachcroft, 1712 Sir Rich. Hoare,
1713 Sir Sam. Stanier, 1714 Sir W. Humphreys, 1715 Sir Charles Peers, 1716 Sir
J. Bateman, 1717 Sir Wm. Lewen, 1718 Sir John Ward, 1719 Sir G. Thorold, 1720
Sir John Friar. 1721 Sir Wm. Stewart, 1722 Sir Ger. Conyers, 1723 Sir Peter
Delme, 1724 Sir G. Mertins, 1725 Sir Francis Forbes, 1726 Sir John Eyles, 1727
Sir Ed. Beecher, 1728 Sir Robert Bailis, 1729 Sir Richard Brocas, 1730 H.
Parsons, esquire. 1731 Sir Francis Child, 1732 John Barber, esquire. 1733 Sir Wm.
Biliers, 1734 Sir Edward Bellamy, 1735 Sir John Williams, 1736 Sir. J.
Thompson, 1737 Sir John Barnard, 1738 Micajah Perry, esquire. 1739 Sir John Salter,
1740 H. Parsons, esquire. 1741 D. Lambert, esquire. 1741 Sir R. Godschall, 1742 G.
Heathcote, esquire. 1742 Robert Wilmot, esquire. 1743 Sir Robert Westley, 1744 Sir Hen.
Marshal, 1745 Sir Richard Hoare, 1746 William Benn, esquire. 1747 Sir R. Ladbroke,
1748 Sir Wm. Calvert, 1749 Sir Sam. Pennant, 1750 J. Blachford, esquire. 1750 F.
Cockayne, esquire. 1751 T. Winterbottom, esquire. 1752 R. Alsop, esquire. 1752 Sir Crisp.
Gascoyne, 1753 Edw. Ironside, esquire. 1754 Thomas, Rawlinson, esquire. 1754 Stephen
Theodore Jansen, esquire. 1755 Slingsby Bethel, esquire. 1756 M. Dickenson, esquire. 1757
Sir Charles Asgil, Bt. 1758 Sir Richard Glyn, Bt. 1759 Thomas Chitty, esquire. 1760
Sir Matthew Blakiston, Bt. 1761 Sir Sam. Fludyer, Bt. 1762 W. Becksord, esquire.
1763 W. Bridgen, esquire. 1764 Sir W. Stevenson, 1765 George Nelson, esquire. 1766 Sir
Robert Kite, 1767 Rt. hon. T. Harley, 1768 Sam. Turner, esquire. 1769 W. Beckford,
esquire. 1770 Barlow Trecothick, esquire. 1770 Brass Crosby, esquire. 1771 William Nash,
esquire. 1772 J. Townshend, esquire. 1773 Frederick Bull, esquire. 1774 John Wilkes, esquire.
1775 J. Sawbridge, esquire. 1776 Tho. Hallifax, esquire. 1777 Samuel Plumbe, esquire. 1778
Brack. Kennet, esquire. 1779 Sir W. Lewis, 1780 Sir William Plomer, 1781
A LIST of SECOND TITLES, showing to whom they belong. D. Duke, M. Marquis E.
Earl, V. Viscount.
Aberdour E. Morton Aghrim E. Athlone Althorpe V E. Spencer Amiens E.
Aldborough Ancram E M. Lothian Andover V E. Suffolk Apsley E. Bathurst Ashley
E. Shaftesbury Athenry E. Louth Balgony E. Leven Barnard V E. Darlington
Beauchamp V E. Hertford Beaumont M D. Roxburgh Bellasyse E. Fauconberg
Bellfield E. Pelvedere Berindale E. Caithness Binning E. Haddington Blandford M
D. Marlborough Boil E. Glasgow Boil E. Shannon Brabazon E. Mead Brackley M
D. Bridgwater Brom V E. Cornwallis Bruce E. Aylesbury Bruce E. Eglin Burford E
D. St. Alban's Burghersh E. Westmorland Burleigh E. Exeter Bury V. E. Albemarle
Buttevant E. Barrymore Cambden V E. Gainsborough Cantalupe V E. Delawarr
Cardross E. Buchan Carlingford E. Tyrconnel Caermarthen M D. Leeds Carmichael
E. Hyndford Carnarvon M D. Chandos Castlecomer E. Wandesford Castlecoote E.
Mountrath Castlemain E. Tylney Caulfield E. Charlemount Chewton V E. Waldegrave
Chichester E. Donegall Clan-maurice E. Kerry Clare E. Nugent Clermont E.
Clermont Clifton E. Darnley Clonmell E. Ligonier Clysdale M D. Hamilton Cobham
V E. Temple Cochran E. Dundonald Cockermouth E. Egremont Colloony E. Bellamont
Compton E. Northampton Cranburn V E. Salisbury Crighton E. Dumfries Crosbie E.
Glendore Cummerland E. Balcarras Dalkeith E D. Buccleugh Dalrymple V E. Stair
Dare E. Selkirk Deerhurst V E. Coventry Delvin E. Westmeath Deskford E.
Findlater Down E. Moray Drumlanrig M D. Queensbury Drummond E. Perth Duncannon
E. Besborough Dungarvan E. Cork Dunglass E. Home Dunkellyn E. Clanricarde
Dunluce E. Antrim Dupplin V E. Kinnoul Dursley V E. Berkeley Euston E D.
Grafton Fairford V E. Hillsborough Fenton V E. Kelly Fermanagh E. Verney
Fielding V E. Denbigh Fincastle E. Dunmore Fitzmaurice E. Shelburne Fleming E.
Wigton Folkstone V E. Radnor Forbes E. Granard Fordwich V E. Cowper Garlies E.
Galloway Garnock V E. Crawford Gifford E M. Tweedale Gillford E. Clanwilliam
Glamis E. Strathmore Glenlivet E. Aboyne Gore E. Ross Gowran E. Upper Ossory
Glenorchy E. Bredalbane Graham M D. Montrose Granby M D. Rutland Grevile E.
Warwick Gray E. Stamford Guernsey E. Aylesford Harley E. Oxford Hartfell E M.
Annandale Hartington D. Devon Hastings E. Hunts Hay E. Errol Headfort E.
Bective Henley E. Northington Hensol E. Talbot Herbert E. Pembroke Hervey E.
Bristol Hinchinbroke V E. Sandweich Hermitage V E. Deloraine Hinton V E.
Poulett Hobart E. Bucks Hoddo E. Aberdeen Hope E. Hoptoun Howard E. Effingham
Huntingtour E. Dysert Huntly M D. Gordon Hyde E. Clarendon Ikerrin E. Carrick
Jocelyn E. Roden Kennard E. Newburgh Kennedy E. Cassilis Kilcoursie V E. Cavan
Kildare M D. Leinster Kilmaurs E. Glencairn Kingsborough E. Kingston Kirkwall
E. Orkney Lempster E. Pomfret Le Poer E. Tyrone Leslie E. Rothes Lewisham V E.
Dartmouth Limeri^k E. Clanbrassil Lincoln E D. Newcastle Lindsay M D. Ancaster
Linton E. Traquair Loftus E. Ely Longueville V E. Sussex Lorn M. D. Argyll
Loughneath E. Massureene Ludlow V E. Powys Lumley V E. Scarborough Lymington V
E. Portsmouth Macduff E. Fife Mahon V E. Stanhope Maidstone V E. Winchelsea
Maitland V E. Lauderdale Malden V E. Essex Malpas V E. Cholmondeley Malton E M.
Rockingham Mandeville V D. Manchester Mansfield E. Mansfield March E D.
Richmond Mauchlane E. Loudon Maule E. Panmure Maxwell E. Farnham Middlesex E D.
Dorset Milsington V E. Portmore Milton V E. Fitzwilliam Molyneux E. Sefton
Montgomery E. Eglington M^thermer M D. Montagu Moore E. Drogheda Mordaunt V E.
Peterborough Morpeth V E. Carlisle Mountstewart V E. Bute Newtoun E.
Lanesborough Nidpath E. March Norreys E. Abingdon North E. Guildford Nuneham V
E. Harcourt O'Bryen E. Inchiquin Orwell E. Shipbroke Ossulston E. Tankerville
Paisly E. Abercorn Parker V E. Macclesfield Perceval E. Egmont Percy E D.
Northumberland Petersham V E. Harrington Pit V E. Chatham Pollington E.
Mexborough Polwarth E. Marchmont Preston E. Ludlow Primrose V E. Roseberry
Ramsay E. Dalhousie Rawdon E. Moira Rosehill E. Northesk Royston V E. Hardwicke
Rusborough E. Miltown St. Asaph V E. Ashburnham St. Laurence E. Howth Seymour
D. Somerset Sherrard V E. Harborough Stanhope E. Chesterfield Stanley E. Derby
Stavordale E. Ilchester Stopford E. Courtown Strathnaver E. Sutherland Sudley
E. Arran Surrey E D. Norfolk Talbot E. Shrewsbury Tamworth V E. Ferrers
Tavistock M D. Bedford Titchfield M D. Portland Trentham V E. Gower Tufton E.
Thanet Tudibardin M D. Athol Tunbridge V E. Rochford Turnour E. Winterton
Vaughan V E. Lisburne Villiers V E. Jersey Villiers E. Grandison Wellesley E.
Mornington Walpole V E. Orford Wentworth V E. Strafford Westport E. Altamont
Winchester M D. Bolton Windsor E. Plymouth Worcester M D. Beaufort.
A LIST of the SIR-NAMES of the NOBILITY, to show what Family, Honorable
Persons are of. D Duke -- M Marq. -- E Earl -- V Vis.
Acheson Gosford Agar Brandon E Agar Clifton Aland Fortescue Allen Allen V
Amherst Amherst Annesley Glerawley V Annesley Valentia V Arbuthnot Arbuthnot V
Archer Archer Arundel Arundel Ashburnham Ashburnham E Aylmer Aylmer Barnwall
Kingsland V Barrington Barrington V Barry Barrymore E Bateman Bateman V
Bathurst Bathurst E Beauclerk St. Albans D Beauclerk Vere Bellasyse Fauconberg
E Bellenden Bellenden Bennet Tankerville E Bentinck Portland D Beresford Tyrone
E Berkeley Berkeley E Bertie Ancaster D Bertie Abingdon E Bingham Lucan
Birmingham Louth E Blaney Blaney Bligh Clifton Boscawen Falmouth V Bourke Naas
Bouverie Radner E Boil Cork E Boil Shannon E Boil Glasgow E Boil Boil
Brabazon Mead E Brodrick Midleton Bromley Montfort Brown Altamont E. Brown
Montagu V Brownlow Brownlow Bruce Elgin E Brudenel Aylesbury E Brudenel
Brudenel Brydges Chandois D Bulkeley Bulkeley V Burrell Willoughby of Eresby
Butler Lanesborough E Butler Carrick E Butler Mountgarret V Butler Cahier Byng
Torrington V Byron Byron Cadogan Cadogan Campbell Argyl D Campbell Marchmont E.
Campbell Breadalbane E Campbell Loudon E Capel Essex E Carey Falkland V
Carmichael Hyndford E Cathcart Cathcart Caulfield Charlemont E Cavendish
Devonshire D Cecil Salisbury E Cecil Exeter E Chetwynd Chetwynd V Chichester
Donegall E Cholmondeley Cholmondeley E Clifford Clifford of Chudley Clifford
Clifford Clinton Newcastle D Clive Clive Cochran Dundonald E Cockaine Cullen V
Cole Enniskillen V Collier Portmore E Colville Colville of Culross Colville
Colville of Ochiltree Compton Northampton E Conway Hertford E Conyngham
Conyngham V Cooper Shaftesb^ry E Coote Bellamont E Coote Montrath E Cornwallis
Cornwallis E Coventry Coventry E Cowper Cowper E Cranstown Cranstown Craven
Craven Crawford Crawford E Creighton Erne Cros^e Glandore E Cusse Desert
Cunninghame Glencairn E Curzon Searsdale Gust Brownlow Dalrymple Stair E Damer
Milton D'Arcy D'Arcy Dawney Down V Dawson Carlow V Dowson Dartrey De Burgh
Clanricarde E De Courcy Kinsale De Ginkele Athlone De Gray Walsingham Dennis
Tracton Devereux Hereford V Digby Digby Dormer Dormer Douglas Queensbury D
Douglas Morton E Douglas S^lkirk E Duff Fife E Dunning Ashburton ^ig^mbe
Edgecumbe Edwardes Rensington ^lphinstone ^phi^one ^ine K^lly E ^ine Buchan E
^vans Carbery Air Air F^irfax F^irfax F^lconer H^kertoun Fane W^moreland E
Fermer P^fret E Fielding D^bigh E Finch Winc^ E Finch Ayle^ford E Fitzger^d
Luinder D Fitzmaurice Kerry E Fitzpatrick Upper Ossory E Fitzroy Grafton D
Fitzroy Southampton Fitzwilliam Fitzwilliam E Fitzwilliam Fitzwilliam V Flower
Ashbrook V Foley Foley Forbes Gracard E Forbes Forbes Forrester Forrester
Forrescue Clermont E Fortescue Fortescue Fox Ilchester E Fox Holland Fraser
Saltoun Gage Gage V Germain Sackville V Godolphin Godolphin Gordon Gordon D.
Gordon Aboyne E Gordon Aberdeen E Gore Ross E Gore Arran E Gore Annaly Gower
Gower E Graham Montrose D Gray Gray Greville Warwick E Gray Stamford E Grimston
Grimston V Grosvenor Grosvenor Hamilton Hamilton D. Hamilton Abercorn E
Hamilton Haddington E Hamilton Boyne V Hamilton Belhaven Hamilton Clanbrassil
Hanger Coleraine Harcourt Harcourt E Harley Oxford E Hastings Huntingdon E
Hawke Hawke Hay Tweedale M Hay Kinnoul E Henley Northington E Herbert Pembroke
E Herbert Powis E Herbert Porchester Hervey Bristol E Hewitt Lifford V Hickman
Plymouth E Hill Hilsborough E Hobart Buckinghamshire E Holroyd Sheffield Home
Home E Hood Hood Hope Hopetoun E How Chedworth How How V Howard Norfolk D
Howard Effingham E Howard Suffolk E Howard Carlisle E Howard Clonmore Ingram
Irvine V Irby Boston Jocelyn Roden Johnson Annandale M Jones Ranelagh V Kennedy
Cassilis E Keppel Albemarle E Ker Roxburgh D Ker Lothian M. King King King
Kingston Kinnaird Kinnaird Lamb Melbourne V Lambart Cavan E Langdale Langdale
Leeson Miltown E Leg Dartmouth E Leg Stawel Leigh Leigh Lennard D'Acre
Lenox Richmond D Leslie Leven E Leslie Newark Leslie Lindores Liddel
Ravensworth Lin^say Balcarras E Loftus Ely E Ludlow Ludlow E Luttrel I^nham
Lion Strathmore Lysaght Lisle Lyttelton Westcote Macartney Macartney Macdonald
Macdenald Macdonnel Antrim E Macdowal Dumfries E Mackay Raay Maclellan
Kircudbright Maitland Lauderdale E Manners Rutland D Marsham Romney Mason
Grandison E Massey Massey Maude De Montalt Maule Panmure Maxwell Farnham E
Maynard Maynard V Main Newhaven Mead Clanwilliam E Molesworth Molesworth V
Molineux Sefton E Monkton Galway V Monson Monson Montagu Manchester D Montagu
Montagu D Montagu Sandwich E Montagu Beaulieu Montgomery Eglinton E Moore
Drogheda E Moore Mountcashel V Moore Castle Stewart Mordaunt Peterborough E
Moreton Ducie Morres Mountmorres V Murray Athol D Murray Mansfield E Murray
Dunmore E Murray Stormont V Murray Elibank Napier Napier Needham Kilmorey V
Netterville Netterville V Neville Abergavenny Noel Gainsborough E Noel
Wentworth V North Guildford E Norton Grantley Nugent Nugent E Obrien Orkney E
Obrien Inchiquin Ogilvy Findlater E Ogilvy Bamf Olmius Waltham Ongley Ongley
Onslow Onslow Osborne Leeds D Osborne Dumblain V Paget Paget Pakenham Longford
Parker Macclesfield E Pelham Pelham Pepys Rothes E Perceval Arden Perceval
Egmont Percy Northumberland D Percy Percy Petty Shelburne E Phillips Milford
Phipps Mulgrave Pit Chatham E Pit Rivers Ponsonby Besborough E Poulett
Poulett E Powlett Bolton D Pratt Camden Primrose Roseberry E Proby Carysfort
Ramsay Dalhousie E Ratcliffe Newborough E Rawdon Moira E Rice Dinevor Robinson
Grantham Robinson Rokeby Rochfort Belvidere E Rodney Rodney Rollo Rollo Roper
Teynham Rowley Langford V Russel Bedford D Ruthven Ruthven Ryder Harrowby
Sackville Dorset D St. John Bolingbroke V St. John St. John St. Laurence Howth
E Sandilands Torphichen Sandys Sandys Saunderson Scarborough E Savile
Mexborough E Scott Buccleugh D Scot Deloraine E Sempill Sempill Seymour
Somerset D Sherrard Harborough E Shirley Ferrers E Shuldham Shuldham Sinclair
Caithness E Skeffington Massarene E Smythe Strangford V Somerset Beaufort D
Somerville Somerville Southwell Southwell V Spencer Marlborough D Spencer
Spencer E Stanhope Chesterfield E Stanhope Stanhope E Stanhope Harrington E
Stanley Derby E Stewart Moray E Stewart Galloway E Stewart Traquair E Stewart
Blantyre Stopford Courtown E Stourton Stourton Stratford Alborough E Stuart
Bute E Sutherland Sutherland E Talbot Shrewsbury E Tailor Bective E Temple
Temple E Temple Palmerston Thickness Palmerston Thickness Audley Thurlow
Thurlow Thynne Weymouth V Tollemache Dysert E Townshend Townshend V Townshend
De Fer^ars Tracy Tracy V Trevor Dungannon V Tufton Thanet E Turnour Winterton E
Twisdale Say and Sele Ty^ney Ty^ney E Vane Darlington E Vane Vane V Vaughan
Lisburne E Verney Verney E Verney Willoughby de Broke Vernon Shipbroke E Vernon
Vernon Vesey De Vesci V Villiers Jersey E Villiers Clarendon E Villiers
Grandison V Upton Templetown Waldegrave Waldegrave E Wallop Portsmouth E
Walpole Orford E Walpole Walpole Wandesford Wandesford E Ward Dudley V Ward
Bangor Watson Sondes Weaver Mordington Wedderburne Loughborough Wenman Wenman V
Wentworth Rockingham M Wentworth Strafford E We^ey Mornington E West Delawar E
Willoughby Willoughby de Par^am Willoughby Middleton Wingfield Powerscourt V
Wyndham Egremont E Wynn Newborough Yelverton Sussex E York Gray M York
Hardwicke E Zulestein Rochford E.
LORD CHAMBERLAINS, from the present KING's ACCESSION. * The DATES mark the
APPOINTMENT.
Duke of Devonshire. Duke of Marlborough, Nov. 22, 1762 Earl Gower, Apr. 22,
1762 Duke of Portland, July 12, 1765 Earl of Hertford, Dec. 4 1766 Duke of
Manchester, Apr. 1782
VICE CHAMBERLAINS.
Right hon. William Finch. Earl of Jersey, July 12, 1765 Hon. Thomas Robinson,
now lord Grantham, Feb. 13, 1770 Lord Hinchingbroke, Feb. 6, 1771 Lord Chewton,
May 2, 1782
GROOMS of the STOLE.
Earl of Rochford. Earl of Bute, Nov. 25, 1760 Earl of Huntingdon, Mar. 25,
1761 Earl of Bristol, Jan. 2^, 1770 Viscount Weymouth, March 1775 Earl of
Ashburnham, Nov. 10, 1775 Viscount Weymouth, May 1, 1782
LORD STEWARDS.
Duke of Rutland. Earl Talbot, Mar. 25, 1761 Earl of Carlisle, May 1782
COMPTROLLERS.
Lord Edgcumbe, Earl Powis, May 22, 1761 Lord George Cavendish, Nov. 25, 1761
Lord Charles Spencer, Nov. 22, 1762 Thomas Pelham, now lord Pelham, July 20,
1765 Sir William Meredith, Nov. 10, 1775 Lord Onslow, Dec. 1777 Sir Richard
Worsley, Nov. 1779 Earl of Ludlow, Apr. 10, 1782
TREASURERS.
Lord Thomond. Earl Powis, Nov. 25, 1761 Lord Edgcumbe, July 20, 1765 John (now
Sir John) Shelly Nov. 27, 1766 Earl of Carlisle, May 1777 Lord Onslow, Nov.
1779 Earl of Salisbury Sept. 1780 Earl of Effingham Apr. 10, 1782
COFFERERS.
Duke of Leeds. James Grenville, Apr. 3, 1761 Lord Thomond, Nov. 25, 1761 Earl
of Scarborough, July 20, 1765 Hans Stanley, Dec. 4, 1766 Jeremiah Dyson, esquire.
1774 Hans Stanley, 1776 Lord Beauchamp, Jan. 1780
MASTERS of the HOUSEHOLD.
John Harris. Hon. Hen. Fred. Thynne, Apr. 19, 1768 Sir Fran. Hen. Drake, Dec.
19, 1770
MASTERS of the HORSE.
Earl Gower. Earl of Huntingdon, Nov. 25, 1760 Duke of Rutland, Mar. 25, 1^61
Earl of Hertford, August 1766 Duke of Ancaster, Dec. 13, 1766 Duke of
Northumberland, Dec. 8, 1778 Duke of Montagu, Jan. 1781
CAPTAINS of the BAND of GENTLEMEN PENSIONERS.
Lord Berkeley of Stratton. Earl of Litchfield, July 17, 1762 Lord Edgeumbe,
Dec. 8, 1772 Lord De Ferrars, Apr. 6, 1782
KEEPERS of the GREAT WARDROBE.
Sir Thomas Robinson, late lord Grantham. Earl Gower, Nov. 25, 1760 Lord Le
Despencer, May 3, 1763 Earl of Ashburnham, July 20, 1765 Lord Pelham, Nov. 10,
1775
MASTERS of the JEWEL OFFICE.
Sir Richard Lyttelton. Earl of Darlington, Dec. 1762
QUEEN'S HOUSEHOLD. LORD CHAMBERLAINS.
Earl (now duke) of Northumberland. Earl Harcourt, Apr. 21, 1763 Earl Delawar,
1768 Marquis of Caermarthen, Dec. 1777 Lord Southampton, Oct. 1780 Earl of
Aylesbury Jan. 1781
VICE CHAMBERLAINS.
Lord Viscount Cantalupe. Hon. Charles Fitzroy, now lord Southampton, 1768 Hon.
Robert Brudenell 1776
MASTERS of the HORSE.
Earl Heart. (...) Wey mouth, Apr. 21, 1763 Earl (...) May 1765 Duke of (...)
June 1765 Duke (...) Jan. 20, 1768 (...) W^grave, Nov. 1770
TREASURERS.
Andrew Stone, (...) (...) of G^ord, 1774
SECRETARIES.
General Graeme. Ja. Harris, esquire. 1774 Hon. G. A. North, 1700
COMPTROLLERS.
Hon. Sewallis Shirley, General Grame, 1765 Ja. Harris, esquire. 1774
TREASURERS of the CHAMBER.
Charles Townshend. Sir Francis Dashwood (afterward lord Le Despencer), Mar.
21, 1761 Sir Gilbert Elliot, May 29, 1762 Sir George Rice, Apr. 12, 1770 Lord
Charles Spencer, Nov. 1779
LORD PRESIDENTS.
Earl Granville Died Jan. 2, 1763. -- Vacant till September following. Duke of
Bedford, Sept. 9, 1763 Earl of Winchels^a, July 12, 1765 Earl of Northington,
July 30, 1766 Earl Gower, Dec. 23, 1767 Earl Bathurst, Nov. 1779 Lord Camden,
Mar. 27, 1782
LORD WARDENS of the STANNARIES.
Lord Waldegrave. Humphry Morice, Dec. 20, 1762
CHANCELLORS of the DUCHY of LANCASTER.
Lord Kinnoul. Lord Strange, Dec. 15, 1762 Lord Hyde, now lord Clarendon, June
14, 1771 Lord Ashburton, Apr. 17, 1782
LORDS PRIVY SEAL.
Earl Temple. In commission. E. Weston, W. Sharp, and Jer. Dyson, Oct. 12,
1761 Duke of Bedford, Nov. 25, 1761 Duke of Marlborough, Apr. 20, 1763 Duke of
Newcastle, July 15, 1765 Earl of Chatham, July 30, 1766 Earl of Bristol, Nov.
2, 1768 Earl of Halifax, Feb. 9, 1770 Earl of Suffolk, Jan. 22, 1771 Duke of
Grafton, June 12, 1771 Earl of Dartmouth, Nov. 10, 1775 Duke of Grafton, Mar.
27, 1782
ATTORNEYS and SOLICITORS GENERAL, ATTORNEYS.
Charles Pratt (now lord Camden). Mr. York, Dec. 14, 1761 Sir Fletcher Norton
(lord Grantley), Nov. 1763 Hon. Charles York, Aug. 1765 William De Gray (lord
Walsingham), Aug. 1766 Edward (now lord) Thurlow, Jan. 23, 1771 Alexander
Wedderburne (now lord Loughborough), July 1778 James Wallace, Aug. 1780 Lloyd
Kenyon, Apr. 20, 1782
SOLICITORS.
Hon. Charles York. Sir Fletcher Norton (lord Grantley), Dec. 14, 1761 William
De Gray (lord Walsingham), Nov. 1763 Edward Wills, Aug. 1766 John Dunning (now
lord Ashburton), Dec. 23, 1767 Edward (now lord) Thurlow, Mar. 1770 Alexander
Wedderburne (now lord Loughborough), Jan. 23, 1771 James Wallace, July 1778
James Mansfield, Sept. 1780 John Lee, Apr. 20, 1782
FIRST LORDS of the TREASURY.
Duke of Newcastle. Earl of Bute, May 29, 1762 George Grenville, Apr. 16, 1763
Marquis of Rockingham, July 12, 1765 Duke of Grafton, Aug. 2, 1766 Lord North,
Jan. 28, 1770 Marquis of Rockingham, Mar. 30, 1782
CHANCELLORS of the EXCHEQUER.
Henry Bilson Leg. Lord Barrington, Mar. 21, 1761 Sir Francis Dashwood (lord
Le Despencer), May 29, 1762 George Grenville, Apr. 16, 1763 William Dowdeswell,
July 12, 1765 Charles Townshend, Aug. 2, 1760 Lord North, Sept. 16, 1767 Lord
John Cavendish, Mar. 30, 1782
SECRETARIES to the FIRST LORD.
Charles Jenkinson May 29, 1762 Edmund Burke, July 12, 1765 Richard Stonhewer,
Aug. 2, 1766 Sir Gray Cooper and John Robinson. Richard Burke and -- Strachey,
Mar. 30, 1782
SECRETARIES of STATE. SOUTHERN DEPARTMENT.
William Pit (lord Chatham). Earl of Egremont, Oct. 9, 1761 Earl of Sandwich,
Sept. 9, 1763 Henry Seymour Conway, July 12, 1765 Duke of Richmond, May 23,
1766 Earl of Shelburne, Aug. 2, 1766 Lord Weymouth, Oct. 21, 1768 Earl of
Rochford, Dec. 19, 1770 Viscount Weymouth, Nov. 10, 1775 Earl of Hillsborough
Nov. 1779 Earl of Shelburne, Mar. 27, 1782
NORTHERN DEPARTMENT.
Earl of Holdernesse. Earl of Bute, Mar. 25, 1761 George Grenville, May 29,
1762 Earl of Halifax. Oct. 14, 1762 Duke of Grafton, July 12, 1765 Henry
Seymour Conway, May 23, 1766 Lord Weymouth, Jan. 20, 1768 Earl of Rochford,
Oct. 21, 1768 Earl of Sandwich, Dec. 19, 1770 Earl of Halifax, Jan. 22, 1771
Earl of Suffolk, June 12, 1771 Viscount Stormont, Oct. 27, 1779 Charles James
Fox, Mar. 27, 1782
FOR THE COLONIES.
Earl of Hillsborough, Jan. 20, 1768 Earl of Dartmouth, Aug. 14, 1772 Lord
George Germain (Sackville), Nov. 10, 1775 Welbore Ellis, Feb. 12, 1782
FIRST LORDS of TRADE.
Earl of Halifax. Lord Sandys, Mar. 21, 1761 Charles Townshend, Mar. 1, 1763
Lord Shelburne, Apr. 20, 1763 Lord Hillsborough, Sept. 9, 1763 Lord Dartmouth,
July 20, 1765 Lord Hillsborough Aug. 16, 1766 Lord Clare, Dec. 1766 Lord
Dartmouth, Aug. 31, 1772 Lord George Germain (Sackville), Nov. 1775 Earl of
Carlisle, Nov. 1779 Earl of Grantham, Feb. 1781
PAYMASTERS GENERAL of the FORCES.
Henry Fox, afterward lord Holland. Charles Townshend, June 8, 1765 Lord
North, and George Cook, esquire. Aug. 2, 1766 T. Townshand, and G. Cook, esqrs
Dec. 3, 1767 Richard Rigby, June 14, 1761 Edmund Bark, Mar. 30, 1782
JOINT POSTMASTERS.
Earl of Bes^orough; Hon. R. Hampden (now lord Hampden). Earl of Egmont; Hon R.
Hampden, Nov. 27, 1762 Lord Hyde; Hon. R. Hampden, Sept. 10, 1763 Earl of
Besborough; Hon. R. Hampden, July 20, 1765 Lord Grantham; Earl of Besborough,
July 20, 1765 Earl of Hilliborough; Lord Le Despencer, Dec. 27, 1766 Earl of
Sandwich; Lord Le Despencer, Jan. 20, 1768 Hon. Henry Frederick Thynne; Lord Le
Despencer, Dec. 19, 1770 Hon. Fred. Thynne Carteret; Lord Le Despencer, Dec.
19, 1770 Hon. F. T. Carteret; Lord Barrington, Jan. 1782 Hon. F. T. Carteret;
Earl of Tankerville, Apr. 10, 1782
SECRETARIES at WAR.
Lord Barrington. Charles Townshend, Mar. 24, 1761 Welbore Ellis, Feb. 27, 1763
Lord Barrington, July 20, 1765 Charles Jenkinson, June 1778 Thomas Townshend,
Mar. 30, 1782
FIRST LORDS of the ADMIRALTY.
Lord Anson, Lord Hallifax, June 19, 1762 George Grenville, Oct. 16, 1762 Lord
Sandwich, Apr. 16, 1763 Lord Egmont, Sept. 9, 1763 Sir Charles Saunders, Sept.
16, 1763 Lord Hawke, Dec. 2, 1766 Lord Sandwich, Jan 12, 1771 Lord Keppel, Mar.
30, 1782
TREASURERS of the NAVY.
George Grenville. Lord Barrington, June 2, 1762 Lord H^we, Aug. 9, 1765 Sir
Gilbert Elliot, bart. Mar. 19, 1770 Welbore Ellis, June 1777 Isaac Bar, Mar.
30, 1782
VICE ADMIRALS of GREAT BRITAIN.
Lord Anson. Henry Osborne, Jan. 4, 1763 Lord Hawke, Nov. 5, 1765 Sir Geo.
Brydges (now lord) Rodney,, 1781
REAR ADMIRALS of GREAT BRITAIN.
Sir William Rowley. Lord Hawke, Jan. 4, 1763 Sir Charles Knowles, Nov. 5, 1765
Sir Franci^ Holburne, Oct. 1770 Sir Geo. Brydges (now lord) Rodney, Aug. 17,
1771 George Darby, esquire. 1781
VICE ADMIRALS of SCOTLAND.
Earl Finlater. John, Earl of Hyndford, Dec. 22, 1764 Earl of March, Nov. 5,
1765 Earl of Breadalbane, 1776 Lord William Gordon, Mar. 1782
MASTERS of GREENWICH HOSPITAL.
Admiral Isane Townshend. Sir Geo. Br^dges (now lord) Rodney, Nov. 30, 1765 Sir
Francis Holburne, June 15, 1771 Sir Charles Hardy, Aug. 17, 1771 Sir Hugh
Palliser, Sept. 1780
MASTER GENERALS of the ORDNANCE.
Earl Ligonier. Marquis of Granby, May 14, 1763 Lord Viscount Townshend, Oct.
17, 1772 Duke of Richmond, Mar. 30, 1782
LIEUTENANT GENERALS of the ORDNANCE.
Marquis of Granby. Lord Viscount Townshend, May 14, 1763 Right hon. Henry
Seymour Conway, Oct. 24, 1767 Sir Jeffery (now lord) Amherst, Oct. 22, 1772 Sir
William How, Apr. 1782
COMMANDER in CHIEF.
Henry Seymour Conway, Mar. 30, 1782
ORDER of PRECEDENCE.
King's Children and Grand Children -- Brethren -- Uncles -- Nephews Archbishop
of Canterbury Lord Chancellor, or, Keeper, if a Baron Archbishop of York Lord
Treasurer if Barons Lord President if Barons Lord Privy Seal if Barons Lord
Great Chamberlain above all Peers of the same Degree. Lord High Constable above
all Peers of the same Degree. Lord Marshal above all Peers of the same Degree.
Lord High Admiral above all Peers of the same Degree. Lord Steward of the
Household above all Peers of the same Degree. Dukes Marquisses Dukes eldest
Sons Earls Marquisses eldest Sons Dukes younger Sons Viscounts Earls eldest
Sons Marquisses younger Sons Secretary of State, if a Bishop Bishop of London
-- Durham -- Winchester Bishops Secretary of State, if a Baron Barons Speaker
of the House of Commons Lords Commissioners of the Great Sea Viscounts eldest
Sons Earls younger Sons Barons eldest Sons Knights of the Garter Privy
Counselors Chancellor of the Exchequer -- of the Duchy Chief Justice of the
King's Bench Master of the Rolls Chief Justice of the Common Pleas Chief Baron
of the Exchequer Judges and Barons of the Coif Knights Banneret, if made in the
Field Viscounts younger Sons Barons younger Sons Baronets Knights Banneret
Knights of the Bath Knights Bachelors Baronets eldest Sons Knights eldest Sons
Baronets younger Sons Knights younger Sons Colonels Sergeants at Law Doctors
Graduate Esquires Gentlemen Yeomen Tradesmen Artificers Laborers
Irish Peers rank after Peers of equal Titles with themselves. Thus Irish Dukes
rank immediately after English Dukes, Irish Marquisses after English
Marquisses, and so on.

Married Women and Widows are entitled to the same Rank among each other, as
their Husbands would have respectively borne between themselves, except such
Rank is merely prosessional or official; and unmarried Women to the same Rank
as their eldest Brothers would have among Men, during the Lives of their
Fathers.

Maids of Honor rank next after Barons Daughters.

An Alphabetical LIST of the present BARONETS of ENGLAND, their most usual
Places of Abode, with the Time when they, or their Ancestors, were so honored.
The DATES are according to the present Method of beginning the Year the First
of January.
N. B. Where we have not been able to come at the Christan Name of the present
BARONET, we have put that of the last deceased.

1641 Abdy, William 1644 Ackland, T. Dyke 1644 Acton, Richard 1782 Affleck,
Edmund 1769 Alleyne, J. Gay 1699 Allin, -- 1642 Alston, Rowland 1682 Alston,
Evelyn 1660 Anderson, Rev. W. 1781 Andre, William 1641 Andrews, William 1766
Andrews, Joseph 1738 Armytage, George 1761 Asgill, Charles 1661 Ashburnham, Wm.
1660 Astley, Edward 1628 Aston, Willough by 1660 Aubrey, Thomas 1612 Ayloffe,
Joseph 1611 Bacon, Edmund 1776 Baker, George 1641 Bampfylde, C. W. 1781 Banks,
Joseph 1676 Barker, William 1781 Barker, Robert 1611 Barrington, Fitzw. 1779
Bassett, Francis 1779 Bastard, William 1762 Bayntun, Edward 1661 Beaumont,
George 1681 Beckwith, Jonathan 1661 Bedingfield, Rich. 1662 Bernard, Robert
1769 Bernard, Francis 1620 Berney, John 1663 Betenson, R Brad. 1778 Bickerton,
Richard 1664 Biddulph, Theoph. 1641 Bindloss, Edward 1620 Bisshopp, Cecil 1673
Blackett, Edward 1718 Blackwell, Lambert 1772 Blake, Patrick 1774 Blake,
Francis 1686 Blois, John 1642 Blount, Walter 1720 Blount, Charles 1611 Booth,
Rev. Geo. 1660 Booth by, William 1641 Boughton. Edward 1660 Bowyer, William
1775 Boyd, John 1618 Boynton, Griffith 1679 Bradshaigh, Roger 1718 Bridges,
Brook 1660 Bridgman, H. Lev. 1673 Bridgman, Francis 1644 Brigges, John 1757
Bromley, George 1662 Brook, Richard 1661 Broughton, T. 1665 Brown, John 1732
Brown, James 1660 Buck, Charles 1697 Buckworth, Ever. 1681 Bunbury, T. C. 1619
Burdet, Robert 1666 Burdett, Charles 1767 Burnaby, W. Cha. 1641 Burgoyne, John
1769 Burrard, Harry 1766 Burrell, Mer. 1622 Burton, Charles 1661 Carew, Thomas
1641 Castleton, William 1641 Cave, Thomas 1755 Cavendisn, Henry 1661 Cayley,
George 1767 Champneys, Those. 1720 Chapman, John 1686 Charlton, Francis 1720
Chernock, Villiers 1766 Cheer, Rev. Wm. 1720 Chetwode, John 1641 Chichester,
John 1685 Child, Caesar 1674 Clarges, Thomas School Clarke, John 1661 Clavering,
Thomas 1732 Clayton, Robert 1774 Clayton, Richard 1660 Clerk, Fran. Carr 1774
Clerk, Ph. Jen. 1611 Clifton, Gervas 1772 Cocks, Charles 1721 Codrington, Wm.
1778 Coghill, John 1781 Coghill, John 1759 Colebrooke, Geo. 1661 Colleton, John
1693 Colt, John Dutton 1686 Compton, Walter 1628 Conyers, Blaxton 1661 Cook,
George 1611 Cope, Rev. Richard 1714 Cope, Charles 1778 Copley, Joseph 1764
Cornwall, George 1641 Cotton, J. Hynde 1677 Cotton, R. Salusb. 1781 Craufurd,
Alex. 1671 Croft, Archer 1660 Cullum, Rev. John 1759 Cunliffe, Foster 1716
Daeth, Narborough 1641 Dalston, John 1746 Danvers, John 1684 Dashwood, H. W.
1682 Davers, Charles 1641 Davie, John 1761 Delaval, J. Hussy 1626 Dering,
Edward 1707 Dineley, John 1660 Dixie, Wolstan 1704 Dolben, William 1776
Douglas, Charles 166 D'Oyley, William 16^6 D'Oyly, John 1622 Drake, Fra. Henry
1782 Drake, Francis 16^9 Dryden, John 1665 Dukenfield, Nath. 1762 Dundas, Rth.
Law. 1774 Duntze, John 1678 Dyer, John 1677 Dyke, John Dix. 1766 East, William
1672 Eden, John 1776 Eden, Robert 1774 Edmonstone, Arch. 1645 Edwards, Thomas
1617 Egerton, Thomas 1778 Eiliot, John 1717 E^ton, Abraham 1660 E^wes, Henry
1612 Englefield, Henry 1713 Evelyn, Frederick 1775 Etherington, Flen. 1629
Everard, Hugh 1641 Every, Edward 1725 Eversfield, Charles 1714 Eyles-Styles,
John 1660 Fagg, William 1779 Farmer, George 1726 Farnaby, Charles 1747
Fetherstonhaugh, II 1674 Filmer, John 1705 Fleming, Mich. Le 1611 Fletewood,
Those. 1759 Flndyer, Sam. B. 1767 Foley, Rob. Ralph 1774 Folks, Martin 1620
Foulis, William 1660 Frankland, Those. 1723 Frederick, John 1713 Freke, John
1660 Gage, Thomas 1611 Gerrard, Thomas 1774 Gibbes, Philip 1752 Gibbons,
William 1759 Gideon, Sampson 1759 Glyn, George 1746 Gooch, Thomas 1641
Goodricke, John 1764 Gordon, Jennison 1627 Goring, Henry 1728 Gough, Henry 1662
Graham, Bellingh. 1611 Gresley, Nigel 1660 Gresham, John 1746 Gray, Henry 1661
Guise, William 1778 Gunning Robert 1643 Haggerstone, These. 1611 Hales, Edward
1660 Hales Philip 1660 Hales, John 1641 H^ford, Charles 16^2 Halton, William
1776 Hamilton, John 1667 Hanham, William 1774 Hanmer Walden 1746 Harbourd,
Harb. 1771 Harland, Robert 162^ Harpur, Harry 1611 Harrington, James 164^
Hatton, Thomas 1775 Hawkins, Caesar 1676 Head, Edmund, 1^33 Heathcote, Gilbert
17^3 Heathcote, Those. 1763 Henniker, John 1662 Heron, Thomas 1778 Heron,
Richard 1761 Hesketh, Robert 1619 Hesi^rigge, Robert 1621 Hewet, Thomas 1641
Heyman, Peter 1643 Hickman, Nevil 1619 Hicks, John 1660 Hildyard, Robert 1727
Hill, Rowland 1611 Hoghton, Henry 1612 Holte, Charies 1660 Honywood, John 1778
Hood, Samuel 1767 Hort, John 1764 Horton, Watts 1767 Hoskins, Hungers. 1660
Hudson, Charles 1773 Hughes, Richard 1739 Hulse, Edward 1709 Hume, Abraham 16^3
Hunlocke, Henry 1665 Jacob, Hildebrand 1778 James William 1748 ^bbetson, James
1778 Jebb. Richard 16^1 Jenkinson Banks 1620 Jerningham, Wm. 1781 Ingilby, John
1755 Johnson, John 1774 Jones, William 1627 Isham, Justinian 1642 Kaye, John
Lister 1642 Kemp, William 1660 Keyt, Those. Char. 1641 Knatchbull, Ed. 1754
Knollys, Francis 1765 Knowles, C. Hen. 1758 Lade, John 1711 Lake, Jam. Winter
1711 Lambert, John 1660 Langham, James 1641 Langley, Haldanby 1776 Laroche,
James 1641 Lawley, Robert 1665 Lawson, John 1688 Lawson, Gilfred 1660 Lee, Wm.
Hartwell 1660 Legard, John 1600 Leicester, J. Flem. 1773 Leigh, Egerton 1693
Leighton, Charlton 1774 Lemon, William 1778 Lippincot, Henry 1627 Littleton,
Edward 1778 Lloyd, Edward 1662 Long, Ja. Tylney 1664 Loraine, William 1781
Lovett, Jona. 1642 Lowther, James 1764 Lowther, Rev. W. 1772 Lyde, Lionel 1619
Mackworth, Henry 1770 Mackworth, Herb. 1660 Mainwaring, Hen. 1755 Mann, Horatio
1627 Mannock, George 1697 Mansell, Edward 1622 Mansell, William 1642 Markham,
James J. 1667 Martin, Mordaunt 1765 Mawbey, Joseph 1662 Middleton, Wm. 1781
Middleton, Charles 1619 Mill, Rev. Charles 1661 Millbank, Ralph 1705 Miller,
Thomas 1717 Milner, William 1724 Mitchell, Andrew 1689 Molesworth, Wm. 1611
Molineux, Francis 1660 Monnoux, Philip 1774 Montgomery, Wm. 1627 Moore, John
1766 Moore, John 1611 Mordaunt, John 1675 More, William 1781 Mosley, John 1660
Mostyn, Roger 1670 Mostyn, Pyers 1611 Musgrave, Philip 1682 Naper, Charles 1666
Nelthorpe, John 1677 Newdigate, Roger 1641 Northcote, Stafford 1742 O'Carrol,
John 1665 Oglander, William 1643 O'Neil 1661 Osborne, George 1641 Owen, William
1678 Oxenden, Henry 1620 Packington, Herb. 1773 Palliser, Hugh 1621 Palmer,
Cha. Har. 1660 Palmer, John 1681 Parker, Rev. Hen. 1681 Parkyns, Thomas 1661
Parsons, Mark 1762 Paul, Onesiphorus 1737 Pain, Gillies 1737 Peachy, James
1676 Pennington, Joseph 1663 Pennyman, James 1774 Pepperell, William 1716
Perrot, Richard 1612 Peshall, John 1611 Peyton, Yelverton 1776 Peyton, Henry
1628 Pile, Seymour 1623 Playters, John 1628 Pole, John, 1677 Poole, Ferdinando
1644 Prestwich, Elias 1768 Price, Charles 1622 Prideaux, Wilmot 1766 Pringle,
John 1745 Proctor, Those. B. 1628 Price, Ewd. Manly 1781 Quin, Valen. Rich. 1689
Ramsden, John 1774 Raymond, Charles 1641 Read, John 1641 Rich, Thomas 1676
Rich, Robert 1684 Richards, Philip 1778 Riddell, James 1756 Ridley, Mat. White
1621 Rivers Gay, Rev. P. 1660 Robinson, George 1690 Robinson, Norton 1731
Robinson, William 1764 Rodney, Geo. Br. 1699 Rogers, Frederick 1660 Rous, John
1779 Rumbold, Thomas 1661 Rushout, John 1629 Russell, John 1671 St. Aubin, John
1772 St. John, H. Paulet 1642 St. Quintin, Wm. 1675 Samwell, Thomas 1611
Savile, George 1653 Scot, William 1626 Sebright, John 1665 Shaw, John 1755
Sheffield, John 1611 Shelly, John 1660 Shuckburgh, Geo. 1622 Skipwith, Peyton
1670 Skipwith, T. Geo. 1763 Smith, Jarrit 1774 Smith, John 1661 Smyth, William
1663 Smyth, Robert 1714 Smyth, Robert 1660 Smythe, Edward 1685 Soame, Peter
1677 Standish, Frank 1660 Stanley, John Tho. 1661 Stanley, William 1679
Stapleton, Thomas 1660 Stapylton, John 1621 Stepney, John 1628 Stonehouse, Rev.
J. 1641 Strickland, George 1627 Style, Charles 1772 Sutton, Richard 1660
Swynburne, Edw. 1781 Sykes, Francis 1774 Symons, Richard 1662 Tancred, Thomas
1778 Tailor, John 1664 Tempest, Henry 16^2 Temple, Richard 16^4 Thomas, Edmund
1766 Thomas, George 1622 Thompson, Charles 1642 Thorold, John 1642
Throckmorton, To. 1621 Tichborne, Henry 1628 Trelawney, Rev. H. 1662 Trevelyan,
John 1642 Trollope, Thomas 1727 Turner, John 1733 Turner, Gre. Page 1611
Twisden, William 1666 Twisden, J. Pap. 1674 Tynte, C. Kemeys 1723 Vandeput,
George 1751 Van-Neck, G. W. 1628 Vavasor, Walter 1620 Vincent, Francis 1645
Vyvyan, Rev. Car. 1621 Wake, William 1660 Warburton, Peter 1775 Warren. J.
Borlase 1715 Warrender, Patrick 1760 Watson, Charles 1644 Webb, John 1703 We
ster, Godfrey 1700 Wescome, Anthony 1696 Wheat, Jacob 1660 Wheeler, William
1660 Whichcote, Christ. 1664 Williams, David 1661 Williams, Hugh 1774 Williams,
Edward 1688 Williams Win, W 1746 Williams, Booth 1642 Williamson, Hedw. 1641
Willis, William 1759 Wilmot, Edward 1772 Wilmot, Robert 1661 Wilson, Th. Spenc.
1776 Winn, G. Allanson 1755 Winnington, Edw. 1774 Wintringham, Cli. 1611
Wodehouse, John 1628 Wolsely, William 1665 Wolstenholme, Fr. 1778 Wombwell,
George 1749 Woolaston, Is. Law. 1766 Woolf, Jacob 1611 Worsley, Richard 1612
Wray, Cecil 1618 Wrey, Bourchier 1772 Wright, James 1772 Wright, James 1642
Wrottesley, John 1729 Wyche, Cyril 1731 Win, John 1660 Win, Rowland 1612
Wyvill, Marm. 1759 Yeo, William 1665 Yeomans, Rev. R. 1661 Young, G. Estcott
1769 Young, William
BARONETS of NOVA SCOTIA, RESIDENT in ENGLAND.
1637 Carr, Robert 1622 Gascoigne, Those. 1638 Longueville, Those. 1640 Meredith,
William 1628 Musgrave, William Prekering, Edward 1635 Pilkington, Mich. 1638
Slingsby, T. Turner
Besides the above, there are several to whom the Dignity of Baronet has been
granted, but neither they nor their Susscessors have taken out their Patents,
as Sir Robert Cornwall (who was created in Hanover by K. George II.), and Sir
James Bunce, etc.

A Correct LIST of the BARONETS of IRELAND, with the Dates of their Creations,
from the first Institution of that Order in Ireland (by the Letters Patent of
King JAMES I. dated Sept. 30, 1619), to the present Time.

1621 Aylmer, Fitzgerald 1730 Bailey, Edward 1622 Barnewall, Patrick 1775
Barry, Edward 1688 Bellew, Patrick 1703 Blackwood, R. 1622 Blake, Valentine
1760 Blunden, John 1628 Bourke, Ulick 1759 Braddrect, S. 1764 Brook, Arthur
1723 Burdet, Thomas 1645 Burrowes, Era. 1758 Burton, Charles 1628 Butler,
Thomas 1671 Byrne, Gregory 1683 Caldwell, James 1763 C^tter, James 1744
Coulthurst, John 1706 Cox, Richard 1758 Croston, Mar. 1776 Cromie, Michael 1662
Dancer, Thomas 1709 Deane, Matthew 1686 Domville, Thomas 1781 Denny, Barry 1721
Echlin, Henry 1628 Esmond, Thomas 1778 Falkiner, Riggs 1766 Fetherstone Ralph
1780 Flood, Fred. 1724 Fownes, William 1768 Freke, John 1779 French, Charles
16^5 Gething, Richard 16^0 Giffard, Thomas 1760 Gore, Booth 1774 Hamilton, H.
1780 Hamilton, J. S. 1681 Harstonage, Harry 1779 Hill, Hugh 1774 Johnston, J.
A. 1772 Johnstone, Richard 1777 Langrishe, Hercules 1776 Lawson, Nicholas 1704
Levinge, Richard 1768 Loftus, Edward 1758 Louth, Mar. 1774 Lumm, Francis 1622
Lynch, Henry 1627 Mac Donnel, Alex. 1781 Massey, H. Dillon 1763 May, James 1778
Miller, John 1730 Molyneux, Dr. J. 1681 Moore, Emanuel 1651 Morres, John 1758
Morres, William 1781 Newcomen, W. G. 1623 Newcomen, Robert 1768 Nugent, John
1686 O'Brien, Donald 1686 O'Brien, Lucius 1780 O'Bonnell, Neal 1665 O'Neile,
Henry 1629 Osborne, Richard 1629 Osborne, William 1777 Palmer, Roger 1766
Parnell, John 1677 Parsons, Lawrence 1677 Parsons, William 1660 Piers, Henry
1678 Reynell, Richard 1760 Ribton, George 1766 St. George, Rich 1776 Smith,
Skeffington 1748 Somerville, James 1628 Staples, Th. 1768 Steel, Richard 1623
Stewart, Annesley 1780 Tottenham, John 1622 Tuite, Oliver 1778 Tynte, James
Strat. 1780 Waller, Robert 1744 Wolseley, Richard 1761 York, William
Authentic LIST of the BARONETS of SCOTLAND.
1625.
Gordon of Gordonston Strachan of Thornton Campbell of Glenurchy Innes of Innes
Livingston of Dunipace Douglas of Glenbervie M'Donald of Slate Murray of
Cockpool Colquhoun of Luss Gordon of Cluny Lessie of Wardis Gordon of Lessmore
Ramsay of Balmain Forrester of Corstorphine Graham of Braco
1626.
Forbes of Monymusk Johnston of Caskieben Burnet of Leys Moncrieff of Moncrieff
Ogilvie of Carnousie Gordon of Lochinvar Murray of Clermonth Blackadder of
Tulliallan Ogilvie of Innerquharity
1627.
M'Kay of Strathnaver Maxwell of Calderwood Sir James Stewart Napier of
Marchieston Livingston of Kinnaird Cunningham of Cunninghamhead Carmichael,
Westerraw M'Gill, Cranston Riddle Ogilvie of Barnff Johnston of Elphinston
Cockburn of Langtoun Campbell of Lundie
1628.
Aitchieson of Clancairny Montgomery, Skelmorly Campbell of Auchinbreck
Campbell of Ardnamurchan Hope of Craighall Preston of Airdrie Riddell of
Riddell Murray of Blackbarony Murray of Elibank M'Kenzie of Tarbet Elphinstone
of Elphinstone Forbes of Castleforbes Hamilton of Killoch Slingsby of Scriven
1629.
Bruce of Stanhouse Nicolson of Laswade Arnot of Arnot Oliphant of Newton Agnew
of Lochnaw Keith of Ludquhairn
1630.
Hannay of Mochrum Forbes of Craigievar Murray of Dunnerne Crosbie of Crosbie
Park Sibbald of Rankeillor Richardson of Pencaitland Cuningham of Robertland
1631.
Wardlaw of Pittrevie Sinclair of Cainsby Gordon of Embo M'Lean of Morvaren
1633.
Balfour of Denmill Cuningham of Auchinhervie
1634.
Munro of Foulis Foulis of Colinton Bingham of Castewar Vernate of Carlton
1635.
Hamilton of Broomhill Gascoigne of Barnebow Norton of Cheston Pilkington of
Stainlie Hay of Smithfield Widdrington of Cartington Bolles of Asburton Raney
of Rotham
1636.
Fortescue of Salden Thomson of Duddingston Moir of Longford Sinclair of
Stevenson Curzon of Kedleston Brown of the Neale Baillie of Lochend
1637.
Nicolson of Carnock Preston of Valleyfield Kerr of Greenhead. Dick of Braid
1638.
Musgrave, Hayton Castle
1641.
Cooper of Ratlingcourt Crawford of Jordanhill
1646.
Cooper of Gogar Hamilton, Silvertonhill
1661.
Fleming of Farm
1662.
Ogilvie of Barras
1663.
Carnegy of Pitarrow Hay of Park Keith of Powburn Maxwell of Orchardton Seton
of Abercorn
1664.
Henderson of Fordell Murray of Stanhope Dalrymple of Stair P. Chalmers of
Cults Seaton of Charlton Sinclair of Longformacus Mowat of Ingliston
1665.
Graham of Gartmore Malcolm of Lochore Menzies of that ilk Purves of Purveshall
Ramsay of Whitehill
1666.
Elliot of Stobs Erskine of Alva Erskine of Cambo Dalziell of Glenae P. Lindsay
of Evelick Ramsay of B^nff Stirling of ^lorat Scot of Thirleston P. Wood of
Bonington Stirling of Ardech
1667.
Don of Newton Hay of Linplum
1668.
Douglas of Kelhead Barclay of Pearston Cuninghame, Caprington Nisbet of Dean
1670.
Bennet of Grubbett Wallace of Cragie
1671.
Cockburn of that ilk Home of Blackadder Halket of Pitsirran Scot of Ancrum
1672.
Hope of Carse Jardin of Applegirth
1673.
Murray of Auchtertyre Murray of Balmanno
1677.
Dick of Prestonfield Lockhart of Carstairs
1678.
Gilmour of Craigmillar
1679.
Campbell of Ardkinlas Dalmahoy of that ilk Clerk of Pennycuick Co^hran of
Ochlitree P.
1680.
Baird of Newbyth Mattland P.
1681.
Maxwell of Monreith.
1682.
Bannerman of Elsick Kennedy of Culean P. Maxwell, Netherpollock
1683.
Pringle of Stitchel Seton of Pitmedden Stewart of Blair Maxwell of Springkell
Sharp of Scotscraig
1685.
Dalziel of Binns Grierson of Lag Kilpatrick of Closeburn Lawrie of Maxwelton
1686.
Brown of Coalston Calder of Muirton Kinloch of Gilmerton Miln of Barntoun
Paterson of Bannockburn
1687.
Hall of Dunglass Inglis of Cramond Stewart of Allanbank Threipland of Fingask
Paterson of Eccles
1688.
Bruce of Balkaskv Houston of that ilk Lander of Idington
1689.
Livingston of W. quarter
1690.
Lauder of Fountainhall
1692.
Hamilton of Barnton
1694.
Dunbar of Mochrum
1695.
Baird of Sauchtonhall Cumming of Culter Dickson of Carberry
1697.
Hope of Kirkliston Home of Manderston
School.
Dalrymple of Cranston Dalrymple, N. Berwick Dunbar of Durn Hume of Renton
Stewart of Cultness
1700.
Dalrymple of Newhails Elliot of Minto Dunbar of Thunderton Forbes of Foveran
Belsches Wishart, Tofts, Johnston of Westerhall Nicolson of Kemnay
1701.
Elphinston of Logie Whiteford of Whiteford
1702.
Gibson of Addieston Suttie of Balgone. Cuninghame of Milncraig
1703.
Ferguson of Kilkerran H. M'Dougal, Alderston M'Kenzie of Skatewell Pollock of
that ilk Hamilton of Rosehall
1704.
Gordon of Dalpholly Murray of Melgum P. Mackenzie of Royston Grant of Grant
Nairn of Dunsinnan Rochead of Innerleith Wedderburne, Blackness
1705.
Grant of Cullen Stewart of Goodtrees Holburn of Menstrie Naesmith of Davick
FINIS.
INDEX to VOLUME II.
REMARKABLE Occurrences PAGE. 1 V^lgar Hisicrical Errors 16 List of Eminent
Persons 17 List of the Kings of the Heptarchy 98 Kings of England, Vol. I.
following the Preface. Kings of Scotland 101 Kings of France 102 Kings of
Poland 103 Kings of Sweden 104 Kings of Denmark 105 Kings of Spain 107 Kings of
Pertugal, ib. Kings of Pr^ssia ib. Kings of Hungary and Bohemia 108 Emperors of
Russia 109 Emperors of Rome 110 Emperors of the Western Empire 112 Emperors of
the Eastern Empire ib. Emperors of Constantin^ple 113 Emperors of Germany 114
Popes 116 List of the Regiments 117 Present Kings of each Country 118 View of
the Religion and Capital Cities of each Country 119 Comparative View of the
Forces, Revenue, etc. of Europe 120 Royal Family of England ib. Lord
Lieutenants of Ireland 121 Lord Chancellors 122 Chancellors of Oxford 127
Chancellors of Cambridge 128 Archbishops and Bishops of England 129 Irish
Bishops 141 Lord Mayors of London 142 L^st of Second Titles 143 Peers' Names
149 Lord Chamberlains 159 Vice Chamberlains ib. Grooms of the Stole ib. Lord
Stewards ib. Comptrollers ib. Treasurers 160 Cofferers ib. Masters of the Horse
161 Captains of the Band of Gentlemen Pensioners ib. Keepers of the Wardrobe
ib. Masters of the Jewel Office ib. List of the several Offices of the Queen's
Household ib. Treasurers of the Chamber 162 Lords President ib. Lords Warden of
the Stannaries 163 Chancellors of the Duchy of Lancaster ib. Lords Privy Seal
ib. Attorneys and Solicitors General ib. First Lords of the Treasury 164
Chancellors of the Exchequer ib. Secretaries to the First Lord of the Treasury
ib. Secretaries of State 165 First Lords of Trade ib. Paymasters General of the
Forces 166 Postmasters ib. Secretaries at War 167 First Lords of the Admiralty
ib. Treasurers of the Navy ib. Vice and Rear Admirals of Great Britain ib. Vice
Admirals of Scotland 168 Masters of Greenwich Hospital ib. Masters of the
Orduance ib. Lieutenant Generals of ditto ib. Commander in Chief ib. Order of
Precedence 169 Baronets of England 171 Baronets of Nova Scotia resident in
England 177 Baronets of Ireland ib. Baronets of Scotland 178
The following useful and new Books may be had of the Publisher of this Volume,
and all Booksellers. To the Trade who take Twelve of any of the following
Books, a Thirteenth will be given gratis.
A new Edition, being the Twelfth, Price 3s. half bound.

PRINCIPLES of POLITENESS, Parts I. and II. with such Additions, as the growing
manners of the times have made necessary,

By the Rev. Dr. JOHN TRUSLER.

Containing every instruction necessary to complete the Gentleman and Man of
Fashion, to teach him a knowledge of life, and make him well received in all
companies. For the improvement of youth, yet not beneath the attention of any.

Part II. is addressed to, and calculated for, Young Ladies.

This book is adapted as a school-book in the first academies in Europe, and
has been translated into all the European Languages.

* At the request of several private tutors and masters of academies, the
preceding article is translated into French, in a classical and elegant style,
by the Chevalier De Sauseuil, in two vols. price 5s.

An ELEGIAC POEM on the FEARS of DEATH, By the Rev. Dr. JOHN TRUSLER. Price 1s.
6d. PRACTICAL HUSBANDRY, Or the Method of Farming with a Certainty of Gain; as
practiced by all judicious farmers in this country. The result of many years
experience,

By Dr. JOHN TRUSLER.

Price 3s. 6d. sewed.

In this work the plain business of farming is set forth, without either
theory, speculation, or experimental enquiry: a variety of estimates of the
profits of different crops are given, from minutes kept, and the method of
measuring timber laid down.

This book demonstrates, to a moral certainty, of clearing 400l. a year on a
farm of 150 acres of land.

The WAY to be RICH and RESPECTABLE.

The Fifth Edition, Price 2s.

In this pamphlet is given (among a variety of other estimates, or plans of
living, from 750l. a year to 130l. showing how well a family may live upon a
little money, with o^conomy), one showing, that a gentleman residing in the
country may, with a few acres of land, live as well for 500l. a year, and make
an appearance in life equal to those who spend double the sum without these
advantages. With the cheapest method of keeping horses, etc.

N. B. This pamphlet will give every one a proper insight into their domestic
expenses, and save every family scores of pounds.

Such as are fond of farming will here find the expenses attending, and the
profits arising from, the cultivation of land, feeding of sheep, etc.

The GARDEN COMPANION, for Gentlemen and Ladies; or a calendar, pointing out
what should be done every month in the greenhouse, flower, fruit, and kitchen
gardens, with the proper seasons for sewing, planting, etc. with the time when
the produce may be expected, so as to have a regular succession of flowers and
vegetables throughout the year.

The Fifth Edition, Price 1s.

N. B. With the help of this book, any country servant may look after a garden.

The GENTLEMAN's POCKET FARRIER.

A New Edition, Price 1s.

With a plate, showing the age of the horse by his teeth.

Also, how to use your horse on a journey, and what remedies are proper for
common accidents that may befall him on the road; neatly printed on bank paper,
on purpose to lay in a pocketbook.

* This tract has been in great estimation for 50 years past, and has gone
through many editions in Ireland. The remedies it prescribes are simple and
easily obtained, and never fail of a cure, where the disorder is curable, and
no one who values his horse should travel without it.

The ODDS of the GAME of BILLIARDS; with some useful observations that should
be attended to by every player. Accurately calculated. Price 1s. A DESCRIPTIVE
ACCOUNT of the Principal ISLANDS in the SOUTH SEAS, in one vol. 8vo. price 5s.
in boards, or 6s. ^ound, giving a full detail of the religion, government,
customs, manners, etc. etc. of the inhabitants, from the first discovery to the
present time; containing every thing entertaining and instructive to the
general reader, to be met with in Mendana, Le Maire, Schouten, De Quiros,
Tasman, Bougainville, Cook, Parkinson, Fourneaux, Forster, and others, who have
sailed into that part of the world.

In those authors, the information is widely scattered amidst bearings,
soundings, and a variety of nautical observations; here it is brought together
into one regular view. To which is added, some account of the discovery of the
country of Camchatcha, a late discovery of the Russians. -- The whole carefully
collected, digested, and systematically arranged,

By the Rev. Dr. JOHN TRUSLER.

The PHYSICAL FRIEND; Pointing out the symptoms of every distemper incident to
man, with those in every stage of the disease, and what they foretell.

Carefully collected from the best medical authors, and systematically
arranged, with the authorities, by J. A. M. D. and F. R. S. Together with an
alphabetical index of the same symptoms; by which the sick person, referring to
any one that attacks him, may find out his disorder and his real situation.

By occasional recourse to this book, many a tormenting and expensive sickness
may be prevented, and many a lise be saved; for even fatal disorders are, at
first, but slight indispositions; of course, the sick person, not aware of his
danger, has too often delayed seeking for a remedy, till the distemper has
gained too much ground to be easily overcome, and perhaps has destroyed him;
when, by opposing it in time, he might readily have recovered.

In this work physical terms are purposely avoided, that it may be understood
by every reader; being calculated to show the danger of particular diseases in
their first attack; in what cases it is necessary to call in advice, and, in
certain situations, what hopes there are of recovery.

The FOUR FIRST RULES of ARITHMETIC, Price 1s. So fully explained, as to be
learned without the help of a master, which is not the case with any book of
Arithmetic extant.

As nine tenths of the people, particularly women, have no occasion to learn
any more than the first four rules, and have it not always in their power to
procure a master, they will find this work sufficiently adequate to the purpose
of instructing them; each rule being very clearly and fully explained, even to
the capacity of girls; and with the following book, called

FAMILY TABLES, Price 3s. Being a collection of useful tables, framed for the
various purposes of life, they will find more than the first four rules of
arithmetic unnecessary.

A CONCISE VIEW of the COMMON and STATUTE LAW; Being a careful abridgment of
BLACKSTONE's COMMENTARIES, with the law terms explained throughout as they
occur.

By the Rev. Dr. JOHN TRUSLER. Quarto, Price 15s. in boards.

An HISTORICAL and POLITICAL VIEW of the Ancient and Present STATE of the
COLONY of SURINAM, in South America; together with the settlements of DEMERARY
and ISSEQUIBO, lately taken from the Dutch by Sir George Rodney; with an
account of their productions for twenty-five years past. Price 3s.

By a person who lived there ten years, and lately returned.

The SUBLIME READER; Or, the MORNING and EVENING SERVICE of the CHURCH so
pointed, and the emphatical words throughout so marked, as to display all the
beauty and sublimity of the language, and render it, with the least attention,
impossible to be read by the most injudicious reader but with propriety. Price
2s.

With remarks on the service, and notes of general use, By the Rev. Dr. J.
TRUSLER.

Shortly will be published, by R. Baldwin, A New Edition,

With improvements and additions, but for the use of schools printed in one
volume in 12mo,

The DISTINCTION between WORDS esteemed SYNONYMOUS in the English Language,

By the Rev. Dr. JOHN TRUSLER. Very useful to those who would either write or
speak with propriety and elegance.



