THE HISTORY SCOTLAND UNDER THE HOUSE OF STUART.

VOLUME I.



THE HISTORY OF SCOTLAND FROM THE ACCESSION OF THE HOUSE OF STUART TO THAT OF
MARY.

WITH APPENDIXES OF ORIGINAL PAPERS.

BY JOHN PINKERTON.

IN TWO VOLUMES.

VOL. I.

LONDON: PRINTED FOR C. DILLY, IN THE POULTRY.

M DCC XCVII.

PREFACE.
WITH a considerable degree of anxiety the author at length delivers to the
public candor the greatest labor of his life.

The plan of this work being in some respects new, it may not be unnecessary to
indicate the causes of the arrangement. The characters of the monarchs are
delineated at the commencement, not at the close, of their reigns; because in
the most eminent historical productions, when other personages ascend the
scene, they are thus introduced, and recommended to the reader's attention, as
he becomes more interested in the events by a previous acquaintance with the
actors. In the other mode the mind seems to feel some defect in gratification,
some desire to reperuse the reign, in order to mark its correspondence with the
character: nor can any just cause be assigned why the princes should, in this
respect, be distinguished from the other chief personages. Nor is the private
personal character of a monarch always to be discerned in the public fortunes
of his sovereignty, often the machinations of ministers and parties, though it
doubtless have such influence as to deserve great attention: and modern history
not permitting such variety of rhetoric and digression, as the ancient
classical models afford, it becomes the more important to preserve its legal
wealth unviolated, and to diversify the chronicle of wars and treaties by ethic
portraiture, by delineations of men and manners. Yet in this arrangement of the
characters it becomes indispensable, that the reign be first composed with
complete candor, from the most genuine and unbiassed sources, and meditated in
all its relations of time, place, and circumstances, before a just estimate can
be prefixed.

Another novelty is the Retrospect, interposed at appropriated epochs, of the
state of the country in civilization, government, laws, tactics, agriculture,
commerce, literature, and the arts, during a preceding period. The classical
page of history, from the age of Herodotus to the latest voice of expiring
Rome, is illuminated with such researches, though commonly presented in the
form of digressions; but they are certainly deserving of a separate and
peculiar nich in the temple of memory. At the same time it would be rash too
far to depart from the models venerated by the wisdom of ages; or to forget
that the preservation of national events is the allotted province of history.
These sketches must therefore be kept in due subservience to the main design,
least by an injudicious exuberance of extraneous matter the very nature and
name of history perish; and the grandest records of human instruction, the most
pleasing pages of general entertainment, become cumbrous volumes of reference,
chained to the groaning shelves of libraries. Sufficiently difficult, if
performed with a due sense of its importance, is the task of the historian; and
he needs little to encroach on other departments of science, upon which for him
to dilate would be as absurd as if he were to give the natural history of the
animals, and plants, of a kingdom. But when restricted within proper bounds,
and in some imitation of classical practice, these sketches may be regarded as
not only among the most instructive and interesting parts of history, but as an
agreeable variety and relief from the less diversified series of modern events.
The author was happy to find that his ideas on this topic completely
corresponded with those of the late Mr. Gibbon, who was pleased warmly to
express his approbation of this part of the plan, of its arrangement, and of
the space allotted to it, as calculated, not to encumber and oppress the
genuine province of history, but to variegate, enliven, and adorn These remarks
may, at the same time, answer the question, why Dr. Henry's plan was not
followed: and as little would the author, though he warmly venerate the mutual
benefits of the union, be disposed to imitate his example, in sinking the
history of an independent, and most memorable, kingdom, in that of a great
neighboring state; an injudicious mixture, productive of perplexity and
confusion, while clear ideas can only be attained by separate and distinct
views of their history and antiquities.
.

In the important and interesting division of Scottish history, now before the
reader, no pioneer had arisen to clear the way; and the author soon found that
the carelessness and inaccuracy, with which it had been treated, exceeded any
previous expectation he could have formed. Scarce a step could be advanced,
without some doubt arising in fact, or in chronology, so that the information
of a paragraph is often the labor of a dissertation. The most skillful will be
the first to pardon any mistakes that may remain; and the candor of all is
requested for an attempt derived from so many new sources, so many manuscript
materials, that after every care, and attention, not a few errors may have
escaped notice.

Had the author's abilities been equal to his ambition, it was his object and
wish, to have rendered the work so complete a model of modern history, so
perspicuous, interesting, various, animated, and elegant, as to merit general
approbation, as to appear on the toilette as well as in the library: while at
the same time, the events, chronology, references, and appendixes, should
present an exactness impenetrable by the sharpest spear of the sternest
antiquary. Vain hopes! His less sanguine expectations may yet claim the humble
merits of patience and labor, the nurses not the parents of genius -- may
descend from the impervious mountains of ability into the vale of accuracy. Yet
even accuracy is not the meanest merit of the historian, though to attain it
somewhat too much may perhaps be found to be here sacrificed, in minute notes
from diplomatic resources: but in excuse the reader will remember that this
particular division of the Scottish history had never before been attempted by
any writer versed in common authentication, while Sir David Dalrymple, Dr.
Robertson, and other learned and able authors, have minutely illustrated the
preceding and succeeding periods. Such notes are not indeed interesting to the
general reader, but they occupy little space -- and the learned will not blame
even a superstitious regard to accuracy and illustration, where much confusion
and obscurity had before prevailed: nor can the author be justly censured for
the cruel necessity of being his own pioneer, of proceeding as in an American
forest, with most cautious steps through the swamps, and earnestly clearing his
way amid the brambles and thickets of perplexity and error.

Not to mention the innumerable new materials used in the various reigns, that
of James V, in particular, is almost wholly composed from the original letters
of the chief actors; and is perhaps the first attempt of the kind in any
language, a few references to such documents having hitherto satisfied the
ambition of truth and accuracy. On a comparison with preceding accounts, the
reader will judge how much the modern history of all states might be verified,
and improved, by such a plan; and how many gross errors remain in the most
celebrated pages of history. The task is indeed laborious, but what is
temporary labor when compared with eternal truth?

It is a trite remark that an historian should belong to no sect, and no party:
with whatever severity and modesty he may estimate his efforts, still his
labors, however humble, must in their very nature appeal to posterity; and to
pollute his pages with the faction of the day, would be to violate his own
dignity, and reject his best reward. This work, begun long before that change
which produced the present opinions and commotions in Europe, was completed in
a silent inattention to them; and every sentiment would have been the same, if
the publication had taken place ten years ago.

Amid times of singular difficulty, amid objects of far superior importance,
should these volumes be received with favor, it would be the author's ambition
to complete his design, by composing on the same plan the History of Scotland,
from the earliest accounts to the accession of the house of Stuart. In
twenty-four books, comprised in two similar volumes, for the documents being
more rare the divisions would be more brief, he would arrange the materials
contained in his Enquiry into the early part, and the succeeding Annals of Lord
Hailes, with numerous important additions and illustrations. The materials for
this part are nearly complete; and it would give the author great satisfaction
to be encouraged in presenting at length an authentic and legitimate history of
his country, disencumbered from those clouds of fable and error, which have so
long exposed it to neglect or contempt.

From the reign of Mary to the union of the crowns, and of the kingdoms, so
much has been done, that little it would seem remains for future labor. Yet
the untouched manuscript materials might occupy two or three years in the
perusal; and perhaps not a few discoveries might be made by indefatigable
assiduity. The best form of such a work might be, one decade of history to the
union of the crowns, and one of annals to that of the kingdoms: any succeeding
events might appear in a chronological abstract, at sufficient length to
accompany the general history of a kingdom.

It only remains to admonish the reader, before he proceed to the perusal of
this work, that the letter O, prefixed to a reference, implies that the paper
is the Original, either written or signed, sealed or dictated, by the party;
and that C is the mark of a Copy, generally contemporary, always ancient.

CONTENTS OF THE FIRST VOLUME.
BOOK I. CONTAINING THE REIGN OF ROBERT II. CONSIDERATIONS on the accession of
the House of Stuart, and its state at the time -- character of Robert II --
claim of Douglas -- transactions with France and England -- parliament -- war
with England -- Berwick taken and retaken -- expedition of Nottingham --
incursions -- truce -- Lancaster in Scotland -- league with France --
parliament -- French troops arrive -- war with England -- expedition of Richard
II -- Scots attack England -- battle of Otterburn -- Fife Regent -- truce --
death of Robert Page 1 BOOK II. CONTAINING THE REIGN OF ROBERT III. Character
of Robert III -- disorders in the highlands -- truce with England -- feuds --
title of Duke -- war with Henry IV -- expedition of that king -- Rothsay's
character and marriage -- defection of March -- incursions -- parliament --
murder of Rothsay -- incursions -- battle of Homildon -- cruelty of Henry Percy
-- murder of Drummond -- siege of Coklaws -- captivity of prince James --
Northumberland's rebellion -- death of the king Page 45 BOOK III. CONTAINING
THE REGENCIES OF ROBERT, AND MURDAC. DUKES OF ALBANY. Character of Albany --
March returns -- a heretic burnt -- Jedburgh taken -- mutual ravages --
insurrection of Donald lord of the Isles -- battle of Harlaw -- university of
St. Andrew's sounded -- Henry V of England -- incursions -- disgraceful
expedition of Albany -- his death -- Murdac regent -- treaty for the ransom of
James -- affairs of the Scots in France Page 85 BOOK IV. CONTAINING THE REIGN
OF JAMES I. Character of James I -- parliament -- execution of Albany, his
sons, and Lennox -- parliament -- commercial negotiation with Flanders --
parliaments -- imprisonment of highland chiefs -- representatives for shires --
treaty with France -- insurrection of Alexander lord of the Isles -- his
submission -- commercial treaty with Flanders -- parliament -- truce with
England -- commotions in the highlands -- English proposals -- heretic burnt --
March confined -- parliament -- death of Mar -- Margaret of Scotland wedded to
the Dauphin -- siege of Roxburgh -- parliament -- assassination of James Page
108 BOOK V. A RETROSPECT OF THE STATE OF SCOTLAND, DURING THE REIGNS OF ROBERT
II, AND III, AND JAMES I. Sect. 1. State of the people, and of civilization --
2. Government, laws, tactics -- 3. Agriculture, useful arts -- 4. Commerce,
money, navigation -- 5. Ecclesiastic history, literature, language -- 6.
Ornamental arts, manners, dress Page 143 BOOK VI. CONTAINING THE REIGN OF JAMES
II. Minority and regency -- truce with England -- Crichton, Livingston, and
Douglas -- marriage of the queen dowager -- execution of Douglas -- marriage
treaty with Bretagne -- power of Douglas -- fall of Crichton and Livingston --
death of the dauphiness, and the queen dowager -- execution of Livingston --
English incursions -- battle of Sark -- marriage of James, his character and
active authority -- parliament -- affairs with Douglas -- his treasons --
murder of Maclellan -- Douglas stabbed by the king -- commotions allayed --
tranquillity -- university of Glasgow founded -- grand rebellion of Douglas --
quelled -- conflict at Arkinholm -- death of Moray and Ormond -- parliament --
James invades England -- truce -- parliament -- siege of Roxburgh -- death of
James Page 186 BOOK VII. BEING THE FIRST PART OF THE REIGN OF JAMES III.
Minority of James III -- regency -- Henry VI and his queen in Scotland --
Berwick acquired -- house of Angus rivals the former power of Douglas -- war
with England -- truce -- death of Mary of Gelder -- of bishop Kennedy -- Boyds
in favor -- parliaments -- Mary the king's sister wedded to Sir Thomas Boyd
earl of Arran -- marriage treaty with Denmark -- Orkneys ceded to Scotland --
Margaret of Denmark arrives -- fall of the Boyds -- character of James --
parliament -- reflections on some despotic measures -- parliament -- St.
Andrews an archbishopric Page 246 BOOK VIII. BEING THE SECOND, AND LAST, PART
OF THE REIGN OF JAMES III. Transactions with England and Burgundy -- marriage
treaty with Edward IV -- commencement of English influence in Scotland --
forfeiture of Ross -- parliament -- character of Albany and Mar -- Albany's
escape -- death of Mar -- war with England -- parliaments -- Albany in England
-- Glocester's invasion -- plot -- execution of the royal favorites -- James
confined -- truce -- deliverance of James -- Albany's treason and flight --
Margaret the king's sister weds Crichton -- parliament -- Douglas a captive --
negotiations with Richard III -- impolicy of James -- death of Margaret of
Denmark -- parliament -- marriage indenture -- confederacy against James --
conflict at Blackness -- battle at Sauchy -- death of the king Page 278 BOOK
IX. A RETROSPECT OF THE STATE OF SCOTLAND, DURING THE REIGNS OF JAMES II, AND
III. Sect. 1. State of the people, and of civilization -- 2. Government, laws,
tactics -- 3. Agriculture, useful arts -- 4. Commerce, money, navigation -- 5.
Ecclesiastic history, literature, language -- 6. Ornamental arts, manners,
dress Page 338
APPENDIX.
No I. Letter from the Earl of Douglas and Mar to Richard II, probably in 1377
Page 441 No II. Extracts from the Chamberlain's Roll, anno 1377 Page 442 No
III. Annabella queen of Scotland to Richard II, 28th May 1394 Page 446 No IV.
The same to the same, 1st August 1394 Page 447 No V. David Prince of Scotland,
Earl of Carric, (and afterward Duke of Rothsay,) to John of Gaunt Duke of
Lancaster, about 1398 Page 448 No VI. George Dunbar Earl of March to Henry IV,
18th February, 1400 Page 449 No VII. Christiana Countess of March to Henry IV,
probably in 1404 Page 450 No VIII. James of Douglas, Warden of the Marches,
probably to Henry IV in 1405 Page 451 No IX. Commission by Robert duke of
Albany, Regent of Scotland, to his ambassadors sent into England, 26th May 1414
Page 453 No X. Indenture between Murdac duke of Albany Regent of Scotland, and
Alexander earl of Mar, 16th November 1420 Page 454 No XI. Annual Revenues of
the Hostages for James I, 1424 Page 456 No XII. Acts for Taxes, 1424 and 1431
Page 458 No XIII. The contemporary account of the murder of James I Page 462 No
XIV. Coronation Oath, and Oaths of fidelity and homage, 1445 Page 476 No XV.
Ordinances of War, issued by William earl of Douglas in 1448. Page 478 No XVI.
Extracts from the Chamberlain's Roll, anno 1449 Page 480 No XVII. Letter of
James II to Charles VII of France, 8 July, 1455 Page 486 No XVIII. Forfeiture
of the Douglases, 1455 Page 489 No XIX. An Account Charge and Discharge, of
John Bishop of Glasgow, Treasurer to James III, for the Year 1474 Page 493 No
XX. Edward IV to Dr. Legh his ambassador in Scotland, 1477 Page 501 No XXI.
From the old chronicle at the end of Winton, 1482 Page 502 No XXII.
Pacification of Blackness, 1488 Page 505 No XXIII. Present State of the Scottish
Records Page 507 [No XXIV. Agreement in Parliament, between the Queen Dowager
and the Livingstons, 4 Sept. 1439] Page 513 [No XXV. Declaration of the
Parliament concerning the slaughter of Douglas, 12 June 1452.] Page 516
THE HISTORY OF SCOTLAND.
BOOK I. CONTAINING THE REIGN OF ROBERT II.
Considerations on the accession of the House of Stuart, and its state at the
time -- character of Robert II -- claim of Douglas -- transactions with France
and England -- parliament -- war with England -- Berwick taken and retaken --
expedition of Nottingham -- incursions -- truce -- Lancaster in Scotland --
league with France -- parliament -- French troops arrive -- war with England --
expedition of Richard II -- Scots attack England -- battle of Otterburn -- Fife
regent -- truce -- death of Robert.

THE accession of the family of Stuart to the Scottish throne deserves the
particular attention of the historian. 1371
Among the many families, which have held the regal scepter in the various
kingdoms of Europe, none have been hailed with equal applause, none have
encountered equal animosity. This house being at the head of affairs, when many
violent effervescences of party arose, the sober voice of candor has been
drowned in the tumult of numerous partisans. Truth has sighed when she beheld
all the weeds of obloquy, and all the flowers of praise, heaped upon the same
monument.

But the period is at length arrived, when the violence both of religious, and
of political, party was to suffer a considerable abatement. When universal
right of conscience shall order governments to refrain from the private
business of the bosom; and shall render even the name of toleration ridiculous
by tearing down the veil, which obscured the most sacred prerogatives of
mankind. When the interested aims of antiquated parties were to become objects
of equal neglect to enlightened nations, who began to see that one party alone
could serve them, an union of the people against their corrupters and
oppressors.

There is a gloomy bigotry in the spirit of party which is inimical to reason,
and which clouds the sunshine of the mind. Absurdity becomes as contagious as a
pestilence; and many tenets are objects of belief because they are
impracticable to argument. Hence we cease to wonder when we behold the human
character, so variable in itself, and so liable to every alteration of time and
circumstance, supposed to be constant and immutable in one family only. To the
jaundiced eye of party the whole House of Stuart became, as it were, one test
of political and religious opinion. Instead of granting, according to the
dictates of reason and of fact, that the monarchs of that illustrious family
were as various in their characters, and conduct, as those of any other
genealogy, and country, faction has been so absurd as to form them into one
house of fame, or dispraise. One character alone may indeed be ascribed to the
whole family, in the sacred term of unfortunate: and their proverbial
misfortunes as often contradict the political maxim, that want of success is
but another expression for defect of prudence, as they confirm the rigorous
observation. If one other general remark be allowed, it must be, that most of
the princes of this family were better qualified for the enjoyments and
elegancies of private life, than for the toil and dazzling bustle of royalty;
and had little of that tyrannic splendour which pleases the people so much,
because they regard the monarch as the public representative, and exult when he
shows his spirit by trampling upon them. A mild sovereign may receive the
appellation of a tyrant, from his yielding some prerogatives, and thus raising
hope and resentment because he concedes not more; while, with equal injustice,
a despot may secure popular applause, because his royal spirit preserves the
tyranny in pure and uncorrupted pomp. To confirm this observation let the
houses of Tudor and of Stuart be compared. But after these preparatory remarks,
it is now proper to return to the immediate course of the narration.

The scepter of Scotland passed to the family of Stuart at an unfortunate
period for the acceding progeny. Instead of a new sovereign who might interest
the wishes of the nation, by the amiable and splendid promises of youth, or
excite its confidence and ambition by the steady spirit of middle age, the
reins of government fell into a hand trembling under the weight of years.

In order to enable the reader to form just ideas concerning this important
event, it becomes necessary to explain, as briefly as possible, the origin, and
progress, of the family of Stuart; and its actual condition when it ascended
the Scottish throne.

The fables of adulation have now passed away, and it is acknowledged that we
have no certain evidence concerning this family, till the reign of David I,
when Walter the son of Alan appears as Steward Dapifer, a term synonymous with
Seneschalcus, in France as in Scotland: Du Cange voce Seneschalcus. The
derivation of the latter word is not clear; schak is a servant; Marischalcus is
the servant who had the charge of the horses; but Seen or Senet remains
unexplained: it may be from sean to see, as inspector; or from segen a banner,
(see Lie Dict. Anglosax., perhaps it is allied to senescantia, convivium, Du C.
But the most plausible etymology seems to arise from Senn, a chief herdsman,
Sennten, a herd, ( Scheuchzer Iter Alp. I, 49,) as the wealth of early times
consisted of herds and flocks. The office is evident; it was not only the chief
of the household, but its power, from the confidence acquired by that station,
extended to the collection and management of the revenue; to the administration
of justice; and even to the chief direction in war. During the reigns of the
first race of France, the Stewards are classed after the bishops and counts: in
the time of the second race they follow the Comites Palatii: about the year 980
they succeeded to the extinguished office of Mayors of the Palace. But the
power was in France found too vast for a subject; and in 1191 the dignity and
emoluments began to be reserved to the crown. The office was gradually
subdivided into those of Great Master of the Household, Constable or commander
in chief, and High Justiciary. Du Cange, ib.
of Scotland: and there is room to believe that this genealogical appellation
points to the noble and ancient English family of Fitz Alan. Walter was
succeeded in his high office by Alan his son; who was followed by the second
Walter. No action worthy of the historic page is authentically recorded of
these three: and the most important intelligence, which we can obtain from
their charters, is the situation of their lands; which were chiefly in that
western promontory, washed by the fertile and picturesque river Clyde, and now
called the shire of Renfrew, then, and since, the territory of the family, and
power, of the Stewards Crawford's History of the shire of Renfrew, and of the
House of Stuart, Edin. 1710, folio, Paisley 1782, 4to. Stewart's Genealogical
account of the Stuarts, Edin. 1739, 4to. For the origin of the family consult
also the remarks of lord Hailes, Annals I, 358.
. A higher fate awaited Alexander, the fourth Steward of Scotland, who united
the adjacent island of Bute to his patrimony by marrying the heiress; for in
the year 1255, he appears among the great nobles, who opposed the exorbitant
power of the Comyns; and, three years after, is mentioned as one of the regents
of Scotland, during the minority of Alexander III; and, in 1263, he commanded
the Scottish army at the contest with the Norwegians near Largs Crawf. 12.
Stewart, 50. Dalrymple's Annals 1255, 1258. For the battle of Largs, Fordun II,
98, who styles the leader Alexander Stuart of Dundonald, great grandson of
Walter the first Steward, and grandfather of Walter who married Marjory
daughter of Robert I. Winton MS. 587, says the king commanded in person. The
Norwegian accounts are silent concerning the Scottish general. Crawford
erroneously quotes Fordun, as asserting that the Steward was killed in the
conflict: by Stewart's account, drawn from Sympson's House of Stuart, Edin.
1712, 8vo, and Abercromby I, 451, he died in 1283. aged 69.
. James, the next High Steward, was also a regent of Scotland after the unhappy
death of Alexander III; shared the fame of Wallace in defense of his country,
but soon abandoned him; then resumed the character and exertions of a patriot,
and had the merit of being excepted in the amnesty of Edward I. His age alone
seems to have restrained him from assisting the early patriotic endeavors of
Robert I, for he died in 1309, after a life of sixty six years Crawf. 13 -- 23.
Stewart, 51. Dalrymple's Annals 1286, 1297, 1303, etc.
.

But the prosperous fortunes of this house moved in a yet higher progress, when
Walter, the sixth High Steward, strengthened and adorned his country. One of
the heroes who divided the danger, and the glory, at Bannocburn, his youthful
courage, and tried fidelity, were, the following year, rewarded with the
largest gift which a subject could receive, in his marriage with the only
daughter of his sovereign. His valor, and his abilities, were confirmed in the
public esteem by the defense of Berwick, and by his government of the kingdom
in conjunction with Douglas: and his early death was lamented by a grateful
people Crawf. 23 -- 25. Stewart, 52 -- 54. Dalrymple, Vol. II, passim. He died
in 1326. Dalr. II, 116.
. Robert, the seventh High Steward, was the only issue of Walter and the
princess: and to him the crown of Scotland was destined to devolve.
Distinguished in early youth by his conduct at the battle of Halidon, by his
decisive exertions against Edward Baliol; by the singular praise of being
appointed, in conjunction with Murray, governor of Scotland, at the age of
eighteen, he did not afterward frustrate the general expectation Crawf. 26.
Stewart, 55. Dalr. II, 165, 174, 175. The Steward was sole regent 1338 -- 1341,
and 1346 -- 1357. Dalr. II, 202, 221.
. Twice sole governor of a fierce and high spirited nation, he confirmed the
claim of his birth by the tenor of his actions: and he afterward ascended the
throne, fully experienced in the duties of obedience, and the arts of command.

The actual state of the family, when it became royal, claims our next
attention. Rewards for successive services of importance, and the dower of the
princely bride, had increased the possessions of the Stuarts to a great number,
and extent, in various regions, both in the western and eastern parts of
Scotland Crawf. passim.
. Had the territories of Douglas been as detached as those of Stuart, that name
had never become formidable to the crown: but chance, and not design, seems to
have presided in this distant allotment. The title, and office, of High Steward
had succeeded, in France, to the supremacy of the Mairs of the Palace: and in
that, and other, countries were soon found too lofty for the ambition of a
subject: hence it is not matter of surprise that no territorial dignity was
annexed to this distinction, till the year 1359, when the earldom of Strathern
devolving into the hands of David II, was by him conferred on Robert,
afterward his successor Crawf. 26. Additional Case of the Countess of
Sutherland by Sir D. Dalrymple, 1770, p. 55.
. But, in 1258, Walter, a cadet of the family, had become Earl of Monteith, by
wedding the heiress Crawf. 11. Stewart, 49. Sutherland Case, 14 -- 18.
; and Sir John Stuart of Bonkill, another cadet, was by David II created Earl
of Angus; and he and his heirs held the estate, while the Umfravilles of
England grasped at the title for many generations Crawf. 13. Stewart, 150.
Sutherland Case, 11.
. Robert, the Steward, had but one brother, Sir John Stuart of Railstoun, the
only issue of his father's posterior marriage with a sister of Graham of
Abercorn Crawf. 25. Stewart, 54.
; and this brother sleeps in the silent shades of heraldry: but the family, by
the extent of their possessions and connexions, wanted not power to support
their just title to the throne. Of all the great Scottish families that of
Douglas alone seems to have been equal, and perhaps superior, in power. The
successor to the scepter was also fortified by a numerous progeny, ready to
assert and to perpetuate his claim. By his first wife, Elizabeth daughter of
Sir Adam More of Rowallan, he had his successor John lord of Kyle, created Earl
of Carric by David II; Walter earl of Fife; Robert, by marrying an heiress of
his own family, Earl of Menteith, afterward Earl of Fife likewise, and Duke of
Albany; and Alexander of Badenoch Earl of Buchan: besides six daughters, united
to the powerful families of March, Lion of Glamis In the second year of this
reign the Thanage of Glamis was granted to John Lion; the relevium 10 l.
Scotstarvet's Calendars, Harl. 4609, f. 109.
, Hay of Errol, Mac Donald of Ilay and the Isles, Douglas of Nithsdale, Lindsay
of Glenesk. Nor was his second wife, Euphemia Ross daughter of the Earl of
Ross, unproductive of additional supports to his family, in David afterward
Earl of Strathern; and Walter lord of Buchan, Earl of Athol and Caithness, and
of Strathern upon his brother's death, but to be in a future period branded as
the murderer of James I: and in four daughters, the elder of whom afterward
wedded James earl of Douglas; while the three others were joined to Keith a son
of the marshal, and two knights Logan and Swinton Crawf. 28 -- 30. Stewart 56
-- 58.
. The attachment of Robert to the fair sex also appeared from his natural issue
by his concubines, among which six sons are noted by genealogists; and the
Stuarts of Bute, Cairney, and others, are of their descendants Crawf. 30, 31.
Stewart 58 -- 60. "Bell chevalier etoit, et avoit unze filz," says Froissart of
Robert II. Tome I, f. v. 256, edit. 1518.
. It was certainly fortunate for the acceding family that it possessed such
internal strength at this crisis; but this chance was overbalanced by peculiar
disadvantages.

The King was advanced to his fifty fifth year He was born on the 2d of March
1316. Dalr. II, 65.
; and the weakness of his reign sufficiently testifies that age began, and
continued, to freeze abilities, which had formerly flowed in a clear and
copious stream. His eldest son and heir, the Earl of Carric, had been maimed by
a horse Fordun II, 414. The rebellious steed belonged to Sir James Douglas of
Dalkeith, "Johannes Comes de Carrik, ex percussione equi Domini Jacobi Douglas
de Dalkeith, quasi claudus effectus."
, and was lame and weak in body, and of no power of intellect. A personal
deformity, which often arouses superior spirit in an individual, is pernicious
to princes, in whom not a defect, but a superiority, of dignity is matter of a
general expectation, so deeply rooted in our nature, that savage nations often
appoint their sovereigns only from superior personal appearance. This remark
must also be applied to Robert II himself, whose eyes, disfigured by
imflammation, disgusted the beholders Froissart II, f. 177. The MS Bib. Reg. 18
E 1, reads, "Or sen vint le roy Robert d'Escoche, qui estoit ung grant bon
homme, a tout ungs rouges yeulx rebrachies, ils sembloient de cindal." They
were red like sandal-wood; hence his vulgar epithet of blear eye, or watery
eyes. Dalr. II, 279; but ungs is not one, see the Gloss. du Roman de la Rose.
. Humanity would pass such topics, did not so much of human history depend on
the slightest qualities, or defects of princes.

The person of Robert II was however large and majestic Fordun, II, 383.
. The qualities of his mind it is difficult to mark with precision. The disease
of his eyes seems to have induced a desire of privacy, and age a propensity to
indolence, and the indolent are always ruled by those around them. War he
shunned, and declined the laborious office of a general; but the leaders whom
he appointed were well chosen and successful. In the more difficult and more
truly glorious arts of peace, he is entitled to considerable praise. The
terrors of justice he knew how to deal impartially to the guilty, while he
opened every gate of protection to the innocent. His actions proceeded in a
solid and rational tenor; and his promise was the exact standard of his
performance. Internal discords his equity appeased; and though his own age, and
the infirmity of the apparent heir, rendered his reign feeble, yet his wisdom
prevented it from being unfortunate. In a word he is little known to history,
because he was a good king, and a good man.

Upon the death of David II the states of the kingdom assembled at Lithgow; Feb.
and their determination appeared unanimous in the appointment of Robert as
successor to the vacant throne Fordun, II, 382.
. But a sudden cloud arose, which threatened all the storms of civil war.
William Earl of Douglas unexpectedly claimed the crown, as uniting in himself
the dubious pretensions of Common, and the solid title of Baliol. Yet the claim
was no sooner made than withdrawn. Our elder historians assert that the strong
interests of the Earls of Dunbar and Murray, and the yet stronger of Sir Robert
Erskine, keeper of the castles of Dunbarton, Edinburgh, and Stirling, appearing
decided for the Steward; induced Douglas to resign his expectation; while the
historian of the house of Douglas ascribes the desertion of the claim to its
own friends Fordun, II, 382. Winton MS. 818. Hume's house of Douglas, I, 160 --
163.
. Pretensions, which now strike as vague or usurpative, might not wear that
appearance in an age when the rights of succession were fluctuating and
undetermined. But prudence certainly did not conspire with ambition upon this
occasion, for no previous concert appears, no conciliation of interest; and the
claim can only be recommended as a subject of speculation. Had Robert I united
his house to that of Douglas, the prosperity of Scotland might perhaps have
been more ample under a family that, though subject, showed a regal spirit;
that in war boasts a genealogy of heroes; and that happened to have few of
those minorities, which harrassed the kingdom under the Stuarts: but in the
more useful honors of peace the latter family seem to have been far superior,
and by their merit alone better deserved the scepter.

Robert, attended by the states, proceeded to Scone, where he was crowned with
the usual ceremonies Fordun, II, 383, says on the 25th March; but the MS.
Records 4to, in the State Paper Office, fix the 26th March, and add that Landel
bishop of St. Andrews officiated. Next day the king, sitting "super montem de
Scone," on the moot-hill of Scone, according to custom received the homage of
the bishops and peers; among the latter are only enumerated John earl of Carric
Steward of Scotland, William earl of Douglas, the earls of Strathern, Mar, and
Menteith. All paid homage, and took oath of fidelity, except the bishop of
Dunblance, and Archibald Douglas, who only took the oath. Ibid. fol. 58.
: March
and, to settle the succession, a solemn act was passed by the king and states,
declaring John Earl of Carric, and Steward of Scotland, undoubted and apparent
heir of the kingdom Extract of this act, Abercr. II, 165. The act itself, Hay's
Vind. of El. More, p. 115. On the 3d of the ensuing May, in a privy council
held at Edinburgh, (present bishop of St. Andrews, earls Douglas and Carric,
Byggar the chancellor, sir Robert Erskine chamberlain, James Douglas, Hugh de
Eglinton, John Lion keeper of the privy seal,) orders were issued concerning
the royal household, domains, and castles, "per modum qui in alio Registro,
facto super ordinationibus et factis talibus non perpetuis, continetur." 4to
Register, fol. v. 58. The preservation of this invaluable volume leads us
deeply to regret the loss of the others.
. 1371 27 Mar.
To conciliate Douglas, his eldest son was honored with the hand of Euphemia,
the King's daughter: and to procure time and opportunity to win the public
confidence, before engaging in difficult and important affairs, it was resolved
religiously to observe the truce concluded with England, two years before, for
the term of fourteen years, and the stated payments due for the ransom of the
preceding monarch See several commissions, and acquittances, of 1371 and 1372,
in the 4to Register, fol. 32 -- 35.
. At the same time, in order to convince France that a change of politics had
happened upon the accession of the new family, the treaty with that country was
renewed; and it was specially stipulated that, in case of a competition for the
Scottish crown, June
the King of France should withstand any English influence, and should support
the determination of the states of Scotland Fordun, II, 392 -- 395: this
chapter is transposed, but Bowar, the arranger of Fordun's materials, is a bad
chronologer, a charge incident to all our historians including Buchanan. Fordun
gives a transtation of the treaty in latin. A copy of the French original may
be seen in the 4to Register, fol. 66 -- 68. Robert's commission is dated at
Scone, 31 March 1371, regni 1. The alliance was concluded at Vincennes 30 June
1371; and was ratified by Robert at Edinburgh 28 Oct. It is remarkable that
this treaty bears to be formed with the "Rois et roiaume d'Escoce, et
communaute d'Escoce."

In the same Register, fol. 68, are preserved the secret articles, dated 30
June. Charles V engages to persuade the pope to declare the truce between
England and Scotland void and null; to pay 100,000 nobles toward discharging
the ransom of David, or a larger sum if necessary to defray it totally; and the
100,000 nobles, even if not due, toward the expense of a war with England.
Before Scotland shall commence hostilities, France is to supply armor for 500
Scottish knights and squires, and for 500 sargents, and is to pay the wages of
this thousand for two years; the knight to have 3 fols, the squire 18 deniers,
the archier 9 deniers d'esterlings a day, all paid by the year in advance.
France is also to send at her expense 1000 men at arms to Scotland, and to
continue the subsidy as the war may demand: the payment to commence at Bruges,
half a year after the rupture of the alliance with England. But Robert,
naturally addicted to peace, and who saw the impolicy of commercing hostilities
at the accession of his family to the throne, appears never to have accepted or
ratified these private articles.


.

Another clause in the same treaty had effects apparently not foreseen, and
certainly not wished nor intended. It was agreed reciprocally that the subjects
of the allied powers should not serve in the English armies; and different
Scottish men, who had, toward the end of the preceding reign, entered into them,
in consequence withdrew. This circumstance was considered as an indication of
war; and, joined with the jealousy naturally arising from the renewal and
amplification of the treaty between Scotland and France, induced the English
monarch to use caution and vigilance; and he issued a mandate to the Whop of
Durham, 1372 Feb.
ordering that all capable of arms, in the north of England should hold
themselves in readiness to oppose any Scottish invasion Rymer VI, 713. The
affair of Roxburgh, which happened in 1377, is erroneously dated this year by
our unchronological writers.
.

But to such a weakness had the illustrious reign of Edward III fallen, and so
disordered was the machine of his government, that from this period to his
death, five years after, it is impossible to pronounce from his disposition
that there was peace, or from his exertion that there was war, between the two
kingdoms. 1372
The Scottish king endeavored to cultivate peace by attentive payment of the
ransom, though the English sovereign continued to deny his title, and only
condescended to use that of "most noble and potent prince our dear Cousin of
Scotland;" and when disposed to war, "our adversary of Scotland Rymer VI, 724.
VII, 673, etc.
." But in this respect a similar conduct to the French monarch afforded
precedent, and consolation.

In a memorable parliament, held at Scone, committees were, 2 Mar.
in imitation of the parliament assembled by David II in his fortieth year,
appointed for the general administration of justice; and lords of the articles
were chosen. The chief statutes are, that no assessors be permitted to fit in
the royal council, that no horses be sold into England, though cattle and sheep
may; money exported is to pay forty pence in the pound. No sherif, serjand, or
mair, is to require presents, or remission of debt. No mandate against the
common course of law is to be obeyed, under whatever seal it may be issued. And
a long, and severe, ordinance is enacted against murderers, and their abettors
4to Register, fol. v. 58, f. v. 60: the first reference bears the first year of
Robert's reign, the last, the second; the parliament continuing to sit after
the 26th March, the date of his accession. See also Skene's edition of the
statutes of Robert II; but he erroneously dates them the 2d of May 1372,
instead of the 2d of March. The earl of Carric, as Steward, or as High
Justiciary, was sworn to enforce the statutes; and the earls, barons, and
burgesses to observe them. Skene, ib. the Register is defective, two pages
being left blank. But it presents curious preliminary notices concerning the
committees of justice, and the lords of the articles, confessedly appointed in
imitation of the parliament 1370. Some of the burgesses summoned were absent,
"from contumacy," or rather neglect; a common grievance, which induced James I
to order them to choose delegates.
.

The attention of Robert was again directed to the succession in a parliament
held at Scone. 1373 Apr.
It was provided that, failing John Earl of Carric and his heirs, Robert Earl
of Fife and Monteith. Alexander Lord of Badenoch, David Earl of Strathem, and
Walter afterward Earl of Athol, should, in this order of birth, and their
heirs, wear the diadem in case of the failure of immediate heirship in any
predecessor Register fol. 63, 1373 regni 3: the act styles them sons of the
king, "ex sua prima et secunda uxore:" and, forgetting the sole claim of the
house of Stuart, it stigmatizes female succession as dangerous. In the same
Register, fol. v. 63, appears a deed by the earl of Douglas, 26 April 1373,
narrating that the king had granted him a free-port at North Berwich, but the
gift being found injurious to others, he abandons it.
. This act was prudent in one point of view, as calculated to strengthen the
succession, and guard against civil war; but, in another, as the apparent heir
was infirm, and had no children at the time, it perhaps lent a fanction and
support to the ambition of the second son, which had such violent effects in
the following reign.

A few succeeding years must have been peaceful and happy, for they supply no
materials to history In the 4to Register, f. 4, is a notarial copy of an
instrument, Paris 31 Jan. 1374, purporting that as margaret Logy, calling
herself queen of Scotland, had commenced a process at Rome, the French king, on
warm remonstrances from Robert, engages to desire the pope to recall the
sentences pronounced. See Dalr. Ann. II, 264, whence it appears that the
legality of her divorce from David II was the question.
.

But a greater order of affairs opens upon us, 1377
when Richard II succeeds to the English throne. Two wars, pregnant with
various and important events, distinguish the latter part of the reign of
Robert II; and it is the not unuseful province of history to delineate
hostilities in particular, as calling forth the greatest exertions of character
and talents, and as lasting beacons to warn mankind against the danger of war
their greatest enemy.

An officer of the Earl of March was slain by the English at Roxburgh, then in
their possession; and the Earl, after a vain demand of satisfaction, attacked,
ravaged, and burned the town, during a fair, and glutted his followers with
slaughter, revenge, and spoil. The English borderers retaliated on the lands of
Sir John Gordon, who entering England was encountered by Lilburn, whom after a
desperate affray he defeated at Carham Winton MS. 819, 820. Fordun, II, 383.
Walsingham hist. p. 197, and Ypodigma Neustriae, 136, fixes the date,
carelessly omitted by the Scottish compiler, whose chronology is confusion
itself.
. These border tumults were at length rendered respectable by the interference
of the Earl of Northumberland. Arming ten thousand men he proceeded to ravage
the lands of March for three days, and returned with considerable booty Walf.
ib. Otterbourn, 148. Fordun, 385, says the English cavalry were dispersed in
the night by youths armed with rattles, and a rout ensured.
. Excited by this success the Northumbrians, under some inferior leader,
invaded the weft marches of Scotland; but met with a different reception, few
of them escaping to tell the fate of the rest Walf. 214.
. And, if we credit an English historian, the government of his country,
alarmed at this misfortune, sent Edmund Mortimer Earl of March to treat with
the Scots, on the usual day for settling the disputes of the marches; and the
truce was renewed with reluctance, and for a short time Walf. 214.
. Commissions for compromising these disorders were however issued by Richard
II, on the twenty seventh day of September this year, and on the first of
January following Rymer VII, 174, 183.
.

The revenge of an individual contributed still further to destroy any
remaining harmony between the two nations. Mercer a Scotishman, 1378
commanding a small fleet of Scottish French and Spanish vessels, suddenly
displayed his motley squadron before Scarborough, and captured some valuable
English ships of merchandise, because that his father, a wealthy merchant
residing in France, had been taken at sea by some Northumbrians, and imprisoned
at that place. The father was a man of importance at the French court, esteemed
by Charles the Wise, and his advice followed in many points detrimental to the
English, and advantageous to the French, commerce. Walsingham expresses
unaffected concern that the Earl of Northumberland had executed justice in soon
delivering him without ransom; for, adds he, if he had been ransomed by the
common rules he might have enriched the king, and kingdom, with inestimable
wealth "Nam si redemptus fuisset captivorum more, regem et regnum inestimabili
pecunia divited effecisset." p. 212. It was apparently on this occasion that a
letter was written to the English king, by the earl of Douglas and Mar. It
terms John Mercer, "mon homme;" and says he was detained though cast on shore,
contrary to the great truce: "Mr. Thomas Mercer, mon clerk," is also mentioned
as captured. See it in that treasure of original pieces, Vesp. F. VII, f. 34.


. But though the elder Mercer had been delivered, it would appear that his
ships and cargo were not; and that retaliation conspired with revenge to excite
his son to this enterprise. The young man, boasting of the exploit, continued
to keep the sea, as defying the maritim power of England; till John Philpot, a
wealthy and ingenious merchant of London, stung with the disgrace offered to
the commerce of his country, fitted out ships of force provided with one
thousand men, raised at his own expense, who assaulted and took Mercer, his
newly acquired prey, and fifteen Spanish ships which assisted him Walls. 213.
. The Duke of Lancaster, who swayed the councils of the young English monarch,
rather checked than applauded the spirit of Philpot; and commissioners were
appointed to treat with those of Scotland concerning peace Rymer VII, 206.
. 22 Oct.


It is difficult to discover the real pretext, or occasion, of the capture of
the castle of Berwick by the Scots this year; Nov.
and the events of this period are not a little embroiled by various and
discordant accounts. According to the old English and Scottish writers, this
breach of the truce arose from the rashness of a few borderers Walls. 222, 223.
Ypod. 136. Otterbourn, 148. Fordun, II, 391.
; but, if we believe Froissart, it was the consequence of a war, commenced by
the determination of the Scottish government. This last account we are disposed
to follow; and to infer, from the narrative of it is author, that the counsels
of France, which aimed to divert the attention of Richard II from the ambitious
views of his grandfather, had a share in stimulating the Scots, already stung
with repeated insults, to regard the dubious truce in the same light with the
English, and to break it when it suited their convenience Mezeray, Abr. III,
98, relates that the Scots now broke the truce with England, instigated by
advantages which he mentions, and which correspond with the secret articles of
1371.
. The French historian infroms us, that, by direction of Robert II, and his
council, a small army was ordered to meet on the borders under the command of
Douglas, Murray and Mar. While this host was gradually assembling, and esquire,
named Alexander Ramsay, proceeded with forty companions to Berwick. Sending a
spy to discover the state of the castle, it was found that there was no water
in the ditches, and no guard on the walls. Ramsay and his followers immediately
planted ladders, scaled the walls, and came to the keep, where the commander
was in bed, it being apparently early in the day, and he was killed in
attempting to escape. An alarm being given the governor of the town ordered the
stop and pillars of the drawbridge to be destroyed; and upon the assailants
finding that they could not pass, the governor and his people shouted "Are you
there? Remain where you are. You shall not escape without our permission."
Ramsay resolved to wait for succor from the army, for Douglas had already
marched from Dalkeith to Dunbar Froissart, Tome II, fol. v. 6, edit. 1518, 4to.
.

Meanwhile the Earl of Northumberland summoned his array to Berwick; and with
ten thousand men besieged the castle, and began a mine. The Scottish barons
resolved to raise the siege: and Archibald Douglas, a relation of Ramsay,
advanced with a chosen party; but found the English too numerous, and was
forced to retire; upon which the castle was taken by assault, and all the Scots
slain, except Ramsay who yielded to Lord Percy Ibid. f. v. 8. The whole account
is compared with the MS. in Bibl. Reg. 18 E 1.
.

The Earl of Nottingham joined Northumberland, and they resolved to fight the
Scottish army if it advanced against them, or, if not, to ravage the southern
parts of Scotland. A party of three hundred lances and as many archers was
detached, under Musgrave the governor of Berwick, to Melrose, while the rest of
the English army advanced to a hamlet near Roxburgh where the Scots lay.
Musgrave sent two squires to explore the enemy, who were taken, and discovered
the English situation and designs; upon which the Scots resolved to surprise
Musgrave, and marching immediately arrived near Melrose at midnight; but a
tempest of wind and rain blowing in their faces, they could hardly withstand
it is force, and wandered from their way. Halting under a wood, and making
fires, they remained till dawn, when the tempest abated: and, as they were
forced to forage, they had some skirmishes with Musgrave's men who were alike
employed; and he determined to advance to the right, in order to join the
English army, but the Scots amounting to seven hundred lances, and two thousand
uncouthly armed, lay in the wood, and intercepted his progress. A conflict
being unavoidable Douglas, according to the custom of the times, knighted James
his son, and Robert and David, two sons of the king: the battle was quickly
decided; Archibald Douglas, lighting on foot, and wielding a sword of enormous
length which another man could hardly have held, made great slaughter:
Musgrave, his son, and many knights, and squires were taken. The Scottish army
retired toward Edinburgh with their captives, while Northumberland and
Nottingham could not pursue them, because of the tempestuous season of the
year, and were forced to return, and dismiss their men, while the Scots were
rejoicing and ransoming their captives at large sums Froissart, ib.
. Such is in abstract the account of Froissart, whose native simplicity, and
particularity of detail, lead, whenever he is followed, into some length of
narration; but it is hoped, not unpleasing, as it paints the spirit and manners
of the times. The Scottish chronicles impute the defeat and capture of Musgrave
to Sir John Gordon; and inform us, that Johnston, and others distinguished
themselves in skirmishes with the English upon the western marches Fordun, II,
385. Winton, 822.
.

Though a pestilence now raged in England, 1379
the Scottish borderers continued their inroads, with the usual barbarity of
marauders accustomed to rapine and cruelty Walls. 234. This historian, warmly
prejudiced against the Scots, styles them, "humani generis inimici," and
depicts their cruelty in glaring colors. He says that they even played at
football with the heads of the slaughtered. English, and left the north of
England a desert; (see also the Ypod. 137.) They carried off even swine, an
animal formerly always left by them: nor, it may be added, are the common
people of Scotland yet reconciled to it is use. To preserve themselves from the
plague, which the English said God in his grace had sent for their repentance,
the Scots used this prayer in their own idiom, "Good and Saint Mungo, Saint
Romayn and Saint Andrew, schield us this day fro Goddis grace, and the foul
death that Englishmen dien upon." Ib.
. The embarrassing affairs of the Duke of Bretagne the English ally, and an
indecision which seems to have prevailed in the councils of Richard II at this
period, conspired with the pestilence to prevent any exertion to retaliate; as
the latter calamity was a sufficient barrier against any important expedition
of the Scots.

But in the next year a Scottish vessel, 1380
worth seven thousand marks, being taken by English ships from Hull and
Newcastle, the Scots, enraged at the loss, entered England under the Earl of
Douglas; and piercing Cumberland and Westmoreland, drove from the forest of
Inglewood forty thousand domestic animals of different kinds, which a party
conducted to Scotland Walls. 249. Otterb. 152.
. Douglas with twenty thousand men surrounded the town of Penrith by night,
during a fair; ravaged, and burned it, and loaded his army with spoil.
Returning by Carlisle they intended to attack that city, but learning that the
northern counties of England were armed, and advancing, the Scots determined to
secure their prey, with which they were too much incumbered to fight with
advantage, and continued their march to their own country Ibid. Fordun, II,
391. Winton, 823.
. The pestilence had not quite abated, and it is importation revenged the enemy
for their loss; this being the third great attack of this calamity in Scotland,
and in which not less than one third part of it is people is said to have
perished Fordun, ib. Winton, 825.
. The Earl of Northumberland meditated an active revenge, till he was prevented
by an unexpected order from the king to defer the matter to the determination
of the next solemn day for the affairs of the marches Walls. 249.
. But fifteen hundred English, chiefly of Cumberland, advanced into Scotland
with fire and sword, till falling into an ambuscade of five hundred foes, on
disadvantageous ground, many were slain, or drowned in the Solway in their
flight, and some were made captives Winton, 824. Fordun, from some erroneous
MS. estimates the English at 15,000.
.

Happy it is for the two kingdoms, intended by their situation for perpetual
union, that those unceasing inroads, destructive of cultivation and of trade,
and which enriched the idle and the bad at the expense of the good and
industrious, now only harass the march of the historian; who lost, as in the
moving sands of a desert, sighs for the pleasing landscape of peace, or the
grandeur of some important scene.

The Duke of Lancaster, who managed the councils of his sovereign, had assumed
the title of King of Castile; and determined to prosecute his pretensions to
that kingdom, arising from his marriage with the daughter of Peter the cruel,
by assisting the Portugueze against the reigning prince Rapin, Acta Regia, sub
anno.
. It was improtant to his purpose that a truce should be established with
Scotland, either by the terrors of a decisive war, or by the conciliating
respect of an honorable embassy: and he resolved to be himself the bearer of
both. With a royal commission to adjust the terms of peace, and with a
formidable army, he advanced to borders of Scotland. This armed negotiation was
successful; for, in answer to his invitation, the bishops of Dunkeld and
Glasgow, the Earls of Douglas and March, and Archibald Douglas lord of
Galloway, appeared as commissioners from Scotland; and a truce was concluded at
Berwick to last for one year Rymer, VII, 268, 276.
. Nov.
The English, not apprized of Lancaster's original intentions, murmured to see
their northern counties consumed by his numerous army: and the expense of the
negotiation, which ended in delaying the ransom of David II, and in other
concessions, enereased their discontent Walls. 254. The expense was 11,000 marks.
.

According to an agreement made in concluding the truce, 1381 June
Lancaster again proceeded to Scotland in the following summer, but only with
his usual train; and he was instigated to use his best endeavors for a treaty
by a promise of the English council that, if he could confirm a truce for three
years, they should assert his pretensions to Castile, and furnish him with a
competent force to join with that of Portugal Froissart, II, fol. 79.
. Meeting the Earl of Carric, heir of the kingdom, and other Scottish
commissioners, at Alchester near Aytown, an important conference ensued. The
Scots complained that, during the truce of fourteen years, many infractions had
been made by the English upon their freedom of intercourse and commerce with
England, established by that truce; and the fact being denied, they offered to
submit the evidence to an equal number of noblemen of both nations: but the
English waved the affair, by offering the vague expedient of calling in the
mediation of some neighboring sovereign. Lancaster however consented that the
payment of any further part of the ransom should be deferred till Candlemas
1383, to which period the treaty was extended; and agreed again to meet the
Earl of Carric in July that year Rymer, VII, 312.
. The insurrection of Wat Tyler prevented the Duke's immediate return to
England, he being apprehensive of the fury of the rebels, from his attachment
to Wickliff, and other unpopular actions. He proceeded to the castle of
Edinburgh, which, as a mark of honor, was given up to him and his attendants;
and hi resided there till the subjection of the rebels rendered his return to
England secure Fordun, II, 396. Winton, 826.
.

A truce of one year concluded between England and France 1383
contributed still further to give a respite to the horrors of war: and as
treaties were, in that age, understood only to bind the sovereigns who
contracted, and not their heirs, the Scottish king sent an embassy to the
succeeding French monarch Charles VI, who engaged when war should recommence
between England and Scotland, to send to the latter kingdom one thousand men at
arms; a formidable force at that period, in which a few knights in panoply were
wont to defeat armies of rude infantry. He also promised a thousand sets of
armor for as many Scottish gentlemen; and a sum of money to conciliate the
court and nobles to enterprises certainly foreign to the real interests of
their country Register fol. 69. Du Tillet, Recueil f. v. 116. Charles VI had
succeeded his father on the 16th Sept. 1380. The treaty was signed at Paris on
the 8th April, and ratified by Robert on the 20th August, 1383. Register fol.
69, 70.
. The ignominious barter of the blood, and prosperity, of the nation for French
gold cannot be palliated, but by the confession that it was necessary to
maintain an active alliance with France; and that the sums drawn from that
country were reputed a compensation to Scotland for being commonly engaged in
war solely by her ally. To suppose that any treaty existed, preceding the
unhappy and imprudent reign of John Baliol, is to suppose that France was
capable of the utmost treachery and impolicy, when she permitted the ruin of
Scotland by Edward I; and that the Scots were so improvident as to submit the
determination of their crown to an inimical sovereign, instead of their ancient
ally "That old league, counted amongst the fables of the ancient Palladines."
Drum. Hift. p. 22.
. And even after the active alliance appears, during the reign of David II, an
alliance to be written with the tears, and signed with the blood, of Scotland,
scarcely can history mention one war, into which France did not conduct that
country. But had Scotland been blessed with a more free and democratic
government, her peace, her industry, her learning, her happiness, had not been
sacrificed to a corrupt aristocracy; for as to the Monarch, supposing that he
wished for peace, and had the public interest at heart, how could he at once
reject the desire of a necessary ally, and the wishes of an uncontrouled
nobility?

The Duke of Lancaster and the Earl of Carric again met; July
and the latter agreed to a compensation for some damage done by the Scottish
borderers this year to the castle of Wark, and other places in England: but a
definitive treaty being again mentioned, Carric declared that he had no powers
for that purpose; and the conference dissolved without any further renewal of
the pacification Rymer, VII, 403. Compare Walls. 330. Ypod. 141.
.

The truce being thus permitted to expire, 1384
a war of real importance, and of a singular and interesting complexion, took
place. Oct. to July
France had made a brief truce with England, after the part both had taken in
the Flemish commotions, to last till midsummer this year: but, by some neglect,
Scotland had not been included, and this circumstance was esteemed sufficient
to justify an invasion of that country. The Duke of Lancaster, and the Earls of
Northumberland and Nottingham, with a considerable army, Easter 28 Mar.
entered Scotland by Berwick, and ravaged the country up to the walls of
Edinburgh, then, as now, the capital city Froissart, II, fol. 159. He informs
us, f. 170, that Edinburgh was not so large as Tournay, or Valenciennes; but
contained only about four thousand houses.
: from an amiable regard for a place, which had been his asylum on a recent
occasion, Lancaster would not permit the destruction of Edinburgh, but withdrew
his army; and, with an inadequate prey, regained England, before the Scots, who
were unprepared, could intercept his retreat Fordun, II, 398. Winton, 829, says
Edinburgh was ransomed. Both recite a defeat of a party of the English, who had
landed from their vessels near Queensferry: and the continuator of Fordun
piously ascribes it to the interference of St. Columba, whose monastery in an
island of the Forth they had attempted to consume with fire.
. A few villages were burned in this expedition; but the Scottish houses were
then slight huts of wood, and easily refitted: and they found time to remove
their cattle, and effects, into the forests, and even to carry off the straw
roofs of the houses in the capital, as some security against a conflagration
Walls. 334, a curious and minute account; but the historian is prejudiced
against the generous Lancaster, the patron of the Wicklifites. He accuses the
waste of time in north of England, and the liberality of his enmity: and adds
that, on Easter eve, the English encamping in a marsh, to avoid surprise, they
lost fifty horses by the cold and snow; and the Duke would not permit any
forage, which would indeed have been fruitless, as the Scots had withdrawn
their effects to their forests beyond the Forth, leaving famine to combat the
English, unaccustomed to his new enemy.
. We learn from Froissart that Robert summoned an army, but that the French
envoys mean time arrived to notify the truce: although about thirty French
knights and esquires, finding no further employ in Flanders, now came to
Scotland as a theater of arms Froiss. II, f. 159.
. The King wished for peace; but the barons opposed his intentions, and meeting
in the church of St. Giles at Edinburgh resolved on war, and informed the
French knights that their spirit should be immediately called into action.
Without the avowal of the King an expedition was set on foot, and 15000 of such
cavalry as Scotland then had were assembled on the borders; who ravaged the
lands belonging to Northumberland, Nottingham, and Mowbray, and returned loaded
with spoil, before the English had time to collect any force Froiss. II, f. 160.
. The Earl of Northumberland ravaged the south of Scotland again; and as soon
as he dismissed his army the Scots retaliated; so that the summer passed in
mutual inroads Walls. 336.
.

The French knights taking leave, the Scottish barons desired them to send their
friends, to enter this new career of glory, by carrying the war into England;
and it is said that Jehan de Vienne, Admiral of France, and other potent
persons of that country, were instigated by their discourses upon their return,
as much as by the recent treaty, to fulfill its conditions next year Froiss.
II, f. 162.
. A resolution pregnant with such ruin to Scotland, as even to threaten the
subjugation of the kingdom.

At this time the papal influence, which had increased in Scotland by a bull of
Gregory XI against intromissions with the effects of deceased bishops Fordun,
II, 389.
, was honored with an additional support in Wardlaw bishop of Glasgow, who was
raited to the rank of Cardinal, and appointed Legate a Latere for Scotland and
Ireland with ample powers Ibid. 400.
. The commons, who alone constitute a people or nation, seem only to have been
regarded as patient objects of increased exactions both by the nobility and
clergy. Few other events of importance happened this year. William Earl of
Douglas brought Tividale into a state of fidelity, which had been subject to
the English since the battle of Durham: he soon after died, and was succeeded
by James his son, a genuine heir to the the valor of his family Fordun ib.
Winton, 831.
. Near Martinmas the Scots gained the castle of Berwick, by bribing the deputy
governor; and Lancaster induced the English parliament to condemn
Northumberland, the warden of the marches, as guilty of criminal neglect, or
greater baseness upon this occasion. But the earl reinstated himself in favor,
by giving a sum to the Scots, for which they consented to restore the fortress
Walls. 337. Ypod. 141.
.

A singular fluctuation, between war and peace, 1385
now pervaded the distracted counsels of England and France, alike governed by
weak monarchs. In the preceding summer the duke of Lancaster for England, the
dukes of Berry and Burgundy for France, cardinal Wardlaw and the bishop of
Dunkeld, chancellor, for Scotland, had met at Leilinghen, between Calais and
Boulogne, and concluded a solemn truce; which was afterward ratified by Robert
See this famous treaty, Vesp. F. VII, f. v. 31, with Robert's retification. His
commission to his ambassadors is dated 6 June 1384, r. 14. This truce is often
referred to in that MS. and in a commission of Richard II in 1390 is especially
mentioned to have taken place in his 8th year or 1384. That of 1389 was only
regarded as a renewal. Rymer, VII, 438, gives this truce at Baulogne-sur-mer 14
Sept. 1384: but it was afterward prolonged at Leilinghen, (see 1389) and the
first is sometimes styled by the latter appellation, Leilinghen being the place
of meeting though not of signature. This formal and solemn treaty only extended
to May 1385!


. 3 Jan.
Yet this prevented not a renewal of the war in the course of a few months.

Archibald Douglas lord of Galloway, finding that his people were infested by
the English garrison at Lochmaban, besieged that castle, which he took and
levelled with the ground Fordun, II, 397. Winton, 827.
: 4 Feb.
but a truce and agreement were nevertheless made between him and the Earl of
Northumberland, 1385 15 Mar.
and confirmed by the English King Rymer, VII, 468. The meeting was near Salom,
on the Esk, a spot often noted for such transactions; and apparently the same
with Froissart's Zedon. How the frontier of Scotland, which formerly extended
to the Esk, came to be restricted to the Sark, cannot be explained.
. To preserve Roxburgh from a similar fate the baron of Graystock was sent as
governor with a powerful supply: he was intercepted by the Earl of March at
Benrig, the convoy seized, many of his people slain, and he himself led captive
to the castle of Dunbar Fordun, II, 397. Winton, 828.
.

The national council met at Edinburgh, April
but its ordinances were chiefly of a military or a private nature. Charge was
given that the noblemen, to whose government certain districts had been
committed during the war, should prepare their forces, and order them not to
pillage in advancing to the borders: and that John Earl of Carric who, in the
council of last November, had taken upon himself the administration of some
points of justice, should proceed to the highlands, and call the chiefs into
his presence to reform the outrages loudly complained of in those regions. The
inhabitants of Tividale, now restored to the Scottish allegiance by Douglas,
were ordered to produce their titles Register, fol. 72, 73. The highland
plunderers are termed Ketherani or Kerns. William de Fenton complained that the
baron of Dirlton had taken his house, and twice expelled him when restored by
law: the royal force and aid are ordered to reestablish him. A sad proof of the
barbarism of the country, where the laws had no force so near the capital.
David Earl of Strathern accuses his brother Buchan for retaining the barony of
Urquhart, which had only been let to him by Strathern: to avoid scandal an
agreement was recommended. Carric was desired to dispatch letters of royal
authority to Buchan, to discover Finlay Lawson, and the two sons of Harald
Foulson, who had slain fume men of Moray, and to bring them and their
accomplices to justice.
. This parliament was afterward prorogued to the twelfth of June, when it
issued some regulations concerning the coin Register, fol. 74. It is ordered
that the moneyer strike silver coin, "viz. sterling," each pound of metal to
render 29 s. 4 d. Scottish money. The noble is to pass for 7 s. 8 d. the ecu 47
French deniers, or 42 d. Scottish, the Flemish ecu 47 d. the mouton 50 d. all
Scottish money. An absolute prohibition is issued against the exportation of
coin, on the penalty of forfeiting the whole sum, and even the life of the
offender at the king's mercy: foreign merchants who bring victuals, (corn,)
wine, or boards, (bordas,) and similar articles, are however allowed to carry
off the profits.
.

But an event of which there had been no example in Scottish history, and which
fortunately was not repeated till the sixteenth century, is to arrest attention
by its novelty, and importance.

The government of France determined if possible to deliver that country from
the repeated invasions of the English, by carrying the war into England from
its northern limits, in conjunction with the Scots, and in compliance with the
terms of the late treaty. Jehan de Vienne, Admiral of France, a leader of the
first talents and distinction, accordingly failed from Sluys in Flanders with a
thousand men at arms, May
knights and esquires, twelve hundred complete suits of armor for Scottish
gentlemen, and a large sum of money Froissart, II, fol. 164, 166. Hist. de
Charles VI par Juvenal des Ursins, Paris 1614, 4to, 1653, folio, p. 46. Vienne
was the most celebrated warrior of France in that age. He was lord of Rollans,
Clervaux, etc. Admiral of France, and knight of the order of the Annonciade;
his father was Guillaume de Vienne lord of Rollans, one of the most ancient
nobles of Burgundy. After many eminent services, Jehan de Vienne attended the
duke of Bourbon to the siege of Carthage, 1390, and was slain at the rash
battle of Nicopolis against the Turks, 26th Sept. 1396, where this veteran led
the van and performed prodigies of valor. Dict. de l'Advocat, art. Vienne.
Such was his reputation, even in his father's lifetime, that he gloried in
inscribing on his tomb that he gave birth to so eminent a warrior. St. Foix,
Eff. sur Paris, II, 195, edit. 1766.
. France had intended at the same time to attack England on the south with a
powerful armament; but this part of the design was abandoned, after an enormous
expense incurred in the preparations Froissart, II, fol. 166. Des Ursins, p. 9,
says a tax of 12 deniers in the livre was proposed in 1380 by the notables, but
rejected by the people: in 1385, p. 46, the tax was so heavy that many left
France, yet it was consumed by the lords of the court, some of whom were bribed
by the English. Vienne's navy amounted to sixty vessels; and the English had
prepared a fleet, and a fire-ship, to assail them. Ib. p. 47.
. Yet her declared intentions, and the vigor and importance of her plans,
raised such an alarm in England, that all her power and resources were excited
to repel the attack: and the failure of the southern invasion collected the
whole tempest upon Scotland, and shook that kingdom to the center. Vienne
arrived at Leith with his chosen battalion, which, to use the phrase of
Froissart, formed one flower of chivalry; and they were quartered in the
villages around Edinburgh, till the King, then in the country, should arrive at
that capital. The French historian upon this occasion presents a deplorable
picture of the state of Scotland and its people. The poverty of the country,
and the barbarism of the nation, appear to have been extreme: the slightest
accommodations of life, or even of war, could hardly be procured: every article
of iron, or of leather, was imported from Flanders. The French at first
laughed, and said that they were happy to know by experience the hardships of
penury, and the dark side of a military life; but, as their discontent
increased, Vienne could scarcely appease their murmurs. On the other hand the
Scots were not less dissatisfied with their guests; they defamed and hated
their auxiliaries, as strangers of an unknown speech, as the future sharers of
their prey, and as the present consumers of their little property Froiss. II,
f. v. 169.
.

At length the Scottish king arrived; the French money was distributed among the
leading barons See the account of the distribution in Rymer, VII, 484. The king
had 10,000 livres; Douglas 7500, Cardinal Wardlaw 6000, Carric 5500, Archibald
Douglas lord of Galloway 5500, March 4000, Fife 3000, James Lindsay 2000, the
earl of Moray 1000; the other allotents are from 700 down to 10 livres. The
livre of that time might be worth 6 s. in weight; but in the comparative
scarcity of money at least equal to 4 l. in modern currency. Compare the tables
of Le Blanc, whence it appears that the livre of the time weighed about 1 ounce
of silver. In the beginning of July a curious military ordinace was issued,
(Register, f. v. 72,) concerning the conduct of the war; for an account of
which the reader is referred to the next retrospect of manners, etc.


, the armor allotted to proper wearers, and an expedition was determined. An
army of about thirty thousand, mounted on small horses, assembled near
Edinburgh, under the command of the Earls of Fife and Douglas; and marched, in
conjunction with the French chivalry, toward Roxburgh. Entering the English
territory, they destroyed two small forts, assaulted and took the castle of
Wark; and advancing burned several villages in Northumberland, and ravaged the
country from Berwick to Newcastle. But their progress was soon impeded by the
tidings that Lancaster was approaching with a great array; and it was resolved
to secure the prey by returning into Scotland. Vienne, dissatisfied with this
retreat, prevailed on the Scots to besiege Roxburgh; but a dispute arising,
upon a claim of the French to garrison and retain the fortress when taken, the
siege was abandoned Froissan, II, f. v. 177 -- 180. Compare des Ursins, p. 47.
. It appears from Fordun, that the French and Scots made some other predatory
incursions into England Fordun, II, 401.
.

Meanwhile Richard II had made great preparations, and summoned almost the
whole force of his kingdom; and finding that the commotions in Flanders had
frustrated the southern invasion of the French, 1385 Aug.
he determined to exert all his power against Scotland. If we credit an English
historian his army was numerous beyong precedent; and more than three hundred
thousand horses were employed in various services Walf. 342.
. The youthful monarch chose this as his first expedition, and solemn entry
into the field of military fame; and was attended by his uncles, and by the
chief nobles of England. The destruction of the abbey of Melrose, long
respected by the religious awe of the English, to whom it had afforded early
saints and teachers, was the first warlike act of Richard II, the disgrace of
his arms and the omen of his mental weakness. Dryburgh, and newbottel, two
venerable monasteries, and Edinburgh with her churches, were successively given
to the flames. The Scots, unable openly to contend with an enemy so superior in
numbers, prudently followed the advice ascribed to Robert the Great, by
withdrawing their cattle and effects into forests, and wilds; and harrassing
their foes by unceasing ambuscades and excursions. The green crops were alone
left; and the harvest was trampled and destroyed. After remaining five days at
Edinburgh, the English marched to Stirling, which, with an abbey adjacent, was
burnt to the ground. One hundred and twenty vessels carried provisions for the
army, which still advancing destroyed Perth and Dundee, and many abbeys and
monasteries: and the couriers and vanguard even proceeded as far as Aberdeen,
according to Froissart; but, from the old English and Scottish accounts, it
rather appears that the English expedition only extended to the river Forth
Froiss. II, f. 180. Walf. 342. Fordun, II, 401. Winton, 835.
.

To divert the fury of this storm, the Scottish army and French auxiliaries
entered England by the western marches, ravaged Cumverland, and besieged
Carlisle. This invasion concurred with the failure of provisions to induce the
English king to withdraw his vast army; which accordingly returned toward
England by the eastern tract; and disunited councils prevented an encounter
with the Scots, who also retired to their own country by the western boundaries
Froiss. II, f. 182. Walls. 344, says the Scots took more prey than the English
king, "cum imperiali exercitu."
. Such was the issue of a contest, which had excited so great expectation; and
which, as usual, far from being advantageous to either kingdom, ended with the
lasting detriment of both. At the close of the campaign, the French
auxiliaries, exhausted with fatigue and hard fare, could not even procure leave
to sail for Flanders, till they consented to pay the expense of their
maintenance; and Vienne was forced to remain as an hostage till the sum was
paid at Bruges, to Scottish factors, by order of the French government Froiss.
II, 183. This honest writer vents his rage against the Scots, "car oncques si
mauvaises gens ne virent, ne ne trouverent si faulx, et si trahysires, ne de si
petite congnoissance." The French had equally disgusted the Scots by their
usual petulance; and Vienne himself had ventured on an affair of gallantry with
a near relation of the king, to the amazement of their plain and pious allies,
strangers to such manners. Des Ursins, p. 47: who, with more gayety than became
an archbishop, says the French frequented the "dames et demoiselles" of
Scotland, who received them gladly. The anonymous historian of the reign of
Charles VI, whose MS. work was translated from latin into French by Le
Laboureur, and published by him at Paris 1663, 2 vols. solio, also deserves to
be consulted by the curious reader, for an account of this celebrated
expedition, Vol. I, p. 102. He says Vienne's fleet of sixty ships was nearly
burnt by the English, while at anchor, and was afterward assailed by a furious
tempest. On the admiral's arrival in Scotland, "Il manda par mesme moyen la
sterilite et I'incommodite de subsister dans une terre, qu'il reconnut plus
deserte qu' habitee, presque toute couverte de montagnes, et plus pleine de
sauvagine que de bestail." In invading England the French took the castle
Dovart (De Wark?) A second invasion also occurs, p. 108. Douglas alone favored
the French. The admiral's amor is mentioned; and it is asserted that the
King's cousine was not unkind: in revenge Robert, and some peers, intended to
assassinate the presumptuous Frenchman, who was glad to escape. The character
of Vienne was afterward stained by his cruelty to the wife and daughter of
Pierre de Craon. Ib. p. 215.


. This treatment was doubtless ungenerous, and the avarice was disgraceful to
the king and the nobles: but one happy effect followed, for it was long before
any more of those troublesome and insolent inmates infested Scotland.

After a doubtful truce of nearly one year, 1387
the war continued it is progress. William Douglas, whose graceful person and
warlike fame had procured him the hand of the king's daughter Egidia, and the
title of lord Nithsdale, resolved to open a long neglected field of action, by
invading Ireland. Attended only by five hundred men he failed to Carlingford,
and assaulted the town, whose inhabitants being no strangers to his military
reputation, resolved to oppose guile to force, and begged a respite till they
could collect a sum sufficient to ransom the place. The Scottish leader, whose
honest courage suspected no fraud, consented; and was occupied in replenishing
his ships with provisions, while the people of Carlingford sent to Dundalk, and
procured an aid of eight hundred horse, which joined their own array and
advanced against the enemy. Nithsdale had only two hundred of his followers on
shore, from the want of proper boats for landing, and even these few were
divided, a party having been sent to ravage the country. The English resolved
to attack both parties, but the greater number advanced against Nithsdale;
after an obstinate contest the Scots obtained the victory; and they immediately
took, ravaged, and burned the town of Carlingford, despoiled the castle, and
loaded fifteen Irish ships, then in the harbor, with their prey. On their
return the isle of Man presented another object of depredation: and Nithsdale
with his followers arrived safe at Loch Ryan in Galloway, with no small wealth
and honor Fordun, II, 404.
.

The weak, 1388
and impolitic, conduct of Richard II distracted the English councils, and
discontent pervaded the nation, when the Scots thought the time convenient to
retort the ravages of war, which that monarch had carried into their country.
An assembly of the Scottish nobles met at Aberdeen, and agreed to appear with
their respective vassals in arms at jedburgh, for an expedition into England
Froissart, III, f. 108; "ils ordornnerent une feste sur la frontiere de la
sauvage Escoce, en une cite nommee Berdane." The MS. Reg. 14 D II, Vol. IV. f.
v. 355, reads Ahredane.
. Age had so much impaired the faculties of Robert II that his consent was not
expected, nor regarded Ibid. they said, "qu'il ne scavoit guerroyer."
; and the feebleness of John Earl of Carric the heir apparent, both in body and
mind, seemed to increase with his years; so that Robert Earl of Fife, second
son of the king, was respected by the nobles, and nation, as the main support
of the monarchy, and the only active instrument of its influence. When the army
therefore assembled at Jedburgh, he appeared as commander in chief: and to as
complete, and firm, battalions as Scotland had ever sent forth, was added the
terror of the name of Douglas. About twelve hundred lances, and forty thousand
rude infantry, composed an army, rendered still more formidable by the
reputation and experience of some of its leaders. These infantry were chiefly
accoutred with battle axes; for the Scots were unhappily little skilled in the
bow, that perpetual instrument of English triumph Froiss. III, f. 108.
.

Uninteresting is the narration of important actions, if not accompanied by
those circumstances which recommend them to the imagination, and render the
reader as it were a present spectator: and one of the chief utilities of
history arises from the view of characters and of manners. Upon select
occasions therefore it is not improper to descend to the particularity of
memoirs, and to compensate pages of annals by now and then painting a
momentous, or even a singular, event in all the colors of detail. Without
further apology Froissart's account of this expedition, crowned by the
celebrated battle of Otterburn, shall be followed; and only with one cause of
regret, that it is the last aid to be derived from that remakable writer, the
worthy and honest herald of the times of chivalry The subsequent narrative is
derived from Tome III, f. 108 -- 117, edit. 1518, 4to; compared with the
edition of Verard about 1498, and the MSS. The altered editions by Sauvages
have been always neglected in this work.
.

The Northumbrians, having learned that a Scottish army was collecting, resolved
to prepare; and, if the Scots entered England by the western, to repay the
invasion by the eastern marches. An English gentleman went to espy the
intentions of the enemy, who had advanced to the chapel of Salom, a noted
station near the borders: and entering the chapel in the disguise of a servant
saw the Scottish nobles assembled, and heard much of their designs. When he
withdrew he expected to have found his horse tied to a tree, as he had left
him, but he was stolen; and the gentleman's fear, or negligence of art, in
walking away without any enquiry, led to suspicion. He was seized, and
confessed that the Northumbrians, unable to encounter the inimical numbers, had
determined on whatever side England was invaded, to assail Scotland on the
opposite. This induced the Scottish leaders to restrain the main army to the
protection of their own country, and to order only a strong detachment, under
the tried heroism of the Earl of Douglas, to advance into England. At the head
of three hundred men at arms, and of two thousand chosen infantry, Douglas
proceeded, without pillaging the country or attacking any place; passed the
Tine three miles above Newcastle; and, with the suddenness and destruction of
lightning, darted on the county of Durham. When the distant flames, and smoke,
of burning villages had given the first tidings of the Scottish arrival, the
Earl of Northumberland, then at Alnwick, sent his two sons, Henry and Ralph, to
Newcastle, to assemble a force in pursuit of the enemy, while he should gather
another on the north, and preclude their retreat. All the country being
pillaged to the gates of York This is confessed by the English monarch himself,
in a deed published by Rymer, VII, 594.
, and the unfortified towns and villages destroyed, Douglas returned with the
spoil, repassed the Tine at the same place; and came before newcastle, whither
the chief people of the neighboring counties had crowded, to gain the
protection of a walled city, and of the two gallant Percies, Henry surnamed
Hotspur, and Ralph, his brother in birth and arms. Many skirmishes ensuing, at
one of them Douglas won the pennon of Henry Percy, to the great mortification
of that undaunted leader and of his followers: and to add to the disgrace
Douglas vaounted, "This I shall carry as a sign of thy prowess to Scotland, and
shall place it on the pinnacle of my castle to be known by all." Percy retorted
with an oath, "Thou shall never bear it out of northumberland; and in the end
shall have little cause to boast:" to which Douglas replied, "Then thou must
come this night, and take it from before my tent." Next morning the Scots
pursued their march; and, assailing a castle without success, wished to
proceed, but Douglas commanded them to encamp, in order to see if Percy would
advance to recover his pennon, and that, being refreshed, they should again
attack the fortress in the morning. They accordingly fortified their station
with felled trees, to prevent a surprise; and next day captured the castle, and
pursued their journey toward the main army, till they came to Otterburn, a
hamlet amid the wilds of the parish of Elsdon, about thirty miles northwest of
Newcastle, and about twenty from the Scottish borders, which was to be a scene
of celebrity to the bard and to the historian.

Meanwhile Percy wished to pursue the Scottish detachment, but was restrained by
the tidings that the main army was near, and ready to support Douglas; till the
couriers brought certain intelligence that they were far distant, and incapable
of effecting a junction for some days. Percy, with his usual impetuosity,
instantly cried, "To horse!" it being early in the morning; and left Newcastle
attended by six hundred lances, or knights and squires, and eight thousand
infantry accoutred with the dreadful long-bows of England. After a forced
march, they reached the Scottish camp at Otterburn late in the evening. The
Scots had supped, some had even retired to rest fatigued with various exertion;
and the English began to enter the outer entrenchment, where the servants were
stationed, shouting "Percy! Percy!" but they found it well fortified. Some
infantry was ordered to support the servants, by the Scottish chiefs, who in the
mean time armed in haste, and arrayed their men under their banners. Night was
now advanced; but the moon shone clear in a serene sky of the month of August.
19 Aug.


The Scots, armed, and arranged, proceeded, not toward the assailants, but
around an eminence; and attacking the enemy in the rear raised all at once the
cry of battle, upon which the English in surprise turned, strengthened their
ranks, and refounded "Percy!" in answer to the Scottish acclaim of "Douglas."
After a severe contest the Scots were on the point of yielding to numbers, when
the Earl of Douglas, ardently pushed forward his banner; and both the Percies
advanced against him, with equal impetuosity, so that the Scots recoiled, and,
had not the valor of the two Hepburns opposed, the banner of Douglas had been
taken. Douglas, irritated by the apprehension of disgrace, rouzed all his
strength and courage; and, brandishing a two-handed battle-ax, opened the thick
files of the foe, as with a long avenue, despising numerous blows, and
committing his life to the temper of his armor. He had advanced far from his
battalions, when he fell under three mortal wounds. But ignorance of his fate
forbad the English to triumph, and the Scots to despair. The former only saw
that some valiant man at arms had fallen: and the latter were inspirited by the
Earls of March and Moray to follow a tract, which they knew not had conducted
their leader to death. Fortune now began to favor the Scots. Ralph Percy,
advancing too far in return, was severly wounded, and taken prisoner by
Maxwell, a knight who followed Moray: and the English, exhausted with a
fatiguing march and an obstinate contest, bagan to exhibit symptoms of
depression and defeat.

Douglas, faint with the loss of blood, and sensible of the approaches of
death, was defended by his valiant chaplain, William of Northberwick. His
banner lay on the ground, not far from him, the bearer being slain, when
Lindsay, Sinclair, and some other knights, pierced through the now yielding
foe, and reached the spot, and bespoke their general. Even trifles in such a
conversation are interesting. "Cousin, how goes it?" said Sinclair. Douglas
answered "But so, so. Praised be God few of my ancestors have died in chambers
or beds -- Avenge me, for I die -- My heart faints too repeatedly. Raise again
my banner, and shout Douglas! But tell neither friend nor foe how it fares with
me, for my enemies would exult, and my friends be disconsolate." The banner was
erected; the whole field resound with the animating cry of Douglas! and the
Scots, excited as with the voice of victory, instantly formed one phalanx, and
with levelled spears pushed the enemy to flight.

Henry Percy was taken prisoner by Montgomery: and the defeat was complete.
Radman, the governor of Berwick, was almost the only Englishman of note who
escaped: and the Scots pursued the chase for five miles. The number of the
English slain is computed at twelve hundred. Such was the battle at Otterburn,
which Froissart represents as the most eminent fought in his time, for heroic
bravery on both sides, and the real spirit of war. He also highly applauds the
courtesy shown by the Scots to their prisoners; and observes that both nations
were not less laudable for their benevolence after a battle, than for their
courage during its rage Froissar, III, f. 113.
.

Douglas was carried to his tent, where he soon expired: but, though dispirited
at the loss of their leader, the Scots determined to maintain their strong
station against the fresh English army which approached. For the bishop of
Durham had reached Newcastle, the night of the battle, with seven thousand men,
two thousand of whom were cavalry: but a conjunction was prevented by Percy's
impetuosity. Advancing next morning he was met by the fugitives from Otterburn,
whose tidings raised such dismay, that all his followers fled back to
Newcastle, except five hundred, with whom the bishop was at last also
constrained to regain that city. Here he found means to inspirit his followers,
and the inhabitants; so that he marched next morning in quest of the Scots
attended by ten thousand. The Scottish scouts, the day after, notifying his
approach, their chiefs determined not to leave their camp, as they had many
wounded and prisoners to attend: and, when the bishop came within a mile's
distance, they began all at once to sound their horns in a loud discordance of
warlike music. After a pause, the same horrible din of defiance was repeated;
and the bishop arranging his host, and advancing within two bow-shots, was
again saluted with the thundering noise. Observing the strength of the rude
fortification, and that its possessors were too prudent to desert its
advantages, the English, after a brief council, retreated: and the Scots having
refreshed themselves prepared to march. Ralph Percy requesting permission to go
to Newcastle, to have his wounds attended, the Earl of Moray consented, and
ordered him to be conveyed in a litter. The Scottish march, instead of
triumphant seemed funereal, and the joy of success was tempered with tears; for
the body of Douglas, enclosed in a coffin, and borne on a car, formed the chief
object in the progress Froissart, III, f. 117.
.

The main army, under the Earl of Fife, who appears to have had but mean
talents for war, was now lying near Carlisle; and not a little envied the
successful detachment; for the victory, and the gain by ransoms, were esteemed
the most remarkable which had occurred since the day of Bannockburn Ibid. The
ransoms were estimated at 200,000 francs. Robert III granted to Henry Preston,
for the redemption of Ralph Percy, the lands and barony of Frondlin,
Aberdeenshire, the town of Fyvie and place thereof, the town of Meikle
Gaiddies, the five-mark land of Parkhill. Scotst. Call. f. 104. Froissart
apparently errs in the name of his captor. Yet Mar had 201. 2 year for a third
of it, the whole exceeding 6001. Call. f. 114.
.

An assembly of the three estates being summoned to Edinburgh, 1389
solemnly recognized Robert Earl of Fife governor of the kingdom; an elevation
for which he was apparently as much indebted to his own intrigues, as to the
age of the king, and the weakness of the successor Fordun, II, 414. Winton, 845.
. The latter seems, from the parliamentary acts of this reign, to have formerly
stood in that high capacity: and the king commonly shunned the pomp, and, it is
suspected, the duties of royalty, by residing on his parental estate, and
example followed by his successor, though impolitic in an eminent degree.
Preferring the remote mansions of the Stuarts to the centrical and accustomed
residences of the Scottish sovereigns, they seemed to forget their rank, their
office, their people; and removed form the scene of action, from the vital
heart of the kingdom, the monarch could only be seen by the nation in a
dangerous representative. Assemblies of the states seem to have been seldom
held, an aristocratic council decided upon peace and war, and upon the best
interests of the people; but this fault was common to England and most European
kingdoms at this period; while the appointment of the second son, as governor
of the state, to the prejudice of the heir apparent, may be regarded as a new
and dangerous precedent, declarative of great weakness upon the one part, and
upon the other of baneful ambition.

The new Regent, desirous to signalize the commencement of his power, assembled
an army on the borders against the Earl of Nottingham, Marshal of England,
lately appointed Warden of the eastern marches; and who, in the usual
concomitance of pride and weakness, had reproached the Percies for the loss at
Otterburn, where their army was far more numerous than that of the Scots; and
boasted that he hoped to vanquish, even if opposed by number doubling his own.
But when Fife accompanied by Archibald, the succeeding Earl. of Douglas, and by
other nobles, poured his array into England, the Earl Marshal restrained his
men in a secure and inaccessible station; and to a challenge of the Regent,
inviting him to descend and fulfill his threats, he replied that "he had no
orders to expose the lieges of his sovereign to any danger." This answer was
received with peals of laughter; and the Scottish army, after standing in
defiance half the day with banners displayed, ravaged the adjacent country, and
returned Fordun, II, 414. Winton, 846. Walsingham only mentions the burning of
Tinmouth by the Scots. Ypod. 144.
.

A respite was at length given to the war, June
by a truce formed between France and England for three years, in which their
allies were included Rymer, VII, 622.
. Those of France were the kings of the Romans, Scotland, Arragon, Navarre; the
Scottish Earl of March, the isle of Man, the Duchess of Brabant, the Republic of
Genoa. And the allies of England were the king of the Romans, with those of
Portugal and Arragon, the Earl of Salisbury, the lordship of Man, the Duke of
Gelder, John Lord of the Isles of Scotland, and the Republic of Genoa. An
embassy being sent from England, to notify the truce, and desire the consent of
Scotland, the envoys were by the Governor remitted to the king, who agreed as
from deference to France. The Earls of Salisbury and March appear to have been
named in this truce, in consequence of their claims to the isle of Man, and
some debateable lands upon the borders. The Lords of the Isles were really
independent of Scotland, and by their fleets maintained their power in the
isles, and over the western highlands, while the Scottish kings had no fleet to
oppose them, and could not attack mountainous regions inaccessible to armies.
The brief ard confined conquests of Alexander III and Robert I, had not
overcome the old Norwegian spirit; and the Hebudes must be regarded with truth
as an independent principality, till the sixteenth century: had the lords been
told of their occasional submission to Scotland, they would have retorted by
instances of the like necessity forced upon that country be England. But the
circumstance, which especially induced the mention of these princes in the
truce, was a treaty concluded between Richard II, and the Lord of the Isles, in
the preceding year Rymer, VII, 592.
.

This short pacification was the last important act of Robert II, who died at
his castle of Dundonald in Kyle, 1390 19 Apr.
a few miles south of Irwin, after a short illness, in the seventy fifth year
of his age Fordun, II, 415. Winton, 851.
; having completed nineteen years of a reign, mingled with various fortune, but
upon the whole neither unsuccessful, nor inglorious.

BOOK II. CONTAINING THE REIGN OF ROBERT III.
Character of Robert III -- disorders in the highlands -- truce with England --
feuds -- title of Duke -- war with Henry IV -- expedition of that king --
Rothsay's character and marriage -- defection of March -- incursions --
parliament -- murder of Rothsay -- incursions -- battle of Homildon -- cruelty
of Henry Percy -- murder of Drummond -- siege of Coklaws -- Captivity of prince
fames -- Northumberland's rebellion -- death of the king.

JOHN, the eldest son of the deceased monarch, ascended the throne; 1390
and his name being reputed inauspicious to royalty, he assumed that of Robert,
recommended by the virtues and the glory of Robert I, and by the accession of
the House of Stuart under the preceding sovereign The unfortunate reigns of
John of England, John of France, and John Baliol, seem alone to have been
considered. Had the histories of Castille, Arragon, Portugal, Denmark, etc.
been consulted, this vague idea must have passed away. James was, in Scottish, a
most unhappy name; yet was continued to fix sovereigns.
. Power depending wholly upon opinion, princes are often forced to sacrifice
even to the superstitions of the vulgar. Robert III had apparently exceeded his
fiftieth year, when he began to reign, and had been wedded at least thirty
three years to Annabella Drummond, daughter of Sir John Drummond of Stobhall;
by whom he had, however, no children till the year 1378, when David, afterward
Duke of Rothsay, was born; and James his other son did not appear till the
fifth year of his father's reign, being the first royal birth in the family.
Three daughters, to be married to the Earl of Douglas, the Earl of Angus, and
Lord Dalkeith; and two natural sons, completed the progeny of Robert III Bowar,
391. Crawf. House of Stuart, 31. Stewart's Genesis 62. In 1356, or thirty four
years before this period, we find John Stuart, afterward Robert III, subduing
Annandale, Dalr. Ann II, 238; but his precise age remains unascertained. In
1357 his marriage with Annabella is mentioned in a charter. Abercr. II, 157.
.

Though this monarch had been lamed by an unfortunate accident, yet his person
was tall and graceful: his florid countenance, and vivacious eyes, joined with
the snowy whiteness of his beard, rendered him an object at once pleasing and
majestic. But his indolent meekness, his piety, his saint-like humility, are
fitter themes of praise to the monk than to the philosopher, who knows that the
virtues of a king are the virtues of ability, and of action; and that the most
acceptable service to the Deity consists in the service of mankind. The lenity
of Robert III may be vindicated from the yet new elevation of a family,
accustomed to regard the nobles as equals and brothers; but it unhappily tended
to increase the power of the aristocracy, and add to the consequent stock of
public calamity. Yet the years of his reign were fertile, and the people were
contented: though in the continuous struggles with England for political
freedom, it is no wonder that internal liberty made no progress; and that the
Scots remembered that they were soldiers, but forgot that they were men For the
character of Robert III compare Bowar II, 440.
.

Before the coronation of the new sovereign had taken place, an event occurred,
ominous and disgraceful to his reign. His brother, the Earl of Buchan, freed
from parental control, 17 June
and knowing that the scepter had fallen into a weak hand, collected his
highlanders, and burned the cathedral of Elgin, esteemed one of the chief
ornaments of the country, in revenge of some quarrel with the bishop of Moray.
It appears not that he was even questioned for a fact, which united barbarity
with profanation; while, had he received the highest punishment, a more useful
or striking example could not have been instituted, to curb a turbulent
nobility, and teach them obedience to laws, and to the sovereign the guardian
of laws Bowar, II, 416. Winton, 860. Chartul. Morav. apud Shaw's Moray, 412.
The day of St. Botulf is the 17th June: Britannia Sancta, sub die. About this
time William Douglas, the valiant lord of Nithsdale, was slain by the English
on the bridge of Dantzic in Prussia. Bowar, II, 416. The Prussian chronicles
seem to be silent; and the Transacta inter Angliam et Poloniam, Cotton Lib.
Nero, B. II, have been consulted in vain, though copious in papers of this
period: a solemn treaty having been concluded between England and the Grand
Master of the Teutonic order in 1387. In 1402 Henry IV was to complain that no
English woman was allowed to land in Prussia, a regulation perhaps arising from
their beauty being dangerous to the chastity of the knights. In that year there
were thirty two English ships in the ports of Prussia, yet the Poles favored
the Scots. Ibid. sub annis, It is well known that numerous Scottish adventurers
have settled in Poland.

The curious Memoirs of Marshall Boucicaut, written by a contemporary, and
published at Paris by Godefroy, 1620, 4to, mention chapter 18, p. 66, that
Boucicaut went to Prussia, for the third time, to revenge the death of Messire
Guillaume Duglas, (after Bourbon had proceeded to Barbary against the infidels.
Many strangers had assembled at Konigsberg, to join the Grand Master in his war
against the Saracens, (infidels of Prussia;) and Douglas had been slain by the
treason of the English, whom Boucicaut defied, but was answered that the
vengeance belonged only to the Scots. The Grand Master was dead, but the
infidels were defeated at Lecto.


.

The ceremonies of the funeral of Robert II, and the installment of his
successor, being celebrated at Scone, 13 and 14 Aug.
the king's first attention was directed to the confirmation of the truce with
England, and the renewal of the league with France Winton, 859. Bowar, the
continuator of Fordun II, 418. As Fordun's materials closed about 1385, his
continuator shall henceforth be quoted: his name is spelled as it appears in
old Scottish charters in Scotstarvet's Calendars. and in his own work, p. 447.
The renewal of the league with France was ratified by Robert at Edinburgh, 1
Dec. 1390: Register, f. 65. MS. Leagues France and Scotland. It refers to that
of 1371.


. The Earl of Fife managed the public affairs Bowar, 420, styles Fife the
Governor, "coram rege et gubernatore;" yet the power is more certain than the
title. In Vesp. F. VII, f. 29, are instructions to Henry Percy, Scroop, etc. 27
May, regni xiii -- 1390, to demand the remainder of David's ransom, being
24,000 marks: "le Roy d'Escoce, et le Comte de Fyff Gardein d'Escoce," are
mentioned. In 1391 are instructions, ib. f. 30, requiring the homage of the
Scottish peers, clergy, and commons, and that Robert should attend the English
parliament: the sum of 2000 l. a year is demanded, as arising from Edward
Baliol's lands, assigned to the kings of England, viz, Berwick, Roxburgh,
Edinburgh, and all the possessions of these monarchs in Scotland at the time of
the truce of 14 years, between Edward III and David II, etc. These extravagant
demands seem to have been occasioned by Robert's renewal of the French league;
and, if proposed, were treated with due contempt. But Robert accepted the
treaty of Leilinghen: ib. f. 36, n. 1.
,which continued for the first eight years of this reign in a state of external
peace, but were somewhat disturbed at home by inroads of the highlanders,
distinguished by French and domestic writers, from early times to the present
century, as the savages of Scotland.

One of their incursions into Angus has been esteemed worthy of historical
preservation. 1392
According to Bowar, the continuator of Fordun, it was conducted by Duncan
Stuart, a natural son of the Earl of Buchan; but Winton's account bears, by
three highland chieftains, Thomas, Patrick, and Gibbon, sons of one Duncan. Sir
David Lindsay of Glenesk, hearing that an inroad was intended, sent a spy to
discover the circumstances of the design; but he never returned; and the
highlanders, exceeding three hundred in number, rushed into the plains. Sir
Walter Ogilvy, Sheriff of Angus, and Sir Patrick Gray, collected their
followers, and marched against the plunderers, whom they found at Glasclune in
Stormont; and a conflict began, during which the Sheriff was joined by Sir
David Lindsay. The highland ferocity prevailed; and the Sheriff, with his
half-brother Walter Lichton, and sixty of his people, were slain; and Lindsay
and Gray wounded Bowar, 420. Winton, 863.
. That any chastisement was inflicted on the marauders does not appear from the
original account; but it would have been happy if Robert III had possessed
sufficient benevolence and ability to impart some degree of civilization to
this unhappy part of his subjects, and to have fulfilled the noblest duties of
royalty by the propagation of law, peace, and industry.

The insanity of Charles VI of France, which appeared this summer, and the
consequent distracted state of affairs in that kingdom, conspired with the
English discontents, under the maladministration of Richard II, to render a
prolongation of the truce of Leilinghen expedient; and it was accordingly
extended at different times to Michaelmas 1394, 16 Aug.
and afterward to the same term in 1398 Rymer, VII, 714, 769, etc
. This constant repetition of truces between England and Scotland, unknown to
any other history, is tedious and unpleasing in every view. One is led to
imagine that the system of Hobbes is founded in truth, and that war is the
natural state of man. But peculiar circumstances contributed to this inveterate
and lengthened enmity. The conduct of Edward I, when chosen the friendly
arbiter of the disputes concerning the Scottish succession, was unkingly and
ungenerous beyond example; and destroyed the most sacred rules of society, and
every bond of mutual confidence, and of public faith. It is no wonder then that
the Scottish nation had converted all their ancient regard for the English into
a rooted enmity; and that the situation of the two nations confined on one
island occasioned continuous war. The ambition of sovereigns, that chief
scourge of mankind, and spring of slaughter, led the English kings to maintain
the lofty pretensions of Edward I, and untaught by experience to hope the vain
conquest of Scotland; nor could they abandon their claims lest justice should
be interpreted want of power, and the highest wisdom accounted imbecility. Such
evils could arise from the ambition of one man! The inadmission, or dubious
grant, of the title of the Scottish sovereigns, was an insult to them, and to
the nation; which, with the unjust pretensions on the one side, and jealousy
and revenge on the other, precluded all hopes of solid and lasting peace. When
we find Henry VIII, in 1542, repeating the extravagant claims of the first
Edward, almost in his own words, we must exult in those happy events which
terminated a discord that threatened to be perpetual In 1394 occur two letters
from Annabella queen of Scotland to Richard II. Vesp. F. VII, f. v. 38, n. 2,
and f. 39, n. 1. The first, dated 28 May, says that the time of conference,
proposed for a marriage between certain persons of their families, is too
short, as the king was then in a distant part of the country: the second, 1
Aug. mentions that the queen was just recovered from childbed (of James I;)
but that the 1st of October would be a proper time for ambassadors to meet, and
consider the marriage, between "AUCUNS procheins de votre sanc, et AUCUNE des
enfans du Roi, mon seigneur, et de nous." The male hence appears to have been
English. Compare the commission of Richard for the marriage in Rymer, VII, 787,
dated 27 Aug. 1394. In the same year John Donbar earl of Moray was wounded in a
tourney at London, and died at York on his return. Caxton's Higden, f. v. 398.


.

Our historians, barren in the important provinces of internal government,
national freedom or slavery, laws, and manners, and arts, have condescended to
preserve two incidents of little importance, but to show the barbarous spirit
of the times.

A feud arising between Lindsay of Crawford and Robert Keith, 1395
also a man of wealth and distinction, the latter laid siege to the castle of
Fyvie in Buchan, inhabited by his own aunt the wife of Lindsay. Gathering
between three or four hundred of his friends and followers, Lindsay passed the
Grampian hills, called the Mounth or Mound by our old writers, and was met by
Keith at Bourtie church, in the Garioch, Aberdeenshire. In the conflict Keith
was discomfited, with the loss of about fifty men Winton, 866.
.

The north of Scotland being disturbed by continual feuds, 1396
between the two highland factions of Clan Kay, commanded by one Shee-beg and
his relations, and Clan Quhele under a Christie Jonson Winton, 868, call the
clans, of "wyld Scottis," Sha and Quhele; and the leader of the former by his
account was Sha Farquharson, apparently the Shea-Beg, or Sha the little, of
Bowar.
, which could be appeased by no authority nor art of the king, or Fife the
governor, it was at last adjusted by the Earl of Moray and Lindsay of Crawford,
that the dispute should be terminated by thirty men, appointed upon either side
to fight in the royal presence at Perth. Having met on the day named before the
king, governor, many nobles and a great multitude, eager to see this novelty,
one of the Clan Kay felt his heart fail, and escaped by swimming across the
Tay, upon which a clown who was present offered to supply his place for half a
mark. A fierce battle ensued with bows, battle axes, swords, and daggers; and
ended in the defeat of Clan Kay, who had only the mercenary left alive, while
eleven of the opponents kept the field Winton, 868, but he says the conflict
was indecisive. Bowar, II, 420, 421. The modern improvements, or corruptions,
of the tale are beneath notice; they unaccountably originate with Lesley and
Buchanan.
. The highlanders were afterward more quiet for a few years: but it might be
said upon this occasion that a public spectacle had been appointed, to manifest
to the nation that the government was without power, and the laws without force.

To resume a more important train of events, 1398 March
David Earl of Carric, eldest son of the king, the Earl of Fife, and other
Scottish commissioners met John Duke of Aquitain and Lancaster, and others, on
the part of England, according to an agreement made in the preceding year, at
Haudenstank on the marches; and the truce was renewed to Michaelmas 1399 Rymer,
VIII, 33. A letter of Carric to John of Gaunt occurs, Vesp. F. VII, f. 68, n. 2.
. It is not improbable that the superior title of the English Duke led to some
claim of precedence, or respect, not relished by the Scottish princes, 28 April
for in the course of this summer we find the first appearance of the ducal
title in Scotland Bowar, 422. Winton, 873.
; and its appropriation affords another proof of the king's weakness, and of
the governor's insatiable ambition. The heir apparent of the kingdom was
created Duke of Rothsay, a miserable hamlet in the isle of Bute, while the
whole island would not have afforded a territorial title to a baron; and the
Earl of Fife had the real style of heir apparent, in the title of Duke of
Albany, or of all Scotland north of the firths of Clyde and Forth. That such a
perversion should have continued to our own times, is only an instance of that
inattention, and blind imitation, so natural to mankind. These titles were
conferred in a solemn council held at Scone: and prince David, then in his
twentieth year, appeared as the leader of a tournament, exhibited at Edinburgh
by the queen's command Bowar, 421, says it was held near the North Loch, "ubi
nunc est lacus;" does this imply that the lake was recent?
. Chivalry now reigned in both kingdoms: Morley, 1398
an English gentleman, came to Scotland to challenge combats, as David Lindsay,
created Earl of Crawford, had some years before been an actor in the splendid
tournaments of Richard II Bowar, 421 -- 424. Winton, 853.
.

A fresh congress of commissioners was held, October
to establish further articles of truce; and guarantees were appointed for more
effectual security of the borders, and to act as guardians of the peace, in
preventing or chastising any limitary depredation Rymer, VIII, 54.
. A difference was compromised which had arisen on the capture of a Scottish
vessel, having on board Sir John Hamilton of Cadyou, ancestor of the Dukes of
Hamilton, and other men of rank, by immediate restoration, deliverance, and
compensation for the damages Ibid. 57.
. But the family of Douglas seem not to have been pleased with the appearances
of amity between the kingdoms, which the critical situation of Richard II,
owing to the revolt of Ireland, had led him to wish; for the Earl's son, with
Sir William Stuart and others, broke down the bridge at Roxburgh, plundered the
town, and ravaged the adjacent lands Ibid. Winton, 870, seems to narrate this
incident, but has erroneously put Jedburgh.
. This expedition may however have been a mere sally of intemperate courage,
for the Earl of Douglas soon after consented, 6 Nov.
as warden of the western marches, to observe the truce, and gave securities
for that purpose Rymer, VIII, 58, 59, etc
. The English king, intent upon his Irish expedition, was now anxious to
establish a real and lasting peace with Scotland, and instructed his
ambassadors to use every endeavor for this end, or at any rate to procure a
long truce. The Dukes of Lancaster and Rothsay again met; but only confirmed
the truce formerly established, to last till Michaelmas 1399 Rymer, VIII, 65.
. Lancaster had long been Lord Lieutenant of the English marches, and being of
course the chief instrument in the negociations, it is not matter of surprise
that they did not succeed, when we consider the differences between him and
Richard. Feb. 1399
Upon his death in the ensuing year, his son, irritated by the injustice of his
sovereign, returned from his short banishment, Sept. 30
dethroned Richard II; and is known by the name of Henry IV, as the successful
usurper of the English crown.

While the parliament of England was occupied with the deposition of one
sovereign, and the appointment of another Winton, 879, 880, tells a strange
story of Richard II being discovered in the Hebudes, by an Irish lady named
Bisset, wedded to the brother of the lord of the Isles. This Richard was
however maintained by Robert III, and by Albany the regent: he was indevout,
and seemed distracted, says Winton. Bowar, 427, believes the tale. The riming
chronicler gives, p. 880, an incoherent account of the seizure of Dumbarton
castle, by the parson of Kincardin O Neil.
, the Scottish borderers took and ruined the castle of Wark, the governor Sir
Thomas Gray then being absent upon his parliamentary duty, and ravaged the
adjacent country Walls. 403. But Umfraville defeated the Scots at Redswyre, on
another inroad. Harding, f. 199.
. Henry IV soon after nominated Ralph Neville earl of Westmoreland to treat
with Scotland; and, in case that a peace or truce could not be obtained, to
offer an agreement that the towns of Dumfries in Scotland, and Penrith in
England, should be declared free from any hostility Rymer, VIII, 107.
Abercromby unaccountably styles Westmoreland the brother of Henry IV; in which
he is blindly followed by Guthrie. Robert had, in his letters, only addressed
Henry as duke of Lancaster. Vesp. F. VII, f. 59, n. 3. dated 2 Nov. and f. 66,
n. 1.
. This and another commission, granted in the of the year, were alike
ineffectual.

The malady of the monarch, 1399
and the disturbed condition of France, prevented any exertion against the new
English king, though that power did not behold with indifference her ally
Richard II hurled from the throne, and the intrusion of a prudent and spirited
usurper. She excited Scotland to revenge her quarrel by vexatious inroads: 1400
and early in the year Henry summoned his council, to consider the most
effectual means of retorting vengeance Rymer, VIII, 125. To avoid a parliament,
and taxes, dangerous in a new usurpation, the lords spiritual and temporal
assessed themselves. The engagement of the earl of Rutland is preserved, Vesp.
F. VII, f. 72: he is to furnish 60 men at arms for three months, himself and 16
knights, the remainder squires. All who had offices, or pensions, were to
serve, except queen Isabel's servants. Ib. f. 73, n. 1. The royal jewels were
pawned, Vesp. F. VII, f. 91. security was granted to London for money, f. 92,
n. 1. The Cheshire rebels were pardoned on condition of service, f. 92. n. 2.
. Unhappily these means were soon supplied by Scotland itself, in the weakness
of its government, and its intestine divisions. The Lord of the Isles was
acknowledged, as usual, the ally of England; and he visited that kingdom with
his brother John, and a retinue of a hundred horse Rymer, VIII, 146, 2 June.
Yet, in March, Douglas herald had been sent by Robert to propose an
accommodation. Vesp. F. VII, f. 77. n. 2.
. Political knowledge must have been very confined in a country which permitted
this constant mortification; for if the necessary naval force could not be
procured to constrain, yet art and industry might have invited allegiance. The
Earl of March, enraged by a violent affront from the Scottish government, the
circumstances of which will appear with more connection and advantage in a
succeeding part of the narration, was preparing to throw himself into the arms
of England, a country to which situation, and interest, had always too much
attached his family The first letter of March to Henry, offering his
allegiance, is dated Dunbar 18 Feb. Vesp. F. VII, f. 22.
.

Some Scottish ships, under the command of Sir Robert Logan, were taken by the
English. This admiral had boasted that he would destroy the English fleets, and
especially that employed in fishing near Aberdeen: but the event was otherwise:
and the English ships ravaged some of the Orkneys, then held of the crown of
Norway by a Scottish earl Walls. 405. The captors of Logan's vessels were of
Lynn; "per viros de Lemnia."
. It is surprising that a country so well adapted for maritim power as
Scotland, should have neglected that strong engine of defensive or offensive
war, a powerful navy, while the kings of Denmark and Sweden, whose resources
were little superior, had numerous fleets.

Henry IV at length determined, by the most vigorous measures, to render the
commencement of his reign illustrious, in the eye of his subjects, and dreadful
to his foes. He resolved upon a personal invasion of Scotland, being the last
to be performed by an English monarch. It is asserted that his chief irritation
to this project arose from some intercepted letters, from the Scottish governor
the duke of Albany to France, in which Henry was branded with the appellation
of a preeminent traitor; and an insult must wound deeply, when sharpened by
malice and truth Bowar, 430.
. The prudence of Henry had sufficiently weighed the situations of Scotland and
of France, before he ventured to try his new power in this expedition. 9 June
He summoned the whole military force of England to meet him at York: 18 June
and, to save appearances with France, he ordered protection to her ships, and
to those of all countries, except Scotland Rymer, VIII, 146, 147.
. 25 July
Arriving at Newcastle, he admitted March to his homage and fealty, and granted
a pension to his wife and heirs Ibid. 153.
. The proud usurper then fulminated a letter to the Scottish king, and another
to the prelates and nobles, commanding them to meet him at Edinburgh, by the
twenty third day of August, to pay homage to their lord paramount. In these
letters the whole fabulous claim of the first Edward is revived, and deducted
with great faith from old Locrinus Rymer, VIII, 155.
. A pitiful ballad, which has reached our times, seems to have been the only,
and proper, answer of the Scots to this demand It is preserved in the Maitland
MS. Pepysian Lib. Cambridge, and is called the Ring (reign) of the Roy Robert,
from the first line. It was written by a dean named David Steel: and is
printed, but incorrectly, by Watson, in his collection of Scottish poetry, Edin.
1709, 8vo. Part II, p. iii.
. Revenge for the insult which he had received from the Scottish government must
have incited Henry to such an arrogant manifesto; for his prudence is too
firmly established, to permit a belief that he entertained views of effectually
subduing Scotland.

The English army entered that kingdom, 14 Aug.
while a powerful fleet coasted along with provisions An order to Lynn for
ships, 12 July, r. 1. occurs, Vesp. F. VII, f. 64. n. 2.
. After celebrating the Ascension of the Virgin at Hadington, Henry marched to
Leith, where he remained three days, and made repeated assaults on the castle
of Edinburgh, which was bravely defended by the Duke of Rothsay, attended by
the Earl of Douglas, and many noblemen and gentlemen of the southern part of
Scotland. Mean time the Duke of Albany had collected a copious army, and
advanced to Caldermoor in East Lothian. A singular intercourse took place
between the English king, and the Dukes of Rothsay, and Albany. Rothsay sent a
message to the invader, that his pretensions to the Scottish crown might
occasion the effusion of much christian blood, which to prevent, he was willing
to settle the dispute by a combat of one, two, or three nobles, against an
equal number of the English. Henry parried this amiable sally of youthful
vivacity by a piece of wit; answering, that he was surprised that Rothsay, who
showed such aversion to shed christian blood, should propose a combat of the
nobles, whose blood was certainly christian. Albany, on his side, sent a letter
promising that, if Henry would keep his station for six days, he should give
him battle, and either die in the field, or force him to raise the siege. The
English monarch, with his usual spirit, gave his royal word that he should
await the term mentioned; and to testify his pleasure at the tidings he
presented to the herald his upper garment, and a chain of gold. Albany however
did not fulfill his rhodomontade; but kept aloof, and left his nephew in
imminent danger of death, or captivity Walsingham, p. 405, in very brief.
Compare Bowar, 430, Winton, 880, Rymer, VII, 157, 158. But Albany's message
seems to rest with Echard: and Abercromby, II, 215, falsely quotes Buchanan.
Yet see here Oct. 1402.
.

Henry's lenity and moderation, during the whole of this expedition, were
remarkable, and sufficiently contrast his character with that of Richard II;
whose outrage proclaims his weakness; while this invasion showed that cruelty
and destruction are seldom the companions of courage and wisdom. To the towns,
villages, monasteries, and even fortresses, which submitted, he instantly sent
a banner, painted with his arms, to be displayed as the fixed signal that none
of his army should approach them. And when two Canons of Holyroodhouse came
into his presence at Leith, to request the preservation of their monastery, he
answered with great affability, "Far be from my arms the disgrace of molesting
any holy church, and especially yours, in which my father, the duke of
Lancaster, found a refuge. I am myself half a Scotishman, being a Common by
maternal descent; and I call God to witness that nothing but gross provocation
could have brought me here as a foe. But there are in your government people
who write letters in a singular style: and my intention is little to injure the
country, but to see if the writer dare to maintain his words, by meeting in
battle him whom he terms a traitor." Finding that Albany declined an
engagement, and not thinking the castle of Edinburgh an object worthy of longer
delay, or despairing of taking that fortress; perhaps even unwilling to expose
to the chance of destruction a place which had afforded an asylum to his
father; Henry raised the siege, and withdrew his army into England Bowar, 430.
Winton, 881, mentions the destruction of the house of Dalhousie, as the sole
ravage of Henry's arms.
. It is not improbable, at the same time, that a failure of provision, and the
rumoured insurrection of Owen Glendour in Wales, afforded strong arguments for
this retreat.

But if it be difficult to account for the motives of Henry, what are we to
think of those of Albany upon this occasion? At the head of a numerous army, he
was the idle spectator of a triumphant enemy in the heart of his country; and
beheld with indifference the danger of the heir apparent, whose ransom must
have cost the nation an immense sum. The prudence of declining a battle with
the force of England, conducted by the monarch, seems to have been fully
established in Scottish politics, by the latter maxims of Robert I: and the
modern axiom, that battles are the issue of ignorance, and that a weak general
fights when he knows not what to do, was apparently not unknown in former
times. So much may be offered in Albany's vindication. But the character of
this man will soon develope all its blackness; and the consistency of wicked
ambition must force us to infer that, to such a mind, base motives must be the
most effectual. Our ancient accounts ascribe Albany's conduct to a previous
enmity with Rothsay Bowar, 430.
; and it is probable that this gallant youth, conscious of his birth and
expected royalty, saw with impatience his father, his king, his country, under
such mean control. Apparently a coward, certainly unknown in war, Albany might
from baseness decline the combat with a bold and capable monarch; and from yet
greater baseness might have exulted to see, in the capture or death of Rothsay,
the security, the prolongation, of his regency.

Some events, which preceded the English invasion, have been reserved to this
place, in order to present a clear and connected account of internal
transactions in Scotland, interesting and important in an eminent degree. The
King's infirmities increased with his age, and the Duke of Albany must be
regarded as the chief agent, in affairs, which, from the monarch's residence on
distant parental estates, sometimes hardly reached the royal ear, except by the
voice of the nation. It is to be regreted that the meagreness of our annals
seldom permits a near acquaintance with historical characters, till the reign
of the first James. Suspended in the darkness of ignorance, and the distance of
time, the portraits rarely appear distinct, except when enlightened by the
splendour of the diadem. Hence arises a barrenness in an interesting province of
history, the varied and strong delineation of character, so necessary to form
just and complete ideas of important events.

The Duke of Rothsay had now attained his twenty second year; and his mental
features nearly resemble those of the prince of Wales his contemporary. That
warm effervescence of vigorous youth, which tamed by reason, experience, and
time, affords mature materials of a firm and spirited character, had led him
into some excesses, especially of the amorous kind, which afforded pretexts of
constraint from his uncle the governor, and of reproof from his royal parents.
A fondness for riotous pastime and arch roguery were also laid to the prince's
charge; who, to candid eyes, sufficiently compensated these youthful and
trivial defects by his good qualities. Endued with a comely person, an honest
heart, an able head, a most sweet and affable temper, and even deeply tinctured
with learning for that century, his virtues, and not his vices, attracted the
regent's enmity Bowar, 431. The character of Rothsay is chiefly from Winton,
886. Our lord the king is eldest sone,
Sueite and vertuose, young and fair,
And his nerrest lauchful air;
Honest abill, and awenand,
Our lord, our prince, in all plesand,
Connand into literature,
A semely persoun in stature.

.

Robert III only knew his own son from the malicious reports of Albany; but the
queen Annablella, formerly famed for beauty, and still for sense, spirit, and
generosity, was not the dupe of such practices, and appears to have suggested
the marriage of the prince, as a proper and usual expedient to overcome his
wildness, by the sweetness of lawful love, and domestic ties. This project must
have alarmed Albany, and he employed every resource of little cunning to defeat
it, while he did not dare a public opposition. To bring the scheme into
contempt, to gratify his own avarice, to sow dissentions and obstacles, to
procure delay and perhaps abandonment, he held up the marriage of his prince to
sale among the peers of Scotland, instead of demanding a foreign princess,
whose connexions might have aided her husband, and have overturned the regent's
ambitious plans. The Earl of March, a friend of Albany, was the highest bidder;
and having paid a large sum, his daughter Elizabeth was affianced to Rothsay.
But at the instigation of the king's council, the Earl of Douglas, Archibald
the Grim, oftered a larger sum, which was also received; and the regent not
daring to trifle with that illustrious family, the prince actually married
Marjory, the daughter of Douglas, at Bothwell Bowar, 428.
.

The only excuse oftered to March was, that the consent of the three estates
had not been procured to the marriage; and as no meeting of parliament is
mentioned, it is to be presumed that in this rude age the king's council,
consisting of members clerical, noble, and common, was regarded as representing
the three estates, when inconvenient to summon that formidable body. Nay the
repayment of the sum advanced was refused, or delayed; and March, burning with
indignation, procured a safe conduct from the king of England, and retired to
that country, leaving his castle of Dunbar in the custody of Sir Robert
Maitland The first letter of March to Henry, as above mentioned, is dated
Dunbar, 18 Feb. It states that he is greatly wronged by Rothsay, who espoused
his daughter, and though bound by his letter and seal, is about to marry
another: the earl requests help as the kinsman of Henry, Alice de Beaumont
being gud-dame (grandmother) of Henry, and Marjory Common her full sister,
gud-dame of March. He offers his own allegiance, and that of his vassals:
desires that lord Furneval, or Westmoreland, be sent to confer with him; and a
safe conduct for himself and 100 followers. After apologizing for writing in
English, as he understands that speech better than latin or French, he signs in
French, "Le Count de la March d'Escoce." Vesp. F. VII, f. 22. Furneval was
sent, ib. f. 39, n. 2. On the 13th of March Westmoreland was commissioned to
enquire the determination of the Scottish earl. Ib. f. 78. But the precise date
of March's retreat into England is not apparent; though it seems that he
remained in Scotland till he met Henry at Newcastle on the 25th of July. See
Redpath, 369.
. After the retreat of Henry an army was raised to besiege that important
fortress, which if betrayed to the English, might have afforded a dangerous
post to the enemy; and Robert III himself appeared as general: but, before he
reached Dunbar, Maitland was intimidated and yielded the castle to the son of
Douglas Bowar, 429.
. If the Scottish king had no opportunity to show his martial talents, he at
least evinced his goodness and justice in this expedition. After waiting at
Hadington three days, till various reinforcements arrived, the army prepared to
march, the trumpets sounded, and the king's foot was in the stirrup to mount
his horse, when a poor butcher begged an audience. The complaint was against an
officer of the royal household, who had not paid for the meats ordered: the
monarch heard the claim affably and patiently, and sent for the officer: who
not being found he paid the sum himself. He then ordered a proclamation at the
market cross that all debts due by his attendants should be instantly demanded
and paid; and in future always observed this custom on leaving any place; an
useful example to his subjects, in an age when different statutes were required
to enforce a like practice in the nobles. The people upon this occasion,
remembered with pleasure his similar conduct at his coronation, when he ordered
payment to the monastery of Scone, for the growing corn trodden under foot by
the multitude Bowar, 418, 419.
. Such matters are often esteemed beneath the dignity of history; but far be
that pride which would prevent a good action to the meanest of mankind, or its
commemoration; and if this historic dignity be inimical to amiable views of
manners, and to humanity, it is rather an object of scorn than of admiration.

Though, in November and December, 1401
some conferences between the English and Scottish commissioners had been held,
only truces of a few weeks had been adjusted Rymer, VIII, 166, 185.
; and the war soon resumed its depredations. Henry's demands were exorbitant,
as he had been irritated by Robert's neglect, and by being treated as an
usurper. The English monarch instructed his commissioners to require the homage
of Scotland; if refused, an annuity, or lands, were held out as temptations to
Robert: should this pretension prove fruitless, a marriage treaty beween their
families was to be proposed, or at least a truce of thirty years Instructions
Vesp. F. VII, f. 83, 85, n. 1. written, from intrinsic evidence, after Henry's
return.
: all these terms were rendered nugatory by the Scottish alliance with France.

Robert in vain demanded that March should be delivered up: and that earl
required the restitution of his estates with as little success. Henry IV knew
from experience the value of a traitor, and extended to March, his friends and
followers, the warmest protection. Eager to wipe off the stain of his
captivity, Henry Percy joined March, who was inflamed with revange, and anxious
to evince his importance by his services; 3 Feb.
and they entered Scotland, at the head of two thousand chosen men. Piercing by
Peebles to Linton, they assaulted without success the castle of Hales, burned
three villages, and encamped at Preston. But the son of the Earl of Douglas,
advancing from Edinburgh against them, with a body of his followers, they made
a precipitate retreat, leaving their spoils, and tents, and prepared
provisions. The Scots pursued them a whole dreary night of that season of the
year, and captured many at Colbrand's-path, the rest escaping to Berwick; at
the very gates of which town the lance, and pennon, of the lord Thomas Talbot
were taken Bowar, 429.
. The heir of Douglas a few months after wore the brilliant coronet of that
house, upon the death of his father Archibald, surnamed the Grim, a peer
recommended to fame by his wisdom, as much as by his hereditary valor Bowar,
429. These events have been dated 1400 by our historians, misled by Bowar's
inattention to the commencement of the year; but the preceding narrative, and
notes, evince them to belong to 1401. Redpath, 369, shows little acumen in not
being able to solve so slender a perplexity.

In 1401 Northumberland and his son demanded 1000 marks form Henry, for an
inroad, Vesp. F. VII, f. 70, probably this: from this letter it also appears
that they had 3000 l. a year for the wardenship of Berwick, and the east
marches; and 1500 l. for that of Carlisle and the west. On the 28th June 1401,
the manor of Clippeston was granted to March by the English king. Rymer, VIII,
205.


.

This year forms an epoch in the history of Scottish legislation, the more
important, as, after the various laws of Robert II, no further intelligence
arises, till the luminous period commences with the statutes of James I.

The ordinances passed in a parliament held at Scone are 21 Feb.
numerous These laws are published by Skene, in his collection known by the
name of Regiam Majestatem, from the first words of a treatise prefixed. They
were extant in the Register in his time, as he mentions in his tract De
Verborum Significatione; and their authenticity is unquestioned. See also MS.
Harley, 4700. The date is accurately marked in that MS. and by Skene.
. Many concern private property, then in an obscure and precarious condition,
under the feudal oppression, and rapacity of the great: but the following
chiefly deserve historical commemoration. It was decreed that the king's
lieutenant general the Earl of Fife, and other royal ministers, should hear the
causes of churchmen, widows, orphans, and minors, without taking sureties, and
judge without delay: that, during the papal schism, any excommunicated person
might appeal to the conservator of the church, and afterward to the general
congregation of the clergy; that the duel should only be permitted in four
cases, the crime must infer death, it must be secretly designed or perpetrated,
the suspicions must bear verisimilitude, and the truth was not to be discovered
by witnesses or writings. Among the causes why gifts are revocable, are classed
the arts of monks in persuading the laity to donations. Usury, or interest, is
not to be allowed against a minor, who is only to pay the principal. As a check
on the sheriffs, their clerks are to be appointed by the king, and only
amenable to him, to prevent any connivance in injustice. The justiciary courts
are to be held twice in the year, on either side of the Forth: the coroner is
empowered to arrest persons indicted: the lords of regalities, sheriffs, and
barons, are to hold their journies of justice twice in the year, and abbreviate
the terms of appearance: the king's justiciary may remove sheriffs, or other
royal officers in case of default, till the fitting of the next parliament,
which is to judge the cause; a singular statute, confounding the legislative
and executive powers. "To prevent the great and horrible ravages depredations,
fires, and homicides, which are daily committed in every part of the kingdom,
it is ordained that all the sheriffs in the realm make public proclamations,
that no person traveling shall be allowed more attendants than those whose
maintenance he defrays." Ravagers, depredators, incendiaries, robbers,
murderers, are to be punished by death and confiscation. The sheriff shall
arrest malefactors, and take bail for their appearance at the next journey of
justice, or circuit; their nonappearance infers rebellion, and forfeiture of
the bail; if no bail be found, they are at once to be tried by an assize, and
if found guilty forfeit their lives; if they flee from one sheriffdom to
another, the first sheriff is to send a precept to the second for their
deliverance to trial; a similar procedure is to be used to lords, and officers
of regalities, and all lieges are to assist. Among the more minute statutes,
may be named, that allowing the lieges to purchase victuals where they please,
on paying the customs; that against burning the heath of moors in summer, or
autumn, when the corn might be damaged; those against the killing of salmon, or
hares, at prohibited seasons; that which orders farmers, who rent lands for a
term, not to alienate the lease for a term exceeding the agreement. These laws,
like the ruins of an ancient hall of justice, inspire reverence from their
pristine majesty, and utility; and will interest the philosophic reader, as
relics of the progress of society, and of the history of man.

The effects of March's vengeance have already been narrated; but a scene of a
blacker and more deplorable kind is now to open, in the murder of the Duke of
Rothsay. The power and sense of the queen, the gravity of Trail bishop of St.
Andrews, a chief promoter of concord, the valor and wisdom of the first
Archibald Earl of Douglas, had balanced the ambition of Albany, but these three
supporters of the monarchy died within a short period The fourth pestilence
which had ravaged Scotland appeared in 1401; but it appears not that any of
these great persons fell a victim to it. Winton, 884.
, and the governor's passions had no longer any control, save from Rothsay's
merit, and just pretensions. Archibald the second Earl of Douglas of that name,
born to adorn that family by his valor, but to disgrace it by his conduct, was
married to the elder daughter of Robert III, as his father had espoused a
daughter of the preceding king. Thus doubly connected with the royal family, he
seems to have regarded Rothsay, who had wedded his sister, not with fraternal
affection, but with the malevolent eyes of a rival in ambition. Joined in
strict friendship with Albany, and his second son John afterward Earl of
Buchan; and misled by their offers, or by a pique at Rothsay, he shared their
detestable schemes. 1402
The young prince had been married about two years, but had no children; and
perhaps hating the wife forced upon him by his uncle's avarice, he pursued his
former courses. Albany, on pretense of restraining his wildness, had set a band
of his partisans to watch his conduct; and now that the occasion opened the
regent gave the hint, and this band represented to the king that his son would
no longer bear counsel, nor restraint. Indeed this impudent plan of Albany,
this council of guardians appointed to watch a man of sense and spirit, and
that man the heir of royalty, was a certain mode to irritate and inflame
youthful passions, but never could tend to moderate their influence. The
decrepit and infirm monarch was, as usual, distant from the public scene, and
guided by those around him; among whom was now unhappily one Ramorgny, a knight
who had formerly suggested to Rothsay the assassination of Albany, but the
generous nature of the prince had rejected the proposal with horror and
indignation. A successful criminal may be honored; but a crime offered, and
refused, exposes the character to certain hatred and contempt; and it is not
matter of wonder that Ramorgny became in his turn the bitter enemy of Rothsay.
At his suggestion, which may be construed that of Albany, Robert sent a written
order to the regent, to arrest his son, and confine him for a short time, in
order to subdue his stubborn spirit; forgetful of the certain disgrace which
the confinement of the heir apparent must entail on his reign, perhaps on the
future; forgetful of the stain on the succession, and danger of consequent
disaffection in the subjects; forgetful how short a path leads a prince from
the prison to the grave.

The royal mandate was born by Ramorgny and by another enemy of Rothsay, Sir
William Lindsay, whose sister Euphemia had also been affianced to the prince,
and rejected Bowar, 432.
. From these circumstances it may be perceived that the scheme was laid, and
conducted with all the deep and dark art of consummate villainy. Albany,
receiving the order with joy, resolved on its immediate enforcement, and that
the bearers should be the executors. Privacy was necessary; and Rothsay was
inveigled into Fife, upon pretense that he should take possession for the king
of the castle of St. Andrews, till the appointment of another bishop. When the
unsuspecting prince was riding with a small attendance, between Nydie and
Straburn, near St. Andrews, he was seized, and held a prisoner in the castle,
till the governor and his council, assembled at Culros, should determine the
place of his confinement. The tower of Falkland was named; and thither Albany
and Douglas, with a strong band of followers, conducted the prince, seated on a
laboring horse, and covered with a russet cloak, to defend him from the
falling rain. Here under the custody of John Selkirk, and John Wright, two
assassins employed by Albany, the most cruel of deaths, Easter 26 Mar.
that of famine, awaited the heir of the monarchy: and he was buried in a
private manner at Lindoris, distant from the tombs of the Scottish kings, or
those of his family, the conspirators not daring, by a funereal pomp, to awaken
the attention and detection of the people Bowar, 431, 432. Winton, 886, writing
in Fife, the earldom of Albany, and under his regency, conceals all the
circumstances, and only mentions the death and burial of David. Buchanan, X,
10, says a woman supplied the unfortunate prince with thin cakes of barley,
while another gave him milk from her breasts: but they were detected and
removed. The tale seems from Boyce, f. v. 350, who adds that the prince
devoured his own fingers, in famine and despair.
.

A great security to crimes arises from the good nature of honesty, which
believes their commission impossible; and as Albany had conducted his horrible
plot with great skill, and gave out that his nephew had unexpectedly died of a
dysentery; and for the imprisonment there was the king's positive mandate; it
is no wonder that the nation was beguiled. To secure and to continue his
regency, it was however proper that every doubt should be cleared, 16 May
and a parliament was called and met at Edinburgh, an assembly which the long
government of Albany had sufficiently taught him how to choose, and influence.
In a mock examination Albany and Douglas confessed the imprisonment, but
imputed the death to divine providence. A remission was however thought
necessary; and was given by the infirm sovereign in terms as ample, 20 May
as if they had murdered the heir apparent. In this pardon, which is extant,
the confinement of the prince is ascribed to the cause of public utility; but
the immediate motives of the perpetrators are expressly said to be concealed
for a sufficient reason This curious paper is preserved in the 4to Register
often quoted, f. v. 12, whence it was published by Sir David Dalrymple,
Remarks, p. 278.
. Does this singular declaration refer to the king's mandate, which might in
the vulgar eye have appeared a consent to the death of his son; or to some
crime falsely imputed to Rothsay by the conspirators, as for example a design
to murder his father, or uncle? This is dark: but it is certain that folly and
wickedness are companions, and that the means used by Albany to clear his
character are precisely those which fully establish his guilt.

To divert the public attention, it was resolved to continue the war with
England, which had been interrupted by a short truce, and some negotiations for
peace In Vesp. F. VII, f. 118, is a letter from Douglas to Henry, dated
Edybredschellis, 1 Feb. and signed "Le Conte de Douglas, Seigneur de Galway et
de Dunbar:" and Henry's answer 27 Feb. occurs f. 84. From these letters it
appears that on the 16th May 1401, (see in Rymer, VIII, 190, a truce of 26th
April 1401) Douglas and Northumberland had met at Camelspath, and agreed to a
truce of a year to Martinmas 1402: Douglas complains that Northumberland does
not observe the treaty. Henry in return blames Douglas for burning Bamborough;
yet promises to send commissioners. The transactions of the various years, the
title of Dunbar, etc. show these letters to have been written in 1402. Yet on
the 20th Sept. r. 2=1401, Henry had issued instructions to demand homage of
Scotland, admitting however that if there were no evidence, the claims ought to
be abandoned, and a treaty of thirty years proposed, England retaining Berwick,
Roxburgh, and Jedburgh. Vesp. F. VII, f. 83.


. A fair pretext arose from the incursions of March and his adherents, that
earl and his son being pensioned by the English king, for the maintenance of a
small body of troops during the Scottish hostilities. By the advice and support
of the young earl of Douglas, then resident at Dunbar, the chief landholders of
Lothian agreed to conduct separate expeditions into England, because the people
of the Merse favored the exiled earl, and did not exert their usual inroads.
The leader of the first incursion was John Haliburton of Dirlton, who advanced
a considerable way into the inimical country, carrying fire and ravage in his
progress, and returned with success and spoil. But the second, conducted by
Patrick Hepburn of Hales, met with a different fate; for having advanced too
far into England, and remained too long, the Earl of March found time to unite
the power of Northumberland with his own, and to intercept Hepburn and his
followers in their return, 22 June
at West-Nisbet in the Merse, three miles south of Duns. An obstinate conflict
ensued, rather favorable to the Scots, till the son of March arrived. with a
fresh reinforcement, when victory declared for the English. The Scottish leader
was slain, with several other gentlemen, and the flower of the youth of
Lothian; many were mortally wounded; and John and Thomas Haliburtons, John and
William Cockburns, Lauder of Bass, and many others remained captives Bowar,
432, 433. The spot was afterward called Slaughter Hill. Hume Dougl. I, 218. An
original letter from Henry to his council, dated Hareburgh, 30 June, is extant,
Vesp. F. VII, f. 18. He informs them that the son of March, with 200 soldiers
of Berwick, had defeated 400 Scots; and, among 240 taken and slain, are John
Haliburton and three other knights captives; while Sir Patrick Hepburn fell. He
adds that 12,000 Scots had ravaged the country around Carlisle, and intended
another invasion, so the necessary directions for defense must be issued.
Northumberland, and his son, appear, from this letter, to have been high in
Henry's favor.
.

Douglas, stung with regret for the loss of his brave friends and countrymen,
and inflamed with rage against March, his particular enemy, immediately applied
to Albany for a body of troops, to be added to his own power upon an expedition
into England. The governor consented, and dispatched a considerable force under
Murdac his eldest son; the earls of Angus and Moray also joined Douglas, who
entered England with an army of ten thousand men, carrying terror and
devastation to the walls of Newcastle. Henry IV was now engaged in the Welsh
war against Owen Glendour; but the earl of Northumberland, and his son the
Hotspur Percy, with the earl of March, collected a numerous array; and awaited
the return of the Scots, impeded with spoil, near Milfield, in the northern
part of Northumberland. Douglas had reached Wooler, in his return; and
perceiving the enemy, seized a strong post between the two armies, called
Homildon hill. In this method he rivalled his predecessor at the battle of
Otterburn, 14 Sept.
but not with like success. The English advanced to the assault, and Henry
Percy was about to lead them up the hill, when March caught his bridle, and
advised him to advance no further, but to pour the dreadful shower of English
arrows into the enemy. This advice was followed with the usual fortune; for in
all ages the bow was the English instrument of victory, and though the Scots,
and perhaps the French, were superior in the use of the spear, yet this weapon
was useless after the distant bow had decided the combat. Robert the Great,
sensible of this, at the battle of Banocburn ordered a prepared detachment of
cavalry, to rush among the English archers at the commencement, totally to
disperse them, and stop the deadly effusion. But Douglas now used no such
precaution; and the consequence was that his people, drawn up on the face of a
hill, presented one general mark to the enemy, none of whose arrows descended
in vain. The Scots fell without sight, and unrevenged, till a spirited knight,
Swinton, exclaimed aloud, "O my brave countrymen! what fascination has seized
you today that you stand like deer to be shot, instead of indulging your
ancient courage, and meeting your enemies hand to hand? Let those who will,
descend with me, that we may gain victory, or life, or fall like men." This
being heard by Adam Gordon, between whom and Swinton there existed an ancient
and deadly feud, attended with the mutual slaughter of many followers, he
instantly fell on his knees before Swinton, begged his pardon; and desired to
be dubbed a knight by him whom he must now regard as the wisest, and boldest of
that order in Britain. The ceremony performed, Swinton and Gordon descended the
hill, accompanied only by one hundred men; and a desperate valor led the whole
body to death. Had a similar spirit been shown by the Scottish army, it is
probable that the event of the day would have been different. Douglas, who was
certainly deficient in the most important qualities of a general, seeing his
army begin to disperse, at length attempted to descend the hill; but the
English archers, retiring a little, sent a flight of arrows so sharp and strong
that no armor could withstand; and the Scottish leader himself, whose panoply
was of remarkable temper, fell under five wounds, though not mortal. The
English men of arms, knights of squires, did not strike one blow, but remained
spectators of the rout, which was now complete. Great numbers of the Scots were
slain, and near five hundred perished in the river Tweed upon their flight.
Among the illustrious captives were Douglas, whose chief wound deprived him of
an eye; Murdac son of Albany; the Earls of Moray, and Angus; and about twenty
four gentlemen of eminent rank and power. The chief slain were Swinton, Gordon,
Livingston of Calendar, Ramsay of Dalhousie, Walter Sinclair, Roger Gordon,
Walter Scot, and others. Such was the issue of the unfortunate battle of
Homildon Bowar, 433 -- 435. Winton, 886 -- 888. Walls. 407, 408. Otterburn, 236.
Walsingham gives a strange idea of the force of the English arrows, "ut ipsos
armatos omnino penetrarent, cassides terebrarent, gladi^s per^^r^ent, lanc^as
sunderent." He brands Sir John Swinton, as "infidus utrique regi." Hall in
describing this battle, f. v. 17, says not unpoetically, "the bright beam of
victory shone on Saint George's cross." Bishop Percy, who inspected the spot,
informed the author that there is a sudden scar, or little precipice, on the
side of the hill which the Scots descended, and which, being unperceived by
them, contributed much to their confusion and rout. The anonymous historian of
Le Laboureur says I, 453, that Percy had only 1500 cavalry, and 3000 archers.
Pierre des Essars a French knight was taken, for whose ransom, and that of
Douglas, a benevolence was raised in France. See also Des Ursins, p. 148.


.

Henry Percy disgraced the victory by an act of cruelty. Among the captives was
Sir William Stuart of Forest; and Percy insisted that he, being a native of
Tividale when under the English power, should be regarded as a traitor. Stuart,
a man of wisdom and eloquence, defended himself so well that he was acquitted
by three successive juries; but the malice of Percy led him to appoint a new
jury of his followers, and Stuart was drawn and quartered, amidst the murmurs
of the English, who knew that his merit was the only cause of his death Bowar,
434. Winton, 887; who adds that a squire, named Thomas Ker, was tried with
Stuart, for the same alleged offense, and condemned in the same illegal way.
Their quarters were exposed on the gates of York, an atrocity soon retaliated
on Percy himself, as Winton observes, p. 888.
.

Henry IV, on receiving intelligence of the battle of Homildon, desired the
Percies not to ransom, nor deliver, their prisoners, without his consent: and,
to palliate this apparently harsh mandate, he generously granted the earldom of
Douglas, with Eskdale, Lidsdale, Lauderdale, the lordship of Selkirk, forest of
Ettrick, county of Tividale, and all the other appendages of that high house,
to the Earl of Northumberland; who smiled at this liberal gift of a country,
neither conquered, nor likely to be an object of easy seizure Rymer, VIII, 278,
289.
. But the Percies resolved to take the king in his own snare, and to make this
conquest the pretended object of arms, instantly to be turned against the
granter. Meantime Murdac, the regent's son, sometimes termed Earl of Fife, and
some other prisoners were sent to Henry, 20 Oct.
and were presented in full parliament. Sir Adam Forester, one of these
captives, made a speech before that great audience, which would have been wiser
if better timed, representing the advantages of solid and durable peace between
the nations; but Henry checked the oration, because Forester had formerly
deceived him, concerning Albany's intentions to fight, at the siege of
Edinburgh castle Parl. Hist. II, 71, 72; London 1751, 19 vols. 8vo.
. The heir of Albany was freed, upon his word of honor not to withdraw from
England; the inferior prisoners were committed to an easy confinement. The earl
of March requested the parliament, that he might be restored to his lands in
proportion as subdued by the English, and that such of his people as chose to
observe allegiance to England should be received; all which was willingly
granted, but it was insisted that his people should take an oath of fidelity
The commons recommended him to the king. Walls. 238.
.

An incident occurred, 1403
which contributes to paint the features of the times and of the government.
Sir Malcom Drummond, brother of the late queen, had been married for some years
to Isabella, in her own right countess of Mar. He was suddenly surprised in his
castle by a band of ruffians, and imprisoned till he died of his hard
captivity. In the next year, a decent term having expired, Alexander Stuart,
natural son of Alexander the deceased earl of Buchan, brother of Albany, forced
the countess to wed him; and as he was a noted leader of the highland
freebooters there is no room to doubt that he had been the murderer of her
husband, in order to attain this wealthy marriage. These unworthy deeds were
sanctioned by the government; the king's name being boldly set, by the regent,
to a charter confirming the earldom to a lawless intruder Winton, 888, 889. Sir
D. Dalrymple Sutherland Case, Chapter V, p. 45. Record of Charters, B. 7, n. 257.
. Thus every insult, and every crime, seem to have been crowded by Albany, his
younger brothers and adherents, that could contribute to the depression and
destruction of the king's family and connexions.

The Earl of Northumberland, and his son, were now intent upon open rebellion
against Henry IV; and to color the raising of their troops, and gain time for
adding fresh musters, it was resolved to make a short incursion into Scotland,
on pretense of rendering effectual the grant of the earldom of Douglas.
Accordingly Henry Percy, and the Earl of March, proceeding with a considerable
force besieged Coklawis, a strong tower in Tividale on the confines of the
Merse Bowar, 435. It was in, or near, the site of the present Ormiston, about
three miles to the south of Kelso. In a letter to the English council,
Newcastle 30 May, Vesp. F. VII, f. 23, Northumberland mentions that he and his
son have indentures and hostages for the surrender of Ormiston castle in
Scotland, on the 1st of August, if not delivered by battle; and he requires
money for his services. In a letter to Henry, 26 June, ib. f. 25, the earl
demands money, as he had received none, though it was maliciously reported that
60,000 l. had passed into his hands since the king's coronation: he assures his
"Magestee royalle" that he shall be at Ormiston on the day appointed. The
letters are in French.
; June
but found so obstinate a defense that, both parties being fatigued, it was
agreed, between Percy and Greenlaw the captain, that if no aid were sent by the
Scottish king, or governor, the fortress should surrender on the first of
August, being six weeks from the date of the convention. Gladstane, the
proprietor of Coklawis, who had remained concealed in the place, soon hastened
to the king, who referred him to the governor. Albany assembling a council of
prelates and nobles at Falkland, laid the affair before them; and they knowing
him little inclined to war, pretended that it was better to give up that paltry
turret, than encounter further danger from England, when the Scots were
weakened and disheartened by the late defeat. Upon which, to their surprise,
the regent who apparently had intelligence of the commotion raised by the
Percies, and that the north of England was incapable either of offense or
defense, started up, and exclaimed, "I vow to God and St. Fillan that I shall
prevent the appointed day, although none should attend me save that youth, my
groom," pointing to Peter de Kinbuk, then holding his horse at a distance. The
council, effectually duped and astonished by the governor's new spirit,
answered with tears of joy, "May God confirm his work in you; and by his aid we
engage that our help shall not be deficient." Albany was soon at the head of a
numerous army, consisting according to our ancient accounts of not less than
fifty thousand rude cavalry, and as many infantry. With some loss he took the
fort of Inwerwick in Lothian The situation of this place is compared to Baiae,
in the description of Lothian, Blaeu's Atlas.
, which had been seized by the English, after the destruction of the flower of
Lothian at Homildon; and was approaching Coklawis, when a messenger brought him
tidings that Percy was defeated and slain at Shrewsbury. Upon this the governor
encamped his wide battalions around Coklawis, and ordered a herald to proclaim
the joyful intelligence; then dismissed his army, and returned as in triumph
Bowar, 435 -- 438. Winton, 889 -- 891.
. The battle of Shrewsbury, with the prudent and bold conduct of the Scottish
earl of March on the part of Henry IV, and the spirited actions of Douglas This
earl had lost an eye in the battle of Homildon: and in this he was wounded in
verendis. Walls. 411. He felled Henry to the ground, before he was himself
captured. Monstrelet, Vol. 1, f. v. 6, edit. 1518.
in behalf of Percy, belong to English history: of this narration it is the
duty to observe that the conduct of Albany was reprehensible in a high degree,
and that by his usual misconduct he lost a fit opportunity of regaining
Jedburgh, Roxburgh, or Berwick, or otherwise assailing the north of England, in
its weak and disaffected state, and avenging the affronts and the losses of his
country. The people of Scotland were then almost unknown in their own
government, but the patience of the nobles and gentlemen under this long and
disgraceful Regency, yet further to be lengthened and disgraced, can only be
accounted for, by inferring that Albany shared with them the spoils of the king
and of the people, and thus indulged to the utmost the natural spirit of
aristocracy.

An impostor appearing in Scotland, 1404
under the name of Richard II Winton, 879, 880, quoted under 1399. Walls. 413.
, the policy of Henry IV perceived that dangerous commotions might arise from
this pretext, and his desires of peace were increased. He wished to include the
Scots in the long truce, formerly ratified with France; but, not succeeding,
used other pacific negotiations, and Robert III on his side appointed
commissioners to treat for the ransom of Albany's son, May
and Douglas, and for a truce if obtainable upon proper terms; which was in
fact concluded for a very short time Rymer, VIII, 345, 359, 363.
. 6 July to Easter.
Another meeting was agreed on to confer concerning a definitive treaty, and
among the Scottish commissioners were James Douglas lord of Dalkeith, the bishop
of Glasgow, Sir David Fleming, John Merton doctor of canon law, and Walter
Forester canon of Aberdeen and secretary of state Ib. 369, 370. In August,
apparently this year, Robert sent David Fleming with a letter to Henry,
beginning "salutem et quietis desiderium," to confer concerning some affair
mentioned by the English king to Fleming, Vesp. F. VII, f. 63, n. 1. About the
same time the countess of March wrote to Henry, representing her distress, and
that of her husband, since they left their country; the pestilence raged around
their residence, and their foes afforded no opportunity of their retreating to
Colbrandspath till it abated. Percy's followers were enraged at March for the
death of their master, etc. Original signed "Vostre humble oratrice," etc.
Vesp. F. VII, f. 96, n. 2.
. The lasting bars in the way of solid peace seem to have been the treaty
between Scotland and France, and the possession of some places in the borders
by the English, which they could not resign, nor the Scots cease to demand,
without dishonor.

A Scottish vessel, 1405 Jan.
of great value, having been captured by an English armed barge near St.
Andrews, letters were addressed by Robert, by Albany his lieutenant general, by
the bishop of St. Andrews, and by other eminent persons to Henry demanding
restitution, but without effect The original letters may be seen in Vesp. F.
VIII. Robert's, f. 102, n. 1, beginning with wishing to Henry "salutem et
quietis populi desiderium:" Albany's, f. 26; the bishop's, f. 102, n. 2; the
earl of Crawford's, f. 103, n. 1; and one by David Fleming of Biggar and
Cumbernald, f. 82, n. 2.
. In consequence of this injustice, the Scottish commissioners failed in their
appointed meetings with the English on the marches; March
and mutual animosity began to be discovered O. The English commissioners, the
bishop of Bath, the earl of Westmoreland, and lord Fitzhugh, to Henry, Morpeth
26th March. Vesp. F. VII, f. 96, n. 1. In the course of this year Ireland also
displayed her resentment. From the Annals at the end of Camden's Britannia it
appears that, in the year 1400, the constable of Dublin castle met some Scottish
ships near Stranford in Ulster, who defeated the English and slew many. In
revenge the merchants of Drogheda, A. D. 1405, ravaged a part of the Scottish
shore; and in June, the same year, the people of Dublin attacked St. Ninian's.


.

The aged and sickly king, secluded in the isle of Bute Bowar, 436, 439. In the
first passage for Bochan read Botham.
, the victim of his own weakness, and of his brother's savage ambition, had yet
a few friends left. Among these was Henry Wardlaw, nephew of the late cardinal,
and recently appointed bishop of St. Andrews by the Pope, a prelate recommended
by his love of letters, and of his king, and country. To his charge James, Earl
of Carric, and only surviving son of Robert III, now in his eleventh year, was
committed by his father, and by his advice France was chosen as a secure
retreat for the heir of the kingdom, from the brutal force or dark art of
Albany Bowar, 439.
. The polished education to be received in that celebrated country afforded a
fair pretense for this plan; and the regent seems not to have opposed it,
hoping perhaps somewhat from accident, divining the unpopularity of a foreign
education, nor regreting to unite the public attention by being the nearest
heir of the monarchy left in Scotland. Henry Sinclair earl of Orkney was
appointed chief attendant of the prince in this voyage: and a ship was ordered
to the isle of Bass, in the firth of Forth, to receive the important charge.
David Fleming of Cumbernald, a relation of the king, and several chief
gentlemen of Lothian, conducted the prince, and saw him safe on board: on their
return they were pursued by James Douglas, uncle of the earl, and a conflict
followed at Hermanston moor, 14 Feb.
in which Fleming and many others fell Bowar, 439. Winton, 895. -- Walsingham,
416, 417, informs us that Fleming was slain in revenge for his advice to
Northumberland to escape into Wales, as the Scottish nobles intended to have
delivered him up in exchange for one or two of the peers captured at Homildon.
If so this event must have happened in 1406. The gross errors of chronology in
Bowar, Winton, and even our later historians, occasion perpetual difficulties.
That Robert III died on the 4th of April 1406, is evinced beyond all doubt by
the learned Ruddiman, in his notes on Buchanan, p. 436; who at the same time
expresses his opinion that the prince was captured in 1405, as Bowar's
inconsistent account bears that the capture happened on the 30th March, and
that the father died of grief on the 28th March; while Winton expressly dates
these events in the years 1405 and 1406. It is clear from our historians, and
Walsingham, that the earl of Orkney accompanied the prince; and he was a
captive in England in Aug. 1405, when his brothers were permitted to visit
England, as may be inferred from Rymer, VIII, 410; on the 13th Sept. 1405, a
safe conduct was granted to Orkney, then a prisoner, to visit Scotland, (his
brothers apparently hostages,) Rymer, VIII, 415. Yet it is singular that no
mention of the prince occurs in any writing of that year. John son of Henry
says, in a letter to his father, Vesp. F. VII, f 95, n. 2, that Orkney had
joined Northumberland and Bardolf at Berwick: the letter is dated Durham, 9
June, in all appearance 1405. Yet Bowar and Winton agree that Orkney and the
prince were captured in March or April. The same writers concur that Fleming
was slain, on his return from accompanying the prince on shipboard: yet
Walsingham seems rightly to place the slaughter in 1406: he is however mistaken
in dating the capture 1406, as appears from the passports to Orkney. When the
materials are so complex, and discordant, the candor of the reader must be
requested.
.

The prince had only proceeded as far as Flamborough head, when he was
intercepted by a ship belonging to Cley in Norfolk; and the Scottish vessel,
being small and unarmed, was taken without defense. 30 Mar.
The royal captive, and his attendants, were immediately sent to the English
king, who faid with sarcastic joy, "Had the Scots been grateful, they ought to
have sent this youth to me to be educated, for I understand French well." Henry
then ungenerously ordered the prince, and Orkney, to the Tower: and nineteen
years elapsed before James saw the end of his captivity Bowar, 439. Winton,
895, dates the capture 12th April. Walsingham says, with naivete, that James
was sent "ut coalesceret et informaretur in Francia, de facetia linguaque
Gallica." Henry's words he thus expresses, "Certe fi grati fuissent Scoti, hunc
misissent mihi juvenem instituendum, nam et idioma Franciae ego novi." Hist.
417. Ypod. 170.
.

Rothsay herald appears to have been sent, in order to treat for the
deliverance of the prince: and Albany interested in the welfare of his son
Murdac, who remained a prisoner in England, endeavored to conciliate Henry,
and expressed his regret for the failure of the conferences O. Albany to Henry,
Falkland 2 June, signed, "Robertus dux Albaniae, germanns regis Scotiae, et
ipfius locumtenens generalis." Vesp. F. VIII, f. 101, n. 1. On the 10th July
Rothsay herald was again sent by Albany to Henry on private business, probably
to insure the continuance of James in captivity; and to explain that any
preparations of Scotland for war were only to preserve appearances on Albany's
part. Vesp. F. VII, 79, n. 1.
. 2 June
But a storm now burst forth in the north of England, which threatened to
immerge Scotland in open war.

The earl of Northumberland, who had been pardoned by Henry after the battle of
Shrewsbury, began, in concert with the earl Marshal of England, the archbishop
of York, and lord Bardolf, to revive his rebellion, if it can be so called,
against the usurper. But Henry's vigorous measures speedily extinguished the
flame. Some of the earl's confederates were seized, and executed, while he
himself fled into Scotland, June
accompanied by his infant grandson, and by lord Bardolf Walls. 416, 417. Bowar,
439. Original letters of Henry on this rebellion may be found in Vesp. F. VII.
.

The Scots availed themselves of the confusion, to manifest their sense of
Henry's injustice. Some joined Northumberland at Berwick; and the English
monarch, alarmed at the complicated danger, in vain issued a commission to John
his son, 8 July
constable of England, and warden of the eastern frontier, (offices transferred
to him from the earl of Northumberland two years before,) to negotiate a truce
with Scotland till the following Easter Rymer, VIII, 403.
. Upon the retreat of Northumberland into their country, the Scots gave the
town of Berwick to the-flames; but the castle, which was held for the rebel
earl, soon after surrendered to the English king Otterburn, 257, says that the
Scots burned all the town, except the churches and monasteries. It is suspected
that it was on this occasion that a spirited letter was written by James
Douglas, second son of the earl, (Bowar, 439,) to the English king, who
complained that the followers of that nobleman had, in the time of truce,
burned Berwick, and some places in England. Douglas answers that the English
had killed many Scots, and taken some Scottish ships; that they had ravaged
Arran, and the castle of Brathwicke, Lauderdale, Tividale, and a part of
Ettrick forest. This curious original letter may be found in Vesp. F. VII, f.
17. It is only dated Edinburgh 26 July, directed "To ane excellent and amychty
prince King of Inglande:" and after the words "He Almychty Prince, the haly
gast you halt in his yhemsall," is signed, "Jamis of Douglas Wardane of the
March." About this time also must have been written a letter from prince John
to his father Henry, mentioning that the earl of Mar, (Alexander Stuart,) was
at sea between Berwick and Newcastle, despoiling English vessels. Vesp. F. VII,
f. 62.


.

Robert, yielding to age and infirmities, had abandoned the reins of government
to Albany, in title lieutenant general of the kingdom, but in fact regent. It
appears that Albany, probably instigated by Northumberland, meditated, or
pretended to meditate, an invasion of England, for Henry ordered his array to
be in readiness to oppose this design Rymer, VIII, 414.
; 8 Sept.
and he issued a commission to treat with Donald lord of the Isles, 16 Sept.
and John his brother Ibid. 418.
, the potentates of the Hebudes being generally the allies of England. But both
parties soon relaxed in their resentment; end Sept.
and a truce was concluded, to last till the ensuing Easter Henry's commission
is dated 19 Sept. Ib.
.

The ambition of Albany prevented any effectual intercession for the liberty of
the prince; 1406
and perhaps his father regarded him as more secure in England than in
Scotland. No warmth of animosity seems therefore to have arisen on this
account: and Henry renewed his powers to prolong the truce Rymer, VIII, 430.
. 7 Feb.


Robert III, overwhelmed with infirmities and misfortunes, died at the castle
of Rothsay in Bute, 4 April
after having nearly completed the seventeenth year of his hapless reign
Winton, 898. Bowar, 440. The capture of James happened on Palm Sunday 1405; the
death of his father on Palm Sunday 1406; Winton, 897, 898. Hence perhaps the
fable of Robert's dying suddenly, on receiving the tidings of his son's
capture, as both events happened on the same day.
.

BOOK III. CONTAINING THE REGENCIES OF ROBERT, AND MURDAC, DUKES OF ALBANY.
Character of Albany -- March returns -- a heretic burnt -- Jedburgh taken --
mutual ravages -- insurrection of Donald lord of the Isles -- battle of Harlaw
-- university of St. Andrew's founded -- Henry V of England -- incursions --
disgraceful expedition of Albany -- his death -- Murdac regent -- treaty for
the ransom of James -- affairs of the Scots in France.

THE character of Robert Duke of Albany requires but a few features, to finish
the delineation, which has already presented itself in his actions. He
approached his seventieth year, when, by various arts and crimes, he attained
the great object of his pursuits, in the sole government of Scotland. His
person was tall, and majestic, his countenance amiable: temperance, affability,
eloquence, real generosity, apparent benignity, a degree of cool prudence
bordering upon wisdom, may be reckoned among his virtues. But the shades of his
vices are deeper; an insatiate ambition, unrelenting cruelty, and its attendant
cowardice, or at least an absolute defect of military fame, a contempt of the
best human affections, a long practice in all the dark paths of art and
dissimulation. His administration he studied to recommend, not by promoting the
public good, but by sharing the spoils of the monarchy with the nobles, by a
patient connivance at their enormities, by a dazzling pomp of expenditure in
the pleasures of the feast, and in the conciliation of munificence. As fortune
preserved his government from any signal unsuccess, so it would be an abuse of
terms to bestow upon a wary management, which only regarded his own interest,
the praise of political wisdom For the character of Robert duke of Albany
compare Bowar, p. 466, "convivus quotidianus... vir magnarum expensarum, et
extraneis munificus. Erat enim forma praecipuus, corpore procerus et altus,"
etc. with Winton, p. 900, 901, who praises his beauty, strength, wisdom,
religion, hatred of heretics, chastity, sobriety, majestic deportment,
affability, attachment to the clergy, and to the commons; and, from two or
three lines in the passage, evidently wrote this part after the death of Albany
in 1419, though the histroical events of his work relative to Scotland close in
1407. But these old writers uniformly praise the great; both belonged to the
church, which was eminently favored by Albany. Winton lived under his regency,
and in his earldom of Fife; and Bowar often follows Winton. Their
indiscriminate praise is overcome by the indubitable evidence of fact and
record.
.

The three estates, having met in parliament at Perth, soon after the demise of
the late king, decency constrained them formally to recognize the title of the
captive prince to the sovereignty; but the regency and sole command of affairs
were ratified to Albany Winton, 899.
. 1407
The treaty with France was renewed: and the truce with England continuing, the
regent sent ambassadors to adjust any differences which had arisen, yet appears
not to have even mentioned his captive nephew The renewal of the French league,
Feb. 1407, may be found in the 4to Register, fol. v. 61, and MS. Leagues sub
anno. See also Du Tillet, f. 117, where, among the persons who swear, are James
Douglas warden of the marches, brother to earl Douglas; and John Stuart, lord
of Graham, Earl Palatine of Strathern: the latter unknown to our genealogists;
the former is James the Gross, afterward earl of Douglas, (see 1405.) Henry's
letter to John, his son, concerning the prolongation of the truce for a year,
occurs Vesp. F. VII, f. 106, n. 2. Albany's letter appears, f. 111, dated 2
March, and states that the Scottish ambassadors, Sir William Grame, and Sir John
Stuart, having been well received, the regent had called a parliament to
consider Henry's answer; and the truce was prolonged from next easter to that
in the ensuing year. The archbishop of Canterbury advised Henry, (Vesp. F. VII,
f. 88.) to insist that "the fool calling himself king Richard" should be given
up; but the king seems to have passed this matter with due contempt, though in
1404 Serle yeoman of the robes to Richard II came from Scotland to England, and
had persuaded many that Richard was alive. He was executed. MS. Harl. 266, 5 H
4.
. But a more sincere and effectual intercession was made for the Earl of
Douglas, who was permitted to revisit his country upon an engagement to pay a
ransom of one thousand marks, and leaving hostages for security A copy of the
agreement between Henry and Douglas, dated London 14 March 1407, may be found
in MS. Harl. 381, f. 212. After the date Douglas adds, with his own hand, that
if France or Scotland break the truce, he and his followers shall adhere to
Henry. The copy is by Sir Simonds d'Ewes; and the seal is delineated, Douglas
and Galloway in alternate quarters, supporters a male and female savage.
. Many Scots now crowded to the English court, some in the hopes of admission
to the presence of their young sovereign, and of attracting his favor by their
attentions: and others from various motives. Among these was Alexander Stuart,
who had become Earl of Mar by the unwarrantable means above recited; he
appointed a tournament of English and Scots in which the latter were defeated:
but his restless spirit carrying him into Flanders, in the following year, he
distinguished himself in the service of the Duke of Burgundy, who had sent him
to assist in quelling a rebellion of the people of Liege, against their bishop
John of Bavaria Winton's two last chapters, p. 902 -- 916, relate to Mar's
actions; his visit to England in 1407, the tournaments there (see Otterburn
260;) his voyage to France in 1408, p. 904, passage thence to Flanders, p. 905;
the contests at Liege between John of Bavaria and Horn; Mar joins Burgundy in
the war against Liege, p. 910; the death of Horn, p. 913; the council of
Constance, 1414; the marriage of John of Bavaria to Elizabeth of Brabant, 1418;
that of Mar to a Brabantine lady, and his return to Scotland, (1409?) p. 916
Compare Divaeus, Rer. Brabant. Antw. 1610, fol. p. 213, 224. Mar is specially
mentioned, in the war of Liege, by Des Ursins, p. 196, and Berry, p. 12.
Albany, in a letter to Henry 4 Nov. 1407, Vesp. F. VII, f. 77, n. 1, testifies
his gratitude for the king's courtesy to Mar, to Murdac, and to Douglas. It is
doubtful what is the real date of the following events, narrated by Monstrelet,
Tome I, c. 35, edit. 1518, under the year 1407. The prince of Wales, says that
writer, accompanied by his uncles, and an army of 1000 men at arms, and 6000
archers, (about 12,000 in all) proceeded about Tous saints (1 Nov.) to make war
in Scotland. The king of Scotland then at St. Janjon, (St. Johnstown, Perth,)
in the middle of his kingdom, assembled a large army under Douglas and Buchan;
but he found the English too powerful, and sent ambassadors to conclude a truce
of one year. (See 1385.)


.

The Earl of March disappointed in his hopes of the conquest and grant of his
estates, 1408
by the English monarch, was not indisposed to return to his own country; and
the regent and the nobles of Scotland knew, from experience, that his enmity,
and his friendship, were not unimportant. A new government having taken place,
Albany could now throw the blame of the injuries offered to this nobleman upon
the late king; and an accommodation was effected. From the liberality of Henry
IV March had acquired some estates in England, which served to indemnify his
loss; and Douglas restored his Scottish domains, upon condition however of
retaining the lordship of Annandale, and its castle of Lochmaben Bowar, 444.
.

A scene, it is believed, before unknown in Scotland disgraces the annals of
this year. James Resby, an English priest of the school of Wickliffe, was
condemned for heresy by a clerical council, presided by Lawrence Lindoris, an
inquisitor; and delivered to the secular arm, and to the flames, at Perth. The
articles of his heresy amounted to about forty; and the first and chief was
that the Pope is not the vicar of Christ Bowar, 441 -- 443.
. Winton particularly praises Albany for his aversion to Lollards, and to
heresy, and for his devotion to the catholic church: and from this incident the
reputation appears to have been well founded. But it did little honor to his
government to institute the first example to his country of fanatic cruelty,
though much of the blame must rest upon priestly persecution, upon the examples
of other countries and, the spirit of the times. The sacred light of
philosophy, which establishes absolute right of conscience, and unlimited scope
of opinion, was yet far from its dawn; and the barbarism of the age thought to
honor religion by crime, and the Deity by the destruction of man.

The truces, 1409
which had extended from the commencement of the regency to this time, having
expired without renewal, some of the commons of Tividale, a people hardened by
their limitory situation, and constant exposure to war, assaulted and took the
castle of Jedburgh, which had remained in the hands of the English since the
battle of Durham Bowar, 444. Besides Berwick and Roxburgh, Fastcastle was also
in the hands of the English, as appears from different letters. Vesp. F. VII,
p. 97, etc.
. The walls were so hardly cemented together, that much labor was required to
destroy them, as was resolved, in order to prevent the foe from regaining so
firm a hold: and it was agitated in a parliament, held at Perth, that a tax of
two pennies upon every hearth should be raised for this purpose. But the
regent, anxious for popularity, opposed this resolution, saying that during his
regency no tax had ever been levied, nor should he now begin to merit by that
abuse the malediction of the poor: and he accordingly ordered the expense to be
defrayed out of the royal customs Bowar, 444.
. One of the inconsistencies of human affairs is, that a power irregularly or
criminally acquired is often exerted in a manner far more excellent, than the
just tenor of authority; for the latter rests upon an indispensable claim,
while the former requires support from the affections of the people.

To revenge the loss of Jedburgh, 1410
Robert Umfraville, of the English family which claimed the title of Angus,
entered the Forth with ten ships, and took fourteen vessels laden with drapery
and grain: and afterward ravaged various parts of the Scottish coast. The
supply of corn which he brought on his return, was so seasonable to England,
then afflicted with a scarcity, that he was honored with the vulgar
appellation of Robert Mendmarket Harding, c. 207.
. But it is uncertain whether the corn captured in the Forth was an import
into, or an export from Scotland. Nor were the Scots deficient in successful
hostility, for Patrick Dunbar, the son of March, took by stratagem the fortress
of Fastcastle, on the northern shore of the Merse, which had been for a short
time in the English power Bowar, 444.
.

Although Henry IV was irritated by the loss of Jedburgh, and meditated a blow
against the regent, yet to cover his designs he permitted a proposed truce to
proceed so far, as to require Albany's ratification The truce itself may be
seen in Vesp. F. VII, f. 95, n. 1. It is in English, and extends from 21 May
next to 21 May 1411: is dated at Reewele 27 Jan. 1409-10: the commissioners are
Borwick and Cairns for Scotland, Sir Richard Redmain and Mr. Holme for England.
On the 21 Jan. 1410, Henry gave instructions to Emond Bugge, squire of the
chamber, as envoy to Albany, insisting on the return of Douglas to England,
offering Murdac of Fife for a ransom of 50,000 marks, or if a long peace were
granted his free deliverance. Albany herald, had moved the marriage of prince
John of Lancaster with the regent's daughter; but his instructions were
doubted, and if right Henry will deliberate on the business. Vesp. F. VII, f.
90.
. This was conveyed in a letter to Henry, some expressions of which were
esteemed rather presumptuous; for the regent was styled "by the grace of God,"
and mentioned "our subjects of Scotland Rymer, VIII, 635.
." As Henry's title to his crown was not so good as Albany's to the Scottish,
and a considerable similarity occurs in the progress of their ambition, it is
no wonder that such expressions seemed to imply pride, or reproach.

But the most important event during this regency now arises in the rebellion,
1411
as it was termed, of the lord of the Isles. The subject of dispute was the
earldom of Ross, a title of uncertain creation, but which at least ascends to
the twelfth century. The ancient line failed in Euphemia Ross, wedded to Walter
Lesley, whose issue were Alexander Earl of Ross, and a daughter espoused to
Donald lord of the Isles: Euphemia, upon Lesley's death, married Alexander Earl
of Buchan, son of Robert II. Alexander Earl of Ross had by his wife, a daughter
of Albany, an only child also named Euphemia, who became a nun, probably by the
instigation of her mother's family, and with the intention of resigning the
dignity to John Earl of Buchan, second son of the regent, when she came of age;
but the resignation was not executed till four years after this period Sir D.
Dalrymple, Sutherland Case, chapter v, sect. 7, from many records there quoted.
. As Euphemia by entering into a nunnery was regarded as dead in law, Donald
lord of the Isles resolved to defeat the machinations of the family of Albany,
by an immediate seizure of the earldom, which included the island of Sky, and
lay contiguous to his dominions. Not contented with this acquisition, to show
his scorn of the regent, and recommend his alliance to the English king, Donald
raised an army of ten thousand men of the Hebudes, and of Ross, and advanced as
far as Mar in his desolating inroad, intending to sack Aberdeen, and ravage the
country even down to the Tay Bowar, 444.
.

To stop his destructive career, Alexander Stuart Earl of Mar, and Ogilby
sheriff of Angus, hastily collected some troops from Buchan, Mar, Garioch,
Angus, and Merns; and met the invader at Harlaw, 24 July
about ten miles northwest of Aberdeen. Mar's army was inferior in number; and
the battle was obstinate and fierce, but indecisive. On the side of Donald the
chiefs of Maclean and Macintosh fell, with about nine hundred; and Mar lost
five hundred men, among whom were some of rank, as Scrymger constable of
Dundee, George Ogilby heir of the family, and most of the gentlemen of Buchan
Ibid. 445. Contemporary poem The battle of Harlaw. Mar appears to have married
the heiress of Doffle in Brabant, and returned to Scotland, in 1409. He lived
till 1436. Stewart's Genesis 135.
. The lord of the Isles was however so much weakened, that he was forced to
retire; and the regent immediately collecting an army marched to the castle of
Dingwall in Ross, which he took and garrisoned toward the end of autumn. Next
summer Albany set three armies on foot to invade Donald's territories, who was
obliged to abandon his pretensions to Ross, to make a personal submission, and
give oaths and hostages for indemnification, and future observance of peace
Bowar, 445.
. As the interests of the regent were concerned, the motives of his conduct
deserve no applause; but the conduct itself was in this instance spirited and
political, for it might have proved dangerous to have permitted a large and
contiguous accession of territory to an independent chief, the ally of England.

Meantime it appears not that Henry IV made any exertion to assist his ally, a
greater field having opened to his ambition in the affairs of France, the long
dissensions of which kingdom had now ripened into civil war. Henry prepared the
future conquests of his son by engaging in the party of Burgundy, to whom he
this year sent a supply of troops: and it became an object of his prudence to
prevent any disturbance of his designs, by terminating hostilities with
Scotland. The publication of a remarkable papal bull, given by Urban V in 1368,
but not openly current till now, also contributed to this end Abercr. II, 240.
. In this pontifical mandate it is forbidden, under pain of excommunication and
interdiction, to all persons ecclesiastical or secular, of whatever rank, to
form any leagues against the government of Scotland, or to enter that kingdom
hostilely, or make any depredations in it, or even to protect or assist any who
shall infringe this prohibition. To the terrors of excommunication other
penalties are added; and infamy, degradation, incapacity of any places of
honor or trust, are held out to the violators; and, if kings, their subjects
are absolved from their allegiance. This last threat may have had some
influence with Henry, whose title little required any additional shock. Urban V
was a Frenchman, and warm in the interests of his country, struggling at the
period of this bull with Edward III: the origin of this fulmination is
therefore easily explained; and it appears to have lain dormant at first from a
discovery of the friendly dispositions of David II toward England; and,
afterward neglected and forgotten, to have been revived by accident at the
present epoch.

Various negotiations for a truce between England and Scotland occupied this,
and the following year, and occasioned a suspension of arms. Nevertheless
Douglas of Drumlanrig, and Gawin Dunbar, broke down the bridge of Roxburgh, and
set fire to the town Bowar, 447.
. But neither this insult, nor the loss of Jedburgh, could divert the English
king from his attention to France; and the Earl of Douglas, finding no
employment for his martial spirit in his own country, resolved to bear a part
in the French deeds of arms. Thrice, says a monastic historian, he was repelled
by contrary winds, till by the advice of the Earl of Orkney his companion in
the voyage, he visited the isle of St. Colm in the firth of Forth, and
addressed his supplications to the tutelary Saint, Columba. Then he sailed to
Flanders, and by the Saint's assistance soon returned Ibid. The period of
Orkney's deliverance from his English captivity was perhaps 1405. See Rymer,
VIII, 415, 429.
. Douglas must have found it impracticable to take a decided share in the war,
for the alliance of England shifted from one party to the other; nay the French
king himself was indecided.

To Henry Wardlaw, bishop of St. Andrews, 1412
Scotland now became indebted for her first university, an event more
interesting and important than dubious negotiations, or the tumults of war. It
is pleasing to consider the dawn of the light of learning, rising as after a
tempestuous night of discord and barbarism, and commencing its salutary
influence. The studies of the time were indeed unimportant, the thorny tract of
scholastic theology, the clerical usurpations of canon law, a logic which
taught not to reason, a philosophy devoid of wisdom: but still the mind was
employed, a sacrifice, though rude, was offered to science, the field began to
be manured, which in time was to yield productions of delight and of utility.
At Pentecost 1410 the lectures at St. Andrews had begun, but the bulls of
confirmation were not received till this year, 3 Feb.
when Henry Ogilby master of arts, who had been deputed on that service,
arrived with the papal consent. Universal festivity enlivened the city, the
bulls were presented to the bishop who appeared in state in the refectory, were
solemnly perused aloud, and Te Deum sung, and the elevation of joy and of wine
pervaded every street. On a following day a grand procession was instituted, in
which were seen not less than four hundred clergy Bowar, 445. The original
charter of the bishop is rehearsed in Scotst. Call. under the reign of James II.
A deed of this prelate, 18th April 1414, occurs in MS. Harl. 4637, Vol. III, f.
188.
.

The death of Henry IV, 1413 March
and the succession of his warlike son to the English scepter, introduced
little alteration into the affairs of Scotland. One of the first acts of Henry
V was to order the son of Albany, whom policy had still retained captive in
England, and some other prisoners to the tower; lest they might have taken an
advantage, of which there did not want examples, in escaping upon a pretense,
believed in that age to be just, that their promises of honor were only
engaged to the late king, and became vacated by his death Rymer, IX, 2.
Accordingly the truce of May 1412, which was to last till Easter 1418, (Rymer,
VIII, 737,) was regarded as annulled.
. Resolving to take advantage of the distracted state of France, he had
effectual means in his hands to secure the neutrality of Scotland, by
continuing the captivity of James, and of Albany's eldest son; and to show his
amicable intentions he dismissed some Scottish captives of inferior note Rymer,
IX, 5.
. The Scots were afterward amused with three unsuccessful negotiations, in the
same year, between their regent and the English king, for the ransom of James.
Albany sent a more serious embassy for the ransom of Murdac his son; but this
design also failed and only a truce was agreed on, to last till June 1414: at
which time it was continued by further negotiation Rymer, IX, 5, 40, 79, 48,
45, 60. In May 1414 Albany sent Maxwell of Calderwood, and Mr. Robert Lanyn, to
Henry to negotiate the ransom of Murdac and James. Vesp. F. VII, f. 114, n. 1,
2: f. 115, n. 1. The letters are dated at length, "26 Maii 1414, et
gubernationis nostrae 9:" an additional proof that Robert III died in April
1406. The designation of James is singular, "Jacobi filii quondam Domini mei
regis." Bowar, 447, mentions the assassination of Patrick Graham Earl of
Strathern, by Sir John Drummond, who died before the punishment of his crime.
Graham was earl in right of his wife Euphemia Stuart; and their son Malis
Graham was stripped of the title, and estate by James I: a rash act which
excited a Graham to his assassination. Sutherland Case, chapter v, sect. 13.


.

While Henry V was occupied with his victorious expedition into France, 1415
the Earl of Douglas took and burned Penrith; and in revenge Dumfries met with
a similar fate Bowar, 448.
. The want of an Earl of Northumberland now began to be felt; and it was
resolved by the English government to accomplish a treaty, commenced in the
preceding year, for the exchange of the regent's son and the young Earl of
Northumberland, son of Hotspur, who had been left in Scotland by his
grandfather, when he retired into Wales. That he was detained as a captive,
after the seizure of the Scottish prince, can hardly be imputed to injustice;
but he was liberally educated at St. Andrews by the bishop, and met with such
honorable hospitality that grateful impressions alone filled his mind. Before
Henry proceeded to France this exchange had been determined; but was postponed
on account of the ungenerous flight of Murdac, who was however taken, and the
captor liberally rewarded Rymer, IX, 280.
. The anxiety of the regent, now far advanced in years, for the presence of his
heir, and the wishes of the English for the protection of another Earl of
Northumberland, at last conspired together: and the exchange was carried into
effect Rymer, IX, 323. In the invaluable collection of papers, Vesp. F. VII, f.
108, n. 1, is a warrant for removing Murdac to Warkworth, dated 22 May, regni 3
-- 1415: instructions also occur, f. 110, dated at May, r. 3, agreeing to the
exchange, provided that Percy assent to fulfill what Robert Umfraville and John
Witherington, esquires, have promised to Henry in his name. Henry Percy being
at length brought to Berwick, final orders were issued on the 10th Dec. Ib. f.
109.
.

A fresh treaty for the ransom of James proceeded so far, 1416
that Henry consented that the Scottish king, now of age, should visit Scotland,
on condition of returning within a limited time, under the penalty of one
hundred thousand marks, giving hostages for security Rymer, IX, 417.
. But some pretext was found by the regent for breaking off this negotiation;
and he at the same time entered into a correspondence with the duke of Orleans,
now a prisoner in England Guthrie, who generally copies Abercromby, Maitland,
and Granger, has occasionally new intelligence, but carelessly omits to point
out his authorities. He mentions this correspondence, Vol. III, p. 248, as
conducted by means of Henry Talbot, and betrayed by a domestic of Orleans who
was a spy in Henry's pay. In Vesp. F. III, f. 5, is an autograph letter of
Henry V, recommending attention to this intercourse of Orleans and Albany.
.

While Henry V had entered upon his second expedition against France, 1417
and was engaged in the conquest of Normandy, Albany collected a large army,
and dividing it into two parts, appointed the one under Douglas to invest
Roxburgh, while he himself with the other besieged Berwick. But the dukes of
Bedford and Exeter, gathering an array of more than one hundred thousand men,
if we believe an English historian, and of which Exeter boasted that forty
thousand were equal to the chosen soldiers under Henry in France, the Scots
were forced to retire Bowar, 449, mentions this attempt, called the Foul raid
or dirty expedition, with due scorn. Walsingham Y pod. 197, ascribes this
enterprise to the instigations of Oldcastle and the Lolards, who wished to
restore the pretended Richard to the throne: a ridiculous imputation, arising
from malignity against the Lolards. Orleans seems to have been the instigator.
The bombastic narrative of Thomas of Elmham, p. 162, may excite a smile. In
Vesp. F. VII, f. 115, n. 2, is a letter of Henry, dated at Southampton,
mentioning that Albany means to attack Berwick by sea and land, about the 23d
of August, and that cannon and other warlike stores were shipped in Scotland
for that purpose. Albany's army is computed at 60,000. See also Rymer IX, 307,
dated 1415.
. Albany seems to have had crude intelligence, and to have thought that the
force of England was in France, while Henry had in fact only a small but a
select army. The people of Scotland not suspecting the numbers of the foe, and
only seeing the ineffectual expedition, treated this attempt of Albany with
great derision.

The Council of Constance having set a laudable example in the deposition of
Benedict XIII, and in asserting the superiority of councils over the popes,
after securing the consent of the other catholic kingdoms, at last sent an
envoy to Scotland for that purpose. A parliament being summoned to Perth, the
Abbot of Pontiniac produced letters from the Council, and from the Emperor
Sigismund, and the case was examined. Benedict applied to the Regent, who
rather favored his cause, and appointed Robert Harding an Englishman to defend
it, who was so unfortunate as to fall into heretical propositions in the
attempt; and the University of St. Andrews, and most of the clergy, supporting
Martin V the new pope chosen by the Council, it was resolved that Scotland
should follow the example of the other catholic states Bowar, 449 -- 451.
.

The fortress of Work was taken by William Halyburton of Fastcastle, 1419
but some English troops arriving under Robert Ogle, he deceived Halyburton in
proposing a compensation for deliverance of the castle, while his men secretly
scaled the walls, and overpowering the Scots flew Halyburton, and his twenty
three followers Bowar, 458, after a long, but curious, digression concerning
the history of Wales at this period.
.

Henry V had now reduced all the northern parts of France; and the Dauphin was
left almost destitute of friends or resources. In this necessity he sent an
embassy to the Scottish regent, requiring assistance in conformity with long
existing treaties; and a parliament being held it was resolved to comply with
the Dauphin's demand. In consequence Albany sent his second son, John Stuart
Earl of Buchan, with a chosen army of seven thousand men, among whom were some
nobles, and many knights and esquires; and upon their arrival in France the
Dauphin immediately united them with his little army, then about to attempt the
reduction of Languedoc Bowar, 459. The history ascribed to Alain Chartier,
Paris 1617, 4to, but really written by Berry, (see hist. de Jean Chartier,
Paris 1661, folio) mentions, p. 49, the Scots as just arrived in France in
1419. Des Ursins, p. 358, says that two Scottish knights, "Thomas Quelsatry, et
Guillaume de Glass," came to assist the Dauphin in 1418: and p. 388, he
estimates the Scots who arrived under Buchan and Wigton at only 4000, or 5000.
.

Robert Duke of Albany after having ruled Scotland for about thirty-four years,
including his former management under his father and brother, 3 Sept.
died at the castle of Stirling, in the thirteenth year of his sole regency,
after a life of upwards of eighty years. To his high office his son Murdac
succeeded; a man of a very different character, indolent and remiss even to
weakness, and not capable of paternal, far less of princely authority Bowar,
466, 467.
. But the circumstances of the times maintained him in his difficult station
for four years, at the end of which James assumed the scepter of his fathers.

Few incidents worth notice arise during the short regency of Murdac, except
the transactions of the Scots in France, a new scene, but which more properly
belongs to the French history. However at the end of this book a brief account
shall be exhibited of these deeds of arms, which reflected no small credit upon
Scottish valor.

The Earl of Douglas, 1420
entering England with a considerable force, took the town of Alnwick, and
burned it to the ground Bowar, 460.
. In the next year Henry V proceeded to York, and invited Douglas to a
conference, in which he found means to engage the earl to serve him with two
hundred horse, and as many infantry, upon Henry's allowing him the yearly sum
of two hundred pounds Rymer, X, 123, 30 May 1421.
. The motives of Douglas to this singular and treasonable treaty are not
sufficiently apparent, but it seems that the weakness of the Scottish government
concurred with the English gold to instigate this irregular conduct.

To add to the domestic calamities of Scotland under the feeble regency of
Murdac, that country was afflicted with a new and wide malady, proceeding from
irregular seasons. This was a contagious fever and dysentery, in which many of
all ranks perished. Among the persons of note were Henry Sinclair earl of
Orkney, James Douglas lord of Dalkeith; and George Dunbar earl of March, a
nobleman most fortunate in war, the side upon which he stood being always
victorious, as in the battles of Otterburn, Nisbet, Homildon, Shrewsbury,
Benrig, and other less important conflicts Bowar, 460, who adds that the
disease was called the Quhew.
.

In order to induce the Scots to withdraw from France, 1421
by bringing them into the hateful predicament of sighting against their own
king, Henry V determined to have the company of James into France; and, to
induce him to compliance, engaged that he should be permitted, three months
after their return, to pass to Scotland for a time, upon giving a number of
Scottish nobles as hostages Rymer, X, 125. This instrument follows the
engagement with Douglas, and bears to have been mediated by that earl, who may
perhaps be vindicated on the supposition that he only intended to follow the
fate of his sovereign. In 1420 James was a guest at the coronation festival of
Catherine of France, minutely described by Fabian, II, 176, 177.


. But Henry never returned; and his death in the succeeding year opened a surer
prospect to James of his deliverance from a lengthened captivity. 1422 31 Aug.


The Duke of Bedford being appointed Protector of England, justly considered it
as a superior policy to form an alliance with the Scottish king, and deliver him
upon ransom. James was accordingly permitted to send for commissioners from
Scotland, to confer at Pomfret with those of England, 1423 6 July
whose instructions were sufficiently moderate. They were to demand forty
thousand pounds, as a recompense for the maintenance of James while he resided
in England, the name of ransom being unjust and invidious for a prince not
taken in war, nor by his tender age capable of arms: they were to take hostages
for the payment in proportions of two thousand pounds a year: to offer
perpetual peace, or, if rejected, a long truce: to obtain an agreement that no
more Scots should proceed to France, and that those already there be recalled:
artfully to induce the Scots to demand an English lady in marriage for the
king: and lastly to proceed upon compensation of damages if demanded Rymer, X,
294. The proposal of marriage was to originate with the Scots, "cum mulieres
regni Angliae, saltem nobiles, non soleant ultro virorum connubiis se offerre."
. The Scottish commissioners probably returned to submit the terms to their
government, and to procure ample instructions; 10 Sept.
for the final agreement was settled at York, and after a delay of two months
Rymer, X, 299. Murdac's commission is dated 19 Aug. 1423, gub. 3. ib. 298,
whence a doubt may arise that he was not recognized regent till 1420.
.

Murdac the regent had sufficiently learned from experience the oppressive
weight, and mortifications, of power, when not supported by abilities To
strengthen his authority Murdac procured bonds of service from some of the
nobility. That of Mar, dated 20 Nov. 1420, is among Sir James Balfour's papers,
MS. Harl. 4694, fol. 22. Mar becomes "man of spalen, duelling, and revenew," to
Murdac, excepting allegiance to the king: and Murdac grants him part of the
profits of justiciary, of Aberdeen, Bamf, and Inverness; and his natural son
Thomas is confirmed in the reversion of Mar and Garioch. After some other
clauses, half the rents of Badenoch, Urquhart, and Strathoun, are also assigned
to Mar. On such foundations stood the power of the regents.
. His own sons, instead of being awed by the important office of their father,
seemed to share his dignity for the sake of license, and to regard his
authority as a protection for their vices. There is a tradition, the simplicity
of which seems to speak its truth, that the regent had a favorite falcon, which
his son Walter had often requested unsuccessfully, and at last, vexed with
repeated refusal, he tore it from his father's hand, and twisted its neck: upon
which Murdac mildly exclaimed, "Since you pay me so little respect, I must
invite him whom both must obey Boyce, f. v. 358. In Oct. 1423 Murdac swore to
the observance of the alliance with France. Du Tillet, f. 136.
."

But whether the regent's consent proceeded from his wishes, or from his
weakness, and want of influence and ability to withstand the national desire,
it is certain that the Scottish commissioners acted with sincerity. The
conclusive treaty only bears that forty thousand pounds should be paid for the
maintenance of James, within six years, by half-yearly payments: that hostages
should be given: and that the Scottish regent should send ambassadors, empowered
to close the marriage of James with an English lady of rank. The last clause
must refer to the consent of parliament, necessary to effect the espousal and
adjust the dower. And a space of time being required to accomplish these
affairs, the month of March, in the approaching year, was fixed for the final
arrangement. The Scottish commissioners afterward proceeded to London, and came
under solemn engagements to fulfill the agreement, and among other articles
undertook to procure four obligations from the burghs of Edinburgh, Perth,
Dundee, and Aberdeen, for the whole money to be paid Rymer, X, 299, 302. Henry
V only allowed 700 l. a year for the maintenance of James. Pat. Rolls, 2 H 5,
part 3 m.
.

James soon after espoused an English lady who had long attracted his
affections. 1424 Feb.
This was Joanna daughter of the duchess of Clarence, niece of Richard II, by
her first husband John Duke of Somerset, fourth son of John of Ghent, Duke of
Lancaster, and grandson of Edward III. The ceremony was performed at the church
of St. Mary Overy in Southwark; and next day the Scottish king received, as the
portion of his queen, a discharge of ten thousand pounds out of the sum to be
paid to England Rymer, X, 322. Leland Collect. III, 10, Bowar, 474. Caxton's
Higden, 1482, f. 412.
. The hostages came to Durham at the appointed time; and James began his long
expected journey to his own kingdom. Upon his arrival at Durham, a secondary
set of hostages were named, out of which, in case of death, any of the former
might be supplied; and a rental of all their estates was given in, which
affords an interesting record of the state of wealth in Scotland at that period
Rymer, X, 327, 333. See Appendix. The instructions for the meeting at Durham
occur Vesp. F. VII, f. 27.
. Many Scottish nobles and gentlemen now crowded to pay their court to the
sovereign; 9 April
and James, amid the acclamations of the people, entered at last his own realm
Bowar, 474.
. But before proceeding to his memorable and spirited reign, it will be proper
briefly to review the deeds and fate of the Scots in France.

The year after the arrival of the Scottish auxiliaries, we find Henry V using
the company of James, his captive, as a mean of preventing the hostilities of
his subjects; but without effect, for they continued to serve the Dauphin,
justly regarding their sovereign's will as ineffectual while under constraint.
The first important action in which the Scots appear is the battle of Bauge, so
called from a village in Anjou, twenty two miles to the east of Angers. The
Dauphin had appointed the Scots, led by the earls of Buchan and Wigton, and
Stuart of Darnley, to guard that province against the Duke of Clarence, whom
Henry V had detached for its reduction. On the twenty second day of March,
1421, the English when foraging took four Scots, and brought them to Clarence,
who thus learned that the Scottish army and a few French lay at Bauge. The Duke
instantly sprung from the table exclaiming, "Let us attack them, they are ours:
but let none follow save the men at arms:" and after a quick march he came to
Little Bauge, where a few French defended the church, and gained time for
Buchan to arrange his troops. The English aware of this left the church
untaken, and advanced; but to a complete defeat. Clarence, distinguished by a
coronet of gold and jewels upon his helmet, was the first slain; and a similar
fate awaited the Earl of Kent, the Lords Gray and Ross, and above fourteen
hundred men at arms. The Earls of Huntingdon and Somerset, and many others of
note, were made captives. To reward the Earl of Buchan, who had slain Clarence
with his own hand, the Dauphin gave him the high distinction of Constable of
France Des Ursins, 389. St. Remy, (at the end of the anonymous historian of Le
Laboureur,) p. 153. History by Berry, ascribed to Alain Chartier, p. 51.
Monstrelet, c. 239. Bowar, 459, 460, has curious details. Clarence, after
having been pierced with a spear by Sir William Swinton, was slain by Buchan
with a battle-ax. The brothers of the future queen of Scotland were taken
prisoners by the Scots. On hearing the tidings, the pontiff Martin V said
ludicrously, "In truth the Scots are the only antidote of the English."


.

In the following year the Constable took Avranches in Normandy; and probably
learning the agreement which his father-in-law the Earl of Douglas had made
with Henry V, he resolved to detach him from the English interest. For which
purpose he visited Scotland, empowered to offer the earl the duchy of Touraine;
and Douglas consented to bring five thousand men into France. The Dauphin, now
Charles VII, rewarded Stuart of Darnley with the lordship of Aubigny in Berry;
and the family and title were to become not a little illustrious. The death of
Henry V had checked the English exertions; and Buchan and Douglas were only
ordered to defend the Loire, and prevent the foe from entering Berry Bowar,
463. Jean Chartier, p. 7. Berry, p. 55. Chartier expressly says "le duche de
TOURAINE" was granted to Douglas, and so Berry, p. 60: "ducatus Turonensis,"
Bowar, 463: a princely gift! He was afterward buried in Tours, the capital of
his duchy, Bowar, 464. See the grant in Du Tillet, f. v. 136, dated 19 April
1423, extracted from the registers of the parliament of Poitiers; and the
recognizance of Douglas, as Lieutenant General of France, is published by the
same author, f. 136.

The gift of Aubigny of John Stuart Sieur d'Ervette, (Darnley,) et de
Concressault, constable of the Scottish army, occurs, f. v. 135, dated 26 March
1422. That d'Ervette is a corruption of Darnley appears from Jean Chartier, p.
4, and Berry, p. 58, whose cacography is Dervelle (for Dernelle). Congressault,
or Concorsault, is a lordship in Berry, afterward sold by the Stuarts to the
Moni-penies, and had been granted 21 April 1421. Thaumassiere Hift. de Berry,
Bourges, 1691, fol. p. 396.


.

But fortune now became adverse to the Scottish auxiliaries; and two successive
defeats almost extinguished them. The first happened at Crevan in Burgundy, in
the year 1423. Charles VII intended that the Scots should proceed to Champagne,
and defend that country against Salisbury; but Aubigny laid siege to Crevan,
and sent for cannon, which were refused as he neglected his orders. Salisbury
advanced to raise the siege, and an action ensued in which the Scots were
defeated: Stuart of Darnley and Aubigny, constable of the Scottish army, was
taken prisoner; and soon after exchanged for the marshal of Burgundy: Sir
William Hamilton, and about nine hundred, were left on the field Jean Chartier,
4, Berry, 53, Hall, f. v. 86, Monstrelet, II, 8.
.

The other defeat, which may be regarded as final, happened in the first year
of James; but the connection renders its description proper at this place. This
was the memorable battle of Verneuil in Normandy, fought on the seventeenth of
August, 1424. The archbishop of Rheims had been sent ambassador to Scotland, to
procure a reinforcement, which landed in Bretagne; and Douglas, now Duke of
Touraine, advanced to raise the siege of Yvry undertaken by the English. But
the French king learning that a battle must be risqued, before the place was
relieved, assembled all his troops, and leaving Tours, with Buchan the
constable, he met his barons at Chateaudun and advanced to Verneuil. Bedford
upon this raised the siege of Yvry, and marched to meet the French and Scots.
Arriving near Verneuil, he sent a herald to Douglas, who had in derision called
him John with the leaden sword, informing him that he had come to drink with
him, and that he would wait till he had that honor. The Duke of Touraine
answered that he was most welcome; that he had come from Scotland to find him,
and he begged him to come quickly. If in these minute matters the manner of
Plutarch be imitated, it is because it interests, and paints men and manners.
The battalions were soon arranged upon either side, and Douglas resolved not to
lose an advantageous station, but to await the English: the Vicomte of
Narbonne, the French general, unhappily thought otherwise, and proceeded with
the national rashness which had decided the battles of Cressy, Poitiers,
Azincour. Douglas was forced to follow the example; and the army lost breath,
rank, and station, while the enemy retained all. The French sent two thousand
to attack the rear of the foe; but they were defeated by the English archers,
and a general rout ensued. The Duke of Touraine, and his son-in-law the
constable of France, and most of the Scotishmen of note were slain: and of the
French the Vicomte de Narbonne, the Count D'Aumale, and many other nobles: of
common French and Scots fell about four thousand five hundred. Douglas was
honorably interred in Tours, the capital of his short-lived duchy Bowar, 463.
Berry, 58 -- 60. Jean Chartier, 8. Leland Collect. II, 490. Caxton's Higden, f.
412. Monstrelet, II, 15. Hall, 80 -- 90.
. Such was the event of the battle of Verneuil, which ruined the affairs of
Charles VII, till about five years after, when the Maid of Orleans began to
revive them. The heroic race of Aubigny, and other particular families and
individuals, were afterward distinguished in the wars of France; but this
ruinous conflict effectually prevented any Scottish auxiliaries from ever
visiting that kingdom in future A few adventurers must be excepted, and some
troops in the reigns of James III and IV, but whose actions are not known to
history.
.

BOOK IV. CONTAINING THE REIGN OF JAMES I.
Character of James I -- parliament -- execution of Albany, his sons, and
Lennox -- parliament -- commercial negotiation with Flanders -- parliaments --
imprisonment of highland chiefs -- representatives for shires -- treaty with
France -- insurrection of Alexander lord of the Isles -- his submission --
commercial treaty with Flanders -- parliament -- truce with England --
commotions in the highlands -- English proposals -- heretic burnt -- March
confined -- parliament -- death of Mar -- Margaret of Scotland wedded to the
Dauphin -- siege of Roxburgh -- parliament -- assassination of James.

AFTER two weak and inactive reigns, and two regencies of no superior
character, a monarch is to succeed, whose government is to be distinguished for
its novelty and vigor; and the house of Stuart is at last to know a sovereign.
James had now attained his thirtieth year; and his prime of life was yet
further recommended by every advantage, which natural talents, and a complete
education, could bestow. In person he was rather under the middle size, but
endued with such firmness and agility as to excel in every manly exercise. In
wrestling, in the management of the bow, or the spear, in throwing the quoit,
in running, in horsemanship, he yielded to none. But his mental abilities were
yet more conspicuous. A man of science and learning, an excellent poet, a
master of music, the fame of his accomplishments reflected glory even on the
throne. Illustrious in every personal virtue, free from any personal vice, his
very amusements adorned his character; his hours of leisure being frequently
dedicated to elegant writing, and miniature painting, to mechanical arts, and
to the cultivation of the garden and the orchard Bowar, II, 504, seq Mair, 309.
His poems, The King's Quair, Peblis to the Play, etc. have been repeatedly
published. Eneas Sylvius, afterward pope Pius II, who visited Scotland in
1435, describes him as corpulent, "quadratus et multa pinguedine gravis."
Descr. Asiae et Europae, Paris, 1534, 8vo. p. 415.
.

The features of his government it is more difficult to discriminate. If we
believe some writers, not less than three thousand men were put to death, in
the two first years of his reign; and after the inroad of Donald Balloch, three
hundred highland banditti met with the same fate Abercr. II, 311, from Hector
Boyce, f. 361, a fit authority!
. Happily these matters are quite unknown to contemporary and authentic
monuments of our history: the justice of James fell only on a few nobles, and
some chiefs of clans; but the numerous dependants of those victims of equitable
severity embraced every occasion to excite discontents, and propagate
falsehoods against the government, falsehoods which have even past into the
page of history, for one of the misfortunes of the house of Stuart has
consisted in the prejudices of several Scottish historians. If any blame must
fall, let it fall where it ought, upon the misrule of the house of Albany. To a
people who had lived for half a century under a loose and delegated government,
and who had been accustomed to regard license as liberty, it is no wonder that
the punishment of crimes seemed quite a new and strange cruelty: that a
salutary strength of government appeared despotism: that a necessary and legal
taxation assumed the shape of tyrannic extortion. The commons, led by the
nobles, absurdly regarded the cause of the latter as their own, and saw not
that the king in crushing the aristocracy was doing the most essential service
to his people. The plans of James were sagacious and profound, but sometimes
incur the charge of temerity; and while they partake of the greatness of
genius, they are limited by the want of a sufficient power in the Scottish
monarchy for their complete execution. In a word James is fully entitled to the
uncommon character of a great sovereign, in the arts of government and of peace
Bowar, 511, records and apophthegm of James, when he was informed on entering
his kingdom, that the regencies had left it a soene of fraud and rapine, "By
the help of God, though I should myself lead the life of a dog, I shall make
the key keep the castle, and the bush secure the cow."
.

Upon entering his kingdom, Easter 23 Apr.
James proceeded to Edinburgh, were he kept the festival of Easter; and
afterward advancing to Scone, 21 May
was there solemnly crowned with his queen; Murdac duke of Albany, as earl of
Fife, performing the ceremony of placing his sovereign in the throne Bowar, 474.
. A truce of seven years having been previously formed with England Rymer, X,
328, 332.
, James had full leisure and opportunity to attend to the internal state of his
kingdom; 26 May
and a parliament commenced at Perth five days after his coronation Acts, edit.
1566, (commonly called the Black Acts, because printed in black letter,) fol. 2.
. With the acts of this parliament begins the regular series of Scottish laws,
and a new light arises upon a most important province of history, that of
government and manners. The reiterated theme of battles, and negotiations, may
now be diversified with more interesting intelligence, and the arts of peace
may afford a pleasing contrast to the devastations of war. In this national
council it was decreed that the ancient privileges and freedom of the church be
confirmed: that the king's peace be firmly held, and no private wars allowed:
that no man should travel with more followers than he could maintain Acts, f.
2, c. 5.
: that efficient administrators of law be appointed through all the realm: that
no extortions from churchmen, or farmers, in particular be admitted: that the
customs and borough rates be assigned to the king, and mines of gold and silver
under certain restrictions: that the clergy shall not pass the sea without the
king's permission, nor have pensions out of benefices in Scotland: that gold
and silver should not be exported but upon paying a high custom: that all
persons exceeding twelve years of age should be taught archery: that
agriculture be protected by the destruction of rooks, and by a prevention from
setting fire to heathy ground while the corn was standing: that certain customs
be raised on horse, cattle, and sheep, and herrings, and on furs: that inns be
kept in every borough; and no beggars allowed, except permitted by the sheriff
in the country, and in towns by the aldermen or bailies Ib. f. v. 2, f. 5.
.

Such were the salutary regulations of this parliament, many of them bespeaking
political prudence, and others an amiable simplicity of manners. But there were
two others of remarkable import, and therefore reserved for a separate
consideration. The first orders the sheriffs to enquire what lands belonged to
the crown, under the preceding monarchs David II, and the two last Roberts,
declaring at the same time that the king may summon the holders to show their
charters Ib. f. v. 2.
. The second imposes a large subsidy, in order to defray the sum payable to
England for the king's maintenance Ib. f. 3. See Appendix.
. Though the justice of these ordinances cannot be questioned, yet their policy
may. The former, it is believed, produced no effect, except suspicion, and
discontent, among a number of the subjects: and the latter excited an almost
universal dissatisfaction. Though a subsidy to defray the king's ransom, if
taken prisoner, was one of the few taxes authorized by the feudal system, yet
the present circumstances did not, to the public mind, justify the imposition.
The tax consisted of twelve pennies in the pound of all sorts of production,
farms, and annual rents, cattle and grain, whether of the clergy, or of the
laity, and to continue for two years. Auditors, or chief receivers, were
appointed, who in the first year collected about fourteen thousand marks; but
in the second year the popular expostulations increased and prevailed Bowar,
482, himself one of the auditors.
. The consequence was, that the sum payable for the king's maintenance in
England was never defrayed.

It was not to be expected that the usurpations of the family of Albany should
pass unrevenged; 1425
and James was no sooner firm on the throne of his ancestors than he thought of
discharging this great duty in a spirited manner. As their power had continued
for a long time, and was deeply rooted in the nation, it was necessary to try
the public pulse, an proceed by degrees. Accordingly, in the very commencement
of his exercise of authority, James had ordered Walter, the eldest son of the
late regent Murdac, into custody; and at the same time, probably only to veil
his designs, and prevent the family of Albany from being regarded as the sole
objects of his resentment, Malcom Fleming of Cumbernald, and Thomas Boyd of
Kilmarnoc, shared the same fate, but were soon after released Bowar, 481, dates
this imprisonment on the 13th May 1424, before the king's coronation.
. The next objects of imprisonment were Duncan earl of Lennox, father in law to
Murdac, and Sir Robert Graham Bowar, 482. This Sir Robert Graham was the same
who afterward assassinated James. Buch. X, 28.
. At length the public inclination being sufficiently* explored, James ventured
on a most daring expedient; and summoning a parliament to Perth he gave orders
to arrest at once Murdac duke of Albany, 12 Mar.
and Alexander Stuart his second son, with the earls of Douglas, Angus, March,
and not less than twenty gentlemen of great ancestry and power Ibid.
. As it is certain that the revenge only extended to the house of Albany, and
was meant to proceed no further, historians find some difficulty in accounting
for the pretext or motive to this large exertion of authority. The pretext
might perhaps be, that the prisoners had not complied with the late act of
parliament in producing their charters; and as most of them, if not all, had
been warm supporters of the family of Albany, the motive appears more certainly
to have been the prevention of any insurrection in favor of that house.
Instantly upon the seizure of Albany, the king took possession of his castles
of Falkland in Fife, and Down in Menteith: Murdac was committed to Carlaveroc
castle, and Isabella his duchess to Tantallon, places remote from the seat of
their feudal influence Bowar, 483.
.

That the precaution used by James, in securing the friends of Albany, was not
vain, may appear from the conduct of James Stuart, the youngest son of the
duke. Having escaped his intended arrest, he, with the assistance of Finlay
bishop of Lismore or Argyle, raised a band of Highland freebooters, assaulted
and burned the town of Dunbarton, 3 May
and put to the sword Sir John Stuart of Dundonald, uncle to the king, with
thirty two men. The monarch, justly enraged at this insult, ordered the son of
Albany to be proclaimed a felon; and so hot was the pursuit that he was forced,
with the bishop and other accomplices, to seek refuge in Ireland, whence they
never returned. Five of his band being taken in a few days, suffered the most
ignominious and extreme punishment of the law Bowar, 483.
.

After a delay of two months necessary to collect sufficient proofs of Albany's
guilt, and to prepare the minds of the people, 18 May
James adjourned the parliament to Stirling, and this important trial was
instituted. The jury consisted of twenty one members of parliament, all of
whom, as forming only one house, were in Scotland regarded as peers Home, lord
Kaims, Hist. Law Tracts, 272.
. The judge was the king himself, fitting on the throne of justice, with all
the pomp of royalty; and this usual practice of the monarch presiding in his
own cause may be vindicated from the ancient ideas concerning a jury, who were
esteemed arbitrators of fact and of law, the judge being only the organ of
their verdict. It is remarkable that among the jury we find Walter Stuart earl
of Athole, Archibald earl of Douglas, William earl of Angus, George earl of
March, and three gentlemen who had been arrested with Albany Bowar, 483.
. As by the Scottish law a majority was sufficient to condemn a prisoner, this
jury seems to have been artfully managed, in order to remove any suspicion from
the king, and to throw the severity of the verdict upon Albany's own adherents.
Walter the regent's eldest son was first tried, found guilty, 24 May
and instantly beheaded; any delay serving no purpose in such a case but to
create danger. Being a man of tall and comely stature, eloquent and affable, he
was rather regreted. Nor did the vulgar voice less commiserate his brother's
gigantic shape, the former authority of Albany, the venerable age of Lennox, a
nobleman approaching his eightieth year, who were all three executed on the
following day Bowar, 483. The Coupar MS. ib. note, says Walter Stuart was
convicted of robbery; a hint that the depredation of the royal domains, and
revenues, was the chief charge against all the criminals.
. We are left in the dark concerning the ostensible grounds of their
condemnation; but it is probable that their seizure of the royal lands, and
property, formed a chief article. The estates of Fife, Menteith, and Lennox,
with others, thus became the property of the crown, and contributed in some
degree to compensate the defalcations, which had happened under the regencies
But the estate of Lennox was not forfeited, and continued in a kind of
abeyance. Douglas Peer. 397.
.

It must not be omitted that, in the second parliament of this reign, held at
Perth as above mentioned, several prudent laws were passed, for the more
effectual punishment of those who infringed the acts of the national council
Acts, f. 6.
: for preventing any leagues among the subjects, an edict evidently pointing to
the present circumstances of Albany's adherents; as does another, punishing the
receivers of rebels by forfeiture, and another noted statute condemning to
death and confiscation all guilty of propagating falsehoods between the king
and the people. Other laws of this assembly contain regulations relating to
trade and agriculture, and the administration of justice; on which last head it
is ordered that all the inferior judges abide by the strict tenor of the law,
and that the king may warn them so to do, as well those within regalities as
others: that if a poor person cannot see an advocate, the king shall provide
one: that if the sovereign pardons, on condition of the damage being
compensated to the plaintiff, consideration be had of the highlanders who
before the king's return were used to rob and kill each other, for from them
the compensation cannot be raised, but from the lowlanders Acts, f. 6 -- 8. The
officers of state appointed by James appear, from Scotstarvet's Calendars, to
have been, John Cameron bishop of Glasgow chancellor; Sir John Forester
chamberlain; Myrton dean of Glasgow treasurer; Robert Lauder of Bass
justiciary; Walter Ogilvy master of the household; John Shevis clerk of
register; William Foulis secretary, afterward keeper of the privy seal; John
of Spens comptroller. On the 8th June 1425, James issued a commission to Henry
bishop of St. Andrews, authorizing him to resume all alienations from the
church, with power of anathema, and orders to all justiciaries to assist. This
curious paper is preserved in Harl. MS. 4637, Vol. III, f. 189, with an
unimportant deed of that patriotic prelate, 18 April 1414.


.

While James was celebrating the anniversary of his birth at St. Andrews, Aug.
attended by Douglas, Mar, Murray, Angus, and other nobles, he gave audience to
the Flemish ambassadors who had been deputed to settle some commercial
differences. The Scottish merchants had, during the regencies, been treated with
great arrogance, nay even letters of marque had been issued against them, in
Flanders, which, with the duke of Burgundy, sustained the English party against
France. James had in consequence ordered the Scottish trade to be transferred to
Middleburg in Zealand; but upon the offer of compensation, and enlarged
privileges, by the ambassadors, the commerce was restored to Flanders Bowar,
487.
. As Venice was the grand seat of trade between Asia and Europe, so Bruges in
Flanders was the commercial link, which connected the merchandise of Venice,
and the south of Europe, with its northern countries. Most articles of
manufacture being also imported from Flanders by the Scots, who were yet little
versed in the arts of industry, it is no wonder that the Flemish were eager to
retain a commerce, which was one great cause of impoverishing Scotland, and
contributed not a little to the riches of Flanders.

It is with much complacency that this narration now proceeds with the history
of peace, for which ample materials begin with this reign to be found in
Scotland. 1426 11 Mar.
In a third parliament, it was ordered that all merchants should import some
armor, and arms, with their cargoes Acts, f. v. 8.
: that all the lieges should be governed by the laws of the realm, and not by
particular laws, or privileges, or by the laws of other countries: that no man,
who had accused another, should be of the jury on his trial: that the prelates,
earls, barons, and freeholders of the king, should appear personally in
parliament, and not by procurators, except on lawful cause: that the books of
the law be examined, and reformed: that to support the inns, travelers should
lodge in them, and not with friends: that none should pass into Ireland without
license, as the rebels had been there received, nor should the Irish come to
Scotland as they might be spies for the English: that a court of session be
instituted, the chancellor, and certain discreet persons of the three estates,
to sit thrice a year, for a period of time, and hear all causes: that they who
have nothing shall labor for their living: that the acts of parliament be
registered, and copies given to prelates, barons, and burgesses, at their
expense Ibid. f. v. II.
. This last act was particularly necessary, in order to render the
parliamentary institutions known, and practical: and after all it is recorded,
as an apophthegm of Buchanan, that in Scotland one great act of parliament was
wanted, namely a decree to enjoin the strict observance of the others. For a
chief part of government, though unobserved by politicians, rests in the spirit
of the people: laws are vain without manners: and a nation, accustomed to loose
misrule, regards even law as a part of its license, as a sermon and not as a
duty, as a splendid theory and not as solid practice. In a special assize of
this parliament, regulations were introduced into weights and measures, and
provisions were made against the fatal effects of domestic fire Acts, f. 12.
The date is 11 March 1426, which by modern computation is 1427, but the next
acts are of Sept. 1426: the mistake seems to have arisen from this parliament
having sitten till after the year 1426, commenced on the ^^th March.
. The frequent assembling of the national council does great honor to James,
for monarchs inclined to despotism have ever trembled to meet the
representatives of their people; and the acts reflect praise on the patriotism
and the wisdom of the institutors.

To renew the treaty with Denmark, and adjust the debt due to that kingdom for
the dereliction of the Hebudes to Alexander III, May
the Scottish king sent Sir William Crichton his chamberlain, and two other
envoys, to Bergen; where, the debt being completely cleared, an amicable
arrangement was signed Torf. Orc. 198 -- 205. Bowar, 509.
. 29 July


Another parliament, held in the same year Acts, f. 14. Compare Glendook's
folio edition, p. 12.
, 30 Sept.
after some regulations concerning trade and agriculture, ordered that every
lord beyond the Grampian mountains, in whose lands ancient castles stood,
should repair and dwell in them, or at least one of his friends, in order to
govern the country and expend the produce in the territory. To give an example
James commanded the castle of Inverness to be repaired Bewar, 488.
: and finding that the highland chiefs were strangers to his laws and
government, he resolved to inculcate into their obduracy some principles of
good order by a salutary severity. The Lords of the Isles in particular, by
their constant confederacy with England, and repeated inroads, well deserved a
signal chastisement. In pursuance of these motives, certainly just and
laudable, the king assembled a parliament at Inverness in the spring, 1427
which the highland chieftains were specially summoned to attend; and suddenly
arrested Alexander Lord of the Isles, and his mother the Countess of Ross,
Angus Duff leader of four thousand Mackays of Strathnavern, Kenneth More chief
of two thousand, John Ross, William Lesley, Angus Moray, and Macmaken, each
also a chief of two thousand; and in short about fifty principal heads of
lawless clans. Two of them, leaders of a thousand each, were instantly tried,
condemned, and beheaded; and one, who had murdered the late Lord of the Isles,
was also executed in impartial justice. The others were scattered, as
prisoners, among the castles of different lords through the kingdom; and after
a time some were condemned to death, and some were restored to liberty. The
Lord of the Isles and his mother were retained in captivity till, apparently
after a year or more, the former was delivered, while the latter seems in vain
to have been retained as an hostage for his fidelity Bowar, 488, 489. She was
daughter, and heiress, of Sir Walter Lesley, who, with his brother Norman, took
Alexandria in the time of David II, and had a French title. Ib.
. Such were the proceedings upon this occasion, which by some have been termed
sanguinary; but, if necessity be the tyrant's plea, it is also that of law and
of justice. Lenient and conciliatory measures would have had the same effect as
music upon the deaf, and could have served no end but to increase the pride of
these chieftains, and to debase the laws and the monarchy. Perhaps it might
however have proved more political if James, upon the capture of the chiefs,
had insisted upon receiving their sons, or nearest relations, as hostages; and
thus not only have had pledges for their good behavior, but also an
opportunity of contributing to civilize the highlands by bestowing on the
future chiefs a proper education: a conduct which might have passed into a
perpetual rule. But in the choice of difficulties it is almost impossible to
seize the exact mean; and if equity enforce the acknowledgement that James was
apt to do too much, and too little, the peculiarities of the country, and of
the time, must come in for a share of the blame.

It was ordered in a parliament, held at Perth, 1 July
that those burgesses who were summoned to parliament, and were absent without
lawful cause, should be fined in ten pounds each: that the lawsuits of Scottish
merchants in Zealand, Flanders, or other foreign countries, be decided in
Scotland: and several acts appear for the punishment of murder and felony Acts,
f. 15 -- 17. In the original the date is 1426, but errors in the numerals are
not uncommon in the statutes, and it is acknowledged in the preface that the
copyists have often fallen into mistakes. The 22d year of the king, and tuesday
being the 1st of July, monday the 7th, are circumstances which fix 1427, the
dominical letter being E.
.

The next year is distinguished by a considerable innovation in the Scottish
constitution. 1428 March
An act of parliament passed that the small barons or freeholders, might
dispense with their attendance in the national council, upon appointing two
commissioners from each shire: these representatives were to have the privilege
of choosing the speaker of parliament; and the expense of their attendance was
to be defrayed by those who formerly owed that duty Ibid. f. v. 17.
. July
Another remarkable decree afterward appeared, enjoining the successors and
heirs of prelates and barons, to take an oath of fidelity to the queen Ibid. f.
19.
; an institution probably pointing to her regency, in case of the king's
demise, and the immaturity of the prince.

Some trifling negotiations had taken place in the preceding year with England,
now governed by the duke of Gloucester and cardinal Beaufort; but James, though
indebted to that kingdom for an education excellent and truly royal, to which,
and to the school of adversity, he owed the expansion of his talents, had yet
no reason to be satisfied with the generosity, or the friendship, of the
English court Rymer, X, 376, erroneously ascribes a commission of James IV to
the bishop of Moray, for a personal conference with Henry VII, to this year;
mistaking the 22d of James IV, 1509, for the 22d of James I, 1427. Abercromby,
who easily misleads and is misled, has fallen, II, 280: Guthrie, III, 315, 316,
is as usual ludicrously wise upon the occasion, though the mistake had been
detected by Keith, Bishops, 87. Henry VI was only six year of age.
. The Scottish monarch was therefore well inclined to follow the former tide of
politics toward France, whose king Charles VII was still in a most reduced
situation, and nearly overwhelmed by the power of England and Burgundy.
Resolved by every concession to procure the aid of Scotland, Charles dispatched
the Archbishop of Rheims, and John Stuart, Count de Dreux and Lord of Darnley
Aubigny was now in abeyance?
, for that purpose. In consequence of their instructions, the ambassadors
offered to conclude a contract of marriage between Louis the Dauphin,
afterward Louis XI, and Margaret the eldest daughter of Scotland, both then
infants, upon condition, that James should send six thousand effective men to
the assistance of Charles, being the only dower required. The princess was
nevertheless provided in an income, and contingencies, as ample and honorable
as had been ever granted, upon any royal marriage of France. Such terms could
not be refused; and the contract was signed and ratified. Nay, the two monarchs
mutually swore to observe the former alliances, entered into between their
kingdoms: and Charles assigned to the Scottish king the county of Xaintonge, and
Lordship of Rochfort MS. Leagues France and Scotland, Harl. 1244, sub anno,
signed by James 19 July, by Charles 29 Oct. 1428. Instead of Xaintonge, the
duchy of Berry was offered, ib. but neither was actually given, though the
former was afterward claimed by our monarchs. These deeds also appear in Du
Tillet's Recueil, Paris 1588, folio, with the oath of the Scottish queen,
prelates, etc. to observe the treaty, f. 138. In 1427 some Scots were in
France, under Kennedy; and assisted La Hire in the noted relief of Montargis.
Jean Chartier, p. 495.


. The six thousand men were to be sent when the French fleet arrived to
transmit them; but the state of affairs, which changed in favor of Charles the
following year, rendered the maid of Orleans an object of greater attention; to
the increasing prosperity of France the aid was unnecessary, and was never
sent, nor demanded; but as no infringement could be charged, the treaty of
marriage maintained its force, and seven years after was fully completed.

The government of England was rather alarmed at this new connection between
Scotland and France, 1429
and an interview was proposed between James and cardinal Beaufort: the king
was to be attended by a thousand horse, 10 Feb.
and the cardinal obtained permission from the English court to meet him either
on the borders, or in Scotland Rymer, X, 410. On the 1st Dec. 1428 a safe
conduct had been issued to James, to meet the cardinal at Durham or Newcastle,
ib. 403; but the king rejected the proposal. Yet he renewed the truce, 12 July
1429, ib. 428.
. But the interview was apparently not carried into effect, and was perhaps
found to be unnecessary, as the French alliance did not actually occasion any
infringement of the truce.

The Lord of the Isles, who had been at last set at liberty, after many
admonitions and injunctions of fidelity, soon indulged his revenge by gathering
his lawless bands, and burning the town of Inverness. James, justly enraged,
collected an army, and overtook the invader in a marshy ground near Lochaber;
23 June
where the freebooting lord was totally defeated. His force consisted of about
ten thousand men, of whom two clans, Chatan and Cameron, on the sight of the
royal standard, acceded to the king Bowar, 489, who adds that on the 20th March
following, 1430, the former clan surprised the latter in a church, and
destroyed almost all its people.
. The Lord of the Isles, reduced to despair, sent an embassy to entreat peace;
which being refused, he resolved to put himself entirely in the king's mercy.
For which purpose he came privately to Edinburgh, and on a solemn day, 27 Aug.
only attired in his shirt and drawers, he before the high altar of Holy Rood
Church, upon his knees presented his drawn sword to the king, in the presence
of the queen and many nobles. His life was granted, in consequence of his
humble submission; but he was committed to the castle of Tantallon, under the
care of his nephew the earl of Angus; and his mother, the countess of Ross, to
the island of Inch Colm in the firth of Forth Ibid. 490.
.

A commercial league of one hundred years was entered into between Scotland and
Flanders This alliance is referred to on its renewal in 1530. Harl. MS. 4637,
Vol. III, f. 16.
. The latter country had, in 1384, passed to the dominion of the house of
Burgundy by marriage; and this treaty was concluded with Philip III duke of
Burgundy, who in 1430 was to become also duke of Brabant, and in 1433 earl of
Holland and Hainault; united principalities, which ranked him among the chief
potentates of Europe.

Several patriotic regulations were issued by the parliament concerning the
forms of procedure; 1430 March
and a sumptuary law was passed, permitting no men to wear silk, or furs,
except lords, and knights, and their eldest sons and heirs. The different sorts
of armor, and arms, to be used by various ranks of persons, were accurately
prescribed: and it was ordered that the same laws should be observed in
relation to wrecked vessels, as were used in the countries to which they
belonged: and that advocates should swear to their belief in the justice of the
cause which they pleaded. All Scotishmen, who travel to England without the
king's leave, are declared traitors; and, by a remarkable decree, all barons
and lords, having lands on the western or the northern seas, particularly those
opposite to the islands, are enjoined to furnish a certain number of galleys,
according to the terms of their tenures Acts, f. v. 19 -- f. 22.
. The want of a fleet, to keep the islands in due subordination, must have
suggested this last institution: the policy was laudable, and it must be
allowed that James attempted more than all his predecessors to join the
discordant parts of his kingdom in firm and compact union; but this decree,
like most other Scottish acts of parliament, seems to have been carefully eluded.

The prosperity of James was further advanced by his becoming the father of
male-twins, 16 Oct.
one of whom, James, was to ascend the throne upon the premature death of his
father; but Alexander, the firstborn, died in early infancy Bowar, 490.
.

The truce with England being on the point of expiration, 1431 1 May
was renewed for five years Rymer, X, 482 -- 488. This truce appears to have
been settled at Edinburgh in Dec. 1430. See the instructions, Feb. Vesp. F.
VII, f. 43. On the 24th May 1430 Martin V granted to James, and others, an
absolution from the oaths taken in England. MS. Harl. 4637, Vol. III, f. 155.
: and the wisdom of the Scottish monarch preferred to the vain glory of war his
patriotic cares for the establishment of law and order in his dominions. For
unknown causes James ordered the Earl of Douglas, and Sir John Kennedy, his own
nephews by the maternal side, to be imprisoned. Perhaps Douglas had been guilty
of some private practices with England; or the king wished to secure the peace
of the south of Scotland, while he was employed in quelling the northern
insurrections, by retaining Douglas its chief leader in captivity. Conjecture
wanders in such enquiry; but it is certain that Douglas remained a prisoner
till the end of September this year; when the king in a parliament, held, as
usual, at Perth, consented, at the request of the queen, nobles, and prelates,
to deliver both Douglas and the lord of the Isles Bowar, 490.
.

Meanwhile, in spite of all the endeavors of James, the highlands remained in
a state of constant rebellion and savage anarchy. In Strathnavern Angus Duff,
and Angus Moray, both of them lately delivered from the imprisonment ordered at
Inverness, met in conflict with twelve hundred men upon either side; and so
fierce was the encounter that hardly nice of the whole were left alive Ibid.
491. Angus Duff was the chief of the noted Mackays of Strathnavern, ib. 489.
. Donald Balloch, a relation of the Lord of the Isles, landed in Lochaber with
a considerable force; and finding Alexander Stuart Earl of Mar, and Alan Stuart
Earl of Caithness, stationed at Inverlochy, to defend the western coast, he
attacked them, though leaders of a larger number, and put them to a total rout.
Alan, who was the son of Walter Earl of Athol, was slain, with sixteen squires
of his own family, and many others: Alexander, and the remainder escaped by
flight. Donald, conscious of the atrocity of his offense, took immediate refuge
in Ireland Bowar, 491. Boyce, f. 361, sables that James ordered three hundred
of Donald's followers to be executed.
.

Another subsidy was attempted to be raised this year, in order to subdue the
northern rebels; but with what success it was levied, is not apparent Acts, f.
v. 22, ^ 146. See Appendix. Bowar, 482, forgets this tax, though he was again
one of the auditors.
.

After a short period, 1432
condemned to the silence of history, but which probably passed in quieting the
commotions in the highlands, of which no further intelligence occurs during
this reign, 1433
the scene of public affairs again opens. The English government, sufficiently
alarmed at the declining state of their power in France, became more and more
anxious to prevent the now impending completion of the marriage treaty between
that kingdom and Scotland: and for this purpose sent Lord Scrope to the court
of James, with offers of great advantage. His proposals were a firm and
perpetual peace, and the restitution of Roxburgh and Berwick, and every portion
of territory which Scotland could justly claim Bowar, 498. In Vesp. F. VII, f.
53, is a paper 23 July, (11 H 6, 1433.) being an answer to the credence of
Roulle, the envoy of James, and promising that lord Scrope should soon be sent
to promote peace.
. There is reason to believe that the English were sincere; but the honor of
the king and of the nation, and the mutual interests of France and Scotland,
were motives momentous enough to cause the rejection of even superior terms.
The discussion of this affair ended rather ludicrously. Oct.
A parliament being called at Perth, the propositions were agitated before the
king, in the Dominican Church; and the nobles and prelates seemed to accept the
terms, saying that peace and liberty were the objects of their chief desire.
But the abbots of Scone and Inchcolm, fitter assistants at a monastic dispute
than at a public deliberation, asserted that the Scottish king could not treat
of peace with England, because of the confederacy with France, which had been
examined by the university of Paris, and confirmed by the Pope. Other
objections were also started; and the day being wasted in discussion, it was
agreed to resume the subject on the morrow, when John Fogo, abbot of Melrose,
alleged, on the other side, that no person could abide by the divine laws, who
depended on the will of another; and that no king could lawfully swear to
another that he would not make peace with a third, except by the consent of the
second. Violent altercations among the clergy now arose; the parliament was
transformed into a hall of ecclesiastic disputes; and as such disputes never
decide any thing, the members separated without determination, only the very
want of decision left the alliance with France in full force; and the English
propositions were considered as rejected. Lindoris, the inquisitor, called Fogo
to account for his sentiments, as savouring of heresy; and Fogo retorted by
several epistles, but was at last forced to make concessions Bowar, the abbot
of Inch Colm, 499, 500.
. This strange affair calls to remembrance the latter history of the Greek
empire, when vehement churchmen ruined the national concerns by idle disputes;
and so totally useless is learning out of its place, that a senate of American
savages, exerting only their plain sense, would have discussed such a subject
with far more ability than all the abbots in the world. To complete the
absurdity, the Scottish churchmen gave out that the only intention of England
had been to excite schisms and heresies in Scotland Ibid. 499. A letter of
James to the Council of Busle, Aug. 1433, occurs in Martene's Anecdota, Paris
1729, folio, Tom. VIII, p. 615.
; as if the very idea of such imbecility could fall within the conception of
any political mind.

The clergy had, in the preceding part of this year, exerted their power in a
manner yet more blameable. Paul Crawar a German, and a follower of Huss, having
come from Prague to Scotland, where he exercised medicine, was called to
account for his opinions by Lindoris the inquisitor, condemned, and burnt at
St. Andrews Bowar, 495.
.

James proceeded in his schemes of humbling his nobility, 1434
schemes too great for his powers of execution On the 1st Feb. appear
instructions to lord Fitzhugh, concerning the redress demanded by James for
some Scottish ships taken at sea. Vesp. F. VII, f. 57, original signed by the
English council. Of the 7th Feb. ib. f. 58, is a credence to Mr. Stephen
Wilton, envoy to James. As to the proposed marriage between Henry VI, (now
eleven years of age,) and a daughter of James, it had often been deliberated;
but the council hesitated, and referred it to Henry's kindred; so a great
council was to meet at Easter in London, and their opinion should be remitted
to James. Dragon pursuivant had lately been sent to Scotland concerning the
march infractions. His instructions occur, ib. f. 49.
. The earls of March had been long remarkable for their dubious fidelity to
Scotland, and repeated ingratitude to its sovereigns: nor was the memory of the
late revolt, and the mischiefs which it had produced in the preceding reign,
easily to be extinguished. Having therefore quelled the isles and highlands,
which, as the most important office, engaged his first cares, the king resolved
to complete his own power, and that of his kingdom, by removing the family of
March from a territory which had been the free gift of a Scottish king to an
English exile, and by placing that house in a more northern and secure part of
Scotland. In pursuance of this just and prudent plan, James ordered the earl of
March to be confined in the castle of Edinburgh, and took possession of the
fortress of Dunbar, the chief seat of the family Bowar, 500.
.

A parliament being summoned, 1435 10 Jan.
two clergymen, and seven commons, were appointed to hear and report all causes
during the session Abercromby, II, 292, gives their names.
; an institution not explained, but apparently intended for expediting this
particular business, and quite distinct from the committee of lords of the
articles, who are known as early as the reign of David II. The king's advocates
alleged that the father of March having engaged in open rebellion against the
kingdom, it was not in the power of Robert duke of Albany the regent, to pardon
him, a privilege belonging to the crown only; but that the estates were
forfeited: and that, by the laws of Scotland, all alienations of crown lands,
to which description the forfeited estates of March belonged, were void, when
made during the minority, or captivity, of the sovereign. After a long debate
the parliament decreed by the mouth of David Dempster the speaker, that the
estates of March were forfeited, and remained a part of the royal property
Ibid. Acts, f. v. 23.
. The king completed his design, by immediately granting to March the earldom
of Buchan, which had some time before reverted to the crown Bowar, 500. The
earl of Buchan, killed at Verneuil 1424, left only a daughter. Stewart's Genesis
115.
. The only other act of this parliament engages all the members to give written
promises of fidelity to the queen Acts, f. 24.
: and it seems that James was not unaware that his public spirited measures
laid him open to attempts of private revenge: a suspicion, alas, too soon to be
verified.

A considerable property accrued to the crown, by the death of Alexander earl
of Mar, a personage repeatedly mentioned before. This nobleman had debased his
youth by bad actions; but, in the latter part of his life, had acquired no
small reputation in foreign wars. Being a natural son of Alexander, the fourth
son of Robert II, his estates and effects, as provided by the old Scottish laws
concerning bastardy, fell to the king Bowar, 500.
. There may be a surmize that Walter earl of Athole, only surviving uncle of
the king, being also uncle of Mar, who left no surviving issue Mar's son Thomas
died before his father. Sutherland Case, chapter V, p. 48.
, had entertained ambitious hopes of adding this contiguous earldom to his own,
and that of Strathern, which the king had bestowed on him eight years before;
and that his disappointment was one incentive to the atrocious murder of his
nephew and sovereign, if he really was concerned in that crime.

An infringement of the truce happened on the part of England. Sir Robert Ogle
younger, in support of one of the rebels against James, 10 Sept.
entered Scotland with a considerable force, and ravaged the country about
Halton and Paxton. After a conflict, in which about forty were slain, Ogle was
defeated, and made prisoner with most of his followers, by William earl of
Angus, Hepburn of Hailes, and Ramsay of Dalhousie. 30 Sept.
James warmly remonstrated to the English court against this wanton infraction
Bowar, 500, says Ogle was defeated at Piperden. The date is ascertained by the
correspondence of James and Henry on the subject, mentioned in the long
instructions of the English council for redress, Vesp. F. VII, f. 48, dated 5
Feb. regni 14=1436. This inroad is ludicrously magnified by our historians.
.

The dauphin of France having now attained his thirteenth year, 1436
and the Scottish princess her twelfth, it was resolved to complete the
marriage. Two French envoys arrived, to betroth the bride; and she was sent to
France attended by a small fleet, and an honorable train, of which the chief
persons were William Sinclair earl of Orkney the admiral, and John bishop of
Brechin. The others amounted to sixteen knights and squires, and a hundred and
forty young gentlemen: they were guarded by a thousand armed men, in three
galleys, and six barges. The English government, irritated at the rejection of
their proposals, sent out a fleet of one hundred and eighty vessels, to
intercept the princess; and they awaited her appearance in the channel.
Meantime a number of Flemish merchant ships appeared, loaded with wine from
Rochelle, which were captured by the English, but a Spanish fleet suddenly
approaching recaptured the prizes. During these contests, the royal bride
arrived safe at Rochelle, May
being forced to reach that part of France, as the English and their allies
possessed the north: and a dispensation of age being granted by the archbishop
of Tours as diocesan, 13 June
the marriage was soon after solemnized. 6 July
Though James was, by the feudal law, entitled to a subsidy from his people
upon this occasion, yet he had discovered from experience their inability, or
disinclination, to pay any tax; and he was contented with the contributions of
the principal laity and clergy, which were not a little liberal Bowar, 485,
482. A minute account of her reception in France, and marriage, may be seen in
the Hist. de Charles VII, par Jean Chartier, edit. Louvre 1661, fol. p. 91. The
dispensations, and other papers relating to the marriage, may be found in the
curious history of Louis XI by Duclos, Hay, 1750, 8vo. Tome III, p. 4 -- 15.
.

The unhappy bride had passed to a husband of famed malignity; and not all her
prudence, her wit, her love of learning, her taste for poetry, her affability,
could save her from the pangs of domestic distress. After an unfruitful
marriage of nine years, her extreme delicacy of mind caused her to fall a
sacrifice to a vague word of a villainous courtier See the notes on the year
1445.
.

Enraged at the manifest hostility committed by the English, in the attempt to
intercept his daughter, the delay of redress for the incursion of the former
year; and probably desirous of preventing any machinations of his nobility, in
consequence of his vigorous measures, James resolved upon a war with England: a
step to which he might also have been induced by his treaties with France, now
completed by the marriage of the dauphin and Margaret. He summoned the whole
array of his kingdom, computed at nearly two hundred thousand men, mounted on
small horses, but not entitled to the appellation of cavalry, and yet a greater
number of rude infantry, and loose attendants on the army. With this unwieldy
force he besieged Roxburgh; 1 Aug.
and after wasting fifteen days, and almost all the missive arms of the
kingdom, he was forced to abandon the siege, and return inglorious Bowar, 502.
He estimates the force at 400,000! But "inglorii remearunt." The affair is
singular, and rather obscure. Harding, c. 229, 230, says that the connection of
James with Burgundy led him to this invasion, and that he fled on
Northumberland's advancing with 80,000 men. The nobles probably showed their
discontent by dissension, as in the reigns of James III, and V. Burgundy had
abandoned the English interest in 1435, and James was in strict alliance with
him.
. Such is the account of our monastic historian, whose constant warmth in the
praise of James, justifies his candor. Latter writers, upon no authority, say
that the king dismissed his army because he heard of a conspiracy, which would
have been the best reason for retaining it. The real cause seems to have been
that James found that he was consuming his own kingdom by so numerous an host,
and could not dismiss a part, without an affront; or that the spirit of the
nobles, shown under his successors, began to operate in a contempt of the regal
authority, and in the sacrifice of their country to their resentments.

The last parliament of James I met at Edinbugh. 22 Oct.
It was decreed that jurymen should swear that they had received no bribes:
that trespassors may be accused at the king's instance, though no private
prosecutor appear: that, to secure the importation of bullion, merchants should
bring three ounces of bullion for every sack of wool exported, and a similar
rate for hydes, and Hamburgh barrels: that no persons be permitted to remain in
taverns after nine o'clock at night: that no English goods be brought into
Scotland, and that no English man import such except by special permission:
that no Scotishman sell salmon to the English, except the latter have safe
conduct and pay English gold: that no Scotishman buy wine of certain Flemings
in Scotland: that no person be permitted to remove gold, silver, or jewels, out
of Scotland Acts, f. 24, 25.
. The commercial regulations seem more calculated to fetter, than to encourage,
trade; but it was long before the real spirit of commerce was understood, even
in more enlightened countries.

The cruel terminating scene of the life of James approaches. 1437
A very minute, and interesting, account of this melancholy transaction is
contained in a manuscript of the period, hitherto unknown to our historians,
and which shall be here followed This memoir is printed in the appendix, and is
not only extremely curious and important in itself, but as it presents a
specimen of the English language between the time of Chaucer and that of
Fortescue.
; and it is hoped that the singularity, and importance, of the scene will
afford a sufficient excuse for a degree of prolixity.

Sir Robert Graham uncle of the earl of Strathern, afterward of Menteith, had
been imprisoned in 1425, as is above mentioned, but the cause is unknown. Two
years afterward James had resumed the earldom of Strathern, upon pretext, as
seems, that it was confined to heirs male; and had given it to his uncle Walter
earl of Athole for his life: assigning, in recompense, that of Menteith to
Malis Graham, the former earl of Strathern See the Sutherland Case by Sir D.
Dalrymple, chapter v. p. 56, 57, from the original charters.
. Robert Graham may have been discontented at this exchange of his nephew's
dignity; but it is not easy to conceive that his wrath upon this account could
have excited him to the murder of his sovereign, and far less that he could
have wished to serve the ambition of Athole, to whom his nephew's former
earldom had passed. The art of this man seems to have equalled his audacity;
and he must have instigated Athole, now approaching, if not exceeding, his
seventieth year Walter earl of Athole and Strathern, the second son of Robert
II by Euphemia Ross, must have been born about 1367 at the latest.
, to this conspiracy by ambitious views, only fit to captivate the dotage of
age, or inexperience of youth, and inspired by Graham solely to promote his own
desperate revenge. This idea is favored by the following narration, which also
explains the violent causes which inflamed this assassin: but it would be
neither a matter of paradox, nor blame, to infer that Athole, and his family,
were really innocent; and that they were accused by Graham to gratify his
animosity, because Athole held his nephew's estates and dignity. It shall only
be further premised that Sir Robert Stuart, grandson of Athole, on whom the
conspirators pretended to bestow the crown, was the son of David, eldest son of
that earl, left an hostage in England for James, ever since his arrival in his
kingdom; and who apparently died there either before this period, or soon after.

According to this ancient relation, James had discontented his nobles by his
vigorous procedure against them; and they asserted that his avarice of
confiscated estates, and not his justice, induced him to such actions. The
people were also displeased because of the subsidies imposed, to which they had
long been strangers; and were even inclined to pronounce his government
tyrannic. In this posture of affairs, and probably in the year 1434, after
March had been confined, and his estates seized, Sir Robert Graham, now
delivered from his first imprisonment, and irritated by that disgrace,
proposed, in a meeting of the lords and chief men, that he would represent
their grievances to the king, if they would support him. As he was eloquent,
and versed in the laws, they willingly assented. Accordingly, in the next
parliament, or that held for the forfeiture of March in January 1435, Graham's
violence led him to exceed his commission; for he rose with an enraged
countenance, and approaching the royal seat, laid his hand on the king, saying,
"I arrest you in the name of all the three estates of your realm, here
assembled in parliament; for, as your people have sworn to obey you, so are you
constrained by an equal oath to govern by law, and not to wrong your subjects,
but in justice to maintain and defend them." Then turning around, he exclaimed,
"Is it not thus as I say?" But the members, struck with consternation at
Graham's rashness, remained in profound silence: and the king instantly ordered
the audacious censor to prison, to which he was conveyed, after a severe
sarcasm on the meanness of spirit, shown by those who had promised to support
him. Soon after Graham was ordered into banishment; and all his possessions
forfeited to the king.

The bold and gloomy exile retired into the furthest highlands, meditating
revenge: and he had even the audacity formally to renounce his allegiance, and
to send a defiance to the king in writing, asserting that James had ruined him,
his wife, and children, and possessions, by his cruel tyranny; and that he
should kill his sovereign with his own hand, if occasion offered. Upon this a
proclamation was made, promising three thousand demies of gold, each worth half
an English noble, to any person who should bring in Graham dead or alive.
Meantime that ardent spirit was employed in digesting his scheme, and he sent
messages to several of the members of parliament, during its session in October
1436, offering to assassinate the king, and bestow the crown on Sir Robert
Stuart, Athole's grandson, nephew and favorite of James.

The court held the festival of Christmas at Perth; and the contemporary
narrative details some popular stories concerning omens, which happened to
James. The worst omen was his vigorous administration, which had created many
enemies; among whom the conspiracy spread, like a fire among combustible
materials, and had even reached the most intimate attendants of the palace,
without exciting any suspicion. Thrice did Christopher Chambers, one of the
traitors, and who had been a squire of the duke of Albany, approach the royal
presence, to disclose the plot; and as often did he fail, from accident, or
from a mistaken sense of honor, or pity to his associates.

At length the conspiracy being fully ripened, 20 Feb.
a night was fixed for its execution; being that of the second wednesday in
lent, according to Monstrelet, or the twenty seventh day of February in the
year one thousand four hundred and thirty-seven; but that of the first
wednesday in lent, between the twentieth and twenty first day of that month, by
the account of Bowar, which deserves the preference Monstrelet, II, f. 98,
edit. 1518; Bowar, 503. In 1437 lent began on the 17th Feb. In 1438 on the 2d
March. Another argument, if necessary, to enforce the learned Ruddiman's reply
to Abercromby, who, with his usual ignorance of chronology, dates this event in
1438. The chartulary of Glasgow, Harl. 4631, has "Obitus Jacobi primi Regis
Scotorum, vigesimo die Februarii, A. D. Millesimo Quadringentesimo, Trigesimo
Sexto." The chronicle at the end of Winton erroneously bears, fastrens ene, or
shrove-tuesday.
. The earl of Athole, and Sir Robert Stuart, were at the court that evening,
which was passed before supper, and after to a late hour, in the amusements of
the time, in playing at chess and tables, reading romances, singing and music.
An Irish or highland woman, pretending to magic, who had long before given the
king a hint of the plot, and had only met with laughter, again came to unfold
it; but was referred till the morrow, as the king was busy at play. An hour
after, James called for the parting cup; and he and the company drank, and
withdrew. Sir Robert Stuart, private chamberlain to the king, and his chief
favorite, is accused of spoiling the locks of the royal chambers, to prevent
their being shut, and even of laying boards across a deep ditch, that environed
the garden of the Dominican monastery at Perth, where James was now lodged, in
order to enable the conspirators to pass: but these offices seem to belong to
meaner associates, and the guilt of Athole and his grandson is doubtful. After
midnight, Graham with about three hundred persons, mostly raised in the
highlands as may be inferred, entered the garden. The king was now in his
bedchamber, standing before the fire, only dressed in his nightgown, and
conversing gayly with the queen and her ladies, when, just as he threw off his
nightgown to go to bed, he heard a great noise, as of men in armor, crouding
and clashing together, and perceived a blaze of torches. Suspicions of treason
instantly arising, the queen and ladies ran to the chamber door, but could not
fasten it, the locks being spoiled: and the king requesting them, if possible,
to keep the door shut, attempted to escape by the windows, but found them
closely barred with iron. Perceiving no other refuge, he with the fire-tongs
and an exertion of strength, tore up a board of the chamber-floor, and letting
himself down dropped the board above him. He was now in one of these
incommodious necessaries, usual in old edifices; but still could not escape
outward, for, by a sad fatality, a square aperture in the place had been filled
with stone, only three days before, by the king's command, because the balls
were apt to enter it, when he played at tennis. Nevertheless he might here have
remained safe, had not his own impatience betrayed him.

Meanwhile the traitors burst open the chamber door, and several of the ladies
were hurt; particularly, as our historians say, Catherine Douglas, who, with a
spirit worthy of her name, had her arm broken, by thrusting it into the staple
instead of a bar. The ladies shrieking with horror, fled to the furthest corner
of the room; but the queen was so extremely agitated that she stood without
power of speech, or motion, and a villain basely wounded, and would have slain,
her, had not a son of Graham interfered, saying, "What will will you do, for
shame of yourself, to the queen? She is but a woman. Let us go and seek the
king." The queen was then permitted to withdraw; while the ladies remained lost
in tears and consternation.

The traitors sought the king in every part of the chamber, and another
adjoining, without success. Most of them had gone to extend their search, and a
temporary quiet succeeded, when the king most unhappily, after having heard no
noise for some time, and thinking that the conspirators were gone, called to
the ladies to bring sheets, and draw him up from his uncomfortable concealment.
In the attempt Elizabeth Douglas fell down into the place, and Chambers, one of
the assassins, entering with a torch, perceived the king and the lady, and
called to his fellows, with savage merriment; "Sirs, the bride is found, for
whom we have sought, and caroled all night." Upon this, another traitor, Sir
John Hall, leaped down with a dagger in his hand; but the king seized him
behind, and threw him under his feet. Hall's brother met with the same chance:
yet the king in vain tried to wrest a dagger from either, and only wounded his
hands, and rendered himself incapable of further defense. Graham himself now
entered the king's retreat, who requested his mercy; but Graham exclaimed,
"Thou cruel tyrant, thou never had mercy upon thy noble kindred, nor others,
so expect none." James said, "I beseech thee that, for my soul's salvation,
thou will let me have a confessor." But Graham retorted, "Thou shall have no
confessor but this sword;" and stabbed the king, who in vain cried for mercy,
and offered half his kingdom for his life. The assassin, somewhat relenting,
was about to withdraw, when his comrades above desired him to complete their
intention, else he should himself encounter death at their hands. Graham, and
the two Halls, then accomplished the horrid deed by multiplied wounds.

Thus perished James I in the forty-fourth year of his age, and the
thirty-first of his nominal reign, but only the thirteenth of his active
authority.

Not satiated with the murder of their monarch, the assassins sought the queen,
fearing her revenge; but she had now escaped. The rumor at length reaching the
outer court, where the servants were lodged, and thence the town itself,
numbers approached with arms and torches, upon which the conspirators hastily
withdrew. Sir David Dunbar, arriving alone, attacked them, slew one, and
wounded another, but was overpowered and left disabled. Straiton, a page, was
slain: and the band made good their retreat to the highlands, only regreting
that the queen had been saved, whose vengeance they dreaded. Nor without cause;
for, in less than a month, all the chief actors were in jail.

The first taken were Sir Robert Stuart, and Christopher Chambers: who were
executed with cruel tortures at Edinburgh, and the former's confession of guilt
may have been forced from his pangs. Athole was taken by Angus, tried and
condemned; 31 Mar.
but Easter approaching, the cross, upon which his grandson had been tormented,
was taken down, as unbecoming that solemnity; and he was fastened to a pillar,
with a paper crown upon his head, thrice inscribed with the term Traitor.
Antony bishop of Urbino, the papal legate in Scotland, heard the confessions of
Stuart, and Athole Eneas Sylvius is substituted for the bishop of Urbino by
Hector Boyce, the grandfather of all our historical errors; and the mistake is
religiously maintained by all our historians. Eneas Sylvius, afterward pope
Pius II, visited Scotland before the duke of Burgundy left the English party in
Aug. 1435. Comment. p. 4. And in the year that Alfonso of Arragon was captured
by the Genoese -- 1435: ib. He returned in the same year to France: and in 1436
another legate was sent, namely Antony de Santo Vito, bishop of Urbino. Ughelli
Italia Sacra, (Venice 1717, 10 vols. folio) II, 792. His passport occurs in
Rymer, X, 660, and is dated 22 Nov. 1436. Ughelli's account runs thus: "Sexto
autem Idus Quintilis proxime insequentis, [1436,] pro restituenda ecclesiastica
disciplina, aliisque long gravissimis componendis rebus, in Scotiam, ad
Jacobum regem, cum amplissima decernendi potestate ab eodem pontifice [Eugenio
IV] legatus est. Difficillimis Scotiae rebus inopinato Jacobi regis nece magis
magisque perturbatis, ad Anglorum regem, etc. dirigitur." Antony de Santo Vito
proceeded to the council of Basil on his return; and was afterward
distinguished by his embassies to Germany, France, and Spain. In narrating the
murder of James I, Jean Chartier, p. 95, says that the perpetrators were
chiefly servants of Albany, and other lords slain by James, who was a brave and
just prince, and well beloved by his people.


. The latter asserted his innocence; but said that his grandson had proposed
the conspiracy, from which he had dissuaded him, and understood that he had
succeeded. It might be said that Stuart having been forced by torture to
confess guilt, Athole was of course obliged to accord with his grandson's
testimony; for it is difficult to conceive that Stuart could have been guilty
of such black ingratitude to his beneficent sovereign, and of such a total
sacrifice of common prudence, as to engage in this conspiracy, from which to
expect the diadem must have been the infatuation of frenzy. But Graham's art
may have practiced upon his youth, and weakness, to this degree; and the
evidence of his guilt at last rather preponderates. As to Athole, his hoary
head might well have been saved: the laws concerning misprision of treason are
most severe, calling for a sacrifice of kindred, of friendship, and of human
nature: his grandson's scheme he seems to have regarded as too wild for any man
of common understanding to attempt; and was he, for what he expected to pass as
idle discourse, to proclaim his grandson a madman, or a traitor, and to ruin
his posterity? But to leave this discussion, the aged earl was beheaded at
Edinburgh; and his head was fixed upon a spear, encircled with a crown of iron.

Graham, and many others of the traitors, were tortured, and put to death, at
Stirling. The daring chief of the assassins had the insolence to plead that,
having renounced his allegiance under his hand and seal, he had a right to kill
the king, as his mortal enemy: nay he addressed his judges, and the spectators,
assuring them that they should soon pray for his soul, as one to whom they were
indebted for their deliverance from a tyrant. Nor was his courage less than his
dark fanaticism of vengeance, as appeared from the spirit with which he bore
his horrid torments. Some of the associates asserted that they knew not even
the nature of the conspiracy, but had been prevailed on to join the party, upon
pretense that the intention was only to carry off a young lady of the court,
whom Sir Robert Stuart was to marry: a circumstance apparently alluded to in
the expressions of Chambers abovementioned. The son of Graham, Thomas Hall, and
Chambers, are particularly mentioned among the victims; and the latter would
express no repentance for the king's death. This full and minute relation is
given, not only as presenting all the circumstances of an important event, but
as it serves to correct some mistakes of former writers.

James left only one son, his successor; but his female issue consisted of not
less than five daughters; Margaret married to the Dauphin; Isabel to Francis
duke of Bretagne; Eleanor to Sigismund archduke of Austria; Mary to the count
de Boucquan, son of the lord of Campvere; Jean to the earl of Angus, and
afterward to the earl of Morton Crawford Stuarts, 36. Stewarts Genesis 65. The
marriage of Margaret is above narrated. For Isabel, (and her portrait,) see
Lobineau Hist. de Bretagne, I, 621. For Eleonora, De Roo Ann. Aust. 399. Mary's
destiny was more obscure; but from Coucy, p. 574, she appears to have been
wedded before 1449; and her husband was only a seigneur. Olivier de la March,
the contemporary Burgundian, in his curious memoirs gives some notices
concerning her. He says "Le seigneur de la Vere, un mout puissant et notable
chevalier Zelandois, du nom et des arms de Bourselle, et qui, par sa grande
conduite et renommee par la mer, avoit eu la fille du Roy d'Escoce, soeur
german de Madame la Dauphine, don't cy-dessus est faicte mention; et l'avoit
mariee a son fills le Comte de Boucquam." p. 263, 264. And p. 332, ed. Gand,
1566, 410, he mentions that the countess of Boucquan ( sic) daughter of
Scotland was delivered of a son at Vere in Zealand, and the count of Charolois,
son of Burgundy, went to Vere on the occasion. A. D. 1451. Jean is known in
Scottish peerages. See the years 1453, 1457. It is suspected that the princess
Jean, wedded to Huntley about 1470, was a daughter of James II; perhaps of the
queen of James I, by her second marriage. Yet a genealogy of 1484, MS. Harl.
712, thus arranges the daughters: 1. Dauphiness. 2. Duchess of Bretagne, 3.
Johanna to Huntley. 4. Eleonora, Austria. 5. Maria domina Kamfer. 6. Annabella
to Morton.


.

BOOK V. A RETROSPECT OF THE STATE OF SCOTLAND, DURING THE REIGNS OF ROBERT II,
AND III, AND JAMES I.
Sect. 1. State of the people, and of civilization -- 2. Government, laws,
tactics -- 3. Agriculture, useful arts -- 4. Commerce, money, navigation -- 5.
Ecclesiastic history, literature, language -- 6. Ornamental arts, manners,
dress.

SECTION I. State of the people, and of civilization.
WHETHER education, 1371 --
climate, or government, produce most effect on national character, is an
important problem, discussed by many able writers, but hitherto not
sufficiently resolved. It must however be granted by all, that each has its
share in exciting or depressing mental energy, in establishing general industry
or indolence, in promoting public happiness or misery. But of these grand
causes education seems deservedly to claim the preeminence. To deny the power
of climate, would be to forget that man is "subject to the skyey influences;"
yet his industry, or care, my generally overcome or elude its effects: and soil
is almost equally subservient to labor. Government exerts a more pervading
influence; even the peasant in his cottage is oppressed by the burning heat of
despotism, or the blasting storms of anarchy. The rewards of his labor cease
amid the general distress: the caprice of some little tyrant, for slaves are
ever tyrants where they can, or the revenge of a foe, may assail his hovel; and
while his family perishes in penury, the labourer joins the mountain robbers,
and falls the victim of those laws which afforded him no protection. Even
moderate governments affect domestic life, and individuals, more than is
commonly conceived; a war, a tax, an unwise law, becomes an universal
misfortune; while the benignity, and skill, of the rulers enlarge the happiness
of all. The influence, like that of the electric element, is rarely unveiled to
the popular eye, though the subtle fluid operate most widely on the public
health.

In the oriental legislations the connection between laws and manners is often
indissoluble: and the laws become perpetual, by being grafted on the habits of
that creature of habit, man. In Europe, on the contrary, the laws and manners
are proverbially distinct. Jurisdiction punishes crimes, but rewards not
virtues; far less can it improve domestic morals, or diffuse the light of
instruction over a benighted nation. These are the sacred provinces of
education, a cause of national character more prevalent than either of the
former, as it strikes the very root of offense, and sows lasting seeds of
intelligence and worth.

But education, on the extensive scale here implied, remains an experiment even
to the most civilized nations; and its effects must neither be regarded as
speedy, nor infinite. Even infants display, some a perverse, others a placid
disposition: and it is doubtful whether any care or art can eradicate, or
subdue, the inborn temper. If the bad habits of an individual prove often
unconquerable by reason or virtue, how deeply must such habits be rooted in a
whole people, where example operates like a contagion?

Hence it is that the spirit, and manners, of the people ought to present the
main object of political discussion on any particular state, and the more
especially where government and education have little force. In whatever form
of administration, only a part can shine upon the public theater, and thus
attract the notice of history. The mass of the nation remains in obscurity,
even in enlightened ages; and philosophy can only estimate its history by that
of its manners, for which the best materials are to be found, not in the pages
of the annalist, but in poems, novels, and romances. Barren however as are the
annals of the poor, their state may always be justly estimated by that of the
actors, who vaunt and vanish in the historic scene; and from the progress of
nations, as savage, barbarous, or civilized. The monkish page presents but a
small pulse, yet from it the health, or sickness, of the whole body may be
gathered with considerable certainty.

In Scotland, at the period now under review, the people were slowly advancing
from barbarism toward civilization. A peace of some duration had taken place
before the accession of the house of Stuart; and the consequent intercourse
with England, a country then rapidly progressive in the arts of life, must have
increased the national energy. Yet the feudal setters continued to be firmly
rivetted: every man was the soldier, or the menial attendant of his chief; and
flocks, herds, agriculture afforded only subservient occupations. While the
single science of the great was war, their sole amusement hunting, their chief
magnificence a numerous train, it is no wonder that the poor were ferocious and
idle, secure during health of a maintenance from their lords, and in sickness
of monastic charity. Courage honesty, frankness, attachment to their chiefs,
constituted the chief virtues of the peasantry; temperance, and sobriety were
the virtues of the soil: spirituous liquors, that bane of the poor, were as yet
unknown in Europe, except among the stores of the physician. Nor had religious
fanaticism, that unintermitting intoxication, yet poisoned the popular mind
with habitual gloom: the poor chiefly knew the christian religion from its
charity, from the public exhortations of the preaching friars, and from the gay
exhibitions of the Roman catholic system.

By more polished foreigners Scotland continued to be regarded as a country
completely barbarous. The author of the Dittamundi allows that it is rich in
fish, flesh, and milk, but,

Molto e el paese alpestro e peregrino,
E ha la gente ruvida e salvatica.
"Mountainous and strange is the country,
And the people rough and savage Edit. 1501, 4to, lib. IV, c. 26. It is added
that Scotland is improved, Per bonta de Adoardo che hora e vivo,
Che glia frustati piu su che la narica.
"By the goodness of Edward now living, who has chastised it much, or wandered
much over it," for the expression seems provincial and obscure. Edward III of
England is implied, who died in 1377. The Dittamundi of Ubertus de Faciis is a
description of the world, in the form of a commentary on Solinus, who is
introduced in dialogue, as Virgil in Dante.


."
The long and severe ordinances of Robert II against murderers, and their
receivers and supporters, afford a proof that this charge was not unfounded
Stat. Rob. II, apud Skene.
. And the orders to the army, not to pillage their own countrymen, present
another instance of barbaric manners Reg. 4to, f. v. 72.
. The Ketherani, Kerns, or marauding highlanders, by continual inroads into the
low countries greatly obstructed the progress of industry and civilization; and
this intestine evil, more pernicious than foreign invasion, continued to a late
period. Strangers to that industry which excites the Swiss peasant to cultivate
the precipice, and the Norwegian to derive that support from the sea which the
land refuses, the highlanders supplied their wants by rapine: and the civil
animosity was increased by the difference of origin, language, and manners; so
that the difficulties with which the government had to struggle, and the
obstacles against order, were perhaps greater in Scotland than in any other
European kingdom. The example of Henry II of England, who planted a Flemish
colony in Wales, escaped the observation, or exceeded the power, of our
monarchs: and the complete transposition of the population of a province,
though an expedient far from unknown to the Persians, Greeks, and Romans,
appears to surpass the wisdom, or the enterprise of any later government.

Though the peasantry were in fact the slaves of their lords, by menial or by
feudal bondage, yet few instances occur of absolute villanage; and it is
believed no example appears in our records, of an estate sold with the farmers,
laborers, and families, attached to the soil Nisbet in his Heraldry, Vol. I,
p. 131, gives an extract of a charter of Robert I, regni 14, from the
chartulary of Dunfermlin, declaring Adam Adamson and his four sons free:
"declaratum est quod Adamus filius Adami non est homo noster ligius, seu
nativus, quin pro voluntate sua;" and he and sons were delivered "ab omni jugo
et onere servitutis;" executed "coram justiciario nostro."
. The appellation husbond, given to the Scottish farmers, seems indeed to imply
that they were considered as bond slaves of their lord's house, or as fixed to
their own particular farm-houses; yet what little evidence remains teaches us
to consider them rather as slaves in custom, than in law. The husband lands, or
farms, were divided into tillage and pasturage, were always small, and the
farmers of course poor Skene de sign. verb. voce Husband-land, originally about
six acres.
. The cotter who rears his hovel of turf and straw, under an old thorn, and
cultivates three or four acres of the common, would in these ages have been
styled a farmer. Large farms undoubtedly advance agriculture; and perhaps the
numerous laborers employed are as useful and valuable members of society, as
if each farmed a small portion of land.

With the accession of the house of Stuart, a stronger light begins to arise on
the internal state of Scotland. Harbor wrote his celebrated poem in 1375; and
in narrating the actions of Robert I, he presents many pictures of the times
and manners, the lapse of half a century being imperceptible in the slow
progress of civilization. But the curiosity of Froissart a stranger has
preserved the strongest features; and his visit to Scotland forms an epoch in
the history of national manners Froissart was in England in 1391, Tome IV, fol.
14. He was at Dalkeith in his youth, about the year 1360, T. III, f. 117: and
no other visit of his to Scotland is known. It is not therefore wonderful that,
when he wrote his history in 1400, his memory made some slips, particularly the
strange one concerning the house of Douglas, which misled lord Hailes, Remarks,
p. 121. Froissart confounds the earls of Douglas with the Douglases lords of
Dalkeith; nay he assigns to that name the arms of the earls of Moray, "d'or a
trois oreilles de gueulles!" His more recent information was derived from the
French knights who visited Scotland.
. From his account it appears that the French, themselves regarded by the
Italians as barbarians, shuddered at the penury and barbarity of Scotland. Even
in the Doulce Escoche or low lands, (for the highlanders of la Sauvage Escoche
were considered as we now do American savages,) a remarkable ignorance
prevailed of the commonest arts of life. The meanest articles of manufacture,
horse-shoes, harness, saddles, bridles, were all imported ready made from
Flanders. The houses of the common people were composed of four or five posts
to support the turf walls, and a roof of boughs: three days sufficed to erect
the humble mansion Froissart, Tome II, f. 170, edit. 1518, 4to.
. A contemporary historian adds, that "the country was rather desert than
inhabited, was almost wholly mountainous, and more abundant in savages than in
cattle. Hist. de Charles VI, par Le Laboureur, Tome I, p. 102, "plus pleine de
sauvagine que de bestail."
."

The English education of James I contributed to the civilization of his
kingdom. Yet even in his reign the picture by Enea Silvio, afterward pope Pius
II, is far from flattering. "Concerning Scotland he found these things worthy
of repetition. It is an island joined to England, stretching two hundred miles
to the north, and about fifty broad; a cold country, fertile of few sorts of
grain, and generally void of trees, but there is a sulphurous stone dug up
which is used for firing. The towns are unwalled, the houses commonly built
without lime, and in villages roofed with turf, while a cow's hide supplies the
place of a door. The commonalty are poor and uneducated, have abundance of
flesh and fish, but eat bread as a dainty. The men are small in stature, but
bold; the women fair and comely, and prone to the pleasures of love; kisses
being there esteemed of less consequence than pressing the hand is in Italy.
The wine is all imported; the horses are mostly small ambling nags, only a few
being preserved entire for propagation, and neither curry-combs nor reins are
used. The oysters are larger than in England. From Scotland are imported into
Flanders hides, wool, salt fish, and pearls. Nothing gives the Scots more
pleasure than to hear the English dispraised. The country is divided into two
parts, the cultivated lowlands, and the region where agriculture is not used.
The wild Scots have a different language, and sometimes eat the bark of trees.
There are no wolves. Crows are new inhabitants, and therefore the tree in which
they build becomes royal property One of those mistakes frequent in cursory
travels. By c. 19, parl. 1 J. I, trees in which rooks are suffered to build are
forfeited to the king. Hence the error.
. At the winter solstice, when the author was there, the day did not exceed
four hours Pii II Comment. rerum mem. sui temporis, Francfurt 1614, folio, p.
4: a production not in the collections of his works. The author adds a naif
account of his adventures in the north of England on his return. He went
disguised as a merchant, and on passing the Tweed could get neither wine nor
bread: an alarm was spread in the night that the Scottish borderers were
approaching, and the men fled, but the women refused; "nihil enim his mali
facturos hosts credunt, qui stuprum inter mala non ducunt."
." In another place, Silvio observes that the fabulous tale of the barnacles,
the invention of dreaming monks, had passed from Scotland to the Orkneys: and
that coals were given to the poor at the church doors, by way of alms, the
country being denuded of wood Descript. Asiae et Europae, Paris 1534, 8vo, p.
416.
.

The vigorous administration of James I imparted tranquillity and happiness to
the people; and was often regretted by them during the distractions of the
subsequent reigns See Bowar, 510
. Till this period the statutes were concealed from the nation in the darkness
of the latin language; the good sense of this monarch ordered them to be issued
in the Scottish tongue, while in England the laws were to be dictated in Latin
and French till the reign of Richard III. Thus religion, and law, the sole
rules of popular conduct, were veiled from the people; but there is no
absurdity which man has not reduced to practice. The statures of James are
wisely ordained to advance civilization, and the sanguine theorist may exult in
their effects; but they rather proclaim the intelligence of the monarch, and of
his ecclesiastic ministers, than the national advancement. Ordinances prepared
in the cabinet by wise and good men, were passed by the lords of the articles;
while the peers and landholders, with whom the jurisdiction lay, either did not
attend, or voted with a smile. And the frequent repetition of the same laws,
even so late as the reigns of James IV an V, conspires with the records of
history to convince us, that the statutes rather indicate the evils that did
exist, than the remedy of these evils. The roots of national habits are too
deep to be affected by the thunder of laws, the slow divulsion of education can
alone explode them.

Among the statures of the first James, the following are the most pertinent to
the present discussion. That no private wars be allowed; that none travel with
more attendants than they maintain; that no sornars shall force their residence
upon the clergy or farmers; that in burghs, and no high ways, inns be erected;
and that no beggars be permitted, except distinguished by a badge importing the
leave of the magistrates: and the hospitals for the poor and sick are ordered
to be reformed. A remarkable law ordains, that all idle persons, without means
of livelihood, shall be imprisoned, till they give security, and shall within
forty days betake themselves to some service or craft. The trial of the causes
of the poor is declared to be gratuitous Acts, f. 1, 2, 5, 7, 8.
.

The institution of inns, repeatedly enforced, was perhaps calculated to save
the monasteries from the frequent intrusion of numerous guests; but the
necessity of such laws indicates a radical defect in civilization. The first
object of the Romans, after the conquest of a barbaric country, was to open
high ways through it; for on mutual and easy intercourse all civilization
depends. Yet this first and indispensable step is unknown in our statutes. Some
regulations appear concerning ferries; but till within these fifty years the
roads in Scotland were hardly passable. And while the Swiss cuts his way
through the Alps, our mole hills in the highlands present insuperable barriers.
The civilization of a country is always in exact proportion to the number, and
condition, of its high ways. The omission of this one law was radical, and
obstructed all the others The first Scottish statute concerning highways, is of
the reign of Charles II, 1661, cap. 38.
.

In the burghs a greater degree of civilization must have prevailed than in the
country; but the inhabitants of the burghs were few, compared with the general
population. Froissart estimates the houses in Edinburgh, then the capital, at
four thousand Tome II, f. v. 169.
; they were small wooden cottages, covered with straw; for modern Edinburgh,
with its houses of ten or twelve stories, cannot date higher than Mary's reign,
when all the French customs of Scotland really commenced. By a common
calculation the inhabitants of the capital, in the reign of Robert II, hardly
exceeded sixteen thousand.

For some unknown cause, James I prohibited the election of deacons of crafts;
perhaps they abused their power in exciting sedition; perhaps the genuine
spirit of a corporation began to operate in monopoly, and oppression. But a
warden and council are ordered to regulate prices, the warden to be chosen by
the council of the burgh, and not, as the deacons, by the craftsmen themselves.
Masons, carpenters, smiths, tailors, weavers, are the only trades mentioned in
the statute Acts, f. 14, 18.
. The institution of corporations by patent seems unknown in Scotland, till the
reign of James IV: the crafts embodied and regulated themselves; and the
attention of government was hardly diverted to them, except to prevent
imposition. They would have charged for holidays, and undertaken more work than
they could accomplish, while one craftsman would refuse the work neglected by
another Ib. 14. Confrairies first appear in France about 1264. Le Grand, I, 260.
. The sole intention of these acts seems to have been to break the monopoly To
these hints concerning burghs it may be added that harlots are ordered to dwell
in the skirts of the towns, to prevent hazard from fire, concerning which
regulations are enacted. Ib. f. v. 12.
.

James I has himself delineated the manners of the common people, in his poem
called Peblis to the Play. This play was probably an annual festival, in honor
of the saint to whom the church was dedicated, or on some other occasion; and
such wakes are yet known in the north of England. The humor and jollity of the
meeting end in tumult and uproar, but display a very different character to the
gloomy fanaticism of the two succeeding centuries. From this singular poem,
among other articles of manners, we learn that the women wore kerchiefs and
hoods, and tippets; the music arose from the bagpipe; the men sometimes wore
hats of birch-twigs interwoven, the hat being any high covering of the head,
while the bonnet was flat. A tavern, with fair table linen, and a regular score
on the wall, are introduced: the reckoning twopence halfpenny a piece, is
collected in a wooden trencher. The cadger, or packman who carries fish, etc.
through the country, on his little horse; the salmon dance, consisting in
exertions of high leaping; and other anecdotes of popular manners, diversify
the piece Select Scottish Ballads, Vol. II, p. 1.
.

The dress of the common people consisted chiefly of a doublet and cloak, and a
kind of short trowse; the head was covered with a hat of basket-work, or felt,
or with a woolen bonnet; while the logs and feet remained bare A practice
prevalent among the common people of England on this period. Even the feet of
many of the English archers were bare in battle. St. Remy, p. 89.
. Shirts were hardly known even to the great. The female dress was a kerchief
or a hood, and a tippet about the neck: the kirtle, or close gown, was rarely
accompanied either with the wylicot or under petticoat, or with the mantle; and
the feet were naked.

As the state of society was rather pastoral than agricultural, milk, and its
various preparations, formed a chief article of food. Meat boiled with oatmeal,
or fish, supplied more solemn meals. Bread and vegetables were little used, a
circumstance to which it may perhaps be imputed that the leprosy was not
uncommon. The chief fish was the salmon, concerning the capture of which many
regulations occur in the acts of parliament, and which also formed a grand
article in the Scottish exports.

SECTION II. Government, laws, tactics.
THE government, and laws, of a country are so intimately connected with its
history, when composed in a proper manner, and with philosophic views, that
little remains to be added on these important topics, except to glean a few
remarks, and present some general observations.

The policy concerning the highlands formed a chief object in the Scottish
government. David II had excited the chieftains to destroy each other, by
bestowing the estate of the slaughtered leader on his assassin, and by the
reign of terror had established tranquillity Fordun, II, 380.
. This cruel policy was abandoned by the house of Stuart. Robert II assigned
the highlands to the care of his son the earl of Carric, and other peers; who
were empowered to call the chiefs before them, and concert means of justice
Register, f. v. 72.
. But this plan erred in the other extreme of mildness: and James I, after
having been obliged so exempt the highlanders from the law of retribution,
because, as the statute bears, they had been accustomed to rob and kill each
other Acts, f. 8.
, was at length constrained, as we have seen, to have recourse to severity.

The reign of this prince revived the long dormant power of the laws, and the
boldest of the peers dared not to oppose his mandates or messengers. "The
people," adds the old historiographers, "then sat in the opulence of peace,
secure from ravagers, elate in heart, and tranquil in mind; because the monarch
had wisely expelled quarrels and rapine from the state, had appeased discord,
and reconciled enmity Bowar, 510.
." But the regal jurisdiction, though much confined by the feudal system, was
carried by James I to a height that proved fatal to himself.

It is unnecessary to dwell on the feudal government, so ably discussed by
numerous authors. A singular feature of it in Scotland was the freedom from
taxes; and that at a period when France was overwhelmed with them, and the
blood of the poor, as usual, was mingled with the wine of the rich In 1385 the
taxes were so numerous in France that many emigrated. Des Ursins, p. 46.
. Another remarkable distinction from modern times was, that the royal
authority was weakened in war, and increased in peace. The soldiers belonged to
their chiefs, and not the sovereign: but the execution of the laws was a
prerogative of the latter.

An idea of the royal revenue may be formed from the marriage contracts of our
princes, the dower of the wife being estimated at one third of the whole.
Robert II, and III, were married before the accession of the family: and the
avaricious conduct of the English court, in the marriage of James I, rendered
any contract to this effect unnecessary. But that of James II and Mary of
Gelder is extant; and though the evidence be somewhat excursive it is
sufficiently in point MS. Harl. 4637, Vol. III, f. v. 6.
. The dower assigned is 10,000 crowns of gold; and these crowns, in a
contemporary statute, are estimated at six shillings and eight pence each,
Scottish money Acts of 1451.
. Hence 10,000 gold crowns equalled 5000 marks Scottish money, and the royal
revenue was 15,000 marks Scottish, or about 7,500 marks sterling of that time;
in weight about 14,000 pounds of silver, in efficacy about seventy thousand
pounds of modern currency. But the rapacity of statesmen and favorites, and
other causes which did not affect the estates of the aristocracy, considerably
dilapidated the revenue of the crown, and rendered it subject to fuch
variations that fifty thousand pounds may most safely be assumed as a medium.
Perhaps the earls of Douglas possessed a revenue equal to two thirds of the
royal; which however certainly more than doubled that of any other peer In the
estimate of the revenues of the hostages for James I, (Rymer, X, 327, 333,) the
highest are those of Argyle and Dalkeith, 1500 marks sterling. each. But that
of Douglas must have been far larger. The 1500 marks might now equal 15,000 l.
It must not be forgotten that the royal expenses were almost wholly domestic,
there being neither civil nor military lift, the officers of state and
administrators of law being only paid by perquisites; and even embassies were
defrayed by the members of parliament, or by the merchants. The revenue of
Henry V of England was 55,714 l. 10 s. (Rymer, X, 113,) or about 550,000 modern
pounds.


.

The revenue of the crown arose chiefly from its demesnes, from the various
feudal casualties, ward, relief, marriage, escheat, forfeiture; from vacant
bishoprics, fines, presents for grants; and from customs on merchandise. Its
prerogatives appear to have been, 1. to summon the parliament, and propose
laws, which seldom or never failed to pass: 2. the administration of justice:
3. creation of honors and dignities: 4. command of the national array: 5.
nomination to ecclesiastic preferments. As the first of these prerogatives
encroached on the legislative power; so, on the other hand, the parliament
regulated embasses and treaties, and ordered peace or war This important fact
is evinced from many documents in this work. See particularly the reign of
James V.
. The coinage of money belonged to the crown; but any alteration was regarded
as unconstitutional, if not sanctioned by parliament.

Hence it appears that the revenues and power of the Scottish monarchs were in
themselves sufficiently respectable; but the age of Robert II, the weakness of
his successor, the disorders of the regencies, and above all the extreme
avarice of the aristocracy, ever preying on the royal domains and revenue, were
causes that greatly injured both the wealth and influence of the crown.

In passing to the national council, or parliament, the most striking object is
the number of ecclesiastics, which exceeded that of the peers In the parliament
at Cambuskenneth, 1314, the number of abbots already amounted to 14, Scone,
Kelso, Arbroth, Holyrood, Lindoris, Newbottel, Caput, Paisley, Dunfermlin,
Lincluden, Inchaffray, St. Colm, Deer, Sweetheart. The priors 5, Coldingham,
Restenoth, St. Andrews, Pittenweem, Lochleven. Add the bishops 13, and the sum
is thirty-two.
. But till the days of Forman, and the Betons, priestly ambition seems to have
been little known in Scotland; and the statutes generally evince great wisdom
and patriotism in the legislative body. The members unhappily did not assemble
in two chambers as in England; the burgesses were annihilated in presence of
the powerful aristocracy, who themselves only skilled in arms left legislative
discussion to the clergy. An opposition was scarce ever known in the Scottish
parliament, because its operations were previously settled by the well-known
committees of lords of the articles, and approved by the king, so that in fact
the statutes were presented for its sanction, not its discussion. Nay there is
room to believe that an opposition in parliament was viewed in as treasonable a
light as opposition in the field; and that the minority only testified its
dissatisfaction by its nonappearance.

The administration of the laws was the chief difficulty; and the king and
parliament often recommended this great object to the peers in their respective
territories. During a minority the parliament alone had the power of nominating
a regent and council See the reign of James V when the parliament declare that,
by the king's demise, the power had devolved to the three estates who had
appointed Albany regent. Yet the will of the deceased monarch was commonly
respected; and the queens of James I, II, and IV, were acknowledged as regents
for a time.
. At what precise period the king's privy council fucceeded the Aula Regis, or
council of great officers of state is dubious. It was much on the same model,
being composed of the chancellor, chamberlain, treasurer, privy seal,
secretary, and a few other members. Its power during a minority was great, but
at other times entirely under the control of the sovereign, and hardly known
in history. Far superior was the fate of the privy council in Denmark and
Sweden, where the members usurped the chief power; and under the name of
senates controuled the monarchs. The want of titular nobility in these
countries was a radical cause of this singularity, for the prelates having no
balance to their ascendancy, and most of them being senators in virtue of their
sees, the landholders, burgesses, and peasants, could not struggle against so
powerful an aristocracy. In Scotland, on the contrary, the bishops and the
church were a public benefit, as they balanced the power of the ferocious
nobles, and supported the monarch and the laws. All institutions depend on time
and circumstances; and the bane of one country may be the felicity of another.

Had our kings possessed the nomination of the administrators of justice, the
aristocratic influence would have been considerably checked. But most of the
legal officers enjoyed hereditary and indefeasible right. Such were the
sheriffs, though esteemed the king's peculiar officers; nay the peers were
sometimes hereditary sheriffs in their own jurisdictions.

Even in burghs, the aldermen and baillies were more frequently devoted to some
neighboring chief, than to the king.

Of the Mair and Serjands little is known. An act of James I seems to evince
that the office of Mair and King's Serjand was synonymous; and it shows that
the barons had also their serjands. The Mair was destinguished by a red wand;
the officer of regality by a similar badge, red at one end and white at the
other; while the baron serjand had a white wand, and he of the burgh a red. All
bore horns to sound occasionally Acts, f. 17. Another statute, f. v. 19,
mentions Mairs of fee, or hereditary, of the sheriffdom, or of part; and
authorizes them to have deputies, to execute arrests and summonses. It is
suspected that the Murmor of the eleventh century, (Enq. into Sc. hist. II,
319,) was the Mur MAR or great Mair of a province, a term synonymous to the
ancient Earl. In the glossary of Ducange the word Mair or Major implies in
numerous instances great authority. The office of Coroner seems to have
confined to criminal cases, that of Mair to civil. In the isle of Man there
were Moares for every sheading, or district of three parishes: (Order of the
Tinwald 1422, in Townley's Journal, Whitehaven 1791, II, 231, 232.) By one of
those singular changes which occur in society, the sheriff remains a most
honorable office; and the Mair, formerly almost his equal, has dwindled into
the bailiff.
. The terms Mair and Serjand have varied more in signification than perhaps any
others; even now a sergeant at law is a very remote office from a sergeant in
the army; and a Maire of Paris from a Scottish Mair. In its primitive meaning
the term Mair is, in various countries, of high dignity, but had now been
degraded in Scotland from the magistrate to the messenger. The Mair and
Sergeants were the heralds of the law; but their office was in those times
arduous, and honorable, and worthy of the attention of the legislature. Even
these offices were often hereditary; and Skene mentions that in his time there
were "Mairs of fee. De verb. sign. voce Marus.
."

The legal jurisdiction of the crown chiefly appeared in the Brief, or short
writ, issued from the chancery. These brieves were of two kinds, one directed
to the sheriff, or the Mair or serjand messengers of the law, ordering the
party to be cited; the other empowering the judge to try the cause Home Hist.
Law Tracts p. 288.
.

The royal power, though eminent in times of peace, and uncircurnscribed by any
senate, was nevertheless balanced by that of the aristocracy; which during war,
or minorities, even assumed the ascendancy Coronation oaths are solemn trifles,
and they appear unknown to our old annals. According to Nisbet, Her. II, 154,
the clergy, peers, and commons, in order, asked the new sovereign if he were
willing to accept the crown; which being put on his head, a bishop cried God
bless the king; another answered God bless the people, and the king; and again,
God bless the king, and the people.
. The baron was in fact a king in his own jurisdiction; and the operation of
the laws was directed by his loyalty, or his dissatisfaction. The former was
hardly to be secured, except by a munificence which weakened the royal revenue,
and power: this avaricious spirit of the nobility was increased by the
accession of the house of Stuart, and the peculiar circumstances which
accompanied that event. A family, formerly their equal, ascended the throne;
there was no regal ancestry, no foreign splendour, to command awe and obedience:
and a dubious loyalty was only to be won by concessions, or promises, fatal to
the constitutional ascendency of the crown. Age, weakness, regencies, conspired
to increase the wealth and preponderance of the aristocracy; and when James I
regained his scepter; many an effort was required in order to replace its chief
gems.

The few peers, their number hardly exceeding twenty, continued to be chiefly
denominated from the counties into which Scotland was then divided The chief
deviations were, that there never was an earl of Mearns, but Crawford supplied
the place. Leven^x, or the banks of the Leven, (now Lennox) gave a title
corresponding to Dumbartonshire. Yet so strong was the original idea that
Bowar, 541, confounds the counties with the carldoms. Strathern was a county
Palatine, earls David and Walter Stuart, Euphemia the countess, and John
Stuart, 1407, (Du Tillet 117,) all appear as Palatines. The title of Thane
seems to have been introduced after the time of Malcom III, and existed long in
Scotland. Robert II grants the thanedom of Kintore to the earl of Moray,
"reserving the office of the free tenants." Scotst. Call. Harl. 4609, p. 97.
James I grants a charter to Donald thane of Caldor, Id. No. 4620. The same MS.
records a charter to John Meyners of the office of " Cochachderatie of
Kyncollonie; and lands of Ferrochie and Coulentyne, lyland in the abthanrie of
Dull." Yet the difference between a thane and baron is unknown; and some doubts
arise that ignorance may have blended the Saxon Thane and the Irish Tanist.
. The military force of the shire, and the greater part of its civil
jurisdiction, were in the hands of these potentates; and the inferior barons
were attached to them by tenure, by clan, by interest and expectation, or by
bonds of manrent.

The progress of government, legislation, and the useful arts and sciences,
ought to occupy most attention in history; but these pacific objects yield to
wars and revolutions. War unhappily forms the grand basis of the annals of man;
and one battle often produces the happiness or misery of many millions, for
many centuries. Hence the ancient classical historians are ample in describing
the tactics of various nations; while modern writers seem to vie with those of
the middle ages in their negligence of this important theme, which, form its
infinite consequences, deserves to be arranged in the same class with the
government and laws of a country.

It is well known that the chief weapon of the Scots was the spear, often
ineffectual against the English long-bow, because it was not accompanied, as in
the Macedonian phalanx, with strong defensive armor. The buckler in particular
seems to have been small and weak, being only of wicker work covered with
leather; the sallad or iron cap, and the doublet of fence, must have afforded
little protection against the English arrows, which like the Parthian even
pierced the mail of the knight. Other offensive weapons were the brogged staff
or pike, the axe, the sword, the knife or dagger Winton MS. 842, 868. Acts, f.
v. 8, f. 21.
. Such were the arms of the common people: but the chiefs, knights, and
squires, were arrayed in plate-armour which had now succeeded the habergeon, or
coat of small inwoven rings; and they wielded the battle-axe, the two handed
sword, the iron mace, or the spear. Persons worth ten pounds of yearly rent, or
fifty pounds in goods, were ordered to have a hat or helmet, and gorget; a
pesan braced before and behind, with plates to cover the front or the thighs
and legs, and gauntlets. The yeomen worth twenty pounds in effects, were to
have the habergeon, iron hat, bow, quiver, sword, buckler, knife; and, if not
archers, an axe, or a pike. The burgess worth fifty pounds in goods, was to arm
completely as a gentleman; while he who possessed not above twenty, appeared in
the array of the yeoman Acts, f. 21.
.

James I was particularly anxious to establish the use of the bow, and ordered
frequent assemblies near the parish churches for the exercise of archery: but
after his death the national habits prevailed, and among a hundred attendants
of a baron, hardly six archers could be found, the remainder resuming their
spears Bowar, 488.
. It appears that armor, nay spears, and bows, and arrows, were chiefly
imported Act, f. v. 8: in particular the heads of arrows and of spears seem to
have been entirely imported form Flanders.
. The martial music, as is well known, consisted of horns. Some chosen
followers were arrayed in the livery of their chiefs; but the rest of the army
presented a motley mixture Froissart loses all temper in speaking of Scotland,
and the Scots, on account of the treatment of Vienne and his petulant knights.
The admiral, says he, told the French king, that he would rather be earl of
Savoy, or Artois, than king of Scotland; the force of which consisted of about
500 lances (3000 men at arms,) and 30,300 commoners, of no avail against
English archers, or 1000 men at arms, fol, 183, T. II. The common arms he
describes as voulges (hunting spears), dagues or knives, and bastons d'armes.
.

The discipline, and exercise, were trivial; the arrangement was by clans. On
the march almost every man rode a small horse, to save fatigue; but none,
except the knights or fixed cavalry, remained on horseback in a battle. Each
man carried provisions for forty days, chiefly oat-meal; but meat was supplied
by pillage. The right wing became the van, the left the rear, while the center
retained its station.

The exact order of battle, the arrangement of the ranks and files, are
subjects enveloped in much obscurity; and while, with all the lights of the
Roman classics, it remains doubtful whether that great people arranged their
Hastati, Principes, and Triarii, in single lines, or in deep files, there is
less room to wonder at the carelessness of the monkish historians. Yet it
appears sufficiently clear that deep files were used, and that the battles or
battalions were almost square; though sometimes they fought in an eschelle or
circle; sometimes perhaps in the gothic wedge The eschelle was by the Scots
termed a shiltrum. The host was sometimes divided into three or four of these
shiltrums of the heavy armed and spearmen, amid which the archers and light
infantry were sheltered, as by fortresses. See Holinshed's description of the
battle of Falkirk.
. Thin files of two or three seem a modern invention, long posterior to the use
of cannon and fire arms. But the utility of the deep masses formerly used is
not easily discovered; not above three spears could come into contact, and the
rest seems an idle depth, exposed to the arrows of the enemy. This theme must
be submitted to military men; and it is doubtful if the materials be sufficient
for precise investigation.

The most eminent or skilful peers who were present commanded the grand
divisions, commonly four, the right and left wings, the center and reserve.
Under them the smaller barons acted as inferior officers, in feudal gradation,
and often by hereditary right.

In sieges cannon now began to be used, instead of the sows, battering rams,
and other engines, the relics of Roman skill. But no memorable siege
happening after the accession of the house of Stuart, and the Scots having been
singularly deficient in this art, it is unnecessary to illustrate the topic.

These remarks shall be closed with an abstract of the agreement, in the
beginning of June 1385, between the earl of Carric and other peers, and Jehan
de Vienne the leader of the French forces in Scotland. It bears that they shall
march toward the borders on the twenty third of July, and shall lay siege to
some fortresses, but as battle is expected their strength is not to be wasted
in doubtful assaults: that none shall pillage in advancing to the marches, but
shall pay for what they have, on pain of beheading; and all persons coming to
the army to sell victuals shall be safe: if any man slay another, it is instant
death: if any common soldier strike a gentleman, he shall lose his hand or ear;
if one gentleman strike another, justice shall be administered by the captains.
In riots between the French and Scots, the byestanders must seize the guilty,
who if knights are to lose horse and armor, if commoners a hand or an ear; the
like penalty for those who shall dislodge their companions, or disorder the
march. All Scots and French are to wear, before and behind, a white cross of
St. Andrew; if the armor be white, it must be borne on a square, or a circle,
of black cloth. If any Scot insult a Frenchman, he is to be seized by the
French, and brought before a Scottish chief; and so in the contrary. He who
unhorses an Englishman is to have half his ransom. None shall set sire to a
church, kill a woman or a child, or commit rape, on the penalty above mentioned
of knight and common soldier. The prisoner shall belong to that captor who
first received his plighted hand; if taken from him the captain shall order
restitution; if the prisoner be killed a reasonable ransom shall be allowed.
All safe conducts granted by Vienne shall be observed by the Scottish lords and
captains; and the French leaders shall pay like reverence to those of the
Scottish generals Register, f. v. 72.
. Such is this curious ordinance, which throws considerable light on the
military manners of the times.

SECTION III. Agriculture, Useful Arts.
ON these topics only a few brief illustrations occur. Though Scotland was
already denuded of wood, as before evinced, it was not owing to the progress of
agriculture. James I ordered that each poor person who ought to be a labourer,
should either be the half proprietor of one ox in the plough, or dig every day
a square of seven feet of ground, a toil which extended through the year must
not have been inconsiderable Acts, f. v. 7.
. His statutes also ordain that every farmer, using a plough of eight oxen,
shall sow every year a firlot, or four Scottish pecks, of wheat, half that
quantity of pease, and forty beans, under the penalty of ten shillings to the
baron Ibid. f. v. 14.
. Oats and barley were almost the sole crops; not only wheat but pease and
beans were extremely rare, and pease-bannocs were till lately esteemed the next
regale to wheaten bread. The acts concerning wolves and rooks, and burning of
heath at improper seasons, need not be recapitulated. Stealers or peelers of
green wood, breakers of orchards, destroyers of rabbit warrens, and dovecots,
were all justly punished by this wise prince; who also established a new extent
or valuation of landed property Home, hist. law tracts, p. 416, seq
.

The frequent wars between Scotland and England, since the death of Alexander
III, had occasioned to the former country the loss of more than a century in
the progress of civilization. While in England only the northern provinces were
exposed to the Scottish incursions, Scotland suffered in its most civilized
departments. It is apparent that, in the reign of Alexander III, the kingdom
was more abundant in the useful arts and manufactures, than it was in the time
of Robert III.

When James I concluded the commercial treaty with Flanders, it is highly
probable that he invited Flemish artisans to settle in his dominions. With his
admirable talents for government, it seems impossible that he could overlook
the advantages of a plan certainly pursued by his successors Boyce, f. 365,
affirms that James I procured Flemish artists; but a conjecture is better than
his authority. From Bowar, 505, it appears that James delighted in the mechanic
arts.
.

Yet the evidence concerning useful arts and manufactures continues barren. In
a statute of 1428 masons, carpenters, smiths, tailors, weavers, are mentioned
Acts, f. 18.
; and perhaps one or two others crafts, as cordiners, or the like, may be
omitted. The weavers were apparently solely employed in coarse linens, and
perhaps some woolen stuffs. But while Ireland from its English settlements
exported the latter, Scotland had certainly no manufactured export The
Dittamundi testifies the export from Ireland of say, says, or thin woolen
stuffs.
. The rich were wholly clothed in foreign products; which seem even to have
furnished the holiday dresses of the poor.

SECTION IV. Commerce, Money, Navigation.
THE grand emporia of commerce at this period were Venice. England, Flanders,
and the Hanse Towns. Venice in particular concentrated the commerce of the east
and south; and Flanders that of the west and north. Hence the extreme opulence
of the Netherlands, and the rapid progress of their useful and luxurious arts.
To them almost the whole Scottish trade was confined: some voyages to Norway,
Denmark, and one or two of the Hanse Towns, and some to France for wines,
formed perhaps the only varieties.

The imports from Flanders extended, as has already appeared from Froissart,
even to the commonest necessaries. The exports by the account of pope Pius II,
were hides, wool, salt-fish, and pearls Scotland was long celebrated for
pearls. Julius Caesar is accused of invading Britain to procure that precious
article, and there seems no evidence that they were found in the south.
Alexander I had a vast collection. Dalr. Ann. I, 58. The Tay still furnishes
some pearls.
. The statutes further supply horses, kine, sheep, various skins for furs, as
mertrik, fulmart, otter, fox, heart, and roe: and woolen cloths, probably of
Scottish wool manufactured in Flanders for Scottish merchants Acts, f. 3, 5.
Herring, fresh, salted, and red, are also mentioned. Talch or tallow is
forbidden to be exported.
. The customs on imports and exports amounted to about two shillings in the
pound, or a tyth; but the extent of the trade cannot be ascertained Ib. f. v.
7, etc.
. The balance was however greatly against Scotland, as may appear from the
gradual impoverishment of the country, and rise in the value of the coin; and
no less than five statutes of James I appear, against the exportation of money.

The merchants often went abroad with their cargoes; but none was permitted to
use this privilege, except he were worth three serplaiths of wool, each
serplaith being eighty stone weight, or about two sacks Acts, f. 7. Skene voce
serplath.
.

Campvere does not appear to have been the staple port, till after the marriage
of its lord to a daughter of James I. The Dam or Amsterdam, Sluys, Bruges, are
mentioned as the places of resort; and in the latter city James I founded a
Scottish chapel, to be supported by some duties on vessels Acts J. III, 1466,
prohibiting further intercourse with the Swyn, the Sluys, the Dam, or Bruges. A
statute of James I, f. 18, implies no staple, as it mentions indifferently
Zeland and Flanders. The chapel appears in a grant of James IV, 1512, Scotst.
Call.
.

In the old manuscripts of our laws those concerning shipping appear, certainly
not later than the reign of the first James; but they throw no light on
commerce. It is remarkable that they always name Berwick, in mentioning a
seaport; and Bourdeaux is almost the only foreign haven known to their
doubtful pages. They are merely private regulations, probably English, and
composed at Berwick, which, when ships were of fifty tons, aspired to be a
port; and even so late as the reign of James V demanded to be considered as the
staple for all Scottish salmon imported into England MS. Harl. 4700, written
about 1430, and perhaps the oldest extant of the Regiam Majestatem. And see the
reign of James V.
.

Domestic traffic was chiefly carried on at fairs, an amiable and useful
invention of the Roman catholic superstition. They were commonly held on the
day of the saint to whom the parish church was dedicated, and sometimes on
sundays. Thither the merchant or the chapman brought his goods; and the farmer
and the peasant disposed of their products, and returned to their wives,
daughters, or mistresses, with necessaries, or little luxuries, the cloths and
tools of Flanders, or the silks and spices of Venice and the East.

Yet the defect of industry in agriculture, pasturage, and manufactures,
occasioned as above mentioned a great balance against Scotland, and affected
the coinage, which till the year 1355 had been equal in name, weight, and
purity, to the English. In a parliament of June 1385, it was ordered that the
moneyer should issue coin of sterling purity, either from bullion, foreign
money, or vases and other plate; and render out of the pound weight of silver
twenty-nine shillings and four pennies, or in other words three hundred and
fifty-two pennies. Those who bring blanks of France are to have the same
weight, except the loss of six blanks in the pound. The English noble of six
shillings and eight pence is ordered to go for seven shillings and eight pence
Scottish: the French crown of 47 deniers for 42 Scottish pennies; and that of
Flanders for 47 and a halfpenny; while the French mouton is to bear 50. The
exportation of money, by sea or land, is prohibited, on pain of forfeiting the
sum, and even the life of the offender to be in the king's power; except
foreign merchants who bring corn, wine, boards, or the like necessaries, who
may export their profits Register, f. 74.
. In the reigns of Robert III, and James I, Scottish money was to the English as
one to two. The gold coinage of Scotland commences with the accession of the
house of Stuart Anderson Dipl. Grants of Robert III appear to Thomas Melville,
officer of the mint, and to Galfur Goldsmith, coiner. Scots. Call. Harl. 4609,
f. 121. The latter was probably a foreigner, Fleming or Lombard. It is probable
that the engravers for the mint also executed the seals of the middle ages, the
best productions of art in these times.
.

Navigation continued in state of imperfection. The short and heavy shape of
the ships, with a high chamber on the poop and prow, or fore and back, castle,
large tops like galleries in the masts, and other inartificial mechanism,
presents a striking contrast to the light elegance, and rapid movements, of
modern vessels. Even the galleys, or ships with oars, displayed their high
castles, and a form far from agile. The ships had thus less command of the sea,
and were more exposed to the storm, so that it is no wonder that sailing in the
winter months was strictly prohibited. James I ordered with great justice that,
in case of shipwrecks on the Scottish coasts, foreign vessels should undergo the
same laws as were practiced in the countries to which they belonged. Acts, f.
v. 21. A carrick of Lombardy was wrecked near Leith, Oct. 1425. Bowar, 487.
To judge from what little evidence arises few foreign ships visited Scotland,
and the little trade was chiefly conducted by the natives.

SECTION V. Ecclesiastic History, Literature, Language.
IN the middle ages the history of literature is intimately connected with that
of the church; and it is a singular reverse of chance and time when literary
men, themselves the priests of the muses, become enemies of their predecessors
the priests and monks, whose influence was only that of knowledge over
ignorance. During those barbarous times, when science was neglected, and force
alone reigned, a literary man could not pursue his studies, except in a
monastery: and there is reason to believe that many cordially despised the
superstitions which they professed, and had, like the ancient philosophers,
their exoteric doctrine for the people, and their esoteric for the learned: at
least this seems the most rational way of accounting for the preservation of
many classics, and works of philosophy, little accordant with the christian
purity, and doctrine; and for some minute but singular circumstances, in
several sculptures and manuscripts of those times.

That christianity had an eminent effect in the progress of civilization, it
would be absurd to deny. Its enemies assert that it introduced only new motives
of discord, proscribed all vigor of intellect by the imbecility of belief,
excited innumerable wars of religion, (a contradiction in terms almost unknown
to the ancient world,) murdered millions for any absurd dogma; and even by the
severity of its doctrines, tended to vitiate or madden mankind, unable to
observe laws repugnant to their nature. But such are human affairs that no
eminent advantage can be produced, without great concomitant disasters; and the
objections proceed upon a fallacious ground, as being estimated from a partial
view of the influence of christianity in civilized times, instead of a general
retrospect of its influence on barbarous nations and periods. The tenets of the
ancient philosophers had been confined to a few individuals; but the christian
system was diffused through all ranks of men; and its progress into the
northern kingdoms is marked by the first dawn of science, and civilization. It
was in itself a system of education; and thus accomplished what no conquest,
intercourse, nor form of government, could have supplied; and even where its
first steps are marked with blood, the temporary evil produced a lasting
benefit, by abolishing the constant wars and slaughters of savage life, and the
immolation of human victims to deformed idols. Reason has as yet had no power
over nations, and enthusiasm alone could produce such wide and lasting effects:
but while some may doubt whether any particular system of religion be designed
by providence as an eternal fabric, or as a scaffolding to hide and accomplish
some great design, let us be contented to ascribe to christianity its just
merits, in advancing the state of barbaric society.

The history of the church of Scotland preceding the reformation presents few
important events, and the chief are inwoven with the national annals. Only some
detached facts and remarks are reserved for this place.

The privileges of the Scottish church are often confirmed in the statutes, but
are no where precisely enumerated. They seem to have been an exemption from
tribute and war, and from the sentence of a temporal judge: a judicial
authority in the spiritual causes of tithes, testaments, matrimonial and
heretical affairs: freedom to let lands and tithes: submission to no foreign
church, but to the pope alone: a power of holding provincial councils for the
regulation of the national church. In benefices the pontiff had only the right
of confirmation and deprivation, and the purchase of any benefice at Rome was
strictly prohibited. The bishops were elected by the chapter, and the royal
recommendation seems seldom to have intervened. Abbots were chosen by the monks
alone; the secular clergy were named by the proprietors of the lands These
clergy were either parsons, (rectors,) or vicars. Many were in the appointment
of the bishops, and of collegiate bodies, whose chapters they formed. Hence the
lay patronage was much confined. The parochial antiquities of Scotland have
been little explored; but the number of parish churches seems to have increased
since the reformation. It appears, from the foundation charter of the
collegiate church of Dunbar, that a vicar's salary was about ten marks
sterling, or about seventy pounds modern currency.
. Many sees, and abbeys, were opulent; but James III seems to have been the
first monarch who seized and made a traffic of the nomination.

Winton gives a singular tale, unknown to other writers, concerning the
appointment of a bishop of St. Andrews. In the year 1399 Walter Danielston,
parson of Kincardin O Neil in Aberdeenshire, by some means took possession of
the castle of Dunbarton. Three years after, on the death of Trial bishop of St.
Andrews, Thomas Stuart brother to the king was elected by the chapter, but not
confirmed by the pope; and Danielston offered to surrender Dunbarton, if the sea were affigned to him. The terms were accepted by Albany: but Danielston
only survived this strange transaction half a year MS. 886.
.

James I introduced the Carthusian order into Scotland: he found the
Benedictine and Augustinian monks so relaxed in their discipline, that he wrote
a letter of exhortation on the subject to their abbots and friars Bowar, 508.
. After a lapse of near a century, a general council of the Scottish clergy was
held at Perth in 1420; but its regulations are of little moment. Another
council met Antony bishop of Urbino in February 1437, but the king's death
prevented any procedure Innes Essay, II, 587. Bowar, 502.
.

The mass, pilgrimages, and preachings, formed the great objects of devotion.
Bowar displays the virtue of the mass, in saving three monks of his monastery,
who were bringing ale in a boat that was lost, with a credulity worthy of the
ninth century Cont. Fordun, 467.
. The most noted pilgrimage appears to have been Whithern; and James I issued a
general permission to the English and people of Man to visit that sanctuary
Scots. Call. "The saul's of Whithorn." Rabelais, II, 322, mentions the frequent
pilgrimages to St. Treignan, (Ringan, a Scottish corruption of Ninian,) and I,
250, puts St. Treignan of Scotland, as a common oath.
. Sermons in the vulgar tongue were not only delivered by the preaching friars,
but by such of the bishops, and other secular clergy, as were capable. At the
coronation of Robert III, 1390, Thomas bishop of Galloway preached the sermon
Winton, 860. The homilies in latin were for the clergy, and for publication:
but sermons in the vulgar tongue seem to have continued in all ages. The
Anglo-saxon homilies are innumerable: and the practice might be evinced from
contemporary writers of all centuries, in France and other countries. Des
Ursins in particular often mentions sermons, being himself an archbishop.
. An idea of these sermons may be drawn from those at the opening of English
parliaments: latin sentences from scripture were mixed with declamations in the
language of the country.

Scholastic divinity continued to be regarded as the chief branch of
literature: an idle study, in which the powers of the human mind were consumed
in mere disputation concerning ideal words, while things were neglected or
unknown. The acuteness wasted on quiddities, entities, and other absurdities,
might if applied to life, manners, or real science and philosophy, have made
important discoveries: but such is man, ever ready to abandon the important
realities before him, and eager in pursuit of barren visions. Till the
university of St. Andrews was founded in 1412, the Scottish youth designed for
the church were chiefly educated at Paris and Oxford The first professorships
at St. Andrews were for School Divinity, canon law, philosophy and logic: the
professors Lindoris, Cornel, Shevis, Gill, etc. Bowar, 445.
.

Amid many important circumstances, which mark the accession of the house of
Stuart, may be placed the commencement. of a successive series of Scottish
authors; while before that period hardly half a dozen can be enumerated, at
distant intervals, and those chiefly meagre chroniclers or rimers in latin. At
the head of this series stands John Harbor archdeacon of Aberdeen, who in 1375
wrote his celebrated historical poem on the actions of king Robert the Great.
He also composed a genealogy of the kings of Scotland, from the fabulous Brutus
of Geffrey of Monmouth, down to Robert II inclusive; and endeavored to render
the new dynasty more illustrious by poetical embellishment. This work is lost;
but we learn that he derived the Stuarts from Wales, and from Fleance de Waran,
and fell into unchronological errors which Bowar points out, about sixty years
after the appearance of this ideal genealogy, an offering of flattery on the
altar of loyalty Barbour's Bruce, London 1789, pref. p. xix. Bowar, 542.
.

John of Fordun, an useful compiler of history, also flourished under Robert
II. His work was however little known, till it was republished with large
additions by Walter Bowar in the reign of James II. Thomas Barry, canon of
Glasgow, and first provost of the collegiate church of Bothwell, wrote a long
latin poem, in various kinds of rhyme, on the battle of Otterburn, 1388. It is
preserved by Bowar, and is not without merit in its singular line Cont. Fordun,
406.
.

Andrew Winton, prior of Lochleven, composed his riming chronicle of Scotland,
while Murdac duke of Albany was regent, 1419 -- 1424, as appears from his
prayer that the son of Robert Duke of Albany may equal his father MS. 901. "The
fruit of him God grant to be Sik as in his time was he."
. James I is well known as a poet of great genius. It is likely that Sir Hew of
Eglinton, Etrik, Heriot, John Clerk, James Afflek, Mungo Lockhart of Lee, and
Clerk of Tranent, old poets mentioned by Dunbar, belong to this period: and we
know that metrical romances were now common, and formed a favorite amusement of
James I Contemp. account of his assassination.
. Harbor and Winton present ample specimens of the Scottish language at this
epoch.

The civil, canon, and municipal, law, must have been cultivated; but no
certain work remains on these topics, though the statutes evince considerable
skill and prudence. Moral philosophy, natural history and philosophy,
mathematics, medicine, practical divinity, astrology, chemistry, were branches
of science not uncultivated at this period, but no trace of them can be found
in Scotland.

SECTION VI. Ornamental Arts, Manners, Dress.
THE state of the arts was not so mean as may be imagined. Architecture, in
particular, began to assume all the richness, of which the Gothic style is
susceptible. To the credit of Robert II and III it may be remarked, that no
religious foundation is ascribed to them; and the revenues of the crown were
kept sacred from superstition. Of the latter prince it is recorded, that when
Annabella his queen endeavored to persuade him to erect a magnificent tomb for
himself, he answered, with his accustomed piety and humility, that he would
prefer the meanest sepulcher, as more proper for one of the worst of kings, and
greatest of sinners Bowar, 440.
. The foundation of monasteries had, in the preceding century, remarkably
subsided. The wealth of the monks had rendered them voluptuous, illiterate, and
remiss in their duties, so that even the masses for the founders appear to have
been uncelebrated. Hence a new species of religious foundation became
fashionable in the fifteenth century, that of collegiate churches or
provostries, so named because the superior was styled provost. The secular
canons, or prebends, formed a body at the college church, occupied in divine
service, and singing masses for the founders, while their vicars served their
respective parish churches. These collegiate edifices, with some foundations
for the Observantines, a branch of the Franciscans or Gray Friars remarkable
for austerity, present the most certain and genuine specimens of ecclesiastic
architecture at this period; such as Dunbar, Bothwell, Botham, Corstorphin
Spottiswoode, Religious Houses. Winton MS. 835, gives some account of the
architecture of a part of the church of St. Andrews, which had been burnt down,
and was rebuilt by bishop Landal, 1341 -- 1385. Tombs of considerable elegance
are also found in Scotland, of the period now under view; but nothing is known
of the artists.
.

The larger castles continued to be distinguished by one or two exterior walls,
and a court in the center of which stood a large and high tower, or donjon.
Some there were which approached to more modern architecture, being built
around a central court, and only fortified with a ditch and drawbridge. Every
lord or country gentleman had his fortalice, or tower, a lofty edifice with
small windows, surmounted by a flat stone roof and battlements, and secured by
a ditch. In towns the few chief houses had more of the modern style,
fortification being unnecessary while the town was guarded by a wall and ditch.
The architecture seems to correspond with the Flemish; the Scottish artisans
perhaps studying in Flanders.

Bowar celebrates James I for the construction of palaces, and reparation of
castles, but he does not specify the instances Cont. Ford. 514.
. Gardening was also a favorite amusement of that prince; and Bowar mentions
his delight in planting herbs, and trees, and in grafting Ibid. 505. Till the
year 1500 the gardens even in France had only treilles, berceaux, tonnelles,
preaux, sieges, et pavillons de verdure. Le Grand, I, 150.
. The use of pot herbs seems never to have been interrupted in the middle ages;
and constant intercourse with Flanders, a celebrated seat of horticulture, must
have given the Scots a taste for gardening. The monasteries in particular were
distinguished for good gardens and orchards There is an idea, or tradition,
that coleworts were introduced in the north of Scotland by Cromwell's soldiers.
They may have laid out a few gardens, or introduced some particular cabbage or
pot-herb, but olera were common in Scotland in 1267. Fordun, II, 105. The
provincial council of 1269 mentions the tithes of gardens in town or country.
Wilkins, I, 611. And in the preceding century David I was fond of gardening, as
Ailred observes in his life. Vitae Sanct. Sc. 444, 449. Arnoldus Villanovanus,
A. D. 1300, enumerates three sorts of cabbage, white, green, and frizzled. See
also Crescentius de Agricultura.
.

In painting it is probable that no native artist arose, though James I was
himself an eminent calligrapher, illuminator, and painter in miniature Bowar,
505.
. But Venice had already introduced many arts from Constantinople, and in the
current of commerce had imported them to Flanders. Oil-painting in particular
was known for centuries, before John Van Eyck about 1410 made some improvement,
which gave him the fallacious honor of being considered as the inventor Raspe
on oil-painting, 1781, 4to.
. In the erection of the palaces, colleges, and churches, often commemorated in
this century, it seems impossible that painting should have been forgotten. An
old writer mentions that, on the execution of Murdac duke of Albany, his sons,
and Lennox, 1425, they were buried in the Blackfriars church at Stirling, on
the south side of the great altar, with paintings of their persons and arms
"Figuris, et armis, eorundem, depictis." Extracta e Chron. Scot. p. 272, apud
Douglas Peerage, p. 397. For paintings A. D. 1400, see the Statistical Account
of Scotland, I, 329.
. Heraldic painting, at least, must have been common The engraving of seals,
one of the chief arts of the middle ages, may also be considered as belonging
to heraldry.
.

James I was also distinguished for his skill in music; and the chronicler in
celebrating this talent throws some light on the state of music in Scotland at
the time. That prince, he says, sung well; and played on the tabor, bagpipe,
psaltery, organ, the flute, the harp, the trumpet, the shepherds reed: on the
harp in particular his performances were admirable, and were highly applauded
both by Irish and English masters Bowar, 504, 505. The terms are, tympano et
choro, psalterio et organo, tibia et lyra, tuba et fistula... cithara.
.

In the consideration of the manners of the great, hunting forms an eminent
feature. Deer-stealers were severely punished; and a statute appears ordering
that no partridges, plovers, black-cocks, muir-cocks, nor other game, be taken
from the beginning of Lent till August, under a penalty of forty shillings
Acts, f. 7. 19. In 1416 a pair of storks, ciconiae, built in the steeple of St.
Giles, Edinburgh, and remained a year. Bowar 449. The crane, grus, is
commemorated in Adomnan's life of Columba, Vitae S. S. 96.
. Falconry seems to have been a favorite diversion of Murdac duke of Albany;
and was long to continue in high esteem It is first mentioned by Firmicus in
the fourth century. Le Grand, I, 320, says the hound, and glove for the falcon,
on a tomb, show a pacific personage; the lion, belmet, etc. a warrior.
.

But tournaments presented the grandest theater of entertainment. In 1390 Sir
David Lindsay of Glenesk, afterward earl of Crawford, passing with a gallant
train to a tourney, appointed at London by Richard II, overcame lord Wells, a
valiant knight, both in the horse and foot combat: and the circumstances are
detailed with minute pride by the Scottish chroniclers Winton 853 -- 856.
. On the day after the contest, a specimen arose of the rude wit of the time;
an English knight saying that there were no doubt bold men in Scotland, but
such were the issue of the English by illicit intercourse with Scottish ladies,
during the conquest of that kingdom; to which Sir William Dalyel, a knight in
Lindsay's train, retorted that the case might be true, but that it was equally
certain that a proportional degeneracy had taken place among the English
warriors, the progeny of valets, cooks, clowns, and fathers confessors, whom
the ladies had admitted to their arms, during the absence of their lords in
Scotland. And Sir Piers Courtenay, an English knight, royal champion, and
brother to the primate, wearing on his sleeve an embroidered falcon, with this
motto, I beer a falcon, fairest of flicht,
who so pinches at her, his death is dicht
In graith.
Dalyel assumed a similar dress, with the badge of a magpye, and this device, I
beer a py pykkand at ane pes,
Quhasa pykkis at her, I sal pyk at his nese
In faith.
The challenge was understood, and accepted; but the affair terminated in a
ludicrous demand of Dalyel, that, as by the laws of tournament, the champions
ought to be perfectly equal, and he had lost an eye at the battle of Ot^erburn,
Courtenay of course should have one of his extinguished before the combat
Bowar, 423.
. In 1394 the earl of Moray was slain in a tourney with the earl Marshal of
England: and in 1407 Mar was defeated in a similar contest Caxton's Higden, f.
v. 398. Winton, 903.
. James I seems not much to have encouraged these spectacles: and it is his
higher praise that he brought the realm to such tranquillity, that there was no
occasion to proceed to any court in arms, nor to raise any spear, except that
which bore the royal pennon, the mark of his omnipresent authority Bowar, 512.
.

While the commonalty were so much attached to the football and golf, that
positive statutes became necessary against these diversions, in order that
archery might meet with due attention, the great amused themselves with pawme
or tennis. The disposal of the evening, a great object in a life of ease, forms
a marked diversity in the manners of the great in different ages. Among the
ancients the chief repast, at that time, beguiled the fatigues of the day. But
the barbaric customs of a large dinner in the morning, and a slight supper
three or four hours after noon, left the evening listless, solitary, and
vacant. The game of tables or draughts, supplied modern cards; and the
minstrels now and then atoned for the want of theatric exhibitions. The
evenings of James I passed in playing at chess, or tables, reading romances,
singing, piping, harping: the voidee, or parting cup, was the signal of
retiring to rest Contemp. account of his assassination.
.

In food little luxury seems to have been known, till James I. who had resided
nineteen years in England, set the example of a higher style of living Hence
the loud complaints of Boyce against the luxuries introduced by James I.
Winton, 904, mentions Mar's open house and table, at the sign of the Tin plate,
a tavern in Paris. Tin or pewter plates now began to be used instead of wood.
. Under Robert II, the French knights could procure no wine but at a great
price; the ale was no better than small-beer, and the bread was of barley or
oats Froissart, Tome II, f. 182.
. Among the Romans indeed barley bread was the food of gladiators, to give them
strength; it was also a favorite of the Greeks, and Hippocrates has written in
its praise. In the cookery of the middle ages meat was highly seasoned; and
even the wines were often mingled with spices. Distilled spirits are
unmentioned even in the south of Europe, till about the year 1300; and were
chiefly confined to the shop of the apothecary till the sixteenth century.
There seems little mention of brandy or whiskey in Scotland, till the reign of
Charles II Aqua vita distilled from wine was known as a medicine in France,
about the middle of the twelfth century, and seems a product of Arabian
chemistry imported by the crusaders. Arnoldus Villanovanus A. D. 1300 is the
first however who speaks in precise terms of aqua vitae, and recommends it for
most disorders, in his book on the preservation of youth. Le Grand Vie Privee
des Francois, Paris 1782, 3 vols. 8vo, Tome III p. 63, seqq. And he elsewhere
observes that the distillers are not known as a confrairie at Paris, till 1537.
Schoockins de Cerevisia, 1661, says that corn-spirit is derived from Russia.
Whiskey was originally the Irish Usquebauh, a literal translation of aqua
vitae, being barley, saffron, and sugar, decocted, and mixed with corn-spirit.
.

The dress of the common people has already been described; but that of the
great was more complex. The linen shirt began to be used, over which was a
doublet, or vest with sleeves; and the jacket or the gown supplied the modern
coat The gown when very close was called a circoat, and sometimes by the female
term kirtil, as appears from the catalogue of the wardrobe of Henry VIII in
Strutt, III, 80, consisting of robes, gowns, kirtles, coats, and doublets,
where a kirtle with sleeves is mentioned. And in the Speculum Regale, p. 286, a
man's tunic is termed Kyrtil-slaus. The gown was put on as a shirt is, and was
girded. Circoat should be surcate, as being over the coat or jacket, often worn
over the doublet, so called apparently as being a double dress under the
jacket. Juvenal des Ursins describes, p. 177, the whole dress of Charles VI as
consisting of a shirt, vest, ( gippon) robe, hose, and boots.
. The hose, or breeches and stockings in one piece, and shoes of cordwain,
cordovan or Spanish leather; and the hood, or the silken or velvet cap,
ornamented with jewels, completed the dress. An act of James I prohibits any to
wear silk, or the finer furs, except those lords and knights whose income
amounted to two hundred marks a year, and their heirs; the use of embroidery,
pearls, or ornaments of plate, was alike restricted; but others might wear
serpes, belts, broaches, and chains Acts, f. v. 20.
. The belt, or girdle, formed also a necessary article of the dress of the
great: and there were other modes adapted to different ranks and occasions, the
mantle or short cloak open at one shoulder, the tabard or loose jacket, and the
like. But the gown and the robe, and their furring, constituted grand objects
of distinction and expense, being generally of silk, velvet, or cloth of gold.
Other particulars may be learned from the contemporary account of the
assassination of James I: that prince was "standing in his nightgown, all
undressed save his shirt, his cap, his comb, his coverchief, his furred pynsons
upon the form." Shoes with long peaks, fastened to the knees with chains of
gold or silver, were in fashion for some time, as appears from numerous
authentic testimonies; but it is remarkable that they occur in no painting nor
illumination The Eulogium Britanniae, written apparently in the beginning of
the reign of Richard II, 1377, gives the oldest testimony concerning these
chains; and Ross (Warw. Chron. p. 205) says they began in that reign. They were
probably confined to it, whence their rarity in illuminations: but shoes with
long pikes appear in the statutes, 3 E. IV. c. 5, repealed 24 E. IV, 1483, 2nd
are common in MSS.
.

The dress of the ladies consisted chiefly of the kirtil, or close gown and
petticoat in one piece, and the mantle. Other articles were, the wylicot or
under petticoat, shift of fine linen from the Netherlands, hose or high
stockings of linen or woolen cloth, and shoes of leather from the Straits,
Morocco or Spain. Nor ought the girdle, and the broach, which fastened the
mantle, to be omitted. The head-dress appears to have varied considerably,
according to the rank or taste of the wearer In describing the female dress,
Chaucer (Miller's Tale) mentions the seint or girdle, the barme-cloth or apron,
shift embroidered round the neck with black silk, forming a collar, white
volupere or cap with a fillet or ribbon, leathern purse with silk tassels and
ornaments of metal, broad broach, shoes high laced. The wylicot, hose, and
order of the garter, he modestly omits: the kirtil and mantle he passes as
trivial.
.

BOOK VI. CONTAINING THE REIGN OF JAMES II.
Minority and regency -- truce with England -- Crichton, Livingston, and
Douglas -- marriage of the queen dowager -- execution of Douglas -- marriage
treaty with Bretagne -- power of Douglas -- fall of Crichton and Livingston --
death of the dauphiness, and the queen dowager -- execution of Livingston --
English incursions -- battle of Sark -- marriage of James, his character and
active authority -- parliament -- affairs with Douglas -- his treasons --
murder of Maclellan -- Douglas stabbed by the king -- commotions allayed --
tranquillity -- university of Glasgow founded -- grand rebellion of Douglas --
quelled -- conflict at Arkinholm -- death of Moray and Ormond -- parliament --
James invades England -- truce -- parliament -- siege of Roxburgh -- death of
James.

OF the reign, 1437
now about to be described, no original and authentic history remains; and at a
period when we might expect a light so strong, as to illuminate the minutest
features of action, and of character, a kind of twilight surrounds us, in which
only a few large objects can be discerned. The acts of parliament, and other
records, present unquestionable evidence; but it is not in the fixed formality
of such writings that the most interesting details of history are to be found;
and any regular epistolary correspondence concerning public affairs Scotland
cannot display, till toward the end of the reign of James IV. These remarks
are introduced to solicit some indulgence for this particular part of the
narration; in which however no labor shall be spared to recover authentic
facts, and to place them in a distinct point of view Bowar, the continuator of
Fordun, terminates his historical labors with the death of James I. The scanty
original materials, for the reign of the second James, are chiefly the brief
notices at the end of Bowar's work, p. 518 -- 52c, and the history by John
Mair, Paris 1521, Edin. 1740, 4to. p. 322 -- 326, his injudicious narrative of
English affairs abridging the real object of his work. Hector Boyce closed the
first edition of his fables, 1527, with the death of James I: and happy had it
been for our history, if he had not written the reign of James II at great
length; which, after circulating in MS. and being translated, (with the
interpolation of two large passages after mentioned,) by Lindsay of Pitscottie,
was published in the second edition of Boyce's history by Ferrerius, Paris
1574. Not only has Lindsay translated Boyce's fabulous account, but Lesley and
Buchanan have been contented to abridge it, without corrections, or new facts.
In this reign only will Boyce be occasionally quoted, and with much hesitation.
With the reign of James III commence four original historians, seldom or never
borrowing from each other, Lindsay, Ferrerius, Lesley, Buchanan.


.

A parliament being called at Edinburgh, 25 Mar.
the first object was the coronation of the young king, now only in the sixth
year of his age, and which was solemnized on the twenty-fifth day of March,
then reputed the first day of a new year Acts, f. 26. The date is, among many
similar corruptions, put 20th March. But see Ruddiman's notes on Buchanan, I,
439. The continuator of Bowar, p. 518, rightly dates the coronation of James on
the 25th March.
: the next, was an act passed to revoke al alienations of lands, or other
property, belonging to the crown, since the death of the late king, except
granted by the consent of the three states; and to declare all future
alienations void, save those warranted in like manner, until the king shall
have attained his twenty-first year Acts, ibid.
.

In our defect of constitutional information it is not to be discovered by whom
this parliament was summoned. Late writers assert that this high privilege was
exerted by the officers of state; but their duty certainly expired with the
deceased sovereign, and the sacred truth that such officers belong to the
nation is a modern discovery. The same authors carelessly inform us that the
government was divided, by the parliament, between Sir William Crichton the
chancellor, and Sir Alexander Livingston appointed keeper of the king's person.
Both accounts seem more than doubtful. There is every reason to believe, from
the repeated oaths of fidelity ordered by James I to be taken to his queen, and
from other circumstances, that the late monarch had, by his testament,
appointed the queen regent, with a chosen council The contemporary MS. on the
death of James I ascribes the punishment of the regicides to the queen, an
indication that the chief power was in her hands. Of the MS. annals of this
reign by Sir James Balfour a transcript has been obtained; but they are of
little value, and chiefly abridged from Boyce's history. He mentions the
following persons as the council of regency; Sir William Crichton, Archibald
earl of Douglas, William lord Hay, great constable, James lord Lindsay, Walter
Haliburton, treasurer, James Kennedy bishop of St. Andrews, Henry Lighton
bishop of Moray, Mr. William Trumbull, keeper of the privy seal. Livingston as
keeper of the king's person Sir James regards as possessed of the chief
authority: but this council is probably from some record, as he dates its
election 27th March. Yet Kennedy was not bishop of St. Andrews till 1440; the
bishop of Moray was John Winchester; Lighton was bishop of Aberdeen. (Keith's
Bishops.) So much for Sir James's accuracy.

From Scotstarvet's Calendars the following officers appear toward the
beginning of this reign: Sir William Crichton, chancellor; Alexander
Livingston, lord of Calendar; James Livingston, captain of Stirling castle;
William Trumbull, keeper of the privy seal; Sir Robert Lauder of Edrington and
Bass, justiciary; John Railston, secretary; Richard Craig, director of
chancery; Walter Haliburton, treasurer; John Shevis, clerk of register; Nicol
Ottirburn, official of Lothian.


: that the parliament was called by the regency: and that Crichton and
Livingston were not indebted to the national council for their power, but
derived it from the will of James I. It is most improbable that a proud
aristocracy should have forsaken their pretensions, upon this great occasion:
but that the late king should have appointed two gentlemen of reputed wisdom
and integrity, in opposition to the dangerous ambition of the nobles, is
concordant with his character, and highly credible. A similar series of events
ensued to those which occur in the minority of James V: the spirit of the
nation, and of the times, was little adapted to the conduct of a female hand,
not only feeble, but exposed to just suspicion, because the queen was a native
of England, between which country and Scotland had long subsisted either open
enmity, or inveterate jealousy. Finding that her power could not command
confidence, nor influence, she soon shrunk from it; and left Crichton and
Livingston to maintain their turbulent elevation.

An open war with England had taken place before the death of James I, and the
spirit of that prince was not such as to solicit peace; but the present state
of Scotland, under the distractions of a minority, rendered a treaty
desirable. After some negotiation, 18 Sept.
a safe conduct was granted, by Henry VI, to John bishop of Glasgow, Alexander
Seton of Gordon, Sir Walter Ogilvy, and Sir John Forster, as ambassadors from
Scotland Rymer, X, 677. In 1402 the house of Gordon closed in a daughter,
wedded to SETON, the real name of this noble family. So in 1660 the title of
Hamilton passed to the Douglases.
: yet, from some unknown cause, probably a dissension between Crichton and
Livingston, these ambassadors were not sent. 30 Nov.
Soon after, other persons were appointed, namely the lords Gordon and
Montgomery, Methven provost of Lincluden, 1438 31 Mar.
secretary to the king, and John Vaus esquire; and a truce of nine years was
sanctioned Rymer, X, 679, 688. Rymer erroneously supposes the murder of James I
to have happened between the commissions of September and November; a strange
mistake, as any Scottish history might have shown that it happened in lent.
.

If we credit the doubtful accounts which we have of this reign, Crichton had
found means, probably by the superior influence of his office, as chancellor,
to gain possession of the infant king, whom he retained in the castle of
Edinburgh. The queen, favoring the just claim of Livingston, by a stratagem
obtained, and conveyed her son to Stirling, and delivered him to the care of
his legal guardian. The chancellor applied to Archibald earl of Douglas for his
assistance, which was denied: Livingston invested the castle of Edinburgh; but
he and the chancellor agreeing to join against Douglas, concord was restored
Boyce, lib. XVIII, init. Lindsay's translation, p. 5 -- 11, Edit. Edin. 1778,
8vo.
.

There cannot be a stronger proof of the ignorance of our carlier writers,
concerning this reign, than their assertion that the powerful earl of Douglas
was neglected, while it is known, from authentic records, that he held the high
office of lieutenant general of the kingdom, 27 Nov.
and even summoned a parliament Aberc. II, 319, from MS. records.
. In another national assembly it was ordered that the lord lieutenant, 1439 13
Mar.
and the king's chosen council, should hold two sessions yearly for the
administration of justice: and that the lord lieutenant should seize any
rebels, or despoilers, lodged in castles, or strongholds, and enforce them to
find surety for their good behavior Acts, f. v. 26.
. But Archibald earl of Douglas died this year; and was succeeded by his son, a
youth whose years did not exceed fourteen, 1439
and were too immature to support the dignities of his father Boyce and Lindsay
date the death of Douglas in 1439. His epitaph, Hume's Dougl. I, 267, bears
that he died the 26th June 1438: but three original deeds confute this date,
Aberc. II, 319, and show that for M.CCCC.XXXVIIII (1439) Hume read 1438; or, as
not unfrequent, an erroneous date might occur in an epitaph, if placed long
after the event.
.

Meantime petty feuds and commotions destroyed the public peace and welfare:
the flood of aristocratic tyranny and violence, which had been confined by the
stern government of James I, burst the temporary barriers, and deluged the
country.

Joanna, the queen mother, married Sir James Stuart, commonly called the Black
knight of Lorn: the barbarism of the age rendering it unsafe for a woman of
rank to remain without the protection of a warlike husband. But Sir James
Stuart being a friend to the family of Douglas, as is said, Livingston confined
him, and his elder brother, and even the queen, till they engaged not to
support the house of Douglas. 1440
The fruit of Livingston's insolence was that the chancellor, by another
stratagem, recovered the possession of the king's person, and conveyed him to
Edinburgh. But, by the mediation of friends, a lasting agreement was at length
formed between them; and the king was committed to Livingston's care, as
ordered by his deceased father Boyce, lib. XVIII. Lindsay's translation, 13 --
24. The imprisonment of the queen is evidenced by a charter, to Alexander
Napier, comptroller, for his service to the queen mother, to the king, and the
recompense of a hurt in his body, at the time of the traitorous betraying and
imprisonment of the said queen, by Alexander Livingston, knight. The lands
granted are those of Philde in the lordship of Methven, and sheriffdom of
Perth, in the king's hands by the forfeiture of the said Alexander Livingston,
to be held blanch for a silver penny: 7 March 1449-50. Scotst. Call. sub data.
.

However this be, it is certain that a parliament was held at Stirling Acts, f.
v. 26.
, 2 Aug.
in which it was decreed that the privileges of the clergy should be observed:
that the administrators of justice should hold their sessions twice a year:
and, by a remarkable act, that "the king should ride through the realm,
immediately upon intelligence being sent to his council, wherever any
rebellion, slaughter, burning, robbery, outrage, or theft, happened; to call
the sheriff of the shire, wherein the crime was committed, before him, and
before he leaves the shire to remedy the mischief and punish the offenders; in
the execution of which ordinance all the barons, with one assent, are obliged
to assist Ibid. c. 5.
." In this singular decree we find the legislative body regarding the king in
the modern light of a chief magistrate, bound equally with the meanest subject
to an obedience to the laws: yet it may be suspected that this new style, used
by the parliament, flowed from temporary circumstances, and not from fixed
principles of the constitution; the nonage of the king evidently pointing the
act to those who had the custody of his person, as implying that the sovereign
was not to be the prisoner of an individual, but the free inspector of his
kingdom at large.

The power of the house of Douglas had arisen to a formidable height, and was
during this reign to contend with the royal authority. Galloway, Annandale, and
other extensive territories in Scotland, the duchy of Touraine and lordship of
Longueville in France, rendered to the chief of that family revenues perhaps
equivalent to those of the Scottish monarch. The young earl, now in his
sixteenth year, possessed the impetuous spirit, and haughtiness, natural to his
age and fortunes. His highest title, that of duke of Touraine This title was
proudly borne in Scotland. Margaret duchess of Touraine, countess of Douglas
and Longueville, occurs in two charters about this time. Scotst. Call. Harl.
4620 (unpaged, but beg. J. II.) She was the king's aunt, the widow of Archibald
first duke of Touraine, slain in 1424.
, which a weak regency had permitted the house to assume, and which impolicy
had not applied to the French king to discontinue, emboldened the Douglas to
regard himself as a foreign prince, independent of the laws of his country. The
prudence of age might have induced a concealment of pomp, and power, from the
fear of envy, and danger; but, in the arrogance of youth, William earl of
Douglas displayed a constant train of one thousand horse, and a dazzling
magnificence in his household; nay he would even create knights, and hold
courts in imitation of parliaments Boyce, lib. XVIII. Lindsay's transl. p. 13.
.

The chancellor, who, by his office, was chiefly charged to see the due
execution of the laws, was irritated at the insults offered to them by the
power of Douglas. Instead of bearing with the young earl's insolence, in the
hopes that a few years would infuse moderation and prudence into his conduct;
instead of secretly using the king's influence with the court of France, that
the foreign titles and possessions might be withdrawn from the family, Crichton
resolved to cut off the earl, and his brother; a measure which might perhaps
have admitted some apology, had they been advanced to maturer age, for it seems
strictly equitable that an oppressor, who is above the procedure of justice,
may be sacrificed to the laws, without any procedure of justice; but which,
while we consider the tender age of the offenders, must be pronounced unjust,
murderous, and tyrannical. Nay when the consequences are seen, this act will
appear weak and impolitic, and will incur the bitterest charge of depravity,
that of ineffectual guilt.

By plausible invitations, and flatteries, William earl of Douglas, his brother
David, and Malcom Fleming of Cumbernauld, a faithful adherent of the family,
were inveigled into the castle of Edinburgh, and after an insidious
entertainment, and a brief and delusory trial, were beheaded Cont. of Bowar,
518, (and Bowar, 490, note.) Chron. end of Winton. Mair, 322. Among the fables
of Boyce, and all becomes fable in his hands, is the tale of the bull's head,
presented before Douglas as a symbol of death. Such a signal were absurd in
itself, and the height of impolicy. As Boyce connects the Scots with the
Egyptians, etc. this symbol may perhaps be traced in some ancient author: at
present it suffices to say that it was unknown to Scottish history and manners.
. The earldom of Douglas fell to the next male heir, James lord of Abercorn,
surnamed the Gross, a prudent and peaceable man, but who unfortunately enjoyed
his title only two years, and left a turbulent son William, the third of that
name: the unentailed estates of Galloway, Wigton, Balvenie, Ormond, and
Annandale, were inherited by Margaret, sister of the murdered earl, commonly
called The Fair Maid of Galloway, who wedded her cousin the third William,
thereby restoring the house of Douglas to all its power Yet James the Gross
held these titles, or his epitaph is again erroneous. Hume Dougl. I, 295. In a
charter of 1440 he is specially called earl of Anendale, and lord Balveny.
Scotst. Call. Wigton and Ormond do not appear, and may have been unentailed. If
James had Galloway, etc. why did they not pass to his son? Beatrix, wife of
James the Gross, is, by some writers, confounded with the fair maid of Galloway.
. The want of wisdom in the government, upon this occasion, exceeds belief; but
it is easier to commit a murder, than to perform an action of common prudence,
and crime ought never to infer ability. Margaret was apparently a ward of the
crown; at any rate the new earl William, and the heiress, were within the
degrees of consanguinity, and he was forced to apply secretly to the pope for a
dispensation, which not arriving so speedily as he hoped he married her on Good
Friday, in the time of Lent, a day and period esteemed as unlawful as the
marriage Boyce, lib. XVIII. Lindsay's transl. 30. Hume's Dougl. I, 293, 294.
Yet the fact is doubtful. She seems to have been very young, and only
affianced; for in Feb. 1449-50, appears a grant of her marriage to earl
William, Scotst. Call. and published in Hay's Vindication of El. More, p. 66.
. The opposition to this connection ought to have been cogent, the pretexts for
annulling it were just: but for this unaccountable neglect the regency, the
nation, the king, were afterward sufficiently to suffer.

An embassy arrived from Bretagne, 1441
to propose a marriage between Francis count de Montfort, son and heir of John
V surnamed the Good and Wise, and Isabella of Scotland sister to the king
Lobineau Hist. de Bret. Paris 1707, folio, p. 619. On this occasion Lobineau
relates, after Argentre, that on the return of his envoys, Hingant and
Pencoedic, duke John V asking their opinion of the lady, they answered that she
was beautiful, of elegant shape and blooming health, but spoke little,
apparently not from discretion but great simplicity. The duke's noted reply
was, "Chers amiss, je vous pry retournez en Escoce, et me l'amenez; elle est
tell que je la desire. Ces grandes subtilites en une femme nuissent plus
qu'elles ne servent; je n'en veux point d'autre. Par Saint Nicolas j'estime une
femme assez sage, quand elle sait mettre difference enter la chemise et le
pourpoint de son mari.'" Lobineau gives her portrait from an original in the
cathedral church of Vannes.
. The proposals were favorably heard; and Sir George Crichton admiral of
Scotland Lobineau, as usual with the French, corrupts his name to Trethon. He
was perhaps the second son of the chancellor, and is, it is believed, the first
admiral of Scotland on record, though "the admirals of the Scottish king" be
mentioned in the truce of 1429. Rymer, X, 482. Crichton appears as admiral of
Scotland in a charter of 1 April 1450: in Feb. 1451 he is styled George
Crichton of Cairns, admiral of Scotland. On the 8th July 1452 he is earl of
Caithness. Scotst. Call. The title had passed to the crown on the forfeiture of
Athole; and on the death of Crichton was conferred on the Sinclairs of Orkney.
Suth. Case, c. iv, p. 44, 45.
, Foulis archdeacon of St. Andrews, and William Monipeny esquire, who was
afterward employed in many negotiations, proceeded to Bretagne to complete the
transaction. 19 July
It was soon after settled that James should pay with his sister a portion of
one hundred thousand saluts of gold; and the duke of Bretagne agreed to a dower
of six thousand livres Laboineau, ib. The salut might be worth 10 s.. The livre
was then about one ounce of silver, and perhaps equal to two pounds of modern
estimation.
. Her voyage was, from unknown causes, delayed till the following year.

The truce with England, 1442
which would have expired in 1447, was, by anticipation, extended for seven
years longer, till the first day of May 1454 Rymer, XI, 4.
. Isabella sister to the king proceeded to Bretagne, Nov.
where she was wedded to he new duke Francis I John V had died on the 28 Aug.
1442. Isabel landed at the castle of Aurai 30 Oct. with a great train of
Scottish lords and ladies. Lob. I, 621.
.

Sir William Ruthven, sheriff of Perth, 1443
conveying an highland freebooter to justice, was attacked by a body of Athole
men, led by one Gormac, but by the spirit of Ruthven, and some gentlemen in his
company, the assailants were defeated, and about thirty slain Boyce, lib.
XVIII. Lindsay's transl. 30, 31.
. 4 Nov.
A parliament was held at Stirling: of its proceedings we only know that an act
was passed, to secure the property of the church against despoilers Acts, f.
27. Of this year appear to be the answers to the articles of the Scottish king,
Vesp. F. VII, f. 59, for they mention that the Scottish parliament was to meet 4
Nov. They chiefly concern the payment of 40,000 marks, due for the ransom of
James I.
. Some doubts having arisen concerning the succession to the important earldom
of Orkney, 1443
Thomas of Tholac, the bishop, made a formal report on the subject to
Christopher III, king of Denmark Sweden and Norway, in which the right of the
house of Sinclair is evinced This valuable diploma is printed in Wallace's
Orkneys, and in the Orkneyinga Saga: and is one of the most curious historical
pieces of that dark period. The transcriber has, by a common error, omitted
quadragesimo after quadringentesimo, whence the date 1403: but the real epoch
is clear from the contents.
.

The king now approached his fourteenth year, 1444
when, by the usage of most kingdoms, he was regarded as capable of managing
his affairs: the perturbation of a minority, flattery, and the danger of
opposing the royal will, as soon as the slightest degree of manly thought
appears, concurring to suppose in princes, whose station is the most difficult,
a far more early discretion than is to be found in the common ranks of mankind.
That reign must indeed be very weak, which transcends not the inefficacy, and
disturbances of a regency. By the common course of human affairs, the young
king detested the control of Livingston and Crichton; and the numerous friends
of the house of Douglas were successful in sharpening his resentment against
those stern guardians, who had held him in captivity, and in turning his
affections to the earl of Douglas, whose youth was more congenial with that of
the king, and whose power could irresistibly enforce the royal designs. It is
said that Galbraith, a partisan of Douglas, having slain Semple deputy governor
of Dunbarton castle, and seized the whole command of that fortress, Douglas
became anxious for the event, and proceeding to the king's presence, put
himself wholly in the power of James, with professions and oaths of the
humblest fidelity: and that the monarch, delighted with his submission and
behavior, admitted him to his most chosen counsels Boyce, lib. XVIII.
Lindsay's transl. 31.
. However this be, it is certain that the office of chancellor was now taken
from Crichton, and conferred upon James Bruce bishop of Dunkeld Crawf. Off. 32,
from a charter. Keith Bishops, 54, from another.
. Crichton shut himself up in the castle of Edinburgh, of which he had been
governor since the late reign, with a resolution to defend himself against the
violence of his enemies: and Livingston, who was less obnoxious, either by
office or crimes, held the castle of Stirling. Douglas used his new power with
an excess, dangerous to the king, and to himself. In a short time all the
followers of the late administration were displaced, and successors devoted to
the present ministry were appointed: three brothers of Douglas soon became
peers James and Archibald were twin brothers of the second birth. The former
was the first born, but was in the church, (see Drummond 50.) He was however
afterward to become earl of Douglas.
. Archibald, by marrying the younger daughter of James Dunbar, earl of Moray,
acquired that title and estate, upon the death of his father-in-law, to the
prejudice of the chancellor's eldest son James, who had wedded the elder
daughter Crawf. Off. 311. His peerage, and that by Douglas, under the title.
. Hugh was created earl of Ormond; and John lord of Balveny Peerages. The lands
were before in the family. Ormond was erected into a marquisate by James III
for his younger son. Suth. Case, chapter IV, p. 57, whence it appears that Ormond
was a hill, (probably an ancient moot-hill or court of justice,) in Ardmanach
on the east of Rossshire. Yet there is a village of the name, two miles west of
the chanonry of Ross. Pont's Maps.
. This accession of power to a family, before too potent, was the height of
impolicy, and could only be granted by a youth to a favorite.

Douglas procured a parliament to be held, 1445
in which Crichton and Livingston were denounced rebels, and their estates
forfeited. The castle of Crichton was taken, and destroyed; and, in revenge,
the late chancellor made excursions from the castle of Edinburgh, and ravaged
the lands in Lothian belonging to Douglas. The Kingdom fell into complete
anarchy, and became one scene of violence and disorder Boyce, lib. XVIII.
Lindsay's transl. 33, 34. It is certain that a parliament was held in July
1445, and passed an act ordaining that all the lands and effects of the late
king should be enjoyed by the present during his minority, (Acts, f. 27;) a
statute probably pointing at Crichton and Livingston.
.

James was induced to besiege the castle of Edinburgh, which was bravely
defended by Crichton Cont. of Bowar, 519. Mair, 322.
, who had indeed no reason to regard the royal army but as that of Douglas. The
siege was turned into a blockade, and continued till the next year.

Eleanor and Jane, the two unmarried sisters of James, proceeded to France, to
their sister the dauphiness, apparently on the death of the queen mother
Perhaps after her death, (Berry, 158) the precise date of which is unfixed: but
it certainly happened before 24th Nov. 1445, of which date there is a fate
conduct to James Stuart the husband of the deceased queen of Scotland. Rymer,
XI, 107.
; for Scotland was in a state of lawless confusion; and there was reason for
apprehension, that Douglas would convert he princely bridals into a further
accession of power to his family. Upon their arrival, they found the dauphiness
dead Berry hist. de Charles VII, (published with the works of Alain Chartier,
Paris 1617, 4to.) p. 158, "elle etoit belle et bonne done." Duclos hist. de
Louis XI, 1, 57. She was only in her twenty-second year, and was buried at
Chalons. The singular fate of this princess may excuse a digressive note, from
the original materials furnished by Duclos, III, 26 -- 61, being the
informations taken in Oct. 1445, and in 1446, concerning the cause of her
death. These informations purport that certain words spoken by the malicious
Jamet de Tillay, an officer of the dauphin, had penetrated so deeply the tender
and melancholy heart of Margaret, as to occasion her death. Their truth she
denied on the perdition of her soul; but she would recline on her sofa, and
exclaim, Ah Jamet! Jamet! you have gained your purpose. If I die it is on your
account, on account of the fair words you have spoken of me, without cause or
reason. At other times she would say, May I die if I ever wronged my husband!
The seneschal of Poitou, present when the latter expression escaped, exclaimed,
False and wicked scoundrel, she dies by your malice! On her deathbed her
confessor could hardly persuade her to pardon Jamet: and she cried out, Now he
has gained his purpose. The words, she said, were the worst that could be
pronounced of a woman, and tended to ruin her in the opinion of the dauphin.
Almost her last expression was, Were it not for my conjugal faith, I should
repent that I had ever come to France.

On the second examination in 1446, May -- Aug. Jamet de Tillay was twice
questioned; and the queen of France herself gave a deposition. Tillay confessed
that, on entering the chamber of the dauphiness in the dusk of the evening, and
perceiving to lights, he said it was grande paillardie in the officers to show
such negligence; denied that he accused lady Pregente of managing Margaret's
amors, as he would not wish more chastity in his own wife, than he was
persuaded belonged to the dauphiness; and he offered the duel to any man who
would say that he had arraigned her honor: denied that he asserted that
Margaret's illness arose from love, while he only said that it proceeded from
her sitting up all night, making rondeaux and ballads, (44, 52;) and that she
would never have a child while she was so fond of sour apples and vinegar. He
denied that he said the dauphin did not love his wife because "les basses
marches ne se portoient pas bien." The queen's deposition proves Tillay to have
been a malicious meddling fellow, capable of any falsehood. His second
examination bears that Margaret would compose twelve rondeaux in a day; that
she sometimes was laced too tight, at other times too loose. The fatal words at
length appear to have been "Avez vous point vu cette dame-la? Elle a mieux
maniere d'une paillarde que d'une grande maitresse." "Have you seen that lady?
She has more the appearance of a harlot than of a great princess." He denied
that he had said them, and offered the duel; asserting that no lady could have
more of the appearance of high birth. But the words were confirmed by another
witness, p. 59.

On the whole Margaret was too fond of poetry, and her adventure with Alain
Chartier is well known; she was too careless of her person and manners, and had
perhaps a secret blemish which disgusted the dauphin. But the character of her
husband, afterward Louis XI, is of black malignity; and her accuser was proved
to be a "scoundrel" and "common liar," qualities which doubtless recommended
him to the special protection of Louis.


: 16 Aug.
but the French monarch received them with great affection, and demanded a
dispensation for marrying the elder to the dauphin, which being refused by the
pope, she was many years after wedded to Sigismund duke of Austria: and Jane
returned to her own country Duclos, I, 57. Roo Ann. Aust. 399. Jane was wedded
to Angus. Crawf. Stuarts, 36.
. The queen mother who died this year, left three sons by her second husband,
John, and James, afterward earls of Athole, and Buchan; and Andrew, who became
bishop of Moray Berry, 158. Stewarts Genesis 171. Lesley, 298, says she died 15
July 1446.
.

Meanwhile the disorders of the country increased, under the mismanagement of
Douglas, and caused even the regency of Crichton and Livingston to be regreted.
Among the petty feuds, commemorated in our dubious annals, a discord of more
importance is introduced. A dispute arising between Lindsay son of the earl of
Crawford, and Ogilby of Innerquharity, the former was joined by his father, the
latter by the earl of Huntley, and a desperate conflict ensued. Crawford,
Huntley, and Ogilby, were slain, with many other gentlemen, and near two
hundred of their followers Boyce, lib. XVIII. Lindsay's transt. 34 -- 36.
Lesley, 297, dates this conflict 13 Jan. 1445 -- 6.
.

Crichton at length surrendered the castle of Edinburgh, 1446
upon terms highly advantageous to himself, for his estates, and honors, and
even his office, were to be restored; and the conditions were strictly adhered
to Lindsay, p. 37. Crawf. Off. 30, supposes, with great probability, that
Crichton, was not reinstated in the office of chancellor, till the death of
bishop Bruce 1447. In 1448 he appears as chancellor in an instrument. MS.
Leagues, Fr. and S. and du Tillet, f. 140.
. Several reasons appear to have induced the king and Douglas to such
concessions: it was probably now discovered by both that the aged experience,
and abilities, of Crichton were necessary to give some stability, and order, to
government, and restore greater respect to the laws. Douglas seems to have
found that, by grasping all, he would lose all; and that the accession of
Crichton's talents, and fame, would much strengthen the power of his
administration. It also appears that Crichton had never been cordially united
with Livingston, but had from necessity only consented to concord; and now when
the death of the queen mother had left Livingston destitute of strong
influence, he ungenerously made his peace with Douglas, by the sacrifice of his
colleague. It has surprised some that Douglas satiated his revenge upon
Livingston and his family, who were innocent of the murder of his two
relations; and that Crichton was never charged with that assassination: but it
is reasonable to infer that there were powerful motives for this conduct; the
king himself had been present at the murder, and in the jealousy of his
authority might consider it as a matter rather too delicate for discussion;
Douglas might have had little inclination to condemn an action, which laid the
foundation of his power; and the intention of which was perhaps not unknown to
his father, who might otherwise have immediately instigated the whole force of
the house of Douglas against the government Yet the violence of Livingston to
the queen in 1439, (see a note on that year,) indicates the tyranny of his
character; and he might be the chief instigator of the assassination of the
Douglases.
.

The earl of Douglas was, about this time, created lieutenant general of the
kingdom Abercr. II, 333. The Acts, f. 28, mention a lord lieutenant in 1449.
; an office of extreme power, which had been held by one of his predecessors at
the commencement of this reign. He now resolved upon the perdition of the
family of Livingston, which had only done its duty to the king and kingdom, by
opposing the exorbitant influence of the house of Douglas. Accordingly Sir
Alexander Livingston, formerly keeper of the king's person, James his eldest
son, Robert and David Livingstons, and Sir James Dundas, and Sir Robert Bruce,
connected with the family, were committed to several prisons: but Sir
Alexander, and the two other knights, Dundas, and Bruce, were delivered upon
paying large sums of money: the others were tried and beheaded Boyce, lib.
XVIII. Lindsay's transt. 38, 39. It is surprising that there is no superior
authority for these events: but Livingston's forfeiture is mentioned in the
charter of 1450, narrated in the notes to 1439; and that of James his son,
Robert burgess of Lithgow, and James Dundas, in a charter 22 May 1450. Scotst.
Call. Yet Crawf. Off. 312, and Dougl. Peer. 412, seem to evince that James
Livingston was not executed. Boyce calls this eldest son Alexander. In 1446
Dunbar castle was seized by Patrick Hepburn, a rebel, as appears from a
catalogue of the Coldingham charters now at Durham, in bibl. Harl. 4623.


. Dec.


Although the truce with England had, in 1442, 1447
been continued from 1447, when it was otherwise to expire, till 1454, yet the
English borderers, knowing the confusion into which the maladministration of
Douglas had plunged Scotland, resolved to avail themselves of the occasion. The
saintly imbecility of Henry VI, and the cabals of the queen's party, and that
of the duke of Gloucester, distracted the government, and rendered the subjects
unruly and disaffected. Several inroads of the borderers took place this year;
in which, as is said, Dumfries on the one part, and Alnwich on the other, were
burnt Boyce, lib. XVIII. Lindsay, 40, adds Alnwick. Hay, in his Vindication of
Elizabeth More, Edin. 1723, 4to, has published, p. 65 -- 73, a curious paper of
25 Aug. 1447, determining the priority of birth to James Douglas above his
twin-brother Archibald earl of Murray.

About this time died Cameron bishop of Glasgow, who is distinguished by
impiety in the fictions of Boyce. His curious canons, 1432, may be found in MS.
Harl. 4631, Vol. I, p. 47; and his great crime seems to have been his severity
in church discipline.


.

Ravages of such importance called greater powers into action; 1448
and the battle of Sark, so called from a river in Annandale, terminated the
difference in a manner advantageous to the Scots. Unfortunately we have no
English, nor Scottish contemporary account of this battle, the only one which
occurs between the nations for a long period of time. When at the distance of
near a century we find records of this action, the English pass it in complete
silence, and the Scots too much swell their victory. The accounts of Jean
Chartier, and Monstrelet, seem to deserve the preference; but even there the
number appear to be exaggerated. According to the French historians, the
English, to the number of fifteen thousand, conducted by the earl of Huntinndon
and lord Percy, apparently wardens of the marches, entered Scotland by the
western border, and advanced six miles into the country. The earl of Douglas
hastily advanced, with only six thousand, attacked the enemy in the open field;
conquered, and took the two generals captives. Upon the tidings of this defeat,
the earl of Salisbury, who was lord lieutenant of the north of England, raised
an army of sixty thousand, and sent this formidable force to invade Scotland.
Douglas, and his brother Ormond, with thirty-two thousand men, attacked the
English by surprise, and put them to a total route; with the incredible loss of
between twenty and twenty-four thousand, taken and slain. The Scots then
entered England, and ravaged the country as far as Newcastle The reader will in
vain consult the English historians for this battle, the only one of
importance, from that of Halidon 1402 to that Flodden 1513. Harding, Caxton,
Julian Notary, Fabian, Hall, Leland, Coll. 1, 494, even the copious Holinshed,
are equally silent. But the English history, 1422 -- 1509, is very defective.
Monstrelet, III, f. 8, edit. 1518, derives his account from the great chronicle
of St. Denis; and says that three Scottish priests of the diocese of Dunblane,
related it upon oath before the chronicler of France at St. Denis. He dates it
1449; but the truces of that year, and the silence of Rymer in 1448, support
the date commonly assigned by our historians. The battle of Sark also occurs,
Cont. of Bowar, 519; and the war between England and Scotland in Jean Chartier,
p. 142, who, p. 146, narrates the battle of Sark in the same way with
Monstrelet, but with many corroborative circumstances. For Huntingdon he seems
rightly to put Sir Thomas Harrington. Jean Chartier was himself Chantre of St.
Denis. Add that the chronicle of Zanfliet of Liege, who wrote in 1461, bears at
1450 that the Scots invaded England, and took great prey, but he dates this the
same year that James wedded Mary of Gelder: col. 471, in Martene's Anecdota.

Among the unpublished pieces of Rymer, No 4610, there are some articles
tending to confirm this war. Art. 14, 3 Feb. 1449, is a commission to Clifford,
Scrope, etc. on march affairs, mentioning the malicious purpose of the Scots;
Salisbury was warden of the western marches. Art. 15, same date, same effect;
the Scots are ill-disposed to England, and annoy the marches: Henry excuses the
nonattendance of these peers in the parliament to meet 12th Feb. (1449, Parl.
Hist. II, 250.) Art. 9, 8 July 1449, is a commission to the bishop of
Chichester, and lord Beaumont, to treat for abstinence of war, or a truce. Art.
10 to same effect, 27 Aug. 1449.

Lesley, 301, dates the battle of Sark, 1450. The Magnus with the red mane of
the fabulous Boyce is Magnus Redmain, a common English name on the borders,
from the reign of Henry IV. Sir Richard Redmain is mentioned in truces of that
reign, Vesp. F. VII, f. 93 and 95, n. 1. In a French history of Scotland, Vesp.
C. XVI, f. 41 seq he is ludicrously called Barberousse le Grand.

Add that in 1448 Douglas issued severe statutes for the regulation of the
borders, probably occasioned by war. See these curious statutes of Lincluden,
Titus, F. XIII, f. v. 39, and in the Appendix.


.

Sir William Crichton, chancellor of Scotland, John Railston bishop of Dunkeld
secretary, and keeper of the privy seal, and Nicholas Ottirburn official of
Lothian, had passed on a solemn embassy to France and Burgundy. The grand
objects of their mission were, to renew the alliance with France; and to
discover a proper bride for James now in his eighteenth year. The league
between France and Scotland was accordingly repeated in the most solemn and
ample form, 31 Dec.
and with a confirmation of all the preceding treaties, since that of Charles
the Fair and Robert I, in the year 1326 Du Tillet, f. 140. The commission of
James is dated 6 May 1448, r. 12.
.

As the court of France then presented no suitable wife for the Scottish king,
1449
the ambassadors proceeded to that of Burgundy. Philip the Good, who ruled that
potent duchy, or rather kingdom, with celebrated wisdom and splendour, had in
1430, as above narrated, concluded a commercial treaty with Scotland for one
hundred years. He recommended to the ambassadors his kinswoman Mary, daughter
of Arnold duke of Gelderland, as a lady worthy of the hand of their sovereign
Treaty James and Philip, 1 April 1449, MS. Harl. Vol. III, f. v. 6; where it is
mentioned that the envoys found Mary, "jam nubilem et formosam;" and that they
returned to France to consult Charles VII, who sent with them ambassadors to
expedite the marriage. Arnold of Egmont became duke of Gelder in 1423, and died
in 1468. His son Adolf having rebelled against him, he left his territories to
Charles the Bold duke of Burgundy. Miraei Chron. Belg. Antv. 1636, folio, p.
304.


.

This matrimonial engagement was accordingly entered upon, in the presence of
envoys from France, then in strict alliance with Burgundy. 1 April
The treaty was concluded at Brussels; and bore that Philip should pay at
Bruges in the course of two years sixty thousand crowns of gold, as the portion
of the bride. James enfeofed Mary in Strathern, Athole, Methven, Linlithgow,
and other lands for the payment of a dower of ten thousand crowns, in case of
his previous decease; and he relinquished all the hereditary claims of his
wife, in case her father left a male heir. On the same day a perpetual league
of mutual defense was concluded with Philip, in which the duke of Gelderland
was comprehended Treaties James and Philip MS. Harl. 4637, Vol. III, f. v. 6,
and f. 11. In Dec. 1449 the dukes of Bretagne and Austria are joined in the
ratification of the treaties with France and Burgundy. Scotst. Call.
.

During the negotiation reciprocal intercourse, and festivity, occupied the
courts of Scotland and Burgundy. A Burgundian historian describes at great
length a tournament celebrated, in the time of lent, at Stirling in the
presence of the Scottish king, the judge and rewarder of the combat. Two
Burgundians of the noble house of Lalain, and a third styled the squire
Melyades, challenged two of the Douglases, and Halket, to fight with the lance,
battle-ax, sword and dagger. After a festival of some days, the combatants
entered the lists, clothed in velvet, and proceeded to their pavilions to arm;
the earl of Douglas himself, attended by not less than about five thousand
followers, accompanying the Scottish champions. After having been solemnly
knighted by the king, the parties engaged: the spears were soon thrown away:
one of the Douglases was felled by a battle-ax, and the combat becoming
unequal, the king threw down his baton, the signal of its termination De Coucy,
p. 567. His curious and interesting annals of a few years are published by
Godefroy, at the end of the history of Jean Chartier, Paris 1661, folio. He
seems to have been engaged in the negotiations, and to have accompanied Mary of
Gelder to Scotland. For this combat compare Cont. of Bowar, 519, who mentions
the champions, James Douglas brother of the earl, (a circumstance which, with
others, occasions great doubt of his having been a churchman,) James Douglas
brother of Lochleven, and John Ross of Halket. Jaques Lalain was one of the
most celebrated knights in Europe. Olivier de la March is full of his praise.
The Scottish tourney he describes, p. 271. Herue de Meriadet was a squire of
Bretagne, p. 265. Lalain was killed by a cannon-ball in 1453, p. 394. The
family seat was in Hainault.


.

As the lady had been educated in the court of Philip, he defrayed, with his
accustomed magnificence, the nuptial preparations on her side. The lord of Vere
in Zealand, whose son had before this period married a sister of James, was
appointed to conduct the bride; who with many tears took leave of the duke, June
and his son the count de Charolois. Coasting not without terror, along the
inimical English shore, on the sixth day Scotland arose to their eager eyes;
and they anchored near the isle of May, where then stood a hermitage and a
chapel sacred to St. Andrew. Having paid her devotions, the queen proceeded to
Leith, where she was met by many nobles, and a concourse of all ranks of
people, who to the polished Burgundians appeared almost barbarians. Seated on
horseback behind the lord of Vere, Mary advanced to Edinburgh, where she was
lodged in the convent of the jacobins or gray-friars. After the refreshment of
the following day, the king visited her at midnight, and remained three hours.
In the course of a week her nuptials, and coronation, were celebrated with much
barbaric pomp De Coucy, 574, seq The more minute parts, illustrative of manners
and customs, are reserved for that department. In the barrenness of materials,
for the reign of James II, the information of that writer is invaluable, and
yet has been unknown to all our historians! The numerous bishops and nobles,
accompanying Mary in Boyce's deceitful page, f. 366, Lindsay's transt. 38, are
quite unknown to this honest contemporary. From the first page to the last
Boyce is equally a fabulist.

Consult also Olivier de la march, who however briefly mentions the marriage
of Mary of Gelder to James, "un moult beau et plaisant chevalier, jeune et
vertueux roy; et fut celuy qui avoit la moitie du visage rouge."


.

The victories of Douglas had afforded little compensation to Scotland for his
tyranny and oppression, which seemed to increase in proportion to the
continuance of his power. For him, and his followers, there was no law, and the
country groaned under the most destructive anarchy. But the six heavy years of
his authority were soon to expire; and different circumstances were already
preparing to lessen his influence. The charms and sense of the queen began to
infuse a more manly character into her husband, to arouse him from his
lethargy, and to form a party capable of undermining the odious power of
Douglas.

James II may now be said to have assumed a permanent character, of which the
delineation shall be here attempted, as far as barren and scanty materials will
admit. His actions proclaim him a prince of decisive, and sometimes even
violent, spirit. In war he was a valiant and popular leader; and surpassed his
father in a marked attention to military discipline. Negligent of pomp, the
equal of every soldier, he shared the mean repast of the march, confident that
poison is seldom administered in vassels of wood, reposing absolute faith in
the love of his people Mair, 326.
. The power of his ablities, the excellence of his intentions in peace, are
best displayed by the laws of his reign, always the most instructive an
valuable portion of history. His wisdom appears conspicuous, in his reverence
for the counsels of the wise, in guiding his most important actions by the
experience of Crichton, and the benign and patriotic prudence of Kennedy. The
perdition of the aristocratic and tyrannic house of Douglas was to be a
spirited exertion of justice to himself, and to his people. But that any fixed
plan yet existed, for the destruction of the aristocracy, seems a refined
theory, incongruous with the ignorance and spirit and manners of the times; and
is best confuted by the plain facts, that the families abased are ever
remarkable for important crimes, and that the property, and power, which were
withdrawn from one house, were ever to be bestowed on another. Even when Louis
XI, and Henry VII, were, toward the termination of this century, in countries
of greater civilization, and political science, to humble the aristocracy, an
unprejudiced reader will be ready to infer that the events proceed rather from
chance, and circumstances, and the rotation of society, than from design. As to
the person of the second James, we only know, that it was robust; and that a
red tinge, which deformed one of his cheeks, gave him the vulgar appellation of
James with the fiery face Mair, 322. "James with the red cheek, or with the
fire in his face." Chronicle end of Winton, MS. Reg. 17DXX.
.

The truce with England had been, in May, renewed for a very short time; and
among the commissioners named to prolong it, in September, we find Livingston,
who had been again taken into favor, and appointed justiciary of Scotland: a
circumstance which appears to present a proof that the influence of Douglas was
much on the decline. At length, in Novermber, a truce of a new and singular
complexion was ratified, bearing no certain term, but that either monarch might
violate it, when he pleased, upon giving a notice of one hundred and eighty
days Rymer, XI, 229, 231, 235, 247. Sir Alex. Livingston of Calendar,
justiciary of Scotland, occurs p. 235. The paper concerning Berwick and
Roxburgh, 14 Nov. 1449, p. 244, is a curious specimen of language. In June 1450
Dr. Methven had a safe conduct as envoy from James. Rymer's Unp. Papers, 4610,
art. 49.
.

One of the last traces of the power of Douglas occurs in the decrees of a
parliament, held at Edinburgh, this year, and probably in the early part of it.
The sheriffs are therein ordered to cause restitution be made of any stolen
effects: if they should refuse, or be negligent, or partial, the complainant is
to apply to the king's lieutenant, who is to punish the sheriffs as if they
were the robbers: and they are to be treated as those who disobey the king's
acts, given under the royal seal, and decreed by the lieutenant, and the three
estates Acts, f. 28, 20 Jan. 1449, regni 13 -- 1450. Yet this parliament, being
distinct in the acts from that of Jan. 1449-50, seems to belong to 1449.
. It would appear, from this ordinance, that the office of lieutenant general
of the kingdom wanted little of being a sole regency.

This dangerous dignity certainly fell, soon after the marriage of the king:
and Douglas retired from the court, attended with the execrations of the
people. It is said that Sir Richard Colville, having suffered repeated injuries
from Auchinleck, a follower of Douglas, thought he might now venture upon
revenge; which he completed in the slaughter of his enemy. Douglas, irritated
at this insult offered to his fallen power, ravaged the lands of Colville,
besieged his castle, took it, and left not one inhabitant alive Boyce, lib.
XVIII, Lindsay's transl. 54.
. That age, in the true spirit of chivalry, praised the earl's exertion of
friendship: at present this action appears in its real colors, as a sanguinary
revenge, as a contempt of justice, as an insult to the laws, and to society;
and as peculiarly disgraceful to him who had been the second magistrate in the
kingdom.

The commencement of the king's active authority was signalized by a memorable
parliament, 1450 Jan.
held at Edinburgh, in which a great number of salutary regulations were issued
Acts, f. 28 -- 31. This may be the same with the former; but is here, f. v. 28,
dated 19 Jan. 1449.
. It is ordained that a general peace be proclaimed through all the realm, so
that all men might travel in security, without any protection, save that of the
king's peace; and if any subject stand in fear of another he may have borrowes
of peace, that is a pledge for his good behavior: that just, and able, judges
be appointed: that the justiciary shall pass twice through the country in the
year, as ordered by the ancient laws: that any rebellion against the king be
punished according to its nature, and by the advice of the three estates; and
if any openly rebel, or make war upon the king's subjects, in defiance of his
prohibition, the king shall advance against them with the whole force of the
land, if necessary, and punish them according to their deserts. These unusual
ordinances sufficiently paint the disorders, into which the bad administration
of Douglas had thrown the kingdom. Other statutes decree, that if any person
assist those who shall be brought to justice, he shall be punished equally with
the transgressors: that the warden of the marches see that the truce be
strictly observed, and appoint such officers as he shall answer for: that
administrators of law, who wilfully transgress, shall lose their office for a
year, and be fined: that despoilers be compelled to make full, and speedy,
restitution, pay all expenses, and a fine to the king: that the justiciary or
justice general, the chamberlain, the coroners, and other officers obliged to
travel through the country, have but a moderate attendance, that they may not
annoy the people: that forestallers of corn be punished, and the corn forfeited
to the king; and that even the possessors of grain keep no more than is
necessary for their annual consumption, and sell the remainder in open market
at the current price.

Above all, one remarkable act of this parliament deserves attention, being
conceived in the following terms. "It is ordained that if any man, as God
forbid, commit or do treason against the king's person, or his majesty, or rise
in war against him, or lay hands upon his person violently, of whatever age the
king be, young, or old; or receive any that have committed treason, or that
supply them with help or advice, or garrison the house of them who are
convicted of treason, and hold their houses against the king, or garrison
houses of their own in assistance of the king's rebels, or that assault
castles, or places where the king's person shall happen to be, without the
consent of the three estates, shall be punished as traitors Acts, f. v. 30, c.
25.
." This statute has occasioned altercations between the favorers of monarchy,
and those who attach ideas of freedom to a parliament of the middle ages, when
the only dispute lay between monarchy and aristocracy.

It was further ordained that all the regalities, in the royal possession,
should be judged by the king's justiciary; and the freeholders of such
regalities should appear in parliament, equally with those of the royal domains
Ibid.
. As many large estates had fallen to the crown, in the preceding reign, this
measure seems intended to increase the king's influence in parliament: and such
was the spirit of the times that, to increase the power of the sovereign, was
to enlarge the freedom and happiness of the people, laboring under the worst
tyranny, that of a feudal aristocracy. Other prudent statutes concern the
punishment of robbery, the regulation of the coin, and the penalties of
contumacy against the course of justice Ibid. f. 29, 31.
. Such laws shine like a coruscation amid the night of barbarism; but, it is
believed, imparted little of vital heat to the political atmosphere. It is easy
to form good laws: the difficulty lies in the execution. The chief felicity of
a nation is to have few laws, and to be accustomed to obey them.

Douglas, disgusted at the loss of his power, or wishing to display his pomp in
foreign countries, passed to the jubilee at Rome, with a train of six knights,
fourteen gentlemen, and eighty attendants Cont. of Bowar, 519. Mair, 322. The
number is estimated from the safe conduct, granted to him on his return by
Henry VI, 12 Nov. 1450; Rymer, XI, 277. In the jubilee of 1450 innumerable
people crowded to Rome; and ninety-seven were killed by the press, at the end
of the bridge of St. Angelo, De Coucy, 608.
. In his absence many complaints were made against the insolence of his
dependents: the earl of Orkney, a nobleman of princely munificence, respectable
for his talents, and patronage of letters, was sent to examine the abuses, and
was insulted: the king, justly enraged, proceeded in person with a sufficient
force, took the castle of Lochmaben, and demolished that of Douglas Boyce, lib.
XVIII, Lindsay's transl. 55, 56. Hume's House of Douglas, I, 336 -- 339.
Doubtful, for the castle appears in 1454. In 1456, at the instance of William
Sinclair earl of Orkney and Caithness, chancellor of Scotland, Sir Gilbert Hay
translated Bonet's then popular book, L'Arbre des Batailies, as appears from
the prologue published by Dr. Mackenzie in his Lives of Scottish Writers. Our
heralds, liberal in titles, add to Orkney that of Oldenburg, knight of the
golden fleece, etc. not even knowing that Oldenburg was a title of the royal
house of Denmark, and inalienable. The other additions are as false. See the
lists of the knights of the fleece in Guiciardini, defer, de Paesi Bassei.


. Upon his return from Rome Douglas sent a submissive message to the king; and
as he could not, in equity, be reputed guilty of events which happened during
his absence, and for which a sufficient punishment had been taken, he was
graciously received Boyce, lib. XVIII, Lindsay's transl. 57. Hume's Dougl. I,
339; who erroneously adds that he was again appointed lieutenant general of the
kingdom, a title no longer to be found in this reign. Under this year 1450
appear many curious charters, illustrative of history, in Scotstarvet's
Calendars. The queen's endowed lands confirmed in parliament, 22 Jan. --
Permission to bishops to make testaments, and dispose of movables, 24 Jan. --
Lands to George Crichton of Cairns, admiral of Scotland, 1 April -- Permission
to William earl of Douglas to erect Strathaven into a burgh of barony, 23 April
-- Confirmation of a grant by Campbell of Lochaw, (ancestor of Argyle,) to the
collegiate church of Kilmune in Cowal, 12 May r. 14 -- Grant to earl Douglas of
lands of Culter, forfeited by James Livingston, etc. 22 May. -- To William lord
Crichton, chancellor, of the lands of Castellaw, Lothian, to recompense the sum
of 1800 l. expended on the king's house, and 400 l. lent to the king, 12 June
-- Commission to Nicol Ottirburn, and John Dalrumpill a merchant, for receiving
the queen's portion -- Confirmation of the decree that James Douglas of
Heriotmuir is older than his twin-brother Archibald earl of Moray -- Grant of
the marriage of Margaret Douglas, daughter of Archibald earl of Douglas to
William the then earl, 2 Feb. -- Forest of Eurick and Selkirk made a regality
in favor of Douglas, 26 Jan. -- Confirmation of Galloway to Douglas, above and
beneath the water of Cre, blench for a red rose, 26 Jan.

Such minute particulars would be beneath the notice of history, were not this
reign peculiarly obscure, and the author anxious to throw all possible light
upon it.


.

A commission was granted by James to Douglas, 1451 April
and other ambassadors, to confer with those of England, concerning any
breaches of the truce Rymer, XI, 283.
. But the earl certainly did not deserve this confidence, being engaged in a
secret plan of revenge against his sovereign; and in the following month hi
obtained from the English court a protection for himself, his three brothers,
twenty-six gentlemen, and sixty-seven attendants Ibid. IX, 284.
; the chief persons, therein mentioned, afterward following the house of
Douglas in their revolt. 14 Aug.
Other plenipotentiaries were nominated, who adjusted a truce of three years
Ibid. 287 -- 293.
.

In a parliament, 25 Oct.
held at Stirling, a long series of regulations was made concerning the coin,
in which a laudable attention is shown to its purity, and regular currency
Acts, f. 32.
.

Meanwhile Douglas proceeded in his disorderly, and treasonable, practices. He
attempted, as is said, to assassinate Crichton; 1451
who escaped, and afterward had nearly surprised Douglas, then lodging in
Edinburgh with a small train Boyce lib. XVIII, Lindsay's transl. 58, 59. Hume's
Dougl. I, 343. Crichton had probably been advanced to the peerage in 1450, for
his services in the royal marriage: he died about 1454. Sir Alex. Livingston
seems to have died about 1450.
. The lands of John Herries, a gentleman of eminent loyalty, being ravaged by
some followers of Douglas, he complained to the earl without effect, and in
revenge ravaged a part of Annandale: but he was taken, and hanged by the
command of Douglas, in contempt of the king's prohibitory mandate Boyce, lib.
XVIII, Lindsay's transl. 60, 61. Hume, I, 345, 346, who seems rightly to call
him Sir William Harris of Terregles. This writer, who composed his work about
the year 1630, has often original and authentic intelligence.
.

These appear trivial offense, when compared with a grand measure now entered
into by Douglas, and which threatened destruction to the king, and the kingdom.
As Douglas was by far the most powerful noble of the south of Scotland, or
rather a petty sovereign in that department, so Alexander Lindsay earl of
Crawford, and John earl of Ross, lord of the Isles, held the highest authority
in the north. The policy, and vengeance, of Douglas conciliated a league with
these potent nobles, strictly obliging all the parties to mutual defense
against every injury Ibid. Lindsay adds the earl of Moray, who was the brother
of Douglas, and before in the strictest union with him. Compare Mair, 323, who
only mentions Crawford. In July 1451 Douglas had resigned most of his lands
into the king's hands, and procured new charters, "notwithstanding any crimes
of forfeitry," etc. committed by him or his uncle Archibald. Scotst. Call.


; and to such a conjunction the laws themselves were injuries. The monarch
trembled at this confederacy, the power of which was in fact superior to the
royal authority; but he resolved to dissemble for a season, though the nation,
in a just alarm, already beheld the king dethroned, and the country passing,
from aristocratic tyranny and discord, into a subjection to foreign dominion.

An incident however soon occurred, 1452
which hastened the execution of the royal vengeance. Douglas had persuaded or
overawed most of his vassals, especially those in Galloway, Kyle, Carrick,
Cunningham, and the districts adjacent, into an engagement of attendance, and
aid, even against the sovereign himself. But a few of the more moderate, and
prudent, were averse to such illegal ties; and among these was distinguished
Maclelan, guardian of the heir of Bomby, and a near relation of Sir Patrick
Gray, who was son of lord Gray, and captain of the king's guard, an office of
the greatest confidence Among some slight variations, Lindsay has inserted this
story in his translation of Boyce, p. 61 -- 64, and its naif veracity is far
remote from the manner of Boyce. In p. 81 -- 87 is another similar
interpolation, afterward to be used. The royal guard now appears for the first
time, perhaps in imitation of the Scottish guards of France established about
1440.
. The earl of Douglas, irritated at Maclelan's obstinacy in rectitude, suddenly
besieged his house, took it, conveyed the owner to the castle of Douglas, Yet
according to the fabulous Boyce it was demolished in 1450.
and threw him into strict durance. Upon hearing this, Sir Patrick Gray laid
the affair before the king, and instantly obtained a mild letter, rather of
supplication than of command, requesting Douglas to deliver the prisoner to
Gray. The earl was sitting at dinner in the castle of Douglas, when he was told
that Gray, a familiar servant of the king, was at the gate; and, in some
surprise, arose to receive him with much apparent civility, and invited him to
partake of the repast. During the enjoyments of the table, Douglas was
revolving what Gray's commission could be; and guessing the truth gave a secret
order, in consequence of which the prisoner was led to a green beside the
castle, where his head was struck off, and taken away, and a cloth was spread
over the body. The meal ended, Gray produced the royal letter, which was
received with all the respect of fraud; and the earl having perused it said, "I
am beholden to you for bringing me so gracious a letter from the king,
especially considering how matters stand between us at present. The demand
shall instantly be granted, and the more favorably for your sake." He then
took Gray by the hand, and led him to the green, where removing the cloth,
Douglas coldly said: "Sir Patrick, you are come a little too late. This is your
sister's son, but he wants the head. Take his body, and do with it what you
will." Gray replied in anguish, "My lord, since you have taken his head, you
may dispose of his body:" then calling for his horses he mounted, and said to
the earl, "My lord, if I live, you shall be rewarded for your present labor,
according to your demerits." Douglas, enraged at this threat, called for his
horse; but Sir Patrick by the goodness of his led steed escaped the pursuit,
which extended near to Edinburgh.

The king irritated beyond measure at such repeated insults, aggravated by the
most sanguinary cruelty, and the most profligate contempt of the laws; and
anxious to prevent the effects of the formidable league formed against his
authority, called a chosen council to deliberate upon the measures to be
followed. It was resolved, in order to avoid the horrors of civil war, that
Douglas should be inveigled into court by flattery, and upon pretense that the
king forgave his past enormities, and only desired him to reform his future
conduct Boyce, lib. XVIII, Lindsay, 64.
. 22 Jan.
About this time a passport was obtained from the English king, for Douglas,
his brother James, and lord Hamilton, joined with Crichton, Montgomery, Gray,
three bishops, and others, to go in pilgrimage to Canterbury Rymer, XI, 303.
. This safe conduct was apparently never used; and Douglas and his enemies are
so strangely blended in it, that there is room to suspect that, under the
pretext of a pilgrimage of mutual repentance and conciliation, a scheme had
been formed to assail Douglas, when in the defenseless garb of a pilgrim.

However this be, the earl was prevailed upon, toward the beginning of lent,
which this year happened in the end of February, to visit the court at the
castle of Stirling Lindsay, p. 64, says that, according to the report of some,
Douglas obtained a safe conduct from James under the great seal. Hume I, 351,
asserts this as fact: and p. 361 he mentions that this safe conduct was
contumeliously dragged at a horse's tail, after the assassination. That
author's prejudices may be doubted: yet Lesley and Buchanan confirm the safe
conduct.
. After Supper, the king taking him apart into a secret chamber, where only
some of the privy council, and the guard, were in attendance, mildly informed
him that he had heard of the league with Crawford, and other nobles; and
desired him to break such illegal engagements. Douglas proudly refused, and had
the arrogance to upbraid the king with his procedures against him, which had
forced him, as he asserted, to form this confederacy. The sense of repeated
insults, and of an outrageous contempt of his authority, conspired with the
present personal affront, to kindle a flame of instantaneous fury; and the
monarch exclaiming, "If you will not break this league, by God I shall," drew
his dagger, and stabbed Douglas. Sir Patrick Gray then struck the earl with a
battle ax, and the wound was instantly mortal Mair, 323. Boyce, lib. XVIII,
Lindsay's transl. 64 -- 66. Hume's Dougl. I, 352, 355.
.

It is said that the four brothers of Douglas, Sir James the eldest, who had
abandoned his clerical character, and now became earl of Douglas, Archibald
earl of Moray, Hugh earl of Ormond, and John lord Balveny, in the first
eruption of revenge, proclaimed the king a despiser of his covenants and of
good faith, even at the gates of the castle of Stirling. Then collecting their
force, and returning, they burned the town Mair 323 imputes this act to lord
Hamilton. Compare Hume I, 362.
. Two of their own name were extremely obnoxious, because they were loyal, the
earl of Angus, and Sir John Douglas of Dalkeith: the castle of the latter they
besieged in vain. After Douglas, and his family, and followers, had excited
great commotions in the south of Scotland, James partly by exertion, and partly
by lenity, prevailed on them to return to their duty Boyce, lib. XVIII,
Lindsay's transl. 67 seq Hume I, 364 seq
.

This happy effect was produced, in a considerable degree, by the discomfiture
of Crawford, the associate of the Douglases; who rising in arms, was defeated
by the royal troops commanded by Huntley. 18 May
The action happened near Brechin; and was accompanied with great slaughter on
the part of the vanquished This battle is by Boyce and Lindsay assigned to
1453; but the Harleian MS. 2363, written by a monk of Kinloss, dates it on
ascension day 1452. Lesley agrees, p. 304, and Ferrerius Hist. Fam. Gordon, MS.
Harl. 1423, f. v. 148, who gives a long account of his engagement. He wrote in
1545: ib. 145.
.

The civil conflicts being in some measure appeased, a parliament was held at
Edinburgh, 26 Aug.
which issued regulations tending to prevent a scarcity of grain, in
consequence of the internal commotions Acts, f. v. 33. Amid the scarcity, and
imperfections, of materials it may not be improper to commemorate the following
charters of 1452, from Scotstarvet's Calendars. The lands of Guddie were
granted to Robert Norie for bringing the titlings of the birth of prince James,
1 June. The lands and castle of Tantallon to George earl of Angus, warden of
the western marches, 30 June. The earldom of Garioch to the queen, 26 Aug. A
charter by James earl of Douglas was confirmed, 27 Aug.
.

Douglas, 28 Aug.
at length reconciled to the king, entered into a solemn engagement, 1. Not to
pretend any title to the earldom of Wigton, except with the queen's consent: 2.
Nor to the lands of Stewarton, a part of the patrimony of the duchess of
Touraine, his mother: 3. To abandon in future all hatred, or enmity, against
all persons: 4. To preserve the public peace, and make compensations to persons
already injured: 5. To observe the strictest duty and respect to the king. This
instrument was signed by Douglas, and lord Hamilton, for themselves and their
adherents Ruddiman, notes to Buchanan 441, 442, from a copy in the Advocates
Library. Hamilton is called brother of Douglas, because he had wedded Euphemia
widow of Archibald earl of Douglas, who died in 1439.
.

The public tranquillity being completely restored, 1453
the earl of Douglas, the abbot of melros, and Robert Liddel of Balimire,
proceeded on an embassy to England, April
to prolong the truce, which would otherwise have expired in 1454. It was
accordingly protracted to May 1457: July
and was duly ratified by James Rymer, XI, 324, 336, 339.
. During his residence in London Douglas obtained safe conducts for himself,
and lord Hamilton, to pass to Rome Ibid. 326, 327. The three brothers of
Douglas, lord Livingston, the bishop of Glasgow, etc. etc. are included in the
safe conducts. See ib. 333, a safe conduct to some burgesses of Edinburgh, and
Stirling, for the same pilgrimage. The intentions may have been innocent; and
the journey of Douglas in 1450 seems to have rendered these holy expeditions
fashionable in Scotland at this period.
, probably with a view to solicit dispensations for his marriage with Margaret,
the fair maid of Galloway, the widow of William late earl of Douglas, his
brother. In this design he was opposed by the influence of James; nor is there
evidence that he ever completed the marriage.

This interval of domestic quiet was distinguished by the foundation of the
university of Glasgow, by the pious cares of William Turnbull bishop of that
see. It was endued with ample privileges; and a bull of Nicholas V confirmed
the erection. The respectable founder soon after died at Rome, whither he
retired from the subsequent commotions in his country Keith, Bishops, 149. On
the 10th Dec. 1472, appears a charter, confirming the liberties of the college
of Glasgow, granted in 1453. Scotst. Call.
.

Isabel duchess of Bretagne, sister of James, being now a widow, was requested
in marriage by the prince of Navarre; but the proposal being disagreeable to
the French court, the bishop of Galloway, and David Lindsay esquire, were sent
ambassadors to Bretagne, in order to frustrate the prince's application, in
which they succeeded Lobineau, Hist. de Bretagne I, 654. She persisted in
widowhood; and in 1459 there were three duchesses dowager of Bretagne. Isabel
had only daughters, one of whom wedded the duke de Rohan: and she lived till
1494, after surviving many dukes and duchesses of Bretagne. Lob. passim. On the
1st May 1450 James granted a charter to Sir William Monipeny, for services to
the dauphiness, the duchess of Vien, of Bretagne, and of Austria, and his other
sisters, of the lands of Hallis of Airth, to be thereafter called the lands of
Monipeny, blanch for a red rose. Scotst. Call. where see also 7 Oct. 1451. A
descendant Alexander Monipeny bought Concorsault in France from Stuart of
Aubigny: his brother William Monipeny, abbot of St. Satur, was chosen
archbishop of Bourges in 1512. Thaumassiere Hist. de Berry, 396.

Scotstarvet's Calendars are now unhappily defective for four years, from 1453
to 1457.

In 1447 the queen of France, on a pilgrimage to St. Michael, was accompanied
by Eleanor of Scotland, sister of the duchess of Bretagne. Lob. sub anno. See
here, under the year 1457, further intelligence concerning the princesses.


.

The deepest obscurity impends even over the latter part of the reign of James
II, 1454
and it is almost impossible to enlighten the events with the clear colors of
chronology. Amid this uncertainty, the most probable plan of arrangement shall
be followed, and committed to the candor of the reader.

The death of Crichton, the chancellor, who had long moderated public affairs,
seems to have opened the way to the succeeding tumults Crawford, Off. 30, dates
his death 1455, and is followed by Douglas. Yet Crawford, 34, says Orkney was
made chancellor on the death of Crichton; and the former now appears in that
capacity. See in Abercr. II, 430, the fabulous titles of Orkney. So in 1764,
Douglas, Peerage 185, styles William of Nithsdale prince of Danskin, (Dantzic;)
and lord of Spruce, (Prussia)! These gentlemen seem ignorant that foreign
countries have historians.
. Meanwhile the English government complaining of depredations on the
frontiers, the bishop of Brechin, June
and the earl of Orkney chancellor, were appointed ambassadors to adjust the
grievances Rymer, XI, 349.
: and soon after a safe conduct appears to Beatrix, 16 June
countess of Douglas, widow of James the Gross, and Margaret widow of William,
with John Douglas lord of Balveny, on pretense of a pilgrimage to England, but
probably to form treasonable connections between their family and that country
Ibid.
. The contests between the houses of York and Lancaster had now commenced; and
the duke of York being, at this period, possessed of the supreme power, he
favored the house of Douglas, in opposition to James, who, in conjunction with
France, supported the interests of Henry.

Crawford, who had joined in the bond which proved fatal to the late earl of
Douglas, had been punished with forfeiture, but was pardoned on submission
Boyce, lib. XVIII, puts a fabulous oration into the mouth of Crawford, which
Lindsay, 73 -- 78, enlarges with family affection.
. Yet Moray and Ormond, the brothers of Douglas, again excited a rebellion in
the north, and ravaged the lands of Huntley and other loyal persons. Huntley
assembling his followers gave half of Elgin to the flames, because that part of
the town supported Moray: and, though defeated at Dunkinty, he raised fresh
troops, and forced the Douglases, Moray and Ormond, to leave the north of
Scotland, and take shelter in the Hebudes, whence they proceeded to join their
brother in his grand rebellion Compare Boyce lib. XVIII, Lindsay's translation
69, with Hume's Douglases I, 366. But the events of 1452 are intermixed.
. autumn


To understand this rebellion aright, it seems necessary to throw a brief
glance on the affairs of England. In the end of the preceding year Henry VI, a
prince whose weakness rendered his whole reign one minority, had fallen into a
state of insanity; and Richard duke of York had been soon after declared
protector of the realm. As James was ever firmly attached to Henry, and evinced
on subsequent occasions an eagerness to support his interests, there is reason
to infer that York excited, or favored, the rebellion of Douglas, in order to
prevent James from an interference in the affairs of England. Nor in case of
the success of Douglas, in driving James from his throne, would the example
have been unuseful to the designs of York; nor the supreme power of Douglas in
Scotland unimportant to his purposes. The intercourse between York and Douglas
appears to have been mediated by Beatrix, the mother of the latter, and John
lord Balveny his brother, who as is abovementioned had proceeded to England;
and who were afterward specially included in the forfeiture of the family, for
designs on the Scottish monarchy supported by English influence.

When to the aid of York are added the internal causes, the native ambition of
the house of Douglas, unsatiated even by the highest honors of regal favor;
its latent but deep enmity, excited by the destruction of two of its chiefs,
during the present reign, and by other injuries and mortifications; its
consciousness that no monarch could ever sincerely pardon a family, which
formed one nursery of rebellion, which despised the laws, and rivalled the
throne; its apprehensions, from the recent ruin of its power in the north, that
if effectual resistance were not instantly opposed, the annihilation of the
stem and other branches might follow; when these considerations are weighed,
the sources of this grand rebellion may not perhaps appear obscure. The
inflammatory principles had long existed, and were deeply and widely scattered:
the power of York, the money and protection of England, the overthrow of Moray
and Ormond, and the consequent stings of apprehension and revenge, were only
temporary circumstances, which set fire to the train that shook Scotland to its
center.

Such appear to have been the causes of this grand rebellion, which threatened
to overturn the Scottish throne, and which our elder writers ignorantly consider
as a prolongation of that which arose in 1452, on the assassination of William
earl of Douglas; but which as is evident from original documents above adduced,
was wholly extinguished in that year. Later writers have either followed their
example, in confounding distinct events; or have, under the general term of
England, blended the remote, and opposite, interests of York and of Henry. They
also tell us that, soon after the death of the former earl, Beatrix his mother,
and Margaret the fair maid of Galloway his widow, took refuge in England: that
Douglas accepted the embassy, in the view of securing the hand of Margaret,
whose domains were large; and, in order to obtain a dispensation, he afterward
procured a safe conduct for a pretended pilgrimage to Rome The safe conduct is
for four years; and might be intended as a resource in case the rebellion
failed; and whether Henry or York should happen to be in power.
. That a dispensation being refused, he nevertheless wedded Margaret, who in
disgust fled to the Scottish king; and he bestowing her in marriage on his
uterine brother Athole, the consequence was a civil war. But there is no
evidence that James now earl of Douglas wedded his brother's widow: or that she
returned to Scotland before the ruin of the family. The same writers, who state
this affair as the origin of the war, also assert that Douglas and his brothers
were, in July this year, summoned before a parliament, to answer for their
crimes; and upon nonappearance, were declared rebels and forfeited. This latter
circumstance would of itself present a sufficient cause of the commotion: but
the difficulty in the account of these authors consists in discovering what new
crimes the house of Douglas had committed; and the act of forfeiture, 1455, is
infallibly the first and sole act against the family, as is clear from the
records.

The facts and authorities, about to be adduced, will be found unanimous in the
support of the previous observations above given. Nor is there any evidence
that James had planned the ruin of the potent family of Douglas, as theoretic
writers would infer; for he was unprepared, and trembled at the impending
danger. The instrument of August 1452, the honorable embassy of the following
year, indicate complete reconciliation; and though embers of jealousy might at
this season be revived, by the ruin of Moray and Ormond, and by the king's
interference in frustrating the earl's design to wed his brother's widow, yet
the ambition of Douglas, joined with the other causes above mentioned, will to
a candid mind appear the chief springs of this memorable contest.

Unfortunately there is not, for its commencement in the autumn of this year,
that clear evidence which attends its termination in the next. The first events
rest upon doubtful and inaccurate authorities, the use of which necessity alone
can vindicate; and all that can be done is to select the most important, and
probable, circumstances, omitting such as are contradicted by the genuine
records of the ensuing year.

It appears that James, discovering the treasonable correspondence carried on
by Douglas in England, and suspecting his designs, sent an herald to summon him
to appear before the privy council, or perhaps the parliament. Far from showing
obedience that potent earl sent secret messengers to affix, in the night,
placards upon the church-doors of Edinburgh, charging the king with the murder
of the two chiefs of the house of Douglas, and replete with insulting
expressions Boyce lib. XVIII, Lindsay's transl. 70.
.

Instantly assembling a small array, James ravaged some lands belonging to
Douglas. It being the time of harvest, the king not only felt repugnance in
destroying the corn, but could not, except in the most urgent necessity,
harrass his subjects by assembling a large force: he therefore returned; and,
dismissing a part of his followers, he ordered the remainder to besiege
Abercorn, a strong castle belonging to Douglas, and which, from its proximity
to the capital, was an object of peculiar jealousy Ibid.
.

Yet the suddenness of the attack on his domains had so much alarmed Douglas,
who little expected such promptitude, that he withdrew to the borders; whence
he sent lord Hamilton into England to request York's assistance; and a sum of
money was immediately remitted Boyce, lib. XVIII, Lindsay 81. After this the
incidents of 1454 are better authenticated by the second, and last, large
interpolation of Lindsay 81 -- 87.
.

The circumstances of Douglas were now reduced to that crisis, that the only
choice lay between a bold exertion of his whole strength, in the ardent
execution of great and extreme measures, or a patient submission to total ruin.
Reinforced by the pecuniary supply from England, by the imagined fidelity of
vassals long oppressed, by the martial influence of that name, which a
succession of heroes had rendered the trumpet of war, he resolved to oppose his
power in the open field to that of the king. The armed force, that would arise
at the call of Douglas, was estimated at forty thousand men; most of them from
their situation near the borders, and constant exercise in fight, far superior
to any other troops of Scotland.

James had sent the earls of Orkney and Angus, with six thousand men, to
besiege the castle of Abercorn, when Douglas summoned all his force to meet him
at Douglas, on the tenth day, with provision for twenty days, to pass with him
to Abercorn, there to rescue the fortress; or give the king battle, and force
him to fight, or to leave the kingdom. Surprised at this intelligence, the king
justly distrusting the south of Scotland, the chief seat of the power of
Douglas, passed in a ship to St. Andrews; and his despair even suggested to him
an intention to abandon Scotland. But the prudent and respectable bishop of
that see, James Kennedy, a son of the countess of Angus daughter of Robert III,
insinuated motives of consolation, and of courage. By his advice the king
issued proclamations, summoning the array of the north, and offering amnesty to
all who should now join his service: and in a few days a considerable force
arrived; the royal banner was raised in St. Andrews; and the army marched to
Falkland in order of battle. Entering Stirling, attended by the barons of Fife,
Strathern, and Angus, James remained there, till the more northern troops
should approach; and, upon their junction, he found himself at the head of
forty thousand men. He then advanced against Douglas, whose army, amounting to
near forty thousand, (among whom Hamilton, at the head of three hundred horse,
and as many chosen infantry, was to render himself remarkable,) had encamped on
the south side of the Carron, in his march toward Abercorn.

A battle was believed inevitable, which was to decide whether James, or
Douglas, should have the dominion of Scotland. But bishop Kennedy, anxious to
prevent the effusion of blood, had attended the royal army, and now sent a
secret message to Hamilton, his nephew, assuring him, in the king's name, not
only of remission, but of high reward, if he would leave Douglas. Hamilton
returned rather a favorable answer, yet hesitated between the laws of
friendship, and the advantages of loyalty, when the haughtiness of Douglas
conspired to induce him to embrace the latter. A herald, arriving from the
king, charged the rebels to disperse, under pain of treason: Douglas sent him
back with derision; and immediately arrayed his host and marched toward the
royal army; but seeing its strength, and doubting the effect of the
proclamation of amnesty, nay thinking that he perceived its influence in the
dubious service, and fallen spirit of his people, he conducted them back into
their camp, hoping to reanimate their fidelity and courage, before he led them
to battle in the morning. This imprudent procedure was little approved by the
barons, and leaders, especially by Hamilton, who immediately went to the earl,
and inquired if he intended to give the king battle, or not; affirming at the
same time that the delay was full of danger, as his people were deserting while
the royal army was upon the increase. Douglas answered, with contempt, "If you
are tired, you may depart when you please;" and Hamilton, that night, passed to
the king. The other chiefs alarmed at his departure, and suspecting each other,
also disbanded; so that in the morning Douglas trembled when he beheld a silent
and desert camp, not one hundred men remaining, besides those who belonged to
his household, or were his immediate servants. Upon this unexpected change, the
earl fled to Annandale, where he lurked with his brothers till the ensuing
spring. In this surprising manner fell for ever the enormous power of the house
of Douglas; which had arisen from patriotic heroism; and was conducted to
perdition by aristocratic tyranny, and the most ungrateful rebellion.

The events of the subsequent year are happily illustrated by original
evidence, 1455
and particularly by a letter from James to Charles VII king of France,
reciting at some length the termination of the rebellion of Douglas This
important letter is published by D'Achery in his Spicilegium, Vol. III, p. 801,
of the new edition by De la Bar, Paris 1723, folio. The editor erroneously
dates it 1456; but the chain of events, the attempt on Berwick, etc. evince
1455 to be the real year. See the original in the Appendix.
.

Having sent Thomas Spence bishop of Galloway, John lord Lindsay of the Byres,
and Dr. Arons archdeacon of Glasgow, as ambassadors to France, in order to
state the progress and decline of the rebellion, James, as soon as the season
permitted the tedious operations of a siege, recommenced that of the castle of
Abercorn, which had been raised on the approach of winter. The army of James
pitched their tents around this fortress in Easter week; 2b. 8 Ap.
and so imperfect was the art of attack that the siege occupied a month Letter
of James.
.

While the monarch's arms were thus employed, Douglas, who had hitherto lurked
in the borders, fled into England, attended only by four or five persons. But
his brothers, Moray, Ormond, and Balveny, remaining in Eusdale with some
followers, they harrassed the adjacent country, till they were eneountered by
the Scotts, 1 May
and other borderers, who completely routed the marauders. Moray falling in the
action, his head was cut off, and sent to James, then before Abercorn. Ormond
was made prisoner, condemned, and executed. Balveny escaped into England Letter
of James.
. This remarkable route, so fatal to the family of Douglas, happened at
Arkinholm, on the river Esk, a little to the south of the junction of the Eus
with that stream Our fabulous writers place the conflict at Ancrum-muir.
Repeated charters of James to Scott of Kirkurd, the Batisons, etc. for service
on this occasion, specially mention it to have happened at Arkinholm. See
Scotst. Call. 20 Oct. 1458, and 22 Feb. 1459. Hay in his Vindication of El. More
has published two to them, p. 69, 70. Branxholm was afterward granted to Scott
for the same cause, 7 Oct. 1463. Scotst. Call. The origin of the power of the
house of Buccleugh. Arkinholm, or Erkinhom, is on the river Esk, opposite
Wachop-kirk: on the opposite side of the Eus stands Langholm castle. See Pont's
Map of Eusdale and Eskdale. The battle of Ancrum was in 1544. Lesl. 477.


.

At length the towers of the castle of Abercorn being shaken by the repeated
force of machines, an assault was ordered, the fortress was taken by storm, ab
8 May
and levelled with the ground; the chief defenders being hanged, and the others
dismissed. James then proceeded against the castles of Strathaven, Douglas, and
others belonging to the rebels, all which he took, and destroyed even to the
foundations. He then ordered a detachment to besiege that of Creif in Galloway
Letter of James. Crefe is corrupted into Trese, the C and T, f and s, being
similar in MSS. That Creif is meant appears from the Acts of 1455. James omits
the parliament and forfeiture; and only adds that the rebellion was completely
extinct.
; and his power being now firmly established, he returned to the capital to
meet a parliament which had been there summoned.

In this national council the forfeiture of Douglas, 9 June
his mother Beatrix, his brothers Moray and Balveny, was solemnly decreed.
Moray had fallen in a rebellious conflict; but his forfeiture remained to be
pronounced by the law: while that of Ormond is unmentioned, as having been
already sealed by his public execution for treason Acts, f. 34, 36. See this
most curious and important forfeiture in the Appendix. The summons against
Douglas had been executed at Douglas, Strathaven, and Lanark, on the 24th
April: the charges are, the fortifying of the castles of Creif, Douglas,
Strathaven, and Abercorn; connections with England; rising in open war with a
multitude of armed men near Lanark; ravaging the lands of lord Abernethy, the
justiciary; burning Dalkeith, etc. Beatrix is condemned as an accomplice in
burning Kincavil, Bonytoun, and Warnistoun, in the English leagues, etc.
Moray's lands and effects are escheated, and to remain in the king's hands, nor
is the summons mentioned; all proofs that he was slain before the forfeiture,
which proceeds on his fortifying Lochindore, and Tarnaway, and aiding his
brother. Balveny follows as an accomplice of Douglas: and the act is attested
by the seals of Athole, Angus, Menteith, Errol, Lorn, Erskine, Campbell,
Graham, Somerville, Montgomery, Maxwell, Lesley, Glamis, Hamilton, Gray, Boyd,
Borthwick, and five bishops. The date is 10th June; yet the 12th is twice
mentioned.
.

Henry VI having in the mean time somewhat convalesced, James had in May
destined a solemn embassy to England Rymer, XI, 349: a safe conduct 10th May to
Kennedy bishop of St. Andrews, Livingston the chamberlain, etc. with 100
attendants. The battle of St. Albans was on the 22d May.
. But the battle of St. Albans having restored the power to York, the Scottish
monarch manifested his enmity by an attempt on Berwick. July
Some of the adjacent borderers had given information that the place might
easily be taken by surprise: but an Englishman, who had been admitted into
Scotland by safe conduct, and bound by oath not to retire without the royal
permission, preferring his country to his conscience, found means to escape,
and give the alarm. So that when James advanced with a numerous army, he found
the English prepared to defend Berwick by sea and land, and was constrained to
abandon the enterprise Letter of James.
. 8 July
He sent Rothsay herald to France with a letter relating this and the other
events of the year; 9 July
while Henry, or rather the English government, remitted letters of
acknowledgment to Northumberland the warden of the marches, and others, for the
defense of Berwick: and the English parliament granted supplies to guard it
against the Scots, who are accused of besieging it during a truce The letters
of Henry are preserved in Rymer's unprinted papers, No 4611, art. 114, 115: and
are dated 9th July, regni 33. The intelligence was sent to London on the 3d
July: the attempt of James was probably on the 1st or 2d. As a recompense Henry
excused Northumberland from his attendance on parliament. The supplies appear
in the Parliamentary History, II, 278: this parliament met at Westminster 9th
July, 1455. Ib.
.

Douglas was received with favor by the ruling party in England, and a pension
was granted to him for services to be done, till he could recover his estates,
seized, as the record expresses, by the person who calls himself king of
Scotland Rymer, XI, 367.
. When such is the language of a period depressed by civil war, we no longer
wonder at the truces between England and Scotland, and that no solid
pacification could exist: the subjection of Scotland was ever the chief object
of the English kings, and a contemporary writer of that nation hesitates not to
prefer its importance to that of France Harding, f. v. 234.
; the Scottish court well knew that this obstinately weak and ambitious
pretension might seem to sleep, but was always alive.

The transactions of parliament are interesting and important Acts, f. 34. In
f. 35 appears a statute prohibiting, on pain of treason, any intercourse with
Douglas, his mother, or brother (John lord Balveny.)
. 4 Aug.
The first statute concerns the annexation of lands to the royal domains, and
mentions that the poverty of the crown often causes that of the realm; for
which reason, and others not expressed, it is ordained that, in every part of
the kingdom, there be certain lordships, and castles, perpetually annexed to
the royal property, and never to be alienated except by the advice of
parliament; that any other alienation shall be void, and resumeable by the
sovereign at pleasure, with all the profits which have resulted; and that the
king and his successors be sworn to observe this statute. This last clause
seems to indicate that the legislative power possessed a title to direct the
executive: but it is suspected that neither the king, nor the parliament, then
knew the nature of absolute power, or of liberty. The ordinance proceeds to
declare that the whole customs of the kingdom, as they stood at the death of
James I, shall be vested in the present monarch; and to specify the lands
annexed to the crown, among which we sind Ettrick forest, and Galloway, which
belonged to the family of Douglas, but no other lands of that house seem to be
mentioned; a circumstance unaccounted for by our careless writers, and which
probably arose from the other extensive domains of Douglas being shared among
the nobles, and others, who assisted in suppressing the revolt On the 3d July
1455 was a grant to lord Hamilton of the sheriffdom of Lanark, forfeited by
Douglas. See Dougl. Peer. 329. On the 23d Oct. appears a charter to the same,
and Euphemia countess (dowager) of Douglas and lady Bothwell, his spouse;
confirmed 1481. Scotst. Call. Several new peerages were erected on the fall of
the family of Douglas. See Carmichael's Tracts, etc.
. The other chief territories, recorded as belonging to the crown, are the
castle of Edinburgh with some lands in Lothian; that of Stirling, with its
dependent grounds; that of Dunbarton, with some small estates; the earldom of
Fife, with the palace of Falkland; the earldom of Strathern; the lordship of
Brechin; the castle of Inverness, and the lordships of Urquhart, and Abernethy,
with other northern domains; the Redcastle in the south east of Rosshire, with
the appended lordship of Ross, a minute limb of that great earldom, probably
retained by James I, when he pardoned the earl of Ross, the lord of the Isles,
as a key to that distant, and dubious, province.

This parliament further ordered that the office of warden of the marches
should not be hereditary: that all regalities in the king's hands be annexed to
the royalty, and that no regalities be granted in future without the sanction
of the states: that no office be hereditary, and that all offices granted since
the death of James I, be revoked except the wardenship of the marches bestowed
on the infant Alexander, earl of March, and lord of Annandale, second son of
the king, and afterward duke of Albany. It is also decreed that, in the
boroughs, a council of eight or twelve persons, according to the extent of the
town, be established, to decide petty suits: and that the members of parliament
wear particular habits, which are minutely described Acts, f. 35, 36. Annandale
had belonged to Douglas.
.

The national council having again met, on the thirteenth of October, took into
consideration the report of an intended English invasion; and gave directions
concerning the arrangement of beacons and other necessary preparations. They
then ordered that persons suspected of treason should be imprisoned: that none
should pass into England in time of war, without permission, under pain of
treason: and several other regulations appear, all relating to hostilities, but
not of such importance as to merit especial consideration. To the apprehension
of war was added a more immediate calamity, that of the pestilence, which
extended its ravages through the kingdom, and perhaps preserved it from any
invasion at this infectious period Ibid. f. 36, 37.
.

If credit be given to the late, 1456
and doubtful, accounts of this reign two invasions of Scotland took place this
year. The first was conducted by John lord of the Isles, who is said to have
committed several ravages, and even to have burnt Inverness: he then retired,
and was some time after pardoned on submission Boyce, lib. XVIII, Lindsay's
transl. 88. When Boyce is at a loss for incidents he has always recourse from
the earliest periods to the last, to a Donald of the isles. The lord at this
time was John. Sutherland case, chapter v. p. 28. Douglas' Peerage, 361.
. This seems fabulous; and perhaps the same character may be assigned to the
more probable account that Douglas, and the earl of Northumberland, ravaging
the borders, were defeated by Angus, with small loss on either side Boyce, lib.
XVIII, Lindsay's transl. 91.
.

From superior authority it appears that James, enraged at the conduct of the
English court in the supply and reception of Douglas, entered the north of
England, with a large army; but was met at the river Cayle, by two English
ambassadors, by whose arts he was so far deceived, as to return, and dismiss
his forces. The fraud being soon discovered, the Scottish monarch, in twenty
days, raised a more formidable army than the former, ravaged Northumberland
with fire and sword; levelled many castles with the ground; and returned with
some show of military fame Contin. of Bowar, 520. Mair, 325. Boyce, ever
fabulous, supposes that James was fighting on York's side, Lindsay, 99. The
ambassadors probably appeared in Henry's name, and represented him as in power;
but James was afterward undeceived. Lesley, 308, is more authentic. The river
Cayle seems Keil in Roxburghshire. Rymer, XI, 383, gives a letter from York, in
Henry's name, in answer to the defiance of James, sent by Lion-king at arms.
York treats James as an usurper, claims homage, charges him with depredations,
and returns defiance. This letter is dated 26th July 1456, and probably
instigated the invasion by James.


.

Meanwhile Douglas was admitted to the titles of an English subject Rymer, XI,
381.
, and continued in that allegiance to the following monarchs Edward IV, and
Richard III, but in him the family, and the treason, were to become extinct.
His sister-in-law, Margaret, afterward returned into Scotland; where the king,
commiserating her rank, her beauty, her tears, assigned to her the lordship of
Balveny, and wedded her to his uterine brother the earl of Athole Stewart's
Genealogy, 171. But Sir John Stuart was not created earl of Athole till 1457;
and Balveny was only granted to him in May 1460. Douglas' Peer. 49. The
marriage probably did not take place till 1459. The confusion of chronology
springs from the grand fountain of historical error, Hector Boyce.
.

A parliament was held at Edinburgh, 19 Oct.
which published a few ordinances regulating the manner of national defense
against England, the power of the duke of York the enemy of James, and the
invasion of that country, leading the Scots to expect reprisals. Certain rules
were established, concerning those infected with the pestilence, which still
desolated the kingdom, being, it is believed, the fifth great visitation of
that horrid contagion. The value of coin, foreign and domestic, was
considerably raised, so that the Scottish money became to the English as one to
three: and some abuses committed by the king's officers, in exacting the
customs at fairs, were repressed. The most important act, which was however
altered in the next parliament, concerns the holding of the sessions, or high
court of justice, which was ordered to sit for three months at a time; and was
to consist of three eminent clergy, three barons, and three commissioners of
the burghs, to be changed each month; and who were to be sworn, in the royal
presence, impartially to administer the laws. The instructions sent to France
were voted sufficient, but their purport is unknown Acts, f. v. 37 -- 39.
.

A truce with England, 1457 June
where York was no longer in authority, was negociated, and at length concluded
at Conventry to last till the sixth day of July 1459 Rymer, XI, 389. York had
remained in power till February this year. To counteract him, Margaret proposed
to the court of France that the two daughters of James I, who went thither when
the dauphiness died, should be married to the two sons of the late duke of
Somerset her partizan. At the same time Margaret prevailed on the French king
of assist Scotland against the duke of York: and Loheac and Breze invaded the
south of England, and ravaged Port (Portsmouth?) De Coucy 709. Carte, II, 750.
. The territory immediately appertaining to the earldom of Douglas, with
Douglas-dale, and the appendant domains, was now granted to the earl of Angus,
in which family, a branch of the former, it was to remain Hume's Dougl. II, 18,
19. The earldom of Angus passed to the house of Douglas, by marriage, about
1381. From George, second son of William first earl of Douglas, the house of
Angus lineally descended; and the present earl George was the fifth of that
illustrious branch. Hume II, 6 -- 11.
. This measure was imprudent, as it raised the house of Angus to a power little
inferior to that of the preceding lineage of Douglas, and which was afterward
too deeply felt in the kingdom: but individuals learn from experience, while
nations, and successive kings, seldom draw wisdom from former faults. That our
monarchs were strangers to the fixed plan of humbling the aristocracy, imputed
to them by theoretic writers, is sufficiently clear No sooner had Angus
succeeded to the power of Douglas, than the followers of the latter house
joined the former. See the bond of lord Hamilton in Hume II, 19. It is dated
13th May 1457.
.

About this time a negotiation was proceeding at Paris, 1457
concerning the claim of Denmark to an annual sum, for the cession of the
Hebudes about two centuries before Torf. Orc. 184. A singular lawsuit happened
this year between James and lord Erskine, concerning the earldom of Mar, and
the king unjustly gained the cause: nor was the family of Erskine admitted to
its right till 1562. See a minute detail of this grand process in Douglas'
Peer. 467, seq.
. This affair, unimportant in itself, led to the reunion of the Orkneys to the
Scottish crown in the succeeding reign.

The national council, 1458 6 March
being summoned to Edinburgh, distinguished itself by enacting a great number
of prudent laws. The ordinance of the year 1456, concerning the supreme court
of judicature, was revised; and it was decreed that the sessions were only to
continue for forty days at a time, but should be held three times in the year,
at three different cities, Edinburgh, Perth, and Aberdeen; that is once a year
at each place, in successive periods. This court consisted, as has above
appeared, of committees of parliament; and, from a specification in the act, it
seems that the Scottish parliament did not now exceed one hundred and ninety
members Each committee consisted of nine members, three clergymen, three
barons, three burgesses: these distinct committees in the year amount to
twenty-seven members; and the act bears that, on this plan, the judicial
capacity of each member would not revolve above once in seven years, which
infers a total of one hundred and eighty-nine.
. The rotation of these committees of justice was a laudable measure, and
partook more of a free constitution, than the foundation of James V, originally
projected by John duke of Albany, on the model of a French judicatory
parliament, after despotism had tainted the government of France. This
institution also contributes somewhat to instruct us how a French parliament
dwindled into a court of law. Particular regulations were enacted, concerning
the causes to be tried by this court of session, and the mode of procedure: 1458
but it is unjustly, and impoliticly, ordered that the members should defray
their own expenses. Other acts concern the regulation of the coin, of the
hospitals, and of military discipline, particularly for the encouragement of
archery. A curious sumptuary law appears, which shall be reserved for future
consideration: and one common rate of measure is ordered to be followed through
the kingdom. The decrees for the promotion of agriculture deserve applause;
they ordain that lands may be let in fee-farm, and that the king shall set the
example; that woods, trees, and hedges, be planted; that wheat, peace, and
beans, be regularly sown; game is recommended to preservation; wolves, and
birds of prey, to destruction. A decent and peaceable attendance on the courts
of justice is enforced: the violent seizure of lands is guarded against: he who
attains the royal remission is, nevertheless, to make compensation to the
plaintiff for any robbery or spoil: negligent, or corrupt, officers of justice
are to lose their office, and profits, for a year and a day, if heritable; if
not, for ever Acts, f. v. 39. -- f. v. 45.
.

The famous statute of James I is confirmed, concerning leasing making, or the
propagation of falsehoods between the king and the people Ibid. f. 45, c. 100.
; a law perhaps not deserving of much blame, during the struggles between
monarchy and aristocracy, but which afterward became an oppressive engine of
state. Two other acts particularly regard the constitution; by the one it is
wisely ordained that no leagues or bonds of association be entered into, nor
any commotions raised, under the pain of confiscation, and even the life of the
guilty to be in the king's mercy; and that, under the same penalty, no
inhabitants of boroughs shall engage in bonds of attendance; or ride in armor,
save with the king, his officers, or the lord of the borough. The other act
declares that no freeholder, that holds of the king a property of less value
than twenty pounds a year, be constrained to come to the parliament or general
council, as a member, except he be a baron, or be commanded by the king's
officer or writ Acts, f. v. 43, c. 88, and f. 43, c. 85.
. This ordinance, really intended as a relief of the subjects at a period when
attendance on parliament was regarded as a burdensome expense, and loss of
time, has been construed into an intention of undue influence.

The patriotic exertions of this last parliament of James II are terminated
with a decree, that the proper officers order its statutes to be copied and
proclaimed through the kingdom, in order that none may pretend ignorance. The
members conclude with an affecting peroration, to the effect that, since God
has sent their sovereign such prosperity, that all rebels and infringers of
justice are banished, and no party able to excite commotion remains in the
realm, if the king and his ministers be inclined to the quiet and utility of
the state, and to dispense justice and equity among the people, the parliament
therefore exhorts, and requires, the monarch diligently to enforce these
statutes, that he may meet with the approbation of heaven, and of all his
subjects; and expresses gratitude to God, who has sent them such a prince to be
their governor and defender Ibid. f. 45, c. 102.
. Alas, two short years were to close their hopes, and their gratitude! A fatal
chance was again to reduce Scotland to the confusions of a minority, and to
retard the civilization, and the glory, of that ill-fated kingdom. That the
happiness of millions should depend upon the infancy of one, is a paradox in
human affairs, which may provoke the smiles of those who think, and the tears
of those who feel. But such instances seldom occur, and must be suffered, to
avoid greater evils. Severe however, as are the misfortunes of elective
monarchy, when compared with the hereditary calamities of Scotland, they lose
their terrors, and assume the aspect of felicity.

Plenipotentiaries were named, 1459 July
to extend the truce with England, which expired this year; and it was
prolonged for nine years To the 6th July 1468. Rymer, XI, 426. It is dated 12
Sept. and ratified by Henry, 20 Feb. 1460. Ibid. 443. Among Rymer's unpublished
papers, No. 4612, art. 69, is a power from Henry, (Coventry 26th July,) to
confer with envoys from Scotland on secret matters, lately mentioned by Andrew
abbot of Melrose.
. The civil wars of York and Lancaster now raged in that kingdom; and were long
to consume its force, and prevent any molestation of the neighboring states Of
this year, among other curious deeds in Scotstarvet's Calendars, is a grant to
John Dalrumpill, the king's merchant, for services at home and abroad, Jan. and
Aug. In Feb. James issued a singular, and rather arbitrary, mandate, forbidding
John Swift, a burgess of Edinburgh, to disinherit his eldest son: it is
published by Hay Vind. of E. More, p. 61.
.

A commission was issued to Sir William Monipeny of Rattray, Nov.
and Mr. John Kennedy provost of St. Andrews, to proceed on an embassy to
France, and demand the earldom of Xaintonge, which had been granted to James I.
They were also to form a treaty with Castille; and to join Patrick Fokart,
captain of the Scottish guard, in ascertaining and settling the debt due by
Scotland to Denmark: and afterward to pass to Rome, with Mr. Hugh Douglas
archdeacon of St. Andrews, in order to testify the king's obedience to the new
pontiff Pius II Scotst. Call.
.

In the deficiency of historical materials, 1460
it is not easy to discover the pretenses, or causes, which induced James to
break the truce by besieging Roxburgh. It is certain that, in June, he sent
ambassadors to England, to confirm the truce, and to compose any slight
infringements, which might have occurred since its commencement Rymer, XI, 453.
: and that, on the third of August, he was slain. That, in the contest between
the families of York and Lancaster, the Scottish monarch inclined to the latter
is to be inferred from his personal relation, by the mother, with the families
of Somerset and Gaunt, and from the assistance lent by the French king, his
ally, to Henry VI; and is ascertained by the treaties when Henry maintained his
authority, and the intervals of war when York was in power, and by the flight
of Henry, and his queen, into Scotland. The castle of Roxburgh was in the
custody of William Nevil, lord Fauconberg, of the house of Warwick, the chief
pillar of York's honorable cause Calendars of ancient charters, 38 H 6, p. 281.
. It appears therefore that the embassy of June, which consisted of not less
than two bishops, three abbots, and three peers, had far superior intentions to
those expressed in the commission; and was sent to promise aid to Henry, upon
certain previous terms, probably that Roxburgh and Berwick, held by the enemies
of Henry, should be restored to Scotland, if taken by James. On the tenth of
July the Lancastrians had been defeated at Northampton, and Henry reduced to
captivity; an event which seems instantly to have excited the Scottish monarch
to arms, and he proceeded to secure the concessions in the first place, as not
only a necessary object of prudence upon his part, but as affording a
distraction to the arms of York, or a motive to their blame, by holding them
out to the English as the origin of national disaster, and disgrace.

Accordingly, toward the end of July, James, with a numerous army, well
furnished with cannon, and warlike machinery, proceeded to the siege of
Roxburgh castle; which had ever since the battle of Durham remained in the
hands of the English, and presented a monument of jealousy and envy to Scotland
Cont. of Bowar, 520. Mair, 325.
. While the king was observing the effects of his artillery, one of the rudely
contrived cannons of that age, consisting of iron bars, girded with circles of
metal, suddenly burst; a fragment struck his thigh, and the great effusion of
blood produced a death almost instantaneous. The earl of Angus, who stood next
to James, was wounded Cont. of Bowar, 520. Mair, 325. W. Wyrcestre, II, 482.
Chron. end of Winton MS. Reg. 17 D.XX. Aeneae Sylvii Comm. p. 125, edit.
Francof. 1614, folio.
. It is impossible to express the grief of the camp, and of the kingdom, at the
premature loss of a beloved sovereign, in the flower of his age, aggravated by
the circumstances, and by the strange wantonness of the fatality. The young
regretted the death of a youthful prince, of an ardent leader; the old sighed
at the prospect of another minority. Could any consolation have arisen, it must
have proceeded from the spirit of the queen, Mary of Gelder; who, immediately
upon the tidings, arrived in the camp with the infant heir of the monarchy, and
showing him to the soldiers, while the tears gushed from her eyes, she conjured
them by every domestic tie, by the memory of their sovereign, by the fame of
Scottish valor, not to depart from their design, but to destroy this calamitous
fortress. The castle was taken, and levelled with the ground Ibid. but they are
silent concerning the queen; and it is with hesitation that Hector Boyce,
fabulous from first to last, is quoted with a final adieu to that impostor,
Lib. XVIII, Lindsay's transl. 103, 104. Hector wrote three pages of the first
year of James III, but happily did not finish that reign, of which there are
several original historians.
.

Such was the misfortune which deprived Scotland of the opening virtues of the
second James, in the twenty ninth year of his age, and twenty fourth of his
reign. His progeny were James who succeeded him; Alexander duke of Albany, who
was to be the father of John, the regent during the minority of James V; John,
to be the earl of Mar: and two daughters, Mary, first wedded to lord Boyd, and
after to lord Hamilton, whose family, by this connection, were to form hopes of
the royalty in Mary's reign; and Margaret, who married William lord Crichton,
son of the chancellor Stewart's Genesis 69. Jean wife of Huntley, Douglas Peer.
299, was apparently daughter not of the first, but of the second, James.
. Such marriages attended the ignominious sovereignty of James III.

BOOK VII. BEING THE FIRST PART OF THE REIGN OF JAMES III.
Minority of James III -- regency -- Henry VI and his queen in Scotland --
Berwick acquired -- house of Angus rivals the former power of Douglas -- war
with England -- truce -- death of Mary of Gelder -- of bishop Kennedy -- Boyds
in favor -- parliaments -- Mary the king's sister wedded to Sir Thomas Boyd
earl of Arran -- marriage treaty with Denmark -- Orkneys ceded to Scotland --
Margaret of Denmark arrives -- fall of the Boyds -- character of James --
parliament -- reflections on some despotic measures -- parliament -- St.
Andrews an archbishopric.

THE castle of Roxburgh being demolished, 10 Aug.
the Scottish leaders performed ceremonies of homage, and fidelity, to their
young sovereign, now in his eighth year, at the neighboring town of Kelso, and
then proceeded to the fortress of Wark which they also destroyed. Contented
with their success, and anxious to settle the government of their country, they
returned and dismissed the army Lesley, 311. Lindsay 108. Buchanan, lib. XII,
c. 1. The date of the coronation, (St. Lawrence's day,) may be found in the
chronicle at the end of Winton, MS. Reg. 17. D.XX.
.

Soon after a parliament was held at Scone; and the king's coronation was
solemnized. The queen mother, who had the sole care of her royal son, his
brothers, and sisters, appointed that loyal and prudent prelate, Kennedy, to
conduct the young monarch's education Lindsay, 107.
. The settlement of the regency is not a little obscure; some authors inferring
the queen, Mary of Gelder, to have been the sole regent, and to have managed
public affairs by the advice of Kennedy; while others add a council of regency,
consisting of the chancellor lord Evandale, a natural descendant of Murdac duke
of Albany; the earl of Orkney late chancellor, the lords Graham and Boyd, and
the bishops of Glasgow and Dunkeld Ib. 107, 108. Lesley, 311. On the
resignation of the earl of Orkney in 1458, the bishop of Brechin became
chancellor. Andrew Stuart lord Evandale, (or Avondale, Lanarkshire,) a natural
son of Sir James Stuart, (that son of Murdac duke of Albany who fled to Ireland
in the beginning of the reign of James I,) had been recalled with his two
brothers by James II, and appears as chancellor on the accession of James III.
Crawf. Off. 37. The fables, and prolix orations, of Buchanan concerning a
contest between the queen and Kennedy, XI, 6 -- 17 were composed by him to
serve the faction of Murray against Mary, and deserve severe reprobation, as
they evince that he was capable of perverting the very foundation of history.

About the commencement of this reign it appears, from Scotstarvet's Calendars,
that James lord Livingston was great chamberlain; James Lindsay provost of
Lincluden keeper of the privy seal; Sir John Colquhoun comptroller; David
Guthrie of Kincaldrum treasurer; Archibald Whitlaw archdeacon of Moray
secretary.


. But it appears most probable that this council, if it existed, was only of
state; and that the ostensible management had, by the will of the late king, or
the practice of Scotland, passed to the queen mother, who used the tried wisdom
and abilities of Kennedy, in conducting the government. This prelate, by the
best influence, that of talents, and probity, and political skill, had acquired
an authority before unknown to any churchman in Scotland; a country always more
remarkable for the moderation of its clergy, than for their ambition: and at a
period while even the barren wastes of Sweden had become the bloody scenes of
ecclesiastical dominion, it is pleasing to observe the Scottish prelates only
eminent in honesty, and patriotism.

An important event soon attracted the attention of the Scottish government. 1461
Henry VI of England, having been defeated at Touton in Yorkshire by Edward IV,
fled to Scotland, with his queen and son; 29 Mar.
the dukes of Somerset and Exeter, lord Ross, Fortescue the chief justice, and
other persons of rank Hall, 187. Polyd. Virgil, lib. XXIII, p. 511. Harding, f.
v. 227 edit. 1543, 4to, (who wrote, f. v. 229, while Henry was in Scotland.)
Ferrerius, 385. Lesley, 313. Lindsay, 108. See also the Paston contemporary
letters, I, 219, 223. Monstrelet, III, f. v. 61.
. While the mental infirmities of Henry confined him at Kirkudbright, his
heroic queen advanced to Edinburgh, and embraced in Mary of Gelder a form of
similar elegance, a spirit of similar elevation Paston letters, I, 249: Henry
was only attended by four men and a boy.
. The resemblance of their dispositions rendered the former alliance an instant
friendship. A marriage between Edward the son of Henry, and Mary the daughter
of Scotland, was proposed and resolved; but delayed by the youth of the
parties, and finally prevented by the misfortunes, and the death of that prince
Monstrelet, III, f. v. 61. Hall, 137. Buchanan, XII, 3.
. To conciliate the expected aid, Berwick was surrendered to the Scots; and
object often wished and attempted since the disgraceful invasion of Edward
Baliol. June
In return, a Scottish army entered England, and laid siege to Carlisle, which
was held for Edward IV: but the English led by lord Montague raised the siege,
and defeated the Scots with great slaughter Harding, f v. 227. Hall, f. v. 187.
Polyd. Virg. XXIII, p. 511. Mair, 327. Ferrerius, 385. Lindsay, 108. Lesley,
312. Buchanan, XII, 3. The Paston letters, I, 231, bear that 6000 Scots were
slain at Carlisle.
.

So far were the Scottish monarchs from the refined policy of humbling their
nobility, who, in a lawless country and period, formed, as it were, the bonds
of fidelity between the king and the people, that James II had, in destroying
the power of Douglas, only transferred that influence to Angus, another branch
of the family. To gain the assistance of this powerful house, Henry VI now
entered into an engagement to give George, earl of Angus, lands between the
rivers Trent and Humber, amounting to the yearly value of two thousand marks
sterling; and to erect these lands into a dukedom. It was however stipulated
that the earl might war on England, at the command of the Scottish king; and
that he should not be amenable to the English parliament, or courts of justice
Hume Douglas, II, 21, 22, from the original.
.

To balance the influence of Henry in Scotland, Edward IV entered into a
negotiation with John of Ilay, Oct.
earl of Ross, and lord of the Isles, who maintained the independence of his
ancestors. 1462 13 Feb.
By the treaty this potentate, and his numerous vassals, become the liege
subjects of Edward, who assigns to the earl a certain pension; and engages
that, if Scotland be vanquished by the alliance, the part to the north of the
river Forth shall be bestowed on Ross, while that to the south is to be held by
the banished earl of Douglas, both acknowledging the superiority of England
Rymer, XI, 483, 484, 492.
.

Eager to strengthen her designs by additional assistance, Margaret of England
sailed from Kirkcudbright to Bretagne, 16 Apr.
where she prevailed on the duke to advance twelve thousand crowns. She then
passed to Anjou, to her father, whence she proceeded to the French court at
Chinon Wyrcestre, 493. Duclos' hist. de Louis XI. I, 177.
. By an engagement to surrender Calais, 23 June
when in her power, this spirited princess induced Louis XI to reinforce her
cause with a sum of twenty thousand livres, and a permission to Breze, the high
steward of Normandy, to accompany her with five hundred men at arms; who, with
their usual attendants, formed a force of about two thousand men Du Tillet, f.
v. 144. Duclos, ib. Carte, forgetting that Wyrcestre's work is posthumous, and
not finally corrected, so that sometimes events are twice mentioned, strangely
supposes Margaret and Breze to have twice arrived from France and taken
Alnwick, 1462, 1463. Wyrcestre's voyages of Margaret in April, and on
Good Friday, p. 492, 493, are one and the same, the latter date being April
16th, 1462. The date of the deed concerning Calais, the plain narrative of
Duclos, etc. evince the identity. In April 1463, Margaret went to Flanders, and
Anjou, where she remained, Wyrcestre 496; and her presence at the battle of
Hexham, 1464, is more than doubtful. In July 1462 it was not Breze, as Carte
supposes, but Talbot who surrendered Alnwick, which he held with an English
garrison as a partizan of Henry. Wyrc. 493. Redpath and others have been misled
by Carte's inadvertence. Stow, Grafton, and other late writers, deserve little
credit.
. Oct.


She landed near Bamborough, and seized that fortress, Alnwick, and
Dunstanburgh. But Edward IV, and Warwick, advancing with a numerous army,
Margaret and Breze withdrew to their fleet; and passed to Berwick amidst a
dangerous tempest, Dec.
in which several ships, mariners, and soldiers, were lost on Holy Island. The
three castles speedily surrendered to the arms of the English king. Yet Angus
and Breze gallantly advanced with a considerable force, and brought off in
safety Breze's son, with the French garrison, from Alnwick, in the sight of the
English army Harding, 228. Wyrcestre, 494, 495. Fabian, II, 215. Duclos, I,
179. Leland Coll. II. 499. Lesley, 313. Lindsay, 109. Paston Letters, I, 273.
. 1463


Margaret of England finding all further resistance vain, fled with her son,
and some adherents, to Flanders, whence she passed to her father who assigned
her a residence and revenue Wyrcestre, 496. Fortescue the chief justice seems
to have attended her to Flanders, whence he was invited to England. He was soon
after questioned concerning some writings against Edward's right, which had
been circulated from Scotland into England. His declaration in answer appears,
MS. Harl. 1757, f. 188. It is long and curious, but foreign to this work.
. The battle of Hexham fought by her adherents in the following year was fatal
to her cause: while Henry, suspicious of the Scots, ventured into England in
disguise; and, after lurking a year in Lancashire, was discovered and sent to
the tower of London.

Warwick had artfully shaken the attachment of Mary of Gelder to the cause of
Henry, by proposing her marriage with the new English monarch: and the queen
dowager seems even to have proceeded to Carlisle, to advance the negotiations
In April 1462, according to Wyrcestre, 493, Warwick met Mary at Dumfries, on
the business of the marriage. In the Paston letters, I, 270, there are some
singular notices concerning the negotiations in Scotland. "These lords in your
other letter, with lord Hastyngs, and others, ben to Karlyle, to ressave in the
queen of Scots." The same letter asserts that it was agreed that Henry and his
adherents should be delivered up to Edward; these terms having been granted by
the young lords of Scotland in opposition to the old. The same distinction of
party occurs in the minority of James V, which see. The earl of Douglas was, by
the treaty, to be regarded as an Englishman; and retired in consternation to
the abbey of St. Alban's. It appears that the queen and Kennedy were in
concord, in spite of Buchanan's fables; and that their party was that of the
young or new lords, created by the house of Stuart; while perhaps Angus,
attached by interest to Henry and to war with England, led the ancient
aristocracy: but he died this year, leaving a son Archibald only nine years of
age. Douglas Peer. Hume, II, 27.
. But her doubtful reputation, and the ruin of Henry's affairs, frustrated the
design; and she may appear to have fallen a victim to her mortification on the
occasion. Mary of Gelder died on the sixteenth of November, in the flower of
her age Mair, 327. Lindsay, 109. Buch. XII. 18. Lesley, 314, gives the month
and day.
. Her prudence, her spirit, her various virtues and abilities, recommended her
to public veneration, and esteem. A widow in the bloom of beauty, and vigor of
youth, it would not be a matter of surprise that her chastity was dubious; and
even this stain would disappear in the splendour of her merits, for nothing can
be more unjust than to infer that the loss of female modesty is the loss of
every virtue. But there may perhaps be reason to believe that this charge
belongs to calumny, and originated among some of the ambitious and inimical
nobles, who vainly aspired to her hand or her power; or, while awed by her
authority, despised her sway as that of a woman and a foreigner The Hepburns of
Hales, afterward of Bothwell, were fatal to the reputation of our queens. Adam
Hepburn of Hales is charged by Mair, 327, with committing adultery with Mary of
Gelder, he being a married man. The charge is repeated, almost verbatim, by
Ferrerius, 386, who adds her praise, "alias mirum in modum laudatissimae:" by
Lindsay, 109, and alluded to by Buchanan, XII, 18. Sir D. Dalrymple desends
her, Remarks, chapter VII, by saying that Mair brought the charge fifty years after
her death; but he was advanced in years, when he wrote, and it is to be wished
that we had equal evidence for all the events in our history. Sir David omits
another evidence, that of Wyrcestre, a contemporary, cited by Carte, II, 766,
charging her with an amor with Somerset, whose vanity related it to Louis XI;
and Mary in revenge instigated Hales to murder him. Nor could Alexander duke of
Albany have branded his brother James III as a bastard, if their mother's
reputation had been holy. Her devotion is more apparent, than her chastity, by
her foundation of Trinity church and hospital, Edinburgh, 1461, confirmed by
the bishop of St. Andrews on the 1st of April 1462. See Arnot's Edinburgh.
Devotion and love are proverbially connected; and it will be difficult for any
knight errant to overcome the testimony of Wyrcestre, which moreover completely
tallies with that of our historians. "Mense Marcii (1462) dux Somersetiae
reversus est de Flandria, in una carvella, in Scocia. Et Regina Scociae habuit
ipsum in summo odio, eo quod discooperuit carnalem copulam cum ea Regi
Franciae, et fecit deminum de Haylis sibi insidiari ad interficiendum." Ad
finem Libri Nigri a Hearne, II, 492. See also, Leland Itin. V, 94, her
suspected amor with Gray of Northumberland.


.

Nevertheless the bishop of Glasgow, and other ambassadors, met the
commissioners of England at York; and a truce of about one year was concluded.
19 Dec.
The support of Henry's cause was formally abandoned by Scotland; and Edward on
his side resigned that of the banished earl of Douglas: but the deposed king
and peer were to remain inviolate in the respective realms to which they had
fled for refuge Rymer, XI, 517, gives the commission of James; the terms of the
truce are taken by Abercromby, II, 390, from the original in the Scottish
records: but this author seems mistaken, when he mentions the bishop of St.
Andrews as an envoy. There is indeed a safe conduct to that prelate 5 Dec.
1463, Rymer, XI, 509, but not as envoy; though the other persons there named
were the ambassadors. Perhaps it was on this occasion that a declaration was
given by Thomas bishop of Aberdeen, Crawfurd, Hamilton, etc. that the earl of
Oxford, on coming to Scotland in 1461, was ordered to retire, and sold no ships
there. Rymer's unp. papers, No. 4613, art. 48.


.

The truce, 1464 May
lately concluded with England, was violated. The young duke of Albany,
proceeding to Gelderland, with a numerous train, after having procured a safe
conduct from the English monarch, was nevertheless captured at sea: but, by the
spirited remonstrances of the Scottish government, declaring instant war in case
he were not released, his deliverance was speedily effected Mair, 328. Lindsay,
110. Lesley, 314. Ferrerius, 386. Buch. XII, 18. His passport is dated 20th
April. Rymer, XI, 520.
. This event appears to have been accidental, for the truce was immediately
extended to fifteen years Rymer, XI, 525, 1 June.
; 1465
and in the following year to the term, before unknown, of fifty-four years,
closing at the last day of October 1519 Ibid. 557. The commission of James is
dated at Down in Menteith, 28 Nov. 1465: ib. 549. In 1464 the lords of Vere and
Tourhon arrived in Scotland, as ambassadors of Charles duke of Burgundy, and
renewed the alliance. Lesl. 314.


; a vain space, and soon to be interrupted! Edward IV, dissolved in luxury, and
more fond of pleasure than of war, eagerly wished that the Scottish king should
wed an English lady, and that a perpetual peace should be established between
the kingdoms; while the government of Scotland, influenced by bishop Kennedy,
seemed at length to have learned that war was no path to solid advantages. The
new politics of Louis XI, his avarice, his want of faith, seem also to have had
some weight in the pacific inclinations manifested by Scotland Duclos hist. de
Louis XI, I, 291, mentions an embassy from Scotland, in 1465, to reclaim
Xaintonge, and support the duke of Bretagne against the ambition of Louis. The
matrimonial connections with Bretagne and Burgundy operated almost to a
dissolution of the alliance with France. Buchanan following, as usual, the
fabulous Boyce, and with his own wonted neglect of chronology, arranges as in
1465 an insurrection of Donald of the isles, dated by Boyce on 1461. When Boyce
wanted materials in whatever stage of his history he always raised a Donald of
the isles, the perpetual ghost of his pages. From 1427 to 1448 Alexander was
lord of the isles; John from 1448 to 1475. Suth. Case, 30, 31. Dougl. Peer.


.

The death of bishop Kennedy, 1466 10 May
a prelate of high and deserved reputation, excited much public regret. A
grandson of Robert III, his virtues, and abilities, conferred a greater glory
than his royal descent Mary daughter of Robert III was first wedded to George
earl of Angus, and afterward to Sir James Kennedy, by whom she had issue
Gilbert lord Kennedy, and the bishop. Stewart's Genesis 62. The second George earl
of Angus, who died in 1463, was uterine brother of bishop Kennedy. Ib. Dougl.
Peer. Hume, II, 11.
. His wisdom, his munificence, his public spirit, secured the applause, and
gratitude, of his country: and his fame would diffuse a strong and steady
light, independent of the darkness of a barbarous age. Upon the death of the
queen mother, he appears to have retained the chief management of affairs, by
the declared will, or implied consent, of the nation. To the foundation of the
college at St. Andrews, this prelate added two other monuments of his wealth,
his tomb of the finest gothic construction, 1466
and a ship of great size called the Bishop's Barge. The former was sacred to
the idle pride of the times; but in the latter he might reproach his nation
with inattention to commerce, and maritime affairs, and hold out an example for
their imitation. It is asserted that the expense of these three objects
amounted to ten thousand pounds sterling each; or a total sum equal at present
to about three hundred thousand pounds: but it is hardly conceiveable that,
even in twenty-six years of prelacy, and five of public emolument, such a
treasure could have been amassed. Eminent in knowledge of the civil law, in the
learning of the age, in the experience of men, and manners, and politics, the
late king, the nobles, submitted to his wisdom as to that of a public parent.
Nor was the bishop less respectable than the counselor of state, in enforcing
the residence of his clergy, their regular preaching, and visitation of the
sick; and in affording an example, by preaching four times in the year at every
church of his diocese, by inspecting the maintenance of the poor, and the
education of youth, and by the vigorous punishment of clerical negligence
Compare Mair, 328, who, amid much praise, justly blames Kennedy for holding the
commendam of Pittenweem with his bishopric; and for the proud expense of his
tomb. It is singular that Mair should mention the commendam as small, exigua,
and yet estimate its revenue at eight hundred pieces of gold: should we read
eighty? Lindsay, 110, gives a naif character as usual. Ferrerius, f. v. 337,
Lesley, 314, Buchanan, XII, 23, join in the applause.
.

The king, now in his fourteenth year, being delivered from the stern
instruction of the prelate of St. Andrews, became a prey to flattering
courtiers. Among these Robert lord Boyd was distinguished for his conciliating
manners, and interested cunning. His sons, Thomas and Robert, were introduced
to the royal favor; and their uncle, Sir Alexander Boyd, a mirror of chivalry,
was appointed to superintend the military exercises of the youthful sovereign
Ferrerius, 386, Buchanan, XII, 21. Lesley's brevity omits much: and Lindsay,
114, unaccountably passes ten years, 1468 -- 1478. The Boyds, and other western
families, seem to have been favored by bishop Kennedy, whose patrimonial
connections lay in that division.
. After the death of Kennedy, the Boyds had proceeded to such audacity that,
when the king was sitting in the exchequer at Linlithgow, 9 July
they constrained him to proceed with them to Edinburgh, and to remove from his
presence those who had been ordered to attend him by the parliament See an
extract of the trial of the Boyds in 1469, in Crawf. Off. 316, 317. Buchanan,
XII, 22, erroneously supposes the affair to have happened before the death of
bishop Kennedy. His John Kennedy was Gilbert, elder brother of the bishop:
Rudd. notes 443. But his whole account is a fable, and irreconcilable with the
trial. Fabulous elegance, and a complete confusion of chronology, are the
general features of Buchanan's history. Lesley is infinitely superior in
veracity and exactness.
. This violence, which had been declared direct treason by a late act, was in a
very few years to furnish means for the condemnation of the perpetrators.

A parliament being summoned to Edinburgh, 9 Oct.
lord Boyd was solemnly pardoned by the king; and appointed governor of his
person, and of the princes, and royal castles, and afterward one of the
council chosen to conduct the marriages of James, his brothers, and sisters A
solemn pardon was granted to Boyd, Adam Hepburn apparent (heir) of Hales, John
lord Somerville, and Ker master of Cessfurd, 5 Oct. Scotst. Call. Boyd had a
grant of the office of governor of the king, his brothers, and castles, 25 Oct.
Ib. As to the marriages see Crawf. Off. 315. Acts, f. 46, c. 2.
. The privileges of the church were, as usual, ratified: it was ordered that
the dowery of the future queen should amount to one third of the royal revenue,
in lands and customs: several regulations to restrain the avarice of the clergy
concerning pensions, and commendams, were issued: and a statute of Robert I,
denying to any Englishmen benefices secular or religious in Scotland, was
confirmed. For the further security of the public peace, high fines were
imposed upon the burrows, or pledges, of those who had been obliged to give
security for their behavior, and afterward violated the paction. This
parliament further ordained that no person should send money out of the
kingdom, nor take more with him than was necessary for his expenses, under pain
of forfeiting the sum, and ten pounds more: an ineffectual provision for the
want of industry, and calculated to fetter commerce, and increase that poverty
which it was intended to prevent. The increasing wealth of England rendered the
poverty of Scotland more conspicuous: but we in vain peruse the Scottish acts of
parliament, to find encouragement given to the woollen trade, or to
manufactures, or any invitation to foreign manufacturers, to settle in the
kingdom. On the contrary the regulations seem only adapted to banish commerce;
and in consequence depress industry; and as it can hardly be conceived that the
commissioners of the burghs were blind to their own interest, there is room to
believe that the overbearing nobles, and prelates, intended to crush the wealth
of the citizens, a subject of their envy and scorn. The Scottish money was now
to the English as one to three; and the Scottish silver penny became a most
diminutive coin, so that it could not be cut into quarters, or farthings, as
formerly: for the benefit of the poor, this parliament decreed that billon
farthings, of copper mixed with a small portion of silver, should be issued,
being the first example of that coinage in Scotland Acts, f. 46 -- f. v. 47.
.

The national council, having again assembled, 1467 31 Jan.
published several decrees wholly regarding commerce. It was instituted that
none but freemen of burghs, and their domestic factors, and servants, should
pretend to foreign trade, except the bishops, lords, barons, and higher clergy,
who might send their servants: that no craftsmen should engage in foreign
merchandise: that none should aspire to trade, who had not a certain property:
that no ship should sail, without a formal agreement between the merchants and
the master of the vessel; nor enter upon a voyage in winter: that no merchant
should freight any vessel to certain towns in Flanders, among which Bruges, the
grand staple of commerce, is mentioned, but that Middleburg should be the only
allowed port in the Netherlands, while Rochelle, Bourdeaux, and the other
havens of France, are left free as before; an ordinance apparently proceeding
from some fresh dissension with the Flemings Acts, f. v. 47 -- f. v. 48.
.

Meanwhile the Boyds proceeded in their ambitious designs, and collected a
power too heavy for them long to support. Strangers to the prudence of
moderation, their career was rapid in the extreme; and the nation beheld with
disgust, and surprise, their influence so far abuse the weak youth of the king,
as to procure his eldest sister, who had been affianced to the son of Henry VI,
in marriage to Sir Thomas, the son of lord Boyd. The island of Arran, and other
lands, were given as the dower of the princely bride, and erected into an
earldom in order to elevate the station of her husband, who was at the same
time created constable of Scotland In Scotstarvet's Calendars appear grants of
the lands of Arran, Stuartoun, etc. to Mary countess of Arran, and Thomas lord
Boyd earl of Arran her husband, dated 26 April 1467. He is constable in
October. Carm. Tracts, p. 48.
. This connection was the more invidious, as lord Boyd was one of those who had
been appointed to manage the nuptials of the royal family; and as it was
asserted that the princess had been promised to Hamilton's son, as a recompense
for his critical services to her father, 12 Oct.
in withdrawing his forces from Douglas See Abercr. II, 397, but the assertion
is more than doubtful.
.

The statutes of the two next sessions of parliament chiefly concern the state
of money in the kingdom Acts, f. 49, 50.
; 1468 12 Jan
and must have excited discontent by the repeated alterations of the value, a
symptom indicative of a weak or a pernicious government. Scottish money now
became to the English as one to four; a circumstance rather imputable perhaps
to the increasing wealth of England, than to the penury of Scotland; though in
the latter country a great source of abundance had been stopped, by the long
discontinuance of inroads into England, whence a degree of opulence had arisen,
from the spoil and the ransom of captives. However this be, the unpopular
example of James III long served as a beacon to warn the succeeding monarchs,
and there is no further alteration in the value of money till the reign of Mary.

Among the singular incongruities of human affairs, may be classed the fortune
of the third James. His feeble and tyrannic reign was, in its commencement,
graced with the capture of Roxburgh, the reddition of Berwick, and the
important annexation of the Orkneys to the Scottish monarchy; any one of which
events would have reflected honor on the able reigns of his father, or
grandfather. Let us then abandon the maxim, that political prudence, and
success, are the same. The acquisition of the Orkneys forms an incident, so
remarkable in itself, and attended with such lasting consequences, that no
apology need be offered for entering into some detail upon this interesting
subject.

That the Orkneys were considered as a part of Pikland, till the Norwegians
seized them, with the Hebudes, in the ninth century, 1468
has been before explained. When the latter islands were, in 1266, so far
recovered by Alexander III, that the Norwegian kings resigned the title of
their sovereignty to the Scottish, though the Lords of the Isles never paid
homage, except by a constraint which seldom occurred, the Orkneys still
remained an earldom, acknowledging no superior but the king of Norway. The
Norwegian line of earls failed about the year 1330, in the person of Magnus V:
and the earldom passed, by female succession, to Malis earl of Strathern His
right is rather obscure, but it appears to have been by marriage. Diploma of
1443 in Wall. Ork. and Orkn. Saga, p. 552.
; who leaving only daughters, William Sinclair obtained the Orkneys, in right
of his marriage Ibid. 553. William was succeeded by Henry Sinclair, the first
of that name, 1369 -- 1392? He was followed by the second Henry, who died in
1420. The next was William, the celebrated chancellor, who in 1470 surrendered
the Orkneys to the crown. Crawf. Off. 35.
; and in this family they long remained. The undoubted superiority however
rested with the kings of Denmark, to which Norway had been annexed since the
year 1387; they continued to give the investiture; and, on the failure of
heirs, or any pretext of rebellion, or neglect of allegiance, might have
resumed the property. The Norwegian and Danish monarchs even considered the
house of Sinclair as rather invested with the titular, than with the real,
succession; and sometimes appointed other governors Torf. Hist. Orc. 178.
.

When Hakon VI, in 1379, admitted the claim of Henry Sinclair to this earldom,
his investiture was burdened with severe conditions: 1, Sinclair was
considered as being appointed governor, and earl, of the Orkneys, by an
absolute grace of the king: 2, besides precise fidelity upon all occasions, he
is bound to serve his sovereign with one hundred men completely armed, when
required, upon a notice of three months: 3, to defend the Orkneys, and
Shetland, against any invasion, not only with the native force, but with the
whole power of his house: 4, to exert both the said powers in assistance of his
Norwegian sovereign, when he attacked any foreign state: 5, not to build any
castles, or forts, in the islands without the royal consent: 6, to maintain all
the inhabitants in their own laws: 7, not to sell, or impledge, the earldom, or
the right to it: 8, to be bound to answer for maladministration according to
the laws of Norway: 9, to attend the king upon any just cause, or at national
council: 10, to assist Hakon against the bishop of Orkney: 11, the earldom is
to return to the king, in case there are no male heirs: 12, Sinclair is to pay
to the king one thousand gold nobles. The deed contains other strict clauses,
unnecessary here to commemorate: nor need it be added that Sinclair, in case of
a war, must have chosen between his Scottish and Norwegian fidelity, in a
certainty that the possessions under both could not be retained Deed of
Investiture in Torf. Orc. 174 -- 177. In 1380 happened the strange voyage of
Nicola Zeno to Shetland, published at Venice 1558, 8vo. The learned dissent
much with regard to its veracity. If real, his Frisland is the Ferro islands;
and his Zichmni is Sinclair. His book is one of most puzzling in the whole
circle of literature.


.

The direct sovereighty of the kings of Denmark and Norway, over the Orkneys,
appears most evidently in the years between 1422 and 1434, when different
governors were appointed, as would seem during a minority in the house of
Sinclair; for in the latter year the investiture of this earldom was, by Eric
the Danish monarch, conferred upon the celebrated William Sinclair, afterward
chancellor of Scotaland. To this great man, who held the earldom, when the
cession was made, it may appear that Scotland was not a litte indebted for this
advantage In 1418 John Sinclair paid homage to Eric king of Denmark for
Hialtland or Shetland. Torf. 178. In 1422 the earldom of Orkney was assigned to
Thomas the bishop. Ibid. In 1423 to David Meyner of Weems a Scotishman, ib.
perhaps Weymes of Weems. In 1427 it was restored to the bishop. Torf. 182. Earl
Henry died in 1420, Bowar, 460; William was not invested till 1434. Torf. 183.
.

Another object to be considered upon the present occasion, as leading to the
final treaty between Denmark and Scotland, is the annual of Norway, as it is
termed in a Scottish act of parliament Acts, 1466, f. 46.
. When after the unsuccessful expedition, and death, of Hakon IV, Magnus V king
of Norway, had, in 1266, ceded the Hebudes to Scotland, it was stipulated, in
the treaty, that the Scottish kings should pay the annual sum of one hundred
marks, as an acknowledgment for the renunciation. This small sum, as might be
expected, was rather allowed to accumulate, than regularly paid, especially
when any commotions intervened in the Scottish government. The treaty had been
confirmed by Robert I in 1312; and by James I in 1426 Torf. 198.
. But, in 1457, the payment had been neglected for a long period; and
Christiern I, in whom the house of Oldenburg had nine years before ascended the
Danish throne, having at length attained possession of the sceptres of Denmark,
Norway, and Sweden, and having in the preceding year concluded an alliance with
France, remonstrated, even with menaces, upon this account to the second James
Ibid. 183. The name is spelled Christiern (Miles Christi,) by the kings
themselves, till about 1550, when Christian appears. Many papers, Vesp. F. III.
. The object had been considered as of such importance by the Danish monarch
that, in the treaty with France, a special article bore that, in case of any
dispute with the Scottish king, upon this occasion, Denmark should be secure of
the friendship of France Ibid.
. It appears indeed that the sum demanded by Denmark was large; for the penalty
of ten thousand marks, for each failure, was charged: and the aggregate in
forty years of omission arose to four hundred and four thousands of marks
sterling, or nearly ten millions present currency Torf. 184, speaks of forty
years: in p. 185, of twenty-six. The last seems an error, arising from a date
1426, p. 185. Yet from 1426 to 1460 are but thirty-four years. See here May
1426.
. After some negotiation, the commissioners of Denmark and Scotland at length
appeared at Paris, in the year 1460, in the presence of the French king Charles
VII. The Danes only producing a copy of the agreement between Eric and James I;
and the duplicate original of the Scottish archives being in the possession of
the bishop of St. Andrews, the chief of the embassy, who had been arrested by
sickness at Bruges; the Scottish envoys seized the occasion to start objections.
The penalty, they affirmed, could not be incurred as the treaty had not been
infringed, but only neglected; and they even hinted that the long forbearance,
on the part of Denmark, implied a prescription. Charles, wishing to conciliate
his allies, alleged the absence of the orginal treaty as a ground of
indecision: but prudently recommended a marriage between the heir of Scotland,
and the daughter of the Danish sovereign, as the best mean of terminating the
difference. After some consideration of this proposal, the Scottish envoys, who
appear to have had previous powers, assented, upon condition, that the arrears
of the annual sum payable for the Hebudes should be discharged, and the payment
for ever remitted: that the king of Denmark should abandon his right to the
Orkneys and Shetland; and pay one hundred thousand crowns for the decoration of
the royal bride. The Danes required time to consult their court, but in the
meanwhile James II was slain: upon which event, the king and council of France
recommended delay and deliberation Torf. 184 -- 186.
.

It was not to be supposed that the Scottish government would neglect an object
of such moment; and the king's approach to maturity recommended it to
increasing attention. The parliament of 1466 had considered the marriage of
James as connected with the annual of Norway: but nothing further arises till
the present year, when Christiern sent to demand the payment, expressing at the
same time his wishes of amity with the Scottish monarch. In his answer James
protested an equal desire of friendship with Denmark, a country of such
proximity to Scotland, and so much connected by mutual commerce; and promised
to send ambassadors in order to conciliate this, and other affairs Torf. 187.
. 28 July
Accordingly full powers were granted to lord Evandale chancellor of Scotland,
Boyd earl of Arran, the bishops of Glasgow, and the Orkneys, and other persons
of inferior note, to visit the courts of France, England, Spain, Denmark,
Burgundy, Bretagne, Savoy, and other regions, that they might select a wife for
James, and contract the marriage; a general commission either intended to
provide for a failure in Denmark, or to flatter the Danish court by the
appearance of choice, and preference Commission in Torf. 192.
. This honorable embassy proceeded to Copenhagen; and awaited Christiern's
return from Sweden Torf. 187.
.

Christiern I was one of the most powerful monarchs who had ever held the
Danish scepter. Possessed of the three northern kingdoms, and of the duchies of
Sleswick and Holstein, pious, prudent, liberal, and a lover of peace, he was
regarded with veneration by the neighboring princes, who constantly chose him
as the arbiter of their differences. But the frequent tumults of Sweden, and
the repeated ascents of Charles Canutson upon the throne of that kingdom, one
of which happened this year, joined with the sums paid for the acquisition of
Sleswick and Holstein, had exhausted the penury of the Danish treasure. No king
of Denmark had ever rendered his influence so much known in Europe, by foreign
alliances; among which that formed with France against England was the chief:
and a connection with Scotland, important in itself, was further recommended by
mutual friendship and enmity. These circumstances considered will abate any
surprise at the conduct of Christiern, in abandoning to Scotland the islands of
Orkney and Shetland, remote and little profitable to Denmark; and commanded by
a Scottish family, of divided, and uncertain fidelity.

But to Scotland the proximity of these islands, and the universal belief that
they had anciently belonged to the monarchy, rendered their acquisition a
matter of glory, and importance; not to mention their intrinsic value, which
was far from being inconsiderable. The Scottish ambassadors, aware of the weight
of their negotiation, conducted it with zeal and prudence; but could not
prevaiol upon Christiern to grant an immediate dereliction of the Orkneys and
Shetland; while his desire of the alliance, and his poverty, consented to
impledge them for the greater part of his daughter's portion. The chief
articles of this memorable treaty were; 8 Sept.
1, that the arrears of the annual sum arising from the Hebudes, should be
remitted, with all the penalties; and no future payment should be demanded from
the king and queen of Scotland, their heirs and children "Eorumque heredibus ac
liberis duntaxat." Torf. 195.
: 2, that the bride's portion should amount to sixty thousand florins, of which
ten thousand are to be disbursed before she leaves Denmark with the
ambassadors; and for the remaining fifty thousand Christiern, with the advice
and consent of the prelates, peers, and chiefs of Norway, assigns the islands
of Orkney, as a pledge to be retained, till redeemed by him, or any future
Norwegian king: 3, that James should, in case of death, confirm Margaret of
Denmark in the possession of the palace of Linlithgow, and castle of Down in
Menteith, with their territories; and in a revenue of one third part of the
royal income: 4, that if the queen should in widowhood choose to leave Scotland,
she should, instead of this provision, accept one hundred and twenty thousand
florins, of which fifty thousand should be esteemed paid upon the redeliverance
of the Orkneys; provided that the queen did not marry any Englishman of
whatever rank Ibid. 95 -- 197.
.

The Swedish commotions continuing to consume the Danish revenues, the delay of
the payment agreed on protracted the residence of the Scottish embassy at
Copenhagen; and Arran returned to Scotland, to lay the terms before James; and
obtain instructions concerning the conveyance of the bride Torf. 188.
. Winter now approached, and the ice and storms of a Scandinavian sea being
dreadful to the ambassadors, and their fair charge, it was resolved that the
voyage should be delayed till spring; 1469
when Arran, with a noble train, again proceeded to Denmark Ferrer, f. v. 388.
Buch. XII, 27.
. The Scottish peers envied not his commission; but resolved to avail themselves
of his absence, by completing, what on his former departure they had commenced,
his ruin and that of his family. Christiern had not replenished his treasury;
20 May
and his despair of supply prompted him, while he alleged the Swedish war as
an apology, to offer the islands of Shetland, on the same terms with those of
Orkney, but a pledge only for eight thousand florins; while he paid the
remaining two thousand, a sum now equal to about twenty thousand pounds Torf.
188.
. The offer was instantly accepted: and since that period the Orkneys, and
Shetland, have been gems of the Scottish crown In 1470 William Sinclair earl of
Orkney resigned his claims to the king. Scotstarvet narrates a grant to William
earl of Caithness, lord Sinclair, of the castle of Ravenscraig, and lands
adjacent, in recompense for his castle of Kirkwall, "and his haill richt of the
erledom of Orkney;" 17 Sept. 1470. Of the same date are many other advantageous
grants; an engagement that no revocation shall take place though the king be a
minor; a gift of forty marks yearly out of the great customs of Edinburgh;
liberty to live where he pleases, except in England, and receive his rents; a
complete discharge from James and Christiern of all claims whatever, etc.
Scotst. Call. In 1471 the earldom was, in consequence, formally annexed to the
crown. Crawf. Off. 35, from the records of parliament. Abercromby II, 429,
erroneously supposes it forfeited in 1479. Torfaeus, Orc. lib. III, p. 207 --
228, attempts to prove that the Orkneys may still be redeemed by Denmark. They
were claimed in 1549, 1558, 1560, 1585, 1640, 1660, 1667. Torfaeus wrote in
1697: and the claim, on its first revival doubtful, as buried in proscription,
may now be considered as totally lost. Nature by proximity assigned them to
Scotland: and the possession by the Norwegians for six centuries was only an
usurpation of maritime force.


.

Margaret of Denmark arriving at Leith, July
the royal nuptials, and her coronation, were celebrated with much joy; for the
king and the nation exulted in the merits of the queen. She was now only in her
thirteenth year; but to eminent personal charms, she was to unite such
excellent manners, and unaffected piety, that her example became a living
lesson of virtue. The pomp of her reception corresponded with her worth, and
the value of her dower: and the grandeur of the ceremonies was long after
remembered with applause Mair, 328, who here closes his history of Scotland.
Ferrerius, 389, exhausts rhetoric in her praise. Lesley, 315, joins in the
applause.
.

Amid the general joy, one family was lost in cares, and in all the remorse of
imprudent ambition. The sudden elevation of the Boyds had excited uncommon
envy; and their pride had created numerous and powerful enemies. During the
last absence of Arran, such influence had been exerted, that James had passed
from extreme favor into a total alienation from that family; and it was
natural that, as he advanced in years and intelligence, he should become
inimical to a house, which had so grossly abused his power and his youth. As
soon as the ships which conveyed the Danish princess, and her attendants, had
arrived in the Forth, the sister of James with a laudable zeal for her husband,
hastened on board to inform Arran that Scotland was now to him a hostile, and
dangerous, soil. They fled together into Denmark, Arran hoping that his wife
would prove a pledge for his safety Ferrerius, 387, by anticipation: Lesley,
315. Buch. XII, 30.
. But the Scottish monarch yet further irritated by this insult, proceeded to
extreme measures against the Boyds. The chief of the family, lord Boyd, had an
idle recourse to arms: his few followers disbanded, upon the first rumor of
the royal standard being displayed. 20 Nov.
A parliament was held: the charge against the Boyds chiefly rested upon an
action of declared treason, the removal of the king from Linlithgow: it was
pleaded that this deed had been pardoned in open parliament: the answer seems
to have been, that the possession of the king's person had, upon that occasion,
given the Boyds such influence, as to constrain the legislative body. 22 Nov.
Sentence was pronounced; and Sir Alexander Boyd was beheaded. Lord Boyd
escaped his brother's fate, by retiring into England, where he died in a few
years at Alnwick, under the united pressure of age, and of misfortunes,
rendered doubly keen, by the consciousness that they were deserved Ferrerius,
387. Buch. XII, 29. Crawf. Off. 316, from the original trial.
.

Arran remained in Denmark for some time; and James afterward found means to
have his sister sent back into Scotland. Her unfortunate husband wandered into
England, and other countries, till he found an early death, and obscure tomb
The fate of the Boyds is obscure. Of Robert the second son nothing is said; and
it is suspected that the varying relations of Ferrerius and Buchanan originate
from confounding him with Thomas earl of Arran. Though he appear not to be
mentioned in the trial, yet his voluntary exile may have followed the ruin of
the family. Arran, according to Ferrerius, wandered from Denmark to Germany,
Venice, Naples, Tuscany, where he was slain by the husband of a woman, whom he
attempted to debauch: according to Buchanan he went from Germany to France and
Burgundy, and died at Antwerp, where a magnificent tomb was erected to his
memory by Charles the Bold, who himself died in 1477. However this be, in 1470
or 1472, Arran was in England. John Paston esquire in a letter to Sir John Paston
his brother, written, as Mr. Fenne the editor observes, in one of these years,
says "Also I pray you to recommend me, in my most humble wise, unto the good
lordship of the most courteous, gentlest, wisest, kindest, most companionable,
freest, largest, and most bounteous knight, my lord the Earl of Arran, which
has married the king's sister of Scotland." Paston proceeds to style him "a
light, clever, well-spoken, fair archer; devoutest, most perfect, and truest to
his lady, of knights;" and adds that he lodged at the George, Lombard Street,
and had borrowed the siege of Thebes (printed by Caxton?) from Mistress Paston
their sister. Buchanan's account seems to claim the preference. In 1468 Charles
of Burgundy married Margaret of York; and, in the amity of the countries, Arran
perhaps visited England as a traveller.
. Either after his death, or upon a divorce, the Scottish princess was at
length, in 1474, wedded to lord Hamilton, a connection which was to open to
that noble family a near prospect of the crown. Her children by the first
marriage, James Boyd, created lord Kilmarnoc in 1482, and slain in a feud with
the Montgomeries in 1487; and Grecina, wedded to lord Forbes, and after to the
earl of Cassils, died without issue. Her second bed produced James, created
earl of Arran in 1503; and Elizabeth, who wedded Matthew earl of Lennox
Stewart's Genesis 69. Crawf. Stuarts, 40. Buchanan says the children by Arran were
born during his residence in the Burgundian dominions; and Paston's praise
above recited indicates his attachment to his wife. It seems probable that his
death, and not a divorce, separated them. Abercromby, II, 409 -- 414, discusses
this obscure subject. That the princess wedded Hamilton in 1474 is evinced by
the contract of marriage, among the charters of the duke of Hamilton, Abercr.
II, 411; and by a grant of some lands to James lord Hamilton, and Mary the
king's sister his spouse, 12 July 1474. Scotst. Call.
.

The king, who had now nearly attained his eighteenth year, was, upon his
marriage, regarded as arrived at the age of majority; and the reins of state
were left entirely in his hands. His person was elegant, his mind weak. In
attachment to favorites, in superstition, in love of retirement, and
literature, he not a little resembled James VI. The other chief features of his
character were avarice, caprice; and a delight in architecture, music, and
astrology, too violent to leave room for the duties of a monarch. His aversion
to the severity of public business rendered the relaxation of his government
obnoxious to the united evils of anarchy and tyranny: for, besides a fixed
inclination to despotism, his impatience of slow and moderate measures prompted
him to sudden acts of outrage; and his favorites oppressed the people, while
the indolence of the king abandoned the reins of justice; and his lenity to the
bad was cruelty to the good. His scepter was so little stained with blood, that
the future fate of his brother may excite doubt, or astonishment: yet
oppression may proceed by rapid, though silent, steps, while the fears and
weakness of the sovereign constrain him to shrink from sanguinary violence
Compare Ferrerius, f. v. 390, Lindsay, 115; Lesley's account of this reign,
for, contrary to his usual practice, he gives no general character. Buchanan,
XII, 62, shows candor; and a lover of the arts would wish to apologize for the
third James, their patron; and who fell, because he loved and rewarded them to
excess, while the proud aristocracy murmured to see artists for the first time
share their wealth and honors. Drummond, 116, describes James III as tall, his
hair black, countenance oval and adust. The picture at Kensington confirms
these features, unlike those of the family of Stuart; and which might weigh
with the vulgar as an argument that he was spurious, as the malice of Albany
pretended.


.

After the condemnation of the Boyds, the parliament continued to sit, and
issued several statutes Acts, f. v. 51 -- 55.
. The privileges of the church were confirmed, as not unusual at the
commencement of a reign. Among many acts of less importance, some deserve
particular notice. In order to prevent the frequency of murder and homicide,
which, as the statute declares, had of late become very common, it is decreed
that every manslayer, who flees to the sanctuary, shall be brought out, and
delivered to a trial by jury; that if the case be not accidental he may be put
to death, no murderer having any legal claim to sanctuary. By the writ, called
a brief of distress, the property of the poor tenants was liable to seizure,
for the debts of the landlord; an injustice which this parliament condemns, and
declares that the tenants shall only be answerable to the amount of the rent
due. These acts, and others more minute, as that for the preservation of salmon
and trout, and that ordering registers to preserve important writs, deserve
praise: but some there are of a different complexion, and which seem to contain
the first germ of despotism ill understood. The election of aldermen,
(afterward called provosts,) and baillies, is formally wrested from the people
of the burghs, upon pretense of avoiding annual clamours; and, by a ridiculous
aristocracy, the old council of each burgh is to choose the new; and both united
are to appoint the alderman, the baillies, and other officers. The institution
of the lords of the articles is lost in the darkness of the fourteenth century,
and that innovation seems rather an ignorant, than a designed, attempt upon the
liberties of the parliament, and of the nation. But the present was a flagrant
infringement of the freedom of the people; and though the commissioners of the
burghs were generally magistrates, who gained by the court, or by private
interest, sanctioned this measure, yet the nation saw it in a proper light, and
the monarch soon became an object of public detestation. Another statute of
this parliament speaks a new, and strange, language; "it is thought proper that
the court of parliament, justice's court, chamberlain's court, and such like
courts, which continue their sessions, need not be continued from day to day;
but that they be of the same force, until the time that they be dissolved, the
parliament by the king, the justice's court by the justice, the chamberlain's
by the chamberlain, and so in other such like courts." It is unnecessary to add
that the legislative assembly of the nation is here, for the first time, put
upon the mean and dependent footing of a mere court of justice, existing by the
royal pleasure; and assimilated, in terms of contempt, with the inferior courts
Acts, f. v. 54, c. 46: continued is prorogued, adjourned. It is risible to
observe Guthrie, amid much wise discussion, pass these acts in silence, IV,
107; while, at a loss to find instances of the despotism ascribed to this king,
he interprets as such, IV, 105, the fate of the Boyds, and the marriage of the
king's sister to Hamilton!
. This novelty calls for a pause, to discover, if possible, the motives, and
advisers, of such measures.

The youth of James, at this period, and the weakness he afterward discovered,
lead to a strong suspicion that some favorite minister, or ministers, were the
real authors of the despotic procedure, which, during this reign, disgusted all
orders of men. But so barren are still our materials, concerning the internal
government of the kingdom, that conjecture, and probability must supply the
defect of clear information. The power of the chancellor became, in this reign,
yet more remarkable than at any prior period; and he now obtained the high
distinction of a precedence next to that of the princes of royal blood Dr.
Gilbert Stuart on the Public Law and Constitution of Scotland, chap. iv, p. 32,
edit. 1784.
. In parliament he presided, and directed the lords of the articles; and in
fact the whole legislative body. This office during the far greater part of
this reign, from 1460 to 1482, was filled by Andrew Stuart, lord Evandale, the
natural son of Sir James Stuart, son of Murdac duke of Albany. It appears to be
a novelty in our history that one so nearly connected with the royal family,
especially when Evandale and his brothers were legitimated by the king's
mandate in 1472, should hold this important office: and there is room to
suspect that Evandale sacrificed his duty to the nation to the aggrandizement
of the royal family, which he regarded as his own. Besides this motive, other
circumstances conspired to extend the prerogative during this reign, unhappily
not upon the prudent plan, soon after to be followed by Henry VII of England,
in depressing the nobles and raising the people; but upon that already
established by Louis XI of France, in crushing the spirit and freedom of the
commons, with those of the aristocracy. In Scotland the people never knew their
own weight, and the government turned between aristocracy and despotism; the
nobles and the king commonly forgetting the nation, which deserved the neglect
while it silently abandoned its awful claim. But till James VI acceded to the
English throne, and left the Scottish nobles at a great distance, and in a
degrading inferiority, despotism made but a slow progress in Scotland, and the
chief evils arose from the aristocracy which prevented the progress of industry
and civilization. Yet the conduct of James III seems to evince that the nation
could have no reason to prefer the power of the king to that of the nobles; for
the despot who prescribed degrading laws, and expressed open contempt for the
nation, represented in its legislative assembly, was yet more inimical than the
aristocracy; which, even by its dissensions, maintained, in some degree, the
freedom, the vital current of the nation. A chief motive of the arbitrary
procedure of James III appears to have arisen from the temporary humiliation of
the nobility; who, though still possessed of equal power, as they were after to
show in the imprisonment and slaughter of their sovereign, yet were awed for a
time by the ruinous examples of the houses of Douglas and Boyd. The
contemporary reign of Louis XI 1460 -- 1482. Buchanan, XII, 62, adds the cruel
example of Edward IV of England 1460 -- 1483, and the succeeding one of Richard
III. In fact James appears to have been more attached to England than to
France: nor is there a renewal of the French league from 1448 till 1492
recorded in Du Tillet, or the MS. Leagues. But the politics of James were in
constant fluctuation. See 1484.
seems also to have corrupted the counsels of James; for not only did the
alliance with France introduce, at different times, many imitations of the
French government and institutions into Scotland, but James seems to have
selected Louis for his particular model: yet as a man of abilities never
imitates, so happily, in the present instance, abilities cannot be imitated.
Crimes and faults may: and we behold Louis reflected, so to speak, by James, in
the heavy suspicion of a brother's blood, in contempt of the nobility, and in
the choice of low favorites, in an appearance of devotion, in attachment to
astrology, in avarice, in a life of retirement and jealousy, and in the love of
arbitrary power. In their attention to some sciences they were also similar;
and the patronage of Louis to an ingenious foreigner, Galeotus Martius, is
rivalled by that of James to another, William Roger, the English composer of
music Mezeray, Abr. III, 350. Ferrerius, f. v. 390.
. But the success of their political plans was very different. Louis, assisted
by chance and circumstances, laid the lasting foundation of absolute power,
levelled the nobility, crushed the people; and by discontinuing the states
general annihilated national freedom. James wished to establish arbitrary
government by the depression of the nobles, and the people; and by converting
the national council, which neither his abilities nor his power would permit
him to discontinue, into a mere court: but he forgot that neither his revenue,
nor his authority, corresponded with his designs; and fell a sacrifice to the
aristocracy, whose influence resumed its former sway. These reflections have
been excited by the importance of the subject; but their prolixity having
already exceeded the intention, it is proper to return to the narration.

After a silent year in the Scottish annals, 1471 6 May
the first object, which arrests attention, is another parliament, of which
some ordinances deserve historical commemoration Acts, f. 55.
. The statute of the last parliament against murder is enforced, and enlarged;
that crime being again declared to have become common. It is decreed,
"considering the great poverty of the realm," that none shall wear silk, the
importation being so expensive, except knights, minstrels, that is performers
of music, and heralds, and those worth one hundred pounds in the annual income
of lands. Another statute shows that the interests of the country began to be
somewhat understood: it concerns the fisheries, an object of repeated
attention, and endeavors, for three centuries; and now, it is to be hoped, the
successful care of a patriotic society. This remarkable act is conceived in
these terms: 1471
"the lords All members of parliament were denominated lords of parliament, as
a commoner, or a private clergyman, if ambassador, was styled lord ambassador.
So Dr. Magnus in the time of James V. The custom is still retained in "lords of
session," "barons of the exchequer."
think expedient, for the common good of the realm, and the great importation
of riches to be brought into the realm from other countries, that certain lords
spiritual and temporal, and some burghs, cause equip large ships, busses, and
other great pink-boats, with nets and all necessaries for fishing: the
execution of this object, and the form, and number, to be considered at the
prorogation of this parliament Acts, f. v. 57, c. 60.
." But the subject was not resumed: and the scheme only excites a sigh at the
consideration how easily nations are excited to war, or any ruinous project,
and with what extreme difficulty any plan of public benefit is carried into
execution. Another prudent statute provides against the encroachments of the
Roman church, now arising to such enormity, as, in half a century, provoked the
reformation, by prohibiting the clergy, under pain of treason, to procure any
benefices from the court of Rome, not formerly held by the pope's disposal; or
to collect more money for the papal treasury, than had been regulated by the
ancient taxation of Bagimont Acts, f. 56. Lesley, 356, ridiculously dates the
taxation of Bagimont in 1512, instead of 1275.
. In this act the clergy's title to free election of their dignitaries is
mentioned, and confirmed: but two years after we find that James despoiled the
pope only for his own purpose, and crushed even this mean relict of freedom.
The monks of Dunfermlin having chosen an abbot, the king probably won by a sum
of money recommended another to the pope, obtained his confirmation; and this
new tyranny became inviolable custom Ferrerius, f. v. 392. Lesl. 317. Buch.
XII, 22.
. Among the secular clergy also the monarch usurped the rights of the bishops;
and gave, or sold, benefices to laymen, as well as abbacies and priories, a
source of great national disorder and discontent Iidem ib. Lesley's invective
against this odious novelty, by which the alms assigned to the poor were
consumed in the luxury of the rich, is emphatic. Even the protestant Buchanan
murmurs high indignation.
. James was unconscious of the weakness of an unsupported throne; and his wild
despotism assailed all orders of men.

Nevertheless the Scottish clergy now attained greater consistence, and dignity,
from the appointment of a primate. Patrick Graham, the successor of Kennedy in
the bishopric of St. Andrews, obtained from the pontiff a bull erecting that
see into an archbishopric: and to this new dignity he added the titles of papal
nuntio, and legate a latere. Instead of congratulating their order upon this
accession of importance, and the kingdom upon the honor and advantage of a
metropolitan see, at this period to be found in all the other chief states of
christendom; and the want of which, as religion then stood, might bear a
derogatory interpretation, and had induced and might induce the usurping claims
of the primates of York; a spirit of envy seized the Scottish clergy. By an
offer of eleven thousand marks, the bishops excited James to oppose, and
insult, the archbishop: reciprocal interests, and abuses, concurred to unite
the king and the prelates against Graham, a man of worth and learning, who was
imprisoned in the castle of Lochleven; where he died seven years after, in the
vain enjoyment of his titles Ferrerius, f. v. 389. Lesley, 317. Compare Keith
Bishops, 20. Graham was the uterine brother of Kennedy. Stew. Genesis 62.
Drummond, 81, imputes the origin of the enmity against him to the Boyds.
Buchanan, XII, 33, 34, 35, gives a long detail of the persecution of this
venerable prelate, conducted by William Shevez, of Shevis, afterward
archbishop of St. Andrews, a favorite of James. The tale does honor to the
historian's feelings; and brands the persecutors with lasting infamy.
.

BOOK VIII. BEING THE SECOND, AND LAST, PART OF THE REIGN OF JAMES III.
Transactions with England and Burgundy -- marriage treaty with Edward IV --
commencement of English influence in Scotland -- forfeiture of Ross --
parliament -- character of Albany and Mar -- Albany's escape -- death of Mar --
war with England -- parliaments -- Albany in England -- Glocester's invasion --
plot -- execution of the royal favorites -- James confined -- truce --
deliverance of James -- Albany's treason and flight -- Margaret the king's
sister weds Crichton -- parliament -- Douglas a captive -- negotiations with
Richard III -- impolicy of James -- death of Margaret of Denmark -- parliament
-- marriage indenture -- confederacy against James -- conflict at Blackness --
battle at Sauchy -- death of the king.

NOTHING memorable occurs, 1472 10 Mar.
in the course of the ensuing year, except the birth of a prince, afterward
James IV Ferrer. f. v. 392. On the 8th April 1473, appears a grant to Moncrief,
because his wife, a Densk (Danish) woman, brought the king tidings of the birth
of a fair boy. Scotst. Call.
; and the continuation of the truce with England; the throne of Edward IV
having at length been firmly established by the death of Henry VI, 1472
and his son, that monarch resolved to preserve the pacification with Scotland,
which had been somewhat interrupted by the mutual incursions of the borderers,
and other incidents. The commissioners of both nations having met, it was
agreed that the long truce should be strictly observed; and provisions were
made against any infringement Rymer, XI, 758. From Carmichael's Tracts, Edin.
1791, 4to, p. 50, it appears that, in a parliament of this year, James issued a
singular order, that in future there should be no double tressure around his
arms. It was certainly not understood at that time that this ornament alluded
to the connection with France, for the same parliament granted 5000 l. toward
sending 6000 men to France. Ib. See the transactions of 1474.

On the 28th Aug. 1472 a legitimation was granted to Andrew lord Evandale, and
Arthur and Walter his brothers. Scotst. Call. On the 13th Oct. appears a grant
to Jone^ countess of Douglas, the king's cousin, widow of William earl of
Douglas; and another Jan. 1473. Ibid. This lady seems unknown to all our
genealogists. The William slain in 1440 or 1452 must be implied.


.

Charles the Rash, duke of Burgundy, 1473
having engaged in war with Louis XI of France, sent to request the aid of
England. Edward was willing to listen to the demand; but expressed
apprehensions left the Scots should in this case support their French ally. To
obviate this objection the Burgundian ambassadors proceeded into Scotland; and,
by gifts or promises, prevailed on James to agree to a specific continuation of
the English truce for two years, without prejudice of the long pacification
Rymer, XI, 772. The truce bears to be sanctioned by James at the request of
Burgundy his ally. One of the Paston Letters, 16 April 1473, bears that the
earl of Oxford was at Dieppe, and intended to proceed to Scotland with twelve
ships. But the treaty prevented the design of this adherent of the late Henry,
to assist James in invading Edward's dominions.


.

The statutes of the next Scottish parliament are too minute for the notice of
history; 1474 9 May
but the three estates desired the king to form an alliance with the German
emperor, by the means of his father-in-law, the sovereign of Denmark: and at
the same time requested that an embassy might be sent into England, in order to
obtain redress concerning the seizure of a large ship Acts, f. 58.
. This vessel was the noted St. Salvator, commonly called the Bishop's Barge,
having been constructed at the expense of bishop Kennedy, as formerly
mentioned. Remaining the property of the sea of St. Andrews, this ship,
freighted with valuable merchandise, on the account of the archbishop, (for in
this, and the following century, the prelates and nobles in England and
Scotland aspired to commerce,) went aground near Bamborough. Some merchants,
literary persons, and other passengers, were drowned: the abbot of St. Colm,
being captured by the English, was detained till a ransom of eighty pounds was
paid Ferrerius, f. v. 392. Lesl. 316. Rymer, XI, 820.
. In the following year Edward IV ordered a partial compensation of five
hundred marks, with permission to the Scots to sue for any further redress in
the courts of law Rymer, XI, 850.
.

Meanwhile a more important affair was in agitation between the courts of
England and Scotland. Edward IV was aware of the arts by which Louis XI had
endeavored to fix the Scottish monarch in his interests; and resolved to
frustrate the design by the display of superior advantages. In 1472 the duke of
Bretagne had accused Louis of inviting the Scots to assault that duchy, upon a
promise of assigning it to James; a charge apparently well founded, for Louis
had commissioned his envoy Concressault to persuade the Scottish king to equip
as many vessels as he could, 1474
and engage troops from Denmark Duclos, II, 73, 75. Lobineau hist. de Bretagne,
I, 716. The lords of Concressault were of Scottish extract. Torf. Orc. 185, has
"Johannes de Monizon, dominus de Congressault," A.D. 1460, Monipeny? See 1424.
. As the offer of Bretagne was a proof of the artifice of Louis, though too
gross to be attempted except with a young monarch, and unexperienced council;
so the demand of a Scottish fleet was a mark of his ignorance, Scotland having
no ships of war, and none to spare from her scanty commerce. On the other side,
James appears not to have acted without duplicity; for while he consented to
the truce requested by England and Burgundy, he imparted their designs to
Louis, and insinuated that he could listen to no proposal inimical to the
French alliance. At the same time he desired permission to pass through France
in a pilgrimage to Rome, a design which may have proceeded from the known
superstition of James; but which rather seems, from the circumstances, to have
been founded upon the supposition that his absence might excuse the Scots from
lending any assistance to France. Louis, in return, sent Monipeny his
chamberlain, to request James not to leave his kingdom in the present
conjuncture: and the advantages offered by England inducing the Scottish king to
a decision in favor of that kingdom, the advice of Louis was followed, though
not the motive Duclos, II, 146: his work is composed from the best original
documents. Even in July 1473 James designed to pass to France, and many
arrangements were made in parliament. Records in Carm. Tracts, p. 52. The
intention of a pilgrimage to the holy land also occupied the more vigorous mind
of James IV. The violent deaths of prince David, of James I, and II, seem to
have impressed their successors with an idea, that the divine wrath impended
over the family, and that an expiation was due. But it is impossible to account
for the dreams of a superstitious age.
.

To counteract the arts of France, and to fix the wavering resolution of James,
the English monarch entered into a treaty with Scotland, upon a more solid
foundation. The Scottish ambassadors, who had entered England in July Rymer, XI,
814.
, returned to Edinburgh in October, accompanied by the bishop of Durham, Lord
Scrope, and two other English commissioners; who having met with the bishops of
Glasgow and Orkney, the earls of Argyle and Crawford, and others appointed on
the part of Scotland, established an alliance upon the following terms. 26 Oct.
1. That in order to promote the wealth, peace, honor, and interest, of this
noble isle callit Great Britane, a marriage shall be contracted between James
the prince of Scotland, and Cecilia youngest daughter of Edward IV, both in
early infancy. 2. That the truce of fifty four years, extending till 1519,
shall remain in full force. 3. That, during the truce, both monarchs shall
assist each other against rebels, if required. 4. That the prince being only
two years of age, and the bride four, the kings shall solemnly engage to
accomplish the marriage in due time. 5. That the prince and princess shall,
during the life of James, enjoy the usual lands of the heir of Scotland, being
the dukedom of Rothsay, the earldom of Carric, and the lordships called the
Stuart-lands. 6. That Edward shall give with his daughter the sum of twenty
thousand marks sterling, (now equivalent to about one hundred and forty
thousand pounds,) of which two thousand shall be paid yearly in the parish
church of St. Giles at Edinburgh; the first payment to be made on the second
day of February next 1475. And lastly, it was agreed that in case of the death
of the prince, or princess, the heir of Scotland should marry a daughter of
England, upon the same terms; otherwise all the sums advanced shall be repaid
within four years, except the sum of two thousand five hundred marks, which
Edward agrees to abandon in consideration of the intended amity Rymer, XI, 824
-- 832.
.

Such was this memorable treaty, which, had it been observed, might have proved
highly advantageous to both kingdoms; and in particular might have saved
Scotland from the loss of Berwick, and from the ruinous battle at Flodden. The
annual payments of Cecilia's portion may be regarded as a subsidy of
importance, amounting as may be conjectured, to an increase of nearly one third
in the royal revenue of Scotland; and the English policy in this advanced mode
of disbursement seems assumed in order to secure the continuance of the Scottish
amity. A lively writer has observed that a poor state, which is adjacent to a
wealthy, must, in the natural course of human affairs, expect to be ruled by
the money of her neighbor Voltaire Hist. Genesis speaking of Scotland, A. D. 1559.
; and when we behold Sparta in the pay of Persia, overturning the liberties of
Greece, during the Peloponnesian war, we need not sigh at the comparison of
ancient and modern virtue. Taught by the example of France, which disbursed
regular pensions to Edward and his courtiers Duclos, II, 185. Edward's pension
was 50,000 crowns. The others amounted to 16,000: Hastings had 2000. Ibid. 190.
Hall's chronicle, 235.
, England seems now, for the first time, to have laid down a scheme of policy
concerning Scotland, which was afterward to be resumed, and continued, with
success, till the accession of James VI to the English scepter. Resolving to
rival, or exceed, France in pecuniary gratifications, England found gold more
powerful than steel, in fixing the fidelity of her northern neighbor; while
Scotland must find an excuse in her penury, and in the general defects of human
nature, for exposing her fidelity to the mutual temptations of French and
English subsidies. Nor must it be forgotten that the most able politician might
have been perplexed in the decision, whether the connection with England, or
that with France, would most advance the honor and interest of Scotland; so
that no blame of treason to their country can rest with the receivers of the
gold of either kingdom.

The treaty, 1475
which Edward IV had entered into, had been negotiated at Edinburgh, a mark of
friendship before unknown between the countries, as the English monarchs, from
precedence of rank, had ever insisted on the negotiations being conducted in
their own kingdom. To maintain the new intercourse with Scotland, April
Edward sent Dr. Alexander Legh, his almoner, on an embassy to that country. He
was instructed to give complete redress to the Admiral of Scotland, for a ship
fitted out by James himself, which, by a singular chance, had been captured by
the May-flower, a vessel belonging to Richard duke of Gloucester After a long
interval, 1436 -- 1475, it is with pleasure that original papers are quoted.
The instructions to Legh occur Vesp. C. XVI, f. 118, and as they mention that
Edward was about to pass (to France), and the Monday following ascension day as
the 8th May, the date 1475 is evinced. The ship is called the king's own
carweille, (carvel, vessel:) and was taken near the isle of Cageant. Legh was
also to give redress for a ship belonging to the lard of Luf (Lufs?), which had
been captured by lord Gray. Commerce was thus conducted by the great, a
singular feature of national manners: the expression of Isaiah may be used in
an inverse sense, "whose merchants are princes, whose traffickers are the
honorable of the earth." The name of the Scottish admiral is unluckily not
mentioned. Spens or Wood?
.

Having secured the friendship, or forbearance, of Scotland, Edward passed into
France with his army; July
but, being overcome by the money and the wines of that kingdom, he yielded to
the arts of Louis XI, and withdrew inglorious Comines, IV, 5, 10. Duclos, II,
178 -- 195. Hall, 227 -- 235.
.

The parliament, which was prevented from meeting in September by some
appearances of the pestilence, having at length assembled at Edinburgh in
November, issued several unimportant regulations, chiefly concerning the coin
Acts, f. 61. Ferrerius, f. 393. Lesl. 318.
. A clause in the late treaty with England bearing that neither monarch should
assist rebels, and the king's insular power being enlarged by the acquisition
of the Orkneys, it was resolved to proceed vigorously against John, the earl of
Ross and lord of the Isles, who had supported Douglas and his brothers in their
grand rebellion, had in 1462 entered into engagements with England, and whose
conduct merited chastisement. Accordingly having neglected to appear when
summoned, a sentence of forfeiture was pronounced against him See the execution
of the summons, 16 Oct. in Carm. Tracts, p. 52. The points of treason are
seven: 1. Connections with England, 2. With Douglas, 3. Giving safe conducts to
Englishmen, 4. Usurping royal authority, 5. And power of life and death over
the subjects, 6. Seizing Rothsay in Bute, 7. Ravaging Bute. He was summoned at
his castle of Dingwall in Ross. For the forfeiture see Carm. 54.
. 1 Dec.
As soon as the season of the year permitted, 1476 May
a force was collected to execute the sentence. Some vessels being assembled on
the north of the river Forth, the earl of Crawford was appointed admiral, and
the earl of Athole general. Ross, alarmed at this effectual preparation, was
induced to submission by Athole's intercession, which the king rewarded by the
gift of the lands of Cluny. In the ensuing parliament the rebellious earl
appeared, and submitted to the royal will: July
Ross was withdrawn from his power, and annexed for ever to the domains of the
crown, with liberty nevertheless to the sovereigns to grant that extensive
earldom to their second sons. The title of Lord of the Isles was confirmed in
consequence of his submission, and engagement to maintain the laws of the
kingdom. But Knapdale and Kintyre, forming a chersonese in the western sea, 1476
were also withdrawn from his authority, with the castles of Inverness and
Nairn. The earldom of Ross though claimed, or held, by the lords of the Isles,
Donald and Alexander, the grandfather and father of John, from nearly the
commencement of this century, it was yet no violent stretch of power to resume
from hereditary foes of Scotland The restitution itself in Scotst. Call. 15 July
1476, from which correct Ferrerius, f. v. 393, Lesley, 318, Buch. XII, 36. See
Acts, f. 62, c. 87. Carm. Tracts, 56. In the parliament of 1471 Albany appears,
ib. 51; in this of 1476 Albany and Mar his younger brother, 55.
.

In the same parliament, the king, who had now attained his twenty-fifth year,
a period to which the civil law annexed the title of complete majority,
solemnly revoked all alienations, or gifts prejudicial to his crown, or to his
heirs; and, among others, the custody of his castles, otherwise than during
pleasure, especially those which formed the keys of the kingdom Acts, f. 62.
.

The third, 1477
and last payment of the portion of Cecilia which Edward IV thought proper to
make, was duly performed Rymer, XII, 41.
; but a change of political views was speedily to terminate this plan of
pacification.

Of the next national council the chief statute concerns the importation of
provisions. 6 Aug.
The congregated wisdom of the nation is not ashamed to declare, that
provisions being usually very scarce, the chief support of the realm lay in the
hands of strangers, who import them from various countries; and who are of
course entitled to a favorable and honorable reception. Any restriction, or
imposition, is therefore withdrawn; and it is ordered that after the foreign
provisions are entered in the tolbooth, or guildhall, the king, and lords of
the council, shall have the choice at the market price; and the remainder shall
be open to general sale Acts, f. v. 63, c. 91.
. The state of the kingdom may be better discerned by this statute, than by
volumes of declamation: and it is almost unnecessary to add that this want of
common industry led to a gradual increase of impoverishment; for Scotland
possessed not, like ancient Athens, or modern Holland, commerce, arts, and
manufactures far more than sufficient to counterbalance the great disadvantage
of acquiring subsistence by foreign purchase.

This parliament also decreed that an embassy should be sent to the duke of
Burgundy, at the expense of the burghs, to confirm and renew the alliance
formerly contracted, and to obtain a ratification, and if possible an
enlargement of the immunities granted to Scottish merchants, and a redress of
any damages Ibid. f. 63.
. This potent prince had sent conciliating letters to the Scottish court, as the
act expresses: but could the parliament be yet ignorant that the dead body of
Burgundy had been trampled into the ice and mud, before Nanci, on the fifth of
January; and that Mary his only daughter was unmarried, not having united those
wide territories to the house of Austria, by her marriage with Maximilian, till
the eighteenth of August? But it is probable that the parliament sat a
considerable time; and that the latter may be the duke mentioned. An embassy
into England is also ordered, to negotiate another marriage-treaty with the
royal house of that kingdom Ibid.
.

But Edward again sent Legh as his ambassador into Scotland, with instructions
to represent that the marriages proposed by James, between his sister Margaret
and the duke of Clarence, and between Albany and the duchess of Burgundy, widow
of Charles the Rash and sister of Edward, could not be then negotiated, as her
year of mourning was not expired O. letter Edward to Legh, Vesp. C. XVI, f. 121.
.

The superstition of James now suggested a desire to visit the shrine of St.
John at Amiens, 1478 17 March
and Edward granted a safe conduct for his passage through England, with a
thousand attendants, for that purpose; not omitting his earnest desire to
confer with the Scottish king Rymer, XII, 53.
. Yet the journey was deferred: and James was contented with striking a large
medal of gold, which he sent to be appended to the shrine Du Cange Traite hist.
du chef de St. Jean, Paris 1665, 4to, p. 128.
.

The fresh disputes between England and Scotland appear to have originated in
this, or the preceding year; but their cause has not been accurately explained.
The death of the duke of Burgundy, which changed the views of France and
England, seems to have been the chief source of this alteration. Louis XI
having been delivered from this dreadful foe, and having secured himself from
the enmity of Edward IV by a truce for their lives, by the punctual remission
of pensions to the English king and court, and by flattering Edward with the
marriage of the dauphin to Elizabeth his eldest daughter, there was reason to
expect a lasting peace between their kingdoms Duclos, II, 275, 283, 300.
. In consequence, Edward, whose temporary fears, and interest, had alone formed
the treaty with Scotland, and whose only desires were money and luxury, began
to regret the annual disbursements, and to wish for another war as a pretext of
raising money for his pleasures and profusion. But their sacrifice of the
French alliance, and their intestine commotions, prevented the Scots from
hastening into an open enmity with England.

The reign of James had hitherto been successful; and fortune had showered
favors upon him, which to his wiser predecessors had been denied. The
acquisition of Roxburgh, Berwick, the Orkneys, and Shetland; the honorable
marriage treaty with England, the resumption of the earldom of Ross, were
splendid events, which prevented the eruption of public discontent at many new
and arbitrary measures. But James had provoked deep and inveterate hatred; and,
having no standing army, could not rule by fear alone. A great alteration is
now to take place; imprudence is to incur the usual destiny: and a thick cloud
of crimes, and misfortunes, is to darken the succeeding years of this reign.

The character of James was strongly contrasted by those of his brothers,
Alexander duke of Albany, and John earl of Mar. While the king, in solitary
retirement, indulged his favorite studies of music, architecture, and
astrology, he forgot the duties, amid the idle amusements, of a monarch. The
nobles, in the feudal ages, seldom visiting the court, except upon occasions of
business, or high festivals, and being ignorant of the arts in which James
delighted, he had recourse to the conversation of those who excelled in them;
but forgot the majesty of the sovereign so far as to make companions and
favorites of men of mean origin; imitating Louis XI who had raised his barber
Oliver le Dain to great wealth, and high dignities; but a stranger to the
standing army, large revenue, and other resources, which enabled that king to
crush the lofty, and exalt the humble. Cochran a mason or architect, and Rogers
the English master of music, were respectable names among the favorites of the
Scottish king, when followed by those of Leonard a smith, Hommil a tailor, and
Torphichan a fencing master Ferrer. f. 395.
. The contempt and indignation of the nobility were extreme, when they beheld
the public favor of the sovereign to those minions, joined with a pointed
neglect of their haughty order.

Albany was a sensible and spirited prince, fond of martial exercises, of fine
horses, and of attendants tall and vigorous. In person he was of a middle
stature, strong, and well proportioned: his broad shoulders, and blooming yet
stern countenance, engaged the praise of a martial age: and his known courage,
if we believe an historian, was the only cause why the nobles did not rebel
against James, while he lived in amity with this brother Lindsay, 114, 115.
. Mar added superior stature to youth, beauty, and elegance of person: his
gentle manners won every heart; nor did he yield to his brother in the
favorite exercises of the nobility, or in his attention to the breed of his
warhorses: and in hunting, hawking, and every knightly pastime, his skill and
grace were admired Id. 115.
.

The wardenship of the eastern marches had been assigned to Albany, for life,
by his father James II; to which the honors of governor of Berwick, and lord
lieutenant of the borders, had been added. From his father he also derived the
earldom of March, and its strong castle of Dunbar Ibid. The act of forfeiture,
etc.
. If we credit Lindsay, who somewhat depraves his information by representing
Alexander lord Home as chamberlain since the reign of James II, while he held
not that office till the commencement of that of James IV, a violent enmity had
taken place between Albany, and the Homes and Hepburns, whose estates lay
contiguous to his earldom of March. In order to ruin Albany, his enemies
applied to Cochran, who resented that prince's contempt, while he dreaded his
power: this favorite knowing the weak part of his sovereign's character,
procured a witch to pronounce to James, that he should be slain by one of his
nearest kindred; and his children being infants, the suspicion fell upon his
brothers, and led to their ruin. Buchanan imputes the king's enmity against his
brothers to a prophesy of Andrew, a Flemish astrologer, and favorite of James,
that in Scotland a lion should be devoured by his whelps; which, if a real
prediction, was singular in its accomplishment: but the account of Lindsay is
more probable, as the latter emblem could not point to brothers. From the
account of Ferrerius, which is the most ancient, it appears that Mar was
accused of using magical arts against the king's life Lindsay, 116, 117. Buch.
XII, 37. Ferrer. f. v. 393, followed by Lesley 320.
. In our choice of weak motives, we are however left certain that the tyranny
of James was strong: nor is there the smallest reason to infer from the base
treaty made with Edward IV by Albany in 1482, and to which he was driven by
despair and resentment, that he now entertained any disloyal designs; far less
any intercourse with England Could any connections between Albany Mar and
England be discovered, preceding 1479, they might vindicate James; for certain
it is that Albany afterward branded the king as a bastard, (see letters of
Dacre in the reign of James V,) and openly assumed the royal title. It is
remarkable that the peers, in 1488, never objected the death of Mar, or exile
of Albany, to James.
, which kingdom he did not visit till three years after his escape to France;
and even then was induced by the special invitation, and interested views, of
Edward. It is however not improbable that Albany and Mar, having also
encountered the king's indifference, shared the resentments of the nobles, and
with them conspired against the royal favorites, who had sufficient interest
and address to confound their safety with that of the government. Amid the
darkness which attends the commission of crimes, it belongs to candor, and
reason, to infer a motive strong enough to blunt the feelings, and corrupt the
heart, for human depravity cannot at once proceed to the utmost degree: but
when we speak of the "good old times," let us reflect that the three
contemporary sovereigns of France, England, and Scotland, were all stained with
a brother's blood.

However obscure the origin of the tempest might be, 1479
its effects were apparent and dreadful. Mar was seized by the king's command,
and confined a close prisoner in the castle of Craigmillar, near Edinburgh.
Albany was committed to Edinburgh castle; and Evandale the chancellor was sent
to besiege his fortress of Dunbar, which soon yielded, the garrison withdrawing
in boats to the English coast The accounts of Ferrerius and Lindsay are
singularly confused. The former dates the flight of Albany to France in 1471!
The latter blends events, and periods, totally distinct. Lesley and Buchanan
are more accurate. At the siege of Dunbar, the lairds of Luss, and
Craigy-wallace, and Shaw of Sauchie, loyalists, were slain by one cannot-shot.
Lesl. 319. The names of the defenders, who were convicted of treason, 3 Oct.
1479, may be seen in Carm. Tracts, 61. The forfeiture of Orkney, father-in-law
of Albany, and Sir James Liddel, Abercr. II, 429, seems known only to that
inaccurate author. See 1483 for the origin of his error.
.

As the despotic temper of the king was certain, his fraternal affections
dubious, Albany thought proper, after a confinement of some duration, to
contrive means of escape. Either by concert, or chance, a French vessel arrived
in the Forth, and anchored near Newhaven, a small and little frequented port to
the west of Leith, and of short and easy access from Edinburgh. The captain,
either in the plot before, or now gained by Albany's emissaries, pretended that
his cargo consisted of excellent wines; and sent to the castle to request the
duke to honor him by the first choice. Two small casks of malmsey, then a
favorite wine, were ordered: and the captain in one of them concealed a roll
of wax, enclosing a paper of intelligence and directions; while the other
conveyed a long rope, the mean of deliverance. As the duke's messenger was a
confidential domestic of tried fidelity, he was entrusted with the secret, and
served his master's design with zeal. After supper the commander of the
fortress went to the king's apartment to receive his orders, James lodging in
the castle at the time; and having ordered the gates to be shut, and set the
watch, he returned by appointment to Albany's chamber, to enjoy a collation and
wine. The duke and his servant were abstemious, while they artfully engaged the
commander, and three of the garrison who guarded the prisoner, in repeated
draughts of intoxication. Secure in their sleep, or in their death, for
according to some accounts the odious guests were slain, Albany and his
domestic proceeded to a retired part of the wall, concealed from the view of
the watch; and the rope being fixed, and let down, the servant first explored
the dangerous height: but from the shortness of the rope, fell, and broke his
thigh: the duke guarded against the same fate, by increasing the length with
the torn sheets of his bed, and descending safely, first carried his faithful
domestic on his back to a place of security; and then proceeding to Newhaven
made the signal appointed, and was received on board the ship, which
immediately sailed for France. The king was so much surprised at this escape,
almost from his own presence, that he would not yield to conviction, till he
had himself examined the prisoner's apartment, and seen the spot and instrument
of his flight. Vain orders were given to search the castle, and send out
horsemen on all sides, with promises of high reward, before the truth was
discovered Ferrerius and Lesley are contented with mentioning, and both
unchronologically, the flight of Albany to France. Buchanan XII, 39, details
the escape from the castle; and Lindsay, 132 -- 135, is agreeably
circumstantial, but, like most writers of anecdotes, is inaccurate. He supposes
Albany to have fled to England in 1479, and to have persuaded Edward to send an
army in 1481, to deliver James from his peers. James thus reconciled became
afterward jealous of Albany, and imprisoned him in the castle of Edinburgh,
whence he escaped to France in the manner mentioned in the text in 1483. A
strange perversion! In 1479 Albany passed to France; in 1483 to England. Lesley
is the only writer of our history, who knows a little, a very little, of
chronology. The brief chronicle at the end of Winton, MS. Reg. 17 DXX, rightly
dates the flight of Albany to France in 1479.
.

Albany having arrived in France went to Paris, where he was honorably
received: Gaucourt in the king's name, and the magistrates and council of the
city, awaiting on the road with congratulations. Louis ordered Monipeny and
Concressault, Scotishmen of rank, to attend the duke; and his expenses were
defrayed by the royal favor, but his train not exceeding twelve persons there
was no great room for munificence Chronique Scandaleuse, written by a
contemporary, at the end of Comines, ed. 1706, at the year 1479, p. 257. Albany
was lodged "en la rue Saint Martin, a l'enseigne du coq:" his train was "de
dix a doux chevaux." Ib. 258. Compare the accurate Duclos II, 370, 371, who
dates the arrival of Albany in Paris, "s'etant sauve d'un chateau, ou le roi
son friar le retenoit prisonnier," about the month of September 1479. He was
forfeited 4 Oct. 1479. Carm. Tracts, 61, 62.
.

A different fate awaited Mar, who, instead of an open trial by his peers,
encountered a private condemnation by the king's domestic council, apparently
consisting of Cochran and the other minions Ferer. f. v. 393. Buch. XII, 38.
Nor does any vestige of an open trial appear on the records.
. The unfortunate youth was afterward brought from Craigmillar to the
Canongate of Edinburgh, where a vein was cut, and he was allowed to bleed to
death; an easy mode of extinction, preferred by the philosophy of Seneca, and
the luxury of Petronius Ferrerius, ib. "scissa quadam vena, ad mortem usque
effudit sanguinem." Buch. XII, 38, "vena rescissa, mori est coactus." Lesley is
as vague as Ferrerius. Lindsay, 119, "murdered and slain in the Canongate, in a
bathingvat." The contemporary chronicle, at the end of Winton, says at 1479
that many witches and warlochs were burnt; and that Mar was SLAIN, because he
favored the witches and Warlochs, (magicians.) Almost the only now and
remarkable passage in Drummond of Hawthornden's history is, that Mar being
seized with fever and frenzy, was put into a bath, and some veins opened for
his cure; but he died through his own rage, or the neglect of the attendants.
For this he quotes "B. W. E. who was living in that time, and whose records we
have followed," p. 91, ed. 1655, certainly bishop William Elphinston, as
Abercr. II, 429, and other writers infer. With reverence to Drummond's genius,
and love of truth, arguments arise that he was here imposed on by some careless
or designing antiquary. 1. The history ascribed to Elphinston is extant in the
Bodleian library, (the very copy used by Drummond, as appears from Craw. Off.
52,) and only extends to the death of James 1, 1437. 2. Had Drummond used
Elphinston's history of James II an III, (a great desideratum in our
literature,) he must have enriched his pages with new facts, instead of
transcribing, as he does, Boyce, Ferrerius, Lesley, Buchanan. 3. The cure was
new, and probably unknown in that or any age. 4. It was indispensable to the
king's reputation to institute open informations, concerning the causes of his
brother's death. 5. Granting the evidence, Elphinston's testimony would in
itself be highly objectionable, he being the friend of Shevis, and the
favorite of James III, to whom he owed his preferments. Keith, Bishops, 68, 69.
. Several persons of both sexes were, at the same time, condemned and executed,
for conspiring in the pretended magical practices of Mar against the king's
life Ferrer. f. v. 393. Lesl. 320. -- Buchanan XII, 38, says twelve witches
were burnt. They were accused of consuming a waxen image before a fire, to
affect the king's health by magic: the punishment is justified by the design,
and by the belief of the times. This is, it is believed, the first punishment
of witches in Scotland.
.

The wars between England and Scotland now begin to be 1480
more unfrequent, and upon this account to deserve greater attention: that
which now commenced is the most memorable, since the battle of Sark, a space of
more than thirty years: and similar distances divide the present contention,
the battle of Flodden, and that of Pinkie. The great inequality of the contest
is matter of glory to the smaller state, which unhappily either declined, or
was stationary, in wealth, and power; while the other was rapidly progressive.
Henceforth defeated in every great contest, the spirit of Scotland remained
unimpaired; and while her soldiers knew not the name of fear, they might
execrate the caprice of chance, and the want of military skill, patience, and
genius, in their leaders. The historian of the house of Douglas hesitates not
to pronounce that, since the fall of that family, Scotland has performed few
deeds of arms Hume's Dougl. I, 384.
: many of that illustrious progeny were indeed born generals, and the
deficiency of such singular genius, which depends upon great and prompt
faculties, cool intuition, and a kind of prescience, and to which the
impetuosity of the national character is highly adverse, was repeatedly felt by
this warlike kingdom.

If it be often dubious, even in modern times, which of two warring nations was
the aggressor, a superior certainty is not to be expected in remote ages. Some
assert that Edward IV was the author of hostilities; while others affirm that
Louis XI excited the Scottish king to arms. The latter opinion might be
supported by the treaty, which was entered into, in the end of the year 1479,
between Edward IV and the dukes of Austria and Bretagne, the foes of Louis
Duclos, II, 374.
: but as the French monarch pretended ignorance of that transaction, and
continued to pay Edward's pension, and to cultivate his amity, dreading lest he
should openly assist the Flemings, with whom the French were at war, it does
not seem probable that he should wish, by inciting the Scots to arms, to
provoke the decided enmity of England. A diversion of a part of Edward's force
was all that could have been gained; while the practices of Louis might have
been punished by the remainder. Other arguments against this supposition arise
from the silence of Comines, that great contemporary, and other French writers,
concerning this war, or any part taken by Louis in its provocation; and from
the reception of Albany in France, which argues no friendship between Louis and
James: the truce of fifty-four years, and the marriage treaty with England,
having considerably impaired the connection between France and Scotland. On the
other hand, as is before observed, it is certain that in 1478 Edward, by
discontinuing the payment of Cecilia's portion, had infringed the amity with
Scotland, whose resentment had only been suppressed by the commotions in the
royal family, and by the long disuse of war. But to guard against any hostile
intention of the Scots, Edward, on the twelfth day of May 1480, had named his
brother Richard duke of Gloucester, the future usurper, lieutenant general of
the North, and appointed him to lead an army against his inveterate enemy the
Scottish king; whom he accuses of an intention to violate the truce, and enter
the English territories, "in contempt of his own same Rymer, XII, 115, "Spreta
ipsius nominis, omnisque nobilitatis, fama." It is risible to observe the
ignorance of Abercromby, II, 434, and Granger, (Maitland's hist. II, 682,) who
suppose the term nobilitas, (nobleness of mind, honor,) to apply in a modern
sense to the Scottish nobility; and sagely infer that Edward was no stranger to
the discontents of the Scottish nobles! Abercromby, II, 434, unchronologically
places a siege of Berwick in this year, which Lesley, 321, dates 1481,
Ferrerius, 394, in 1482. The chronicle at the end of Winton says that, in 1480,
Angus burned Bamborough, and remained three days in England.


." But in the same of crimes Edward and James were equal; and to that of
virtues their pretensions were similar. Some incursions having been made by the
Scots, Edward, on the twentieth of June following, commanded his array to be in
readiness: yet no important hostility followed, till the ensuing year.

In his aversion for war James sent a herald to the English court, 1481
offering to redress any infringements of the truce committed by his subjects,
provided that Edward would condescend to the same terms: but the herald was
dismissed without answer, a circumstance which of itself sixes the violation
upon Edward Acts, 1481, f. v. 65.
. Louis XI having fallen into the malady, which in two years terminated his
existence, Edward had entered into an active alliance with Maximilian duke of
Austria, who engaged to pay him a pension equal to that allowed by Louis; so
that the English king was now at liberty to pursue his own measures Rymer, XII,
126, 127.
. 2 March
Accordingly he ordered preparations to be made for the march of his army to
the frontiers Ibid. 140.
; and from the writs it seems that a siege was proposed, which it is reasonable
to infer was to be directed against Berwick, the loss of which was not a little
regretted by the English.

To provide against the designs of the enemy, 2 April
a parliament was assembled; the statutes of which, and of some in preceding
reigns, leave it doubtful whether the right of peace and war was conceived to
belong to the king, or to the national council; but in those ignorant ages no
political department was properly divided or understood. Yet the fears, and
conscious unpopularity, of James induced him to desert his despotism on this
occasion, and to submit much to the deliberations of parliament. Besides
regulations concerning the length of spears, and nature of defensive armor,
all persons assembling to the army are prohibited, on severe penalties, to
commit any damage, or spoil, in the Scottish dominions; and the castles on the
borders, and eastern coast, are ordered to be repaired, and provided with
garrisons, and provision Acts, f. 65. A tax of 7000 marks was granted, to
victual Berwick for forty days. Carm. Tracts, 65.
.

The campaign nevertheless ended with little glory, or advantage, to either
side. About sixty Scottish hamlets were burnt by the incursions of the English;
and the fleet of Edward, entering the Forth, captured eight vessels, and gave
to the flames the village of Blackness and another ship which lay there; after
which actions it regained its native shores Ferrerius, 394. Lesley, 320, 321.
Rymer, XII, 139, has published some naval commissions of Edward, 15 Feb. 1481.
. The Scottish borderers carried destruction into England: and the English fleet
returned, but found the coasts so well guarded, that the latter expedition was
ineffectual Ferrer. ib.
. Andrew Wood of Leith, in particular, showed distinguished courage in the
maritime service Grant to him, March 1483. Scotst. Call.
. Meanwhile Edward entered into a treaty with the lord of the Isles, whose
misfortunes had not taught him prudence, and who followed the hereditary
conduct of his family, since the invasion of Edward I, and which was to be
continued to the reign of Edward VI Rymer, XII, 140; a power to treat with the
lord of the isles and Donald Gorme, 22 June. This peer, and a priest named
Rait, (for in old records sir almost universally implies a priest, while the
knight is put after the name,) are mentioned in the acts of parliament, f. 64,
as having withdrawn into England about 1477. Yet in Aug. 1481, occurs a large
grant to John of Ilay, lord of the isles, for good services. Scotst. Call.
. It is said that James led his army into England, but was met by the papal
legate, who denounced a peace among the potentates of the west, in order to
oppose the Turks, who in the preceding year had taken Otranto, and alarmed all
Italy: upon which the king returned, and dismissed his army, while Edward
little regarded the pontifical mandate Ferrerius, 394, Lesley, 321. They
ludicrously introduce the lord of the isles, as a mighty leader in the army of
James! Had they called him Donald, the continuation of Boyce's fund of fable
would have been yet more singular.
. This is highly probable in point of chronology; but as a similar event occurs
in a preceding reign, it is difficult to believe the repeated success of the
same stratagem; and the siege of Berwick not being attempted by the English, it
may seem that the royal host, especially assembled for the defense of that
place, was in consequence disbanded.

Another parliament being summoned, 1482 18 March
the members engaged, with great warmth, in the national enmity against England
Acts, f. v. 65, seq. and compare the edition by Murray of Glendook, p. 80,
where the date, 18 March 1481-2, is rightly assigned. Abercromby, Granger,
Guthrie, etc. confound this parliament with that of April 1481. Lord Kaims,
Hist. Law Tracts, 441, has published the trial of lord Lyle in this session,
which shows that it commenced on the 18th March 1481-2. The trial was on the
22d March 1482. See also Carm. Tracts, 63. The violence of the language was
palpably excited by the ravages of the English in 1481. Incredible confusion
has arisen in our history, and records, from the varying commencement of the
year, in the Roman mode 1 Jan. or according to the manner of the west, 25
March. See l'Art. de verifier les dates, p. iii to xi, for a complete
explanation.
. The depredations of the English by sea and land, being more sensibly felt
after so long a period of peace, and being perhaps directed by the innate
cruelty of Gloucester, the commander in chief, appear to have excited an
indignation remarkably keen. But the decency of modern times is surprised to
find the legislative body using terms of such asperity, as repeatedly to style
the English sovereign, Edward the reifar, that is the robber, or pirate; a
title due to many kings, but seldom employed. It is added that Edward "calls
himself king of England," for the connection between Scotland, and Henry VI,
was not forgotten. The three estates engage that, since Edward seems resolved
to prosecute the war, which he had unjustly commenced, they shall maintain a
firm obedience to their sovereign, with their persons, lands, and goods, in
defense of his person, his succession, the realm, and the subjects; as they,
and their ancestors had done formerly. They order all men within the kingdom to
be prepared, upon a warning of eight days, or less if necessary, to attend the
king in arms, and with provisions for at least twenty days: and a regulation is
given concerning couriers, or posts, to convey orders and intelligence Louis XI
began the foundation of the posts, or rather regular offices for posthorses to
be used by royal messengers, in 1480, and completed the institution in 1481.
Duclos, II, 384, 441.
. In consideration of the king's great expense, in repairing and fortifying the
walls of Berwick, and the castle, in providing them with artillery, and in
maintaining a garrison of five hundred men in the town, the estates oblige
themselves to support garrisons in thirteen forts, upon the borders; the
Hermitage is to receive one hundred men, the others from twenty to sixty. This
statute is singular, and interesting in many respects; the chief captains are
nominated by the states, who ordain that the captains shall appoint their
lieutenants, and shall receive the pay of their soldiers at the rate of two
shillings and sixpence for every spear, and two shillings for each bow Acts, f.
67. Abercromby, misled by his own notes, and confounding Roman and Arabic
numerals, gravely puts eleven for two. Guthrie, IV, 154, joins the dance,
though Granger, 685, had corrected the error.
; the garrisons consisting of equal portions armed with these weapons, and
being allotted to the forts only during the month of May, after which they were
to be lodged in Berwick for three months. The clergy engage to maintain two
hundred and forty of these soldiers; the nobility as many; and the boroughs
half that number. In another statute the national council, in terms of control,
and not of advice, declare that if Edward invade Scotland in person, the
Scottish king shall appear in the field, at the head of the whole force of his
realm; and the members express their firm resolution to live or die with their
monarch Acts, f. v. 66.
. Those who are attached to systems, the bane of history, might build a
splendid speculation upon such decrees: but the wiser, who prefer even
inconsistency to system, will be perhaps inclined to found little upon the
fluctuating views of a rude age, in which no branch of power was properly
defined, or circumscribed. Yet a degree of bigotry must be required not to
perceive principles of eminent dignity, and freedom, in these transactions. The
parliament was doubtless aristocratic; and the Scots having unfortunately no
house of commons, the deputies of the burghs were annihilated by the pomp of
the nobles and prelates; but such had been the despotism of James that the
cause of the nobles became that of the people. Perhaps the usual royal
influence guided this assembly; and the fears of James, exposed at once to
internal discord and foreign war, led him to extraordinary concessions, in
order to strengthen his throne by popularity. Perhaps the aristocracy seized
this critical period to regain lost authority, and, by plausible measures, to
secure the favor of the nation, in the meditated scheme against the king's
favorites. However this be, the loyalty and unanimity expressed by the
parliament were completely delusive.

Other statutes of this assembly are essential to history. It is ordered by the
king, and parliament of Scotland, that an embassy be sent from them to the king
of France, and parliament of Paris, to desire aid; to assure them that James
had ever been, and would be ready to act reciprocally; and to complain that
Louis had returned no answer to repeated letters of James upon this subject
Acts, f. 68.
. This furnishes an additional proof that Louis was not the author of the war:
but did the strange compliment to the parliament of Paris proceed from
ignorance, or from a design to collate the Scottish legislature with a court of
justice? A high reward is offered for the slaughter, or capture of James, the
exiled earl of Douglas; and even his followers are rated at proportional
remunerations; that nobleman acting as a dangerous enemy in the present
hostilities against his country Acts, f. v. 66. Among these followers is sir
Richard Holland, evidently a priest, and perhaps the author of the Houlat, a
satire against James by a partizan of Douglas named Holland. Scot. Poems, 1792,
Vol. III.
. 22 Mar.
Lord Lyle was tried by an assize of sixteen lords of parliament, the king
sitting as judge, for corresponding with Douglas; but was acquitted Kaims Hist.
Law Tracts, 441. Carm. Tracts, 64.
. In recompense for the apparent loyalty of the parliament, the monarch
engaged, by a formal promise, to attend to the impartial administration of
justice, so that the people might have cause to rejoice in the public order, to
the confusion of the king's enemies, and of all "false traitors and untrue
hearts," an expression dangerous and ominous Acts, f. 66.
.

The next important incident of this eventful year was the passage of Albany
from France into England. That deluded, and desperate, prince was instigated
probably by the artifices of Gloucester, who desired such an example, to aspire
to the Scottish crown, 11 June
and to enter into a treaty with Edward IV, disgraceful to himself, and
treasonable to his country. He uses the title, at once ambitious and degrading,
of Alexander king of Scotland, by the gist of the English king: consents to pay
homage, and to abandon some countries, and places on the south of Scotland,
particularly Berwick: and disclaims the league with France. Edward agrees to
assist Albany in reducing Scotland, and maintaining his royalty against James
Rymer, XII, 156, 157: of the 9th May appears an order to fit out a carvell,
called the Michel, commanded by James Douglas, which had lately conveyed Albany
from France to England, as a ship in the English service. Ib. 154. Ferrerius,
f. v. 394, says the French wife of Albany was now dead. Among the unpublished
papers of Rymer, No. 4615, art. 82, are instructions from Edward, 5 March 1482,
to Dr. Legh, Widdrington, etc. commissioners to the borders, to examine if lord
Carlyle, and such others as James shall send, be empowered to deliver up the
prince of Scotland into Edward's hands, till the marriage be accomplished. Open
war is threatened, as James had received great sums, usurped Berwick,
Coldingham, Roxburgh, and other places, and refuses homage. Douglas must be
restored to his honors, and the prince must be delivered by the 8th of May,
and Berwick surrendered! Edward complains that the Scots had, at a meeting on
the marches, slain Robert Lyle, and taken sir Henry Percy and others prisoners.


. In consequence of this treaty Albany joined the English army, which advanced,
under the command of Gloucester, against Berwick The commission to Gloucester is
dated 12 June. Ib. 157.
. The Scottish king assembled his array, and was upon his march to relieve that
important place, when he was prevented by a revolution, which calls for a pause
and an ample detail.

Though conscious of the discontents of the nobles and people, James persisted
in his attachment to mean favorites. Among these Cochran was the chief. This
architect, whose skill, displayed in the erection of several edisices, might
have been rewarded by employment, or by a pension, became the fountain of royal
favor; and was elevated to a giddy and invidious height of power. The liberal
presents of those who sued for his protection, and influence, soon constituted
a wealth enormous for the person, the age, the country: and a part of this base
opulence procured from the king's avarice the earldom of Mar, the fatal dignity
of his murdered brother It is most probable that only the revenues of the
earldom were assigned to him, without the titles, which however his flatterers,
or his own vanity, might use. Thus in 1471, 4th May, the earldom of Levenax, or
Lennox, was granted for life to lord Evandale, with the wards and marriages of
all the vassals. Scotst. Call. Yet Buchanan, XII, 46, specially mentions the
title of Mar as the chief source of the hatred of the nobility. The silence of
the records may arise from the crazures of merited scorn.
. This high honor, disgraceful to the infatuation of James and of his
favorite, was followed by the utmost hatred, and scorn, of the nobility, and
by the execrations of the people. But the new earl of Mar, unconscious that his
extreme elevation was an infallible step to the deepest ruin, continued to
abuse his power, and that of his sovereign, and to increase his wealth by every
species of peculation. His oppression extended to all ranks of men. The nobles
beheld the places, formerly given by the king to their sons, now sold to Mar's
followers: the prelates, and dignitaries of the church, sighed at the increase
of simony: even the daily pittance of the poor did not escape, for Cochran had
debased the current silver, with a degree of alloy, which rendered it black
money, a fraud which led to his ruin, and that of his master; and which has
been erroneously confounded with the billon coinage, ordained by the parliament
of 1466, which was intended for the benefit of the poor, and was continued in
all the succeeding reigns. But this corruption of the money was peculiar to
that of James III, and was such that the merchants, and farmers, rather chose
to let the grain rot in their granaries, than to receive the price in such
dubious metal: and the populace afterward repeated with exultation the
prophesy of Mar, who, when he was told that his coin would be recalled,
answered, as an impossibility, "That day I shall be hanged." In short the whole
honor and welfare of the king, and kingdom, were sacrificed on the domestic
altar of this base, and covetous, minion Lindsay, 119, 120. Ferrerius, 395.
Cochran was of eminent strength, and had first attracted the king's attention
by his valor in a single combat. Buch. XII, 37.
.

Some of the peers had formerly assembled, and consulted upon the means of
delivering the realm from the disgrace, and destruction, inflicted by Cochran,
and the other royal favorites. A nobel deputation had even been sent to the
king, requesting that he would dismiss these pernicious counselors; and
restore the confidence placed by his ancestors in the loyalty of the nobility.
The answer of James was far from satisfactory; but the peers assented to delay;
and dissembled till some decisive occasion should arise. An occasion now
occurred, such as the Scottish nobles, to their singular disgrace, have been
accustomed to seize, from the reign of the first to the termination of that of
the fifth James. Instead of using the proper period of peace, the proper place
of parliament, the day of war, and the camp, have afforded the ruinous scene of
internal dissension; and the sacred interests and glory of their country have
often been abandoned by the nobility, to gratify a just, or unjust resentment
against their sovereign. But the fatal forms of a Scottish parliament, so well
adapted to royal influence, the conception that it was a royal court, the
incapacity of rude nobles to speak against an educated clergy, ever devoted to
the king the source of their fleeting dignities, contribute greatly to absolve
the nobles from this imputation; and it is matter of regret, rather than of
surprise, that they always seized the only occasion when their power was
collected and firm.

The Scottish array, amounting to about fifty thousands, had crowded to the
royal banner at Burrough-muir near Edinburgh, July
whence they marched to Soutray, and to Lauder, at which place they encamped
between the church and the village Lindsay, 122. Ferrer. f. v. 394. Lesley,
321. Buch. XII, 40.
. Cochran, earl of Mar, conducted the artillery; and his presence and pomp were
additional insults. On the morning after their arrival at Larder, the peers
assembled in a secret council, in the church, and deliberated upon their
designs of revenge. The earls of Angus, Argyle, Huntley, Orkney or Caithness,
Crawford, the lords Home, Fleming, Gray, Drummond, Hales, and Seton, are
chiefly mentioned upon this occasion; and the discontent must have spread far
when we find Evandale the chancellor, and some bishops united to the above
names So Lindsay, 123, but this is dubious. Lesley's enumeration is Angus,
Huntley, Lennox, Buchan, Gray, Lyle. Lindsay's Bothwell is lord Hales,
afterward so styled.
. In the course of the debate Gray took occasion to introduce an apologue: the
mice consulted upon the means of deliverance from their tyrannic enemy the cat,
and agreed that a bell should be suspended about her neck, to notify her
approach and their danger; but what mouse had courage sufficient to fasten the
bell? "I shall bell the cat," exclaimed the impatience of Angus, in whom a
current of the blood of Douglas flowed; and the homely times conferred upon him
the appellation of Archibald Bell the Cat. It was concluded that the king
should be put in a gentle imprisonment, in the castle of Edinburgh: and that
all his favorites should be instantly hanged over the bridge of Lauder.

Cochran, ignorant of their designs, at length left the royal presence to
proceed to the council. This upstart earl was attended by three hundred men,
armed with light battle-axes, and distinguished by his livery of white with
black fillets. He was clothed in a riding cloak of black velvet, and wore a
large chain of gold around his neck: his horn of the chase, or of battle, was
adorned with gold and precious stones: and his helmet, overlaid with the same
valuable metal, was born before him Even his pavilions were of silk, and the
fastening chains were richly gilt. Lindsay, 124.
. Approaching the door of the church, he commanded an attendant to knock with
authority; and Sir Robert Douglas of Lochleven, who guarded the passage,
enquiring the name, was answered, "'It Is I, the earl of Mar," Cochran, and some
of his friends, were admitted: Angus advanced to him, and pulling the golden
chain from his neck, said "A rope will become thee better;" while Douglas of
Lochleven seized his hunting horn, declaring that he had been too long a hunter
of mischief. Rather astonished than alarmed, Cochran said, "My lords is it jest
or earnest?" To which it was replied, "It is good earnest, and so thou abused
our prince's favor; but no longer expect such advantage, for thou and thy
followers shall now reap the deserved reward."

Having secured Mar, the lords dispatched some men at arms to the king's
pavilion, conducted by two or three moderate and prudent leaders, who amused
James while their followers seized the favorites. Sir William Roger the
English musician, Preston a gentleman, Hommil, Torphichan, Leonard, and others,
were instantly hanged over the bridge at Lauder. John Ramsay of Balmain, having
clasped the king's person, was alone spared. Cochran was now brought out, his
hands bound with a rope; and his weak pride desiring to exchange the
ignominious bonds of a thief for the silken cords of his own pavilion, he was
answered that he was a traitor and only found merited shame: he was conducted
to the bridge, and hanged above his companions Lindsay, 125. Ferrerius, 395.
Lesley, 322. Buchanan, XII, 45.
.

Such was the influence of the aristocracy over their warlike followers, that
the king was conveyed to the castle of Edinburgh, without commotion or murmur.
Here he was served with respect: but was attended by some of the peers, to
observe his conduct, and prevent his escape, till he should give ample security
not to revenge the death of his favorites; to which he showed obstinate
repugnance. Except this constraint, his will was unviolated, and the royal
authority remained unimpaired Ibid.
.

Meanwhile the English army had acquired possession of the town of Berwick: and
the generals, Gloucester and Albany, learning that the Scottish army was
disbanded, and the king imprisoned, left a party to conduct the siege of
Berwick castle, and advanced with the main force to Endinburgh Ferrer. 396.
Lesley, 322. Buch. XII, 47.
. Their subsequent conduct is not a little mysterious. The capture, or death,
of James, and the coronation of Albany might have been expected from the
English treaty: but the next authentic paper presents to us Albany suing for
his pardon from James; and our early historians, ignorant of Albany's ambition,
represent him as the deliverer of his brother from the power of the nobles. If,
with some writers, we believe that James was not imprisoned in the castle of
Edinburgh, but chose that fortress as a secure retreat, the difficulty remains
the same, or greater The imprisonment is however certain from two charters.
Ruddiman's preface to Anderson's diplomata, and notes on Buchanan, I, 445.
. Even records cannot atone for the want of contemporary historians; and in
such England and Scotland are at this period barren. That Edward IV and Albany
were sincere in their agreement appears from its renewal in the following year;
which also instructs us that Angus and Gray were then, if not before, engaged
in the treasonable ambition of Albany. Hence almost the only rational view
which presents itself is, that Albany, finding a great majority of the nobles,
and the popular voice, completely adverse to his unnatural and base schemes The
continuator of Harding positively says that Gloucester gave peace to Scotland,
because the peers did not join Albany.
, was forced to temporize, and accept a pardon, and the restoration of his
estates; in the hopes that his presence, and influence, might strengthen his
pretensions before their open declaration. The acquisition of Berwick would
afford a prize sufficient to satisfy Gloucester; who might judge, from personal
knowledge, that a delay was more expedient than the perdition of the scheme by
precipitation.

The English army amounted only to about sixteen thousand; and the materials
for a siege had been left before Berwick; hence the capture of the castle of
Edinburgh, and of James, could hardly be attempted by so few battalions, liable
soon to be surrounded or intercepted by a superior force. A Scottish army was
actually assembling at Haddington, under the command of several patriotic
peers; and even the courage of Gloucester might tremble at the prospect of a
battle, without the possibility of a retreat Ferrer. 397, Lesley, 322.
. An historian informs us that those peers prevailed on Albany to pass to their
party, upon an offer of appointing him lieutenant general of the kingdom
Lesley, 322, who adds that the earldoms of Mar and March were to be given to
Albany. The latter was in fact restored by his deliverance from the forfeiture.
Had he said Mar and Garioch, he would have been exact. See the grant, Rudd.
Buch. I, 445.
; a rank tempting to his ambition, for he might, with greater certainty, aspire
to the crown by Scottish, than by English, aid. However this be, after a brief
negotiation, Shevis, the archbishop of St. Andrews, Livington the bishop of
Dunkeld, lord Evandale the chancellor, and the earl of Argyle, all rather
eminent in attachment to James, entered into a solemn engagement with Albany, 2
Aug.
that if he preserved his duty to the king, and the terms of his bond to them,
and other Scottish lords, his lands and offices should be restored, and he and
his followers receive an amnesty: they also engaged that the king should ratify
the treaty in the next parliament Rymer, XII, 160.
. And a truce with England being necessary, in the distracted state of the
kingdom, Berwick was yielded, after having remained for twenty one years in the
Scottish possession, to which it was not to return; and the provost and
merchants of Edinburgh engaged to repay the sums advanced for Cecilia's
portion, if Edward refused to complete the marriage; which resolution being
notified, two months after, the money was repaid Rymer, XII, 161. The provost
seems now mentioned for the first time: more anciently he was denominated
alderman.
.

The other embroiled transactions of this year are, the passport of Edward to
Margaret the sister of James, 22 Aug.
whose marriage with lord Rivers, the brother of Edward's queen, appears to
have been frustrated by the enmity, and intrigues, of Gloucester, or by the
machinations of the Scottish court, for it does not appear that the lady
proceeded to England Rymer, XII, 162.
: a safe conduct to James, who again wished to visit the shrine of St. John at
Amiens Ibid. 170.
, 23 Nov.
probably induced both now and before by the arts of Albany, to whom his
absence might have been advantageous: and a fruitless commission of Edward IV,
to renew, and conclude, the negotiation for the marriage of Rivers and Margaret
Ibid. 171.
. Dec.
But from the passport to James, and the parliament held at Edinburgh Acts,
Murray of Glendook's edition, folio, p. 71. Carm. Tracts, 66. The charter of
James to the citizens of Edinburgh, for assistance in delivering him from his
imprisonment, is dated 16 Nov. 1482. Rudd. Buch. I, 445. Lindsay, 126, supposes
James a prisoner three quarters of a year, read three months.
, 11 Dec.
it appears that the captivity of the king was terminated.

According to the unanimous report of our historians, this deliverance was
effected by Albany, and probably in the end of September. They narrate that
James being still retained in the castle of Edinburgh, under the care of Athole
his uncle, the administration was conducted by Albany, Evandale the chancellor,
and Shevis archbishop of St. Andrews; that Albany passing to visit the queen
Margaret of Denmark, and the prince her son, at Sterling, was instigated by her
to deliver the king; which he effected after a siege of some duration, upon
which Argyle, Shevis, and the chancellor, fled in consternation to their
respective places of abode. Albany hence acquired so much favor from his royal
brother, that they shared one bed and one table Ferrer. 397. Lesl. 323. Buch.
XII, 50. Lindsay, 130. Grant of Mar and Garioch to Albany, for delivering the
king, Rudd. Buch. I, 445: it bears that he exposed himself to great dangers in
the siege. There is also a grant to Dundas of Dundas, for the fame service,
"and venturing life therein." Scotst. Call. 17 Jan. 1483. Our ignorance of the
views of parties, at this period, creates deep obscurity. Abercromby, a warm
defender of James III, and enemy of Albany, denies the fact, II, 452. But a
partizan is little calculated to throw light, where even a candid writer may be
bewildered. Neither Albany nor James were entitled to complete fame or
reproach. They wavered, like the many, between vice and virtue. Albany seems to
have aspired to the government, on the plan of his predecessors in the title,
Robert and Murdac. This probably was the cause of his forfeiture in 1479; and
when he gained this in August 1482, he was satisfied. But finding that the
former council of James contested his authority, and usurped the royal power in
the name of the captive monarch, whom Athole one of their cabal guarded, he
would naturally wish to have the king in his own power; and seems to have
offered to free James, provided that he was named lord lieutenant of the
kingdom, and had a gift of Mar and Garioch. This easy theory reconciles history
and records.

Lesley errs concerning the resignation of the archbishopric by Shevis, (so
called from a village in Aberdeenshire,) to Andrew Stuart. It was Moray, a
bishopric retained by the avarice of Shevis. Compare Keith, Bishops, 86, whence
it appears that Andrew Stuart was in fact elect of Moray, at the meeting of
parliament 2 Dec. 1482.

The contemporary chronicle at the end of Winton closes with the year 1482, and
has some curious notices concerning it: that after the affair of Lauder the
peers cried down the black silver, which had been current for two years in
halfpennies and three penny pieces; and imprisoned James in the castle of
Edinburgh, from Magdalen-day to Michaelmas, (22 July -- 29 Sept.) Corn fell
from 4 l. to 30 s. a boll, or about of the English quarter.


.

The parliament of December appears to have been wholly influenced by Albany;
1483
but that prince's unbounded ambition, and avarice, speedily disgusted most of
the peers; and James was little satisfied with the power of his brother, of
whom he had every cause to entertain the utmost jealousy Nisbet, Heraldry, II,
89, has published some extracts of letters, of James III and IV, to the family
of Arbuthnot, in the Mearns. Among them is one of the former monarch, 3 Jan. r.
23=1483, desiring Arbuthnot's aid, as James was informed that last thursday
some persons had begun to assemble, with a design to invade his person.
. Finding upon what a precarious foundation his authority rested, perceiving
the renewed strength of the loyal party, early in the following year Albany
appointed Angus, Gray, and Sir James Liddel, 12 Jan.
his commissioners to Edward IV, to strengthen the former treasonable treaty
Rymer, XII, 172.
: 11 Feb.
and soon after that infamous agreement was repeated, and enlarged. It appears
that Albany managed the public affairs, for it is agreed that a year's truce
shall be observed: the homage and dereliction of some provinces are left in
silence, but Albany engages to assist Edward against France, and to wed one of
his daughters The divorce of Albany from the daughter of Orkney, his French
marriage, etc. are of uncertain date.
: the exiled earl of Douglas is to resume possession of his lands, as far as
settled in an agreement made between him and Angus: and Edward engages to send
Gloucester and Northumberland, with succors, to assist the duke in conquering
Scotland Rymer, XII, 173.
. But the death of Edward IV, 9 Apr.
in the prime of life, terminated these schemes of unjust ambition: and
Gloucester, who upon the murder of his two nephews seized the English scepter,
22 June
and the title of Richard III, found sufficient occupation in settling domestic
discord.

The violence, and imprudence of Albany's conduct soon exceeding the bounds of
mere suspicion, and his views evidently tending to the disgrace and destruction
of the kingdom, the nobles had resumed their loyalty, and the king was restored
to his free and full power. Albany, understanding that his designs were
discovered, or conscious of guilt, retired into England He had previously
retired to Dunbar, pretending suspicions of poison. Ferrer. 397. Lesley, 225.
These authors say he passed to France; Buchanan, XII, 50, to England: whence
however he soon proceeded to the court of Charles VIII.
, leaving his castle of Dunbar in the hands of an English garrison. His
forfeiture followed; but while the treason of Angus, Gray, and others, remained
unknown, a similar penalty was imposed on lord Crichton, who had also
garrisoned his castle of Crichton and escaped From the Records of Parliament it
appears that Albany was forfeited on the 27th June 1483, with Sir James Liddel
of Halkerston. Carm. Tracts, 68. Grichton in Feb. 1484. Ib. Crawf. Off. 312.
Abercromby, with strange inaccuracy, confounds Crichton with Orkney, II, 429.
. If Buchanan be believed, a private pique of James gave occasion to the
condemnation of this peer: for the king having seduced Crichton's wife, he, in
revenge, found means to win the love of Margaret, the sister of James, by whom
he had a daughter named Margaret Crichton, who died not long before our great
historian composed his work. Nay, according to that hater of kings, before this
adultery of Margaret, she had lost her virginity in the incestuous embraces of
her royal brother Buch. XII, 51.
. The reader may assent, or disbelieve, according to the weight of the
evidence: but Buchanan deserves more implicit credit in the information that
Crichton was restored, a short time before the death of James, in order that,
his former wife now being dead, he might compensate the dishonor of the
princess by marrying her; but Crichton dying soon after, this alliance produced
no other progeny Though many writers have labored the genealogies of the house
of Stuart, yet the marriage of Margaret remains obscure. Crawf. Off. 31, says
William lord Crichton, who succeeded his father James in 1469, had by her also
a son named James, who obtained a charter in 1492. Yet the marriage could not
have taken place till about 1487. See Drummond, p. 111. Scotstarvet's
Calendars, at the year 1482, present a grant of many lands to Mary lady
Hamilton, and among others those of Kilmarnoc formerly given to the queen,
apparently an exchange, for that princess was not yet dead? On the 18th March
1483 Largo in Fife was granted to Andrew Wood of Leith, for his services by
land and sea, chiefly in the English war: confirmed about 1497 with the
addition that the most eminent service had been the defense of Dunbarton, when
the English navy came to besiege it: (1481? unknown in history.) There is in
Scotst. Call. a charter inconsistent with other records. It is of the lands of
"Mekil and litil Pinkartoun, in the barony of Dunbar, constabulary of
Haddington, and sheriffdom of Edinburgh, forfeited by Albany -- to Colin earl
of Argyle, united in the barony of Pinkartoun ward with thr^ suits at the heid
courts of Edinburgh," 29 April 1483. (August?)


.

A parliament was held at Edinburgh, 1484 24 Feb.
which proceeded to settle the disorders of the kingdom Acts, f. 69, 70:
Glendook's edition, p. 71. Abercromby and Granger, from some unknown cause,
imagine this parliament to have been in Feb. 1484-5; though the Acts mark
1483-4. The mistake seems to originate solely in Abercromby's inaccuracy. The
date in the Acts is confirmed by the Rolls of Parliament, Keith bishops, 69:
and see several records, evincing it beyond doubt, in Carm. Tracts, 66, 67, 90.
Not to mention that the preparations for war are irreconcilable with the year
1485. This session was prorogued to the 17th May 1484. Carm. 70, 90; but only
private or judicial business was then transacted.
. The expiration of the truce, the retreat of Albany into England, the hostile
views of Richard III, conspired to render war apparently so inevitable, that
the parliament ordered all the subjects fit for arms to be ready, upon a
warming of eight days, to march with provisions for twenty days, in defense of
the realm against its English foes. In order to appease the discords of the
barons, that they may proceed in concord against the enemy, the king is advised
to call them into his presence, and conciliate their differences; while those
of less eminent station are to submit their feuds to the administrators of
justice, so that internal peace, and obedience to the royal authority, may be
restored. The strict execution of justice is enforced, "that the realm may be
brought to good rule." Some regulations are issued for the artisans in gold, or
rather in silver For the act itself bears that the goldsmiths diminished the
fineness of their "silver work," or wrought silver. The placks, next mentioned,
seem the three-penny pieces of the chronicle at the end of Winton.
: and, after some institutions concerning the coin, the new placks, or large
pieces of base metal, the real black money which gave such just offense, are
called in; a measure long due to an oppressed people.

Charles VIII having acquired the active sovereignty of France, March
at the early age of fourteen, sent Bernard Stuart lord of Aubigny, and an
inferior ambassador, to Scotland, to announce the new reign, and ratify the
alliance: and James in return sent an embassy to France, July
to obtain the ratification of Charles Lesley, 324. Hist. de Charles VIII par
Jaligny, etc. Paris 1684, folio, p. 389. The succession to the crown of either
realm, if doubtful, is to be settled by the prelates and nobles. The envoys to
France were Argyle, Shevis, Evandale, Drs. Inglis and Ireland, etc. Crawf. Off.
45, from the public archives. This treaty seems unknown to Du Tillet, and the
compiler of the MS. Leagues. A renewal of the alliance, 1460 or 1461, would be
a curious discovery. Lesley takes occasion to mention that some troops were now
sent to France under Robertson; and that among the Scots in that kingdom were
Albany, George Montgomery seigneur de Lorges, Aubigny, Robert Stuart marshall
of Frnace, and Nicolas Scot.


. Meanwhile, though Richard III had increased the pension paid to the exiled
earl of Douglas, the state of his affairs did not permit him to assist that
earl, or Albany, in the invasion of Scotland. In their impatience, these two
leaders collected a troop of five hundred horse, and some infantry, hoping that
their friends and followers would soon swell their array; and with this view
advanced to Lochmaben, during a fair. 22 July
But the influence of Douglas was forgotten, even by his former vassals; and
that of Albany was despised: the neighboring gentlemen collecting some hasty
bands, the occasion furnished numbers, fury arms; and after a conflict, or
rather affray, which lasted from noon till night, the last Douglas remained the
ignominious captive of a vulgar hand, while Albany found his safety in the
swiftness of his horse. Douglas, now old and unwieldy, was conveyed to the
royal presence; but, either from shame or scorn, turned his back on the son of
James II, the destroyer of his house: a ray of pity illuminated the despotic
mind of the king, who had now himself tasted misfortune: he sentenced the years
and infirmities of Douglas, who had been educated to the church, to the
religious retirement of Lindoris abbey, while the earl's indifference muttered,
"he who may no better be, must be a monk." In this retreat Douglas perhaps
first knew happiness; and died after four years of penitence and peace Buch.
XII, 52. Hume Dougl. I, 379 -- 381. Drummond, 107, edit. 1655, folio. In the
beginning of 1484 Douglas obtained from Richard III an increase of his pension,
Rymer, XII, 213, 218. On the 25th June 1484 he, and Albany, were at York. Ib.
228. In Scotst. Call. 25 July 1484, a grant to Carruthers for service in the
battle against Alexander Stuart and James Douglas: another 20 Aug. to Crichton
of Sanquhar, for service in the said battle on the west marches. To Alexander
Kirkpatrick, for seizing Douglas, the lands of Kirkmichael, forfeited by
Crichton and his brother Gawin, 2 Oct. 1484.


Albany, having lost all hopes of Richard's assistance, retired into France;
where he wedded, in his second nuptials, the daughter of the earl of Boulogne,
by whom he had a son John, afterward duke of Albany, and regent of Scotland
during the minority of James V. The father, after residing in France for some
years, was accidentally slain in a tournament by the splinter of a spear;
leaving a fame fatal to his title, unnatural ambition, and the want of
fraternal affection Buch. Hume, Drumm. ut supra. Lesley, 326, who, while he
styles him Father of War, confounds him with Aubigny, a not unusual mistake
from the similarity of the title. Our authors seem to concur that about 1484
Alexander duke of Albany wedded Anne of Boulogne, lesl. 319. Lindsay, 131, 136,
calls her the duchess of Boulogne. The act of 13th Nov. 1516 "Dame Agnes of
Boloigne." Hay's MS. calls her Anna de la Tour; her mother Jeanne de Bourbon,
sister of Francis duke of Vendome, (thus confounding Alexander with John.) St.
Genesis 107. -- Crawford, Stuarts, 39, speaks confusedly of Lauragnez, which was
claimed by the father-in-law of John, L'Art, 726. It is certain that the title
of Boulogne was only an addition to that of Auvergne, from the fourteenth
century, L'Art de v. L. D. 724; and that John duke of Albany wedded Anne de la
Tour, in her own right countess of Auvergne and Boulogne. Ib. 726. The
confusion may perhaps be cleared by supposing Agnes, wife of Alexander, one of
the three daughters of Bertrand II count of Auvergne and Boulogne, thus,
Bertrand II of Auvergne and Boulogne. John III of A. and B. Agnes=Alex. d. of
Alb. Ann wedded her cousin=John d. of Alb.

Alexander was accidentally slain in Paris, when inspecting a tourney between
the duke of Orleans and another knight: Lesl. 326. This duke of Orleans was
surely he who became Louis XII in 1498; and for 1483, in Drummond, 106, we may
perhaps read 1493, as the date of the event; which is one of those that seems
easy to trace and yet is difficult. See 1487.


.

The embarrassments of Richard and James rendering the continuance of war
ineligible to both, a treaty was opened; and, after a short negotiation,
concluded at Nottingham Rymer, XII, 236
. To strengthen the pacification, 21 Sept.
it was agreed that James duke of Rothsay, heir of the Scottish throne, now in
his twelfth year, should wed Anne de la Pole, only daughter of the duke of
Suffolk, and niece of the English king Ibid. 244.
: but this marriage was defeated by the death of Richard. In the mean time the
truce was only established for three years, upon the grounds of present
possession, except with regard to the castle of Dunbar, still garrisoned by the
English; and which, by a singular clause, the Scottish king was allowed to
recover by force, after six months had elapsed, and upon a warning of six weeks
given to Richard Ibid. 236.
: a mode probably intended to preserve measures between Richard and Albany. The
powers comprehended are, on the part of England, Castile and Leon, Arragon,
Portugal, Austria, Burgundy, Bretagne; on that of Scotland, France, Denmark,
Gelder, Bretagne: and by an usual, but unaccountable article, except of mere
form, the lordship of Lorn in Scotland, and the isle of Lundy in the river
Severn, are excepted from the truce This form was first observed in 1464.
Lundy, an almost inaccessible isle, was a receptacle for pirates, for whose
acts the English kings could not be answerable. The exception of Lorn seems a
mere form, for the sake of equality. In Call. B. V, 147, are some contemporary
notes concerning this embassy. Richard received the envoys at Nottingham 12
Sept. in great state: a speech of Whitlaw the Scottish secretary is premised,
but the fragment ends abruptly. A part of this celebrated oration is however
preserved, Vesp. C. XVI, f. 75 -- 79. It is in praise of peace, abounds with
panegyric and professions, and applies to Richard the noted line,

Major in exiguo regnabat corpore virtus.
.

In a succeeding national council, 1485 4 Feb.
the renewal of the French league, and the English truce, were solemnly
approved; an embassy was ordered to be sent to York, at the expense of the
clergy, barons, and burghs, in order to complete the marriage treaty Acts, f.
71 -- f. v. 74. Compare Murray's edition, p 80.
. As the truce permitted the capture of Dunbar, the parliament advises the king
to proceed against that fortress, on the first day of May; and the right of
peace and war again dubiously appears, in the particular directions given by
the legislature. An embassy is also appointed to the pope, to obtain his
confirmation of the French alliance, and of the treaty with Denmark concerning
the Orkneys and Shetland; and this embassy Shevez, the archbishop of St.
Andrews, offers to undertake at his own expense; a singularity, which like the
expenditure of the commission to England, betrays great penury of royal
revenue. A further solicitation was to be moved to the pontiff, that he would
grant to the Scottish kings a power of superseding, for six months, the
dispensations to vacant bishoprics; that they might have time to advance the
promotion of such as they could trust, the bishops having the first vote in
parliament, and being of the privy council. Another prudent statute, but
attended with little success, occurs for the encouragement of the herring
fishery in the western sea Murray's edition, p. 80. It is alluded to in the
acts of 1487, f. v. 78. Granger, 701, forgets this statute of 1485.
. Symptoms of discontent disturb the national laws: some friends of Albany, or
some foes to the weak government of James, are recommended to the royal blame:
regulations for the administration of justice are repeated, and respites are
reprobated as more iniquitous than pardons: the abettors of Albany's crimes are
pointed out, as the objects of peculiar prosecution: and the king obliges
himself to grant no respite, nor pardon, to notorious offenders for the space
of two years; an engagement perhaps prohibitory of weak lenity, perhaps of
avarice.

If the castle of Dunbar as besieged, it was without success Buch. XII, 53,
expressly says it was not retaken, till during a severe winter in the beginning
of the reign of Henry VII. The art of besieging was little known in Scotland,
even in the reign of James V: see Tantallon 1528. Drummond, 106, seems to date
the capture 1486.
. Richard III, far from opposing the enterprise, was occupied in counteracting
the designs of the earl of Richmond; who soon after landed in England, and
sealed his title to the crown in the blood of the usurper; 22 Aug.
while Henry VII was hailed by the acclamations of his victorious troops
Ferrerius, 398, and Lesley, 326, assert that Bernard Stuart, lord of Aubigny,
commanded some French troops which accompanied Henry. But the English
historians, from veracity, or from enmity to the French and Scots, are silent,
though minute in describing the arrangement of the battle. Andre of Toulouse,
Domit. A. XVIII, mentions a Dominus de Chandea, an eminent warrior, as leader
of the French.
.

Meanwhile James had insensibly relapsed into his former impolitical conduct.
Immersed in mean pleasures, and trivial pursuits, he neglected the reins of
government, which were alternately relaxed, or restrained with too much
violence The ministry from the year 1483, after the flight of Albany, were
Argyle the chancellor, in which office he appears in the parliament of Feb.
1484. Carm. 66. Crawford great chamberlain; the abbot of Holyroodhouse
treasurer; Mr. David Livingston privy seal; Whitlaw secretary. Scotst. Call.
Lord Evandale survived till 1488, Crawf. Off. 39: he, and Shevis archbishop of
St. Andrews, seem to have retained the king's favor till his death.
. Lost in the retirement of his palace at Stirling, his chief cares were
occupied in architecture and music, at best but laudable amusements. Had not
the prosperity of the monarchy been neglected, public praise might have
attended the erection of the great hall in the castle of Stirling, and that of
the adjacent splendid chapel, in which a dean and a double series of chanters
and musicians were appointed, that the royal ear might never want the luxury of
sound Lindsay, 136. Drummond, 107, says that James now became very devout,
visiting the churches in procession every wednesday and friday.
. But the most exquisite harmony of a king ought to be the voice of a happy
people; and to this James was a stranger. Even his munificence arose upon
discontent: the priory of Coldingham, which the Humes regarded as their
patrimony, was now annexed to the royal chapel of Stirling Lindsay, 137.
. The weak obstinacy of James was ignorant that there are barriers, and
prejudices, which even eastern despotism dares not to infringe. Thinking that
the spirit of the nobility was fled with Albany, the monarch issued a mandate
that the nobles should no longer wear arms, as before, within the precincts of
the court Ferrerius, 399. Guthrie, often affecting to think for himself, and
often thinking with puerility, contends, IV, 209, against Dr. Robertson
concerning this institution, and confounds the court with courts of justice!
: to add to the disgrace, Ramsay, the favorite who had escaped, and who had
been recently created lord Bothwell, was excepted, as captain of the royal
guard, and institution which apparently originated in the preceding reign Our
antiquaries, amid their cager pursuit of trifles, neglect objects of real
curiosity and importance; and the want of dissertations on obscure points of
Scottish history is much to be regreted. The first trace of a royal guard occurs
in 1452, when Sir Patrick Gray was captain. Lindsay, 62. From Scotstarvet's
Calendars it appears that, in 1473, Mr. David Guthrie was captain of the king's
guard, and George Bell lieutenant.
. The attachment of the Scottish monarch to England, and to English favorites,
which had commenced in his youth, and had suffered little interruption from a
short and unwilling war, was viewed with disgust by the prejudices of the
people The act of indemnity, (Acts, f. v. 82,) specially accuses James of
"inbringing of Englishmen, and to the perpetual subjection of the realm." This
is the reproach of enemies, but must have had some color of truth. Ferrerius,
f. v. 398, mentions the favor of James to the English: and Henry VII was not
wanting in return to the Scots. Lesl. 324. The ancient aristocracy seems to
have as yet inherited attachment to France. A grand Scottish embassy was present
at the coronation of Henry VII, 30 Oct. 1485, namely lord Bothwell the
favorite of James, the abbot of Holyroodhouse, Lord Kennedy, Archibald Whitlaw
dean of Dunbar the secretary, John Ross esquire. and the lion-king-at-arms, Ross
herald, Unicorn pursuivant. See an account of the ceremony at the end of
Leland's Collect. Vol. IV, edit. 1774.


. The peers even accused him of an intention to enslave the nation by English
guards and armies: Angus, Argyle, Lennox, the lords Home, Hales, Drummond,
Lyle, Gray, confederated together, again to imprison the king, and to appoint
the prince regent; but this design was delayed, till a further occasion should
be presented by the increasing weakness of the government So Ferrerius, f. 399,
Lesley, 327; and that there was an association, prior to 1488, may appear from
the act of indemnity, which mentions articles "diverse times granted and
broken" by James.
.

In the midst of winter James advanced, 1486
and at length dispossessed the English garrison at Dunbar Buchan. XII, 53.
; but Henry VII, disposed to peace by inclination and by policy, named the
bishops of Worcester and Lincoln, and other commissioners, to meet William
Elphinston the learned bishop of Aberdeen, lord Bothwell, and others, on the
part of Scotland: and a truce of three years was concluded, 3 July
the former being held as annihilated by the usurpation, and death, of Richard
III. James was either ignorant of the perfidy of Angus, or constrained to
conceal his knowledge; for the traitorous friend of Albany is named as one of
the conservators of the truce Rymer, XII, 290.
.

Margaret of Denmark, 1487
the amiable and respected queen of James III, died, in the middle period of
life: the silence of our early and barren historians, concerning her
interference in politics, may be interpreted in her praise; but their neglect
to mention the epoch, and manner, of her death, redounds not to their fame From
Rymer, XII, 328, where the marriage of James is proposed, it is evident that
Margaret was dead before Nov. 1487; and the treaty of July 1486 being silent,
rather indicates that she was then alive. Drummond, 106, seems accurate, when
he says that she was buried at Cambuskenneth the last day of February 1486-7,
(not the 29th, as he puts, the year not being bissextile.) Buchanan's
arrangement of events is in concordance; and he dates at the same time the
death of Alexander duke of Albany, XII, 55.
. To the character of her virtues and accomplishments, formerly given, it is
unnecessary here to add; but it may be suspected that the fate of James, soon
to follow, had been somewhat protracted by the birth and connections, by the
merits, and by the counsels, of the daughter of Denmark.

The last parliament during the reign of James III being Assembled Acts, f. v.
74 -- 78. The persons present may be found in Carm. Tracts, 73. It was
prorogued to the 29th Jan. 1488, when James created his second son duke of
Ross; and four peers, Drummond, Sanquhar, Yester, Ruthven; and knighted four
gentlemen, among whom was William Carlyle son of lord Carlyle. Carm. Tracts, 72.
, 1 Oct.
the king solemnly engaged to contribute to the protection of the common people
Abercromby, the devotee of despotism, may excite a smile when he interprets,
II, 469, poor lieges to imply dutiful subjects. The synonym is singular.
, harrassed by the wanton cruelty of the great families, and that of the public
peace in general, by granting no pardon, for the space of seven years, to any
persons guilty of treason, murder, setting fire to houses, rape, robbery,
theft, or forging the coin. He also consented to several statutes, especially
proposed by the commissioners of the burghs, importing, among less matters,
that merchants engaged in foreign trade should have a certain property, and
respectable character; that no craftsmen should engage in foreign trade; that
the magistrates of burghs should be chosen as specified in a former act The act
referred to, in this important statute, is not evident; but it is mentioned as
guarding against "partiality and mastership," apparently the interference of
peers, or great neighboring landholders, in the election of the magistrates, a
practice to be reprobated by statutes of subsequent reigns. Even the act of
1469, (perhaps alluded to,) might have served as some antidote to this
interference.
; that some commissioners of the burghs should meet once a year at
Innerkeithing, to deliberate concerning commerce, and the interests of their
towns. These transactions were popular; and the states express much
satisfaction that the sovereign has so benignly granted to them all their
desires and requests: but whether James really saw his errors, and resolved to
cultivate a new mode of government, or those apparent concessions were extorted
by his sense of discontent, and apprehensions of a dangerous conspiracy, must
be left in doubt. However this be, the lords spiritual and temporal, barons,
freeholders, and commons, engaged, on their part, that they should not support
the cause of their criminal friends, or relations, by appearing with armed
followers; a practice frequent in this and the following century, and which
leads to the best interpretation of this statute: they moreover engage to
contribute their assistance to the exact administration of justice. Several
ordinances follow, strongly indicative of the height of feudal anarchy, the
violence of the great, and the oppression of the poor: the feeble voice of the
law appears to have been drowned in the public tumult, and civil order seems to
have endured a violent relapse since the death of the first James: the blame
can hardly be ascribed to external violence, time, or fortune; and while
candor confesses the barbarism of the period, and country, it must at the same
time allow that the relaxation of government by the royal neglect, and the sale
of justice by the royal favorites, conspired to constitute the worst of
tyrannies, upon which a complete satire is authentically conveyed in the
national decrees. Such was the increase of crimes, that Justices General are
appointed for the division north and south of the Forth, to hold courts in
every part of the realm with all expedition, supported by their own power, and
what aid the king could spare, in order to bring transgressors to punishment,
and to rescue the royal authority from contempt.

In this parliament the lands of March and Annandale, which had fallen to the
crown by the forfeiture of Alexander duke of Albany, earl of March, Mar, and
Garioch, lord of Annandale and of the isle of Man Albany, and his son John,
bore the arms of Man, as appears from the m^^^ and foals of the latter.
Ferrerius, f. v. 394, says the English seized Man in (...) Yet, since the year
1335, that isle is understood to have been subject to English lords; but
perhaps when James in 1469 acquired the Orkneys, he revived the claim. If an
actual conquest took place it is unmarked in history.
, are annexed to the regal domains; by a solemn deed, authenticated by the
seals of the bishops, abbots, priors, earls, lords, barons, freeholders, and
commissioners of burghs. A statute appears for the encouragement of strangers,
who import provisions, and other merchandise: and another, appointing four
persons from each of the three estates, to revise the ancient laws.

The transactions of this year are closed by a singular indenture, 27 Nov.
subscribed at Edinburgh by the Carlisle herald for England, and Snawdon herald
for Scotland Heralds, like their science, have often romantic appellations.
(...) was Roxburgh: S^auden seems to have been Stirling palace. Itin. (...)
Worcestre.
, importing that the bishop of Exeter, and sir Richard Edgecomb, the English
ambassadors, had agreed with the bishop of Aberdeen, and lord Bothwell,
commissioners on the part of Scotland, in the following manner: that, to
establish a lasting peace, three marriage should be negotiated; between James,
and Elizabeth widow of Edward IV; the duke of Rothsay, and a daughter of
Edward; the marquis of Ormond second son of James, and Catharine the third
daughter of the same English sovereign: and that to conclude these contracts,
and to terminate the controversy concerning Berwick, which the Scottish king
ardently desired to regain, a congress should be held at Edinburgh on the
twenty-fourth day of January next, another in May, and an interview between the
kings in July Rymer, XII, 328.
. This treaty evinces the strong desire of Henry VII to secure the amity of
Scotland; and at same time the attachment of James to the English, laudable in
itself, and concordant with the best interests of his kingdom; but impolitic,
considering the period, and national prejudices.

The final events of the reign of James III approach, 1488
interesting from their novelty, and magnitude. A gradual confederacy of many
nobles had long been forming against the feeble and despotic government of this
monarch; but amid materials not eminent in opulence, or accuracy, amid the
various interests and political views of modern writers, it is difficult to
ascertain the different actors in this important scene. There is no evidence
that the congress, appointed to be held by the commissioners of England and
Scotland in January, took effect; and it even seems that the caprice of the
Scottish king, May
or some other cause, had alienated Henry, who granted a safe conduct, in terms
rather unusual, to the bishops of Glasgow and Dunkeld, the earl of Argyle
chancellor of Scotland, the lords Hales and Lyle, the masters, or heirs of
Darnley and Home, with one hundred and sixty attendants Ibid, XII, 340, May. On
the 30th Jan. Henry had issued a commission to Northumberland, to treat of
peace, ib. 334. On the 2d Feb. a safe conduct appears to twelve persons, not
named, as envoys sent by James, ib. In May a commission was given to two people
of inferior rank, to treat of a peace; but perhaps really to negotiate with the
conspirators, ib. 340. At Easter 1488 (6 April) Ramsay, lord Bothwell, was in
the English court, as envoy from James. Celebr. of Easter 3 H7. end Leland's
Collect. Vol. IV.


; not as ambassadors, but for causes unknown, and the more extraordinary as
some of them undoubtedly belonged to the conspiracy, and a rational suspicion
must affect the others. On all sides it is agreed that the former traitors,
Angus and Gray, united to them Home, justly enraged at a despotic violation of
private property; the first and the last nobleman being the chief authors of
the rebellion. The power of the Hepburns was led into it by lord Hales; and the
treason of the lords Drummond, and Lyle, is equally unquestionable. Darnley, or
Lennox, is obnoxious to the same charge, from the strong testimony of the
earliest narration, and from the mention of his son in the English passport;
which fixes a stain on Argyle, the less easily to be overcome, as he also
appears in the most ancient account. When it is added that to these great names
afterward acceded Huntley, Errol, the earl Marshal, and lord Glamis, the
impolicy of James, which could alienate so many chiefs, must appear in a
striking point of view; and the rebellious war of Douglas, in the preceding
reign, sinks into unimportance, when compared with this grand confederacy For
the names of the peers who opposed James compare Ferrerius, f. 399, Lesley,
(who however seems here to copy the former,) p. 327: Lindsay, 139, names Angus,
Evandale, the Hepburns, (so understand) his erroneous earl of Bothwell,) Home,
140, Gray, Drummond; and from p. 142 it appears that the men were chiefly
borderers, whom the justice of James wished to repress. It must be observed
that lord Home is here so styled by anticipation, as he did not bear the title
till 1489, on the death of his grandfather, a very aged peer. Douglas, 344.
Buchanan hardly mentions any names. The dereliction of the royal party by
Huntley, Errol, Marshal, Glamis, is evinced from the act of indemnity, Acts, f.
82. The records, and events, of the first year of James IV also present
veracious testimony. Argyle's continuance as chancellor indicates his being one
of the rebels. Oliphant, who sat on the forfeiture against Ramsay lord
Bothwell, with five of those abovementioned, may also be suspected: and Seton
and Fleming, from Lindsay, 146. Redpath, 457, suspects the bishops of Glasgow
and Dunkeld, named in the English safe conduct; as spiritual lords are
mentioned in the papal remission. Add that the parliament of James IV, Jan.
1489, constituted Glasgow an archbishopric in favor of Blacader. Carm. 75. He,
and Brown of Dunkeld, were of southern families, attached to the Hepburns and
Homes.
. On the part of the king remained the earls of Crawford, Athole, Monteith,
Rothes, Sutherland, Caithness, Buchan, the lords Forbes, Lovat, Erskine,
Maxwell, Ruthven, Kilmauris Kilmauris was soon after Glencairn: Ferrerius
mentions Sempil (f. 400), not yet a peerage. If we add Mar, Moray, Borthwic,
Yester, Morton, Salton, Carlyle, Sauquhar, Hamilton, Lindsay of Byres,
Innermeth, Abernethy, Kennedy, Cathcart, Haliburton, Somerville, almost the
whole Scottish peerages of the time will have been named. The number little
exceeds forty.
, and Boyd. The causes of the conspiracy have already arisen to view, in the
course of the narration: the open pretext was that James had introduced
Englishmen into the kingdom, with a design to subdue it to his own absolute
power, and to foreign influence Act of indemnity, Acts, f. v. 82. The charge is
ridiculous, and evinces the innocence of James, and the ignorance of the
rebels. See the accusation of Buchan, 8 Oct. 1488, Carm. 77, as a sharer in the
treason, which was to bring Englishmen and their king into Scotland, and to
sell the country to the earl of Northumberland and sir William Tilder! A
singular obscurity surrounds the events of 1488 and 1489. James probably
applied to Northumberland, to assist him, by invading the borders, the
inhabitants of which were his chief enemies; and hence the accusation against
himself and Buchan. Sir William Tilder is surely sir William Tyler, captain of
Berwick at the time, and concerned in several important negotiations. See Rymer
XII, 465, 495, 532, 548, 554, 569, 572, 635. In Perkin's Manifesto, 1496, Tyler
is mentioned as one of the mean persons employed by Henry. Carte, II, 848.
: the professed intention, to dethrone, and imprison James; and assign the
royalty, or regency, to his son.

Of the events which preceded the decisive engagement, Buchanan has, contrary
to his usual practice, given the most ample and accurate detail, and the most
concordant with the original records. According to that historian, James showed
distinguished favor to Crawford, whom he afterward created duke of Montrose;
and to Angus, whose conduct at Lauder, and attachment to Albany, he affected to
forget. But the king's dissimulation and insincerity being known, Angus
regarded this new affection as only the snare of his own destruction, and even
suspected that his powerful concurrence was courted against the peers, with a
view to sow division and ruin, afterward to recoil upon his own head. It is
asserted that the factious nobles being assembled at Edinburgh, Jan.
the king invited Angus to the castle, and proposed to him to lend his
assistance in making them prisoners. Instead of compliance, the earl disclosed
the design to the peers, and joined them in their retreat Buchan. XII, 56, 57.
The deep shades of this historian are somewhat softened. He says that James
proposed to Angus to assassinate the rebellious peers; but Ferrerius, 400,
allows that the king had a marked aversion to shedding blood. The assemblage of
the peers at Edinburgh could only have been on account of the session of
parliament, there held on the 29th Jan. in which James, as abovementioned,
created four new peers, Carm. 72, with a view to weaken the old aristocracy;
but one of them, Drummond, ungratefully joined the rebels. On the rebellion of
Douglas 1454 many new peers had been, for the same reason, created.
.

In consequence of this most imprudent confidence, after the desertion of
Angus, the chief potentate on the south of the Forth, who could have assisted
him against the rebellious inclinations of the remainder, James distrusting the
whole of that region, resolved to pass into the north, which remained devoted
to his interests. With his usual imprudence he crossed the Forth in one of sir
Andrew Wood's vessels, employed in the Flemish trade. A report immediately
spread that the king, overcome by his fears, had quitted the realm to retire
into Flanders; and amid the general consternation the rebels took the castle of
Dunbar, and advanced to Leith. Having issued order to the array of Fife,
Strathern, and Angus, to attend his standard upon an appointed day, James
proceeded to Aberdeen, where the northern counties eagerly poured forth their
bands in defense of the royal cause Lesley's account, 328, 329, is very
defective. Ferrerius, f. v. 399, f. 400, confounds the affair at Blackness with
that at Sauchy; and Lindsay falls into the same error p. 137-144; at p. 142 of
his history a hiatus should be marked before the paragraph, "Thus the king
being in order," etc. as all before relates to the first encounter; and after
to the second.
.

The king now returned to Perth with his standard displayed, and followed by
Athole his uncle, by Huntley, Crawford, and many northern peers and chiefs, and
by a numerous army. As he advanced David Lindsay of the Byres, who had gathered
warlike experience in the campaigns of France, joined him with a thousand
horse, and three thousand infantry, if we credit the, perhaps, partial relation
of Lindsay the historian; who adds, that the king accepted from his hands the
ominous present of a gray courser, more fit as would seem for flight than for
attack. Among others who furnished their array, lord Ruthven was also
remarkable, who led a thousand gentlemen on horseback, provided with defensive
armor and spears, a thousand bowmen, and a thousand armed with swords and
mail. When James had reached Stirling, he was followed by thirty thousand men,
who only wanted a leader Lindsay, 140, who adds, "by commons," or exclusive of
the common attendants of an army. Ferrerius, 400, estimates forty thousand.
.

Thus prepared he advanced against the rebels, who had not been deficient in
their preparations. April?
He found them near Blackness, on the south of the Forth; and an indecisive
skirmish followed, in which Crawford, sir Thomas Turnbull, who bore the royal
banner, and Innes of Innes, eminently distinguished their valor. But both
parties being sensible of the odiousness of shedding civil blood, and dreading
the absolute decision of the contest, a negotiation commenced; the king
subscribed some unknown articles, and delivered Athole to Hales as a pledge of
their accomplishment. The armies were dismissed, and tranquillity was for a
very short time restored Even Buchanan blends with this singular transaction
some circumstances, palpably belonging to the events of June, as the capture of
the prince by the rebels, which, if it had occurred, would have rendered the
deliverance of Athole as a pledge useless, a superior security being already in
their hands. Nor does he hint at any conflict, though the battle at Blackness
be mentioned in the creation of Crawford, duke of Montrose, for his services in
"the said battle," Scotst. Call. 18 May 1488. Rudd. Buch. I, 446. Of the same
date is a charter to sir Thomas Turnbull of Greenwood, who bore the king's
banner. Scotst. Call. Of the 24th May is one to Innes of Innes, ib. of the 17th
to Colless of Balnamone, and Somer of Balyard, confirmed March 1500. Ib. under
the latter date. All are for services on this occasion. Lord Kilmauris was
created earl of Glencairn; but the title died in a few weeks with its owner,
and was not revived till 1503.
. Thus did the timidity of James lose an occasion never to be recalled.

The demands of the rebels appear to have been exorbitant; and James eluding or
delaying their accomplishment, the confederates gradually extended their
influence, and projects, till at length they insisted on the king's abdication,
and the substitution of his son in the regency, or on the throne Buch. XII, 59.
.

The monarch learning this formidable design dispatched envoys to France, and
England, to solicit the immediate interference of these powers, by ambassadors
to mediate between him and the discontented aristocracy: but this mediation, if
effected, was fruitless Ferrer. f. v. 399. Lesl. 328. Buch. XII, 59.
. The royal heralds, sent to summon the refractory peers, were treated with
contempt and personal injury; and their written mandates torn in derision. Both
parties again prepared to terminate the dispute in the field. James fortified
the castle of Edinburgh, May
where the treasure accumulated by the unwise avarice of many years was placed;
and again sent to summon the northern chiefs to his standard.

Meanwhile the conspiring peers found means to corrupt Shaw of Sauchy, in whose
charge the prince had been left at Stirling; and the infamous governor
surrendered the innocent youth, who was conducted to Linlithgow, and by
constraint was to appear guilty of a father's blood. It was artfully proclaimed
that James sought the life of his son, whose defense had called the peers to
war; and the prince's name was itself an army. A part of the king's treasure,
which had formerly been seized at Leith, contributed to provide wagons for
baggage and stores, and to attract the desperate and the mercenary Lindsay,
139, 140. Buch. XII, 58. Our historians seem unanimous that the prince was in
the hands of the faction, before the affair of Blackness; but some difficulties
attend that supposition; and they, as mentioned, confound the transactions.
.

James proceeded to Stirling, to join the peers of the north and west, who were
advancing with their troops. On his arrival the treacherous governor denied him
admittance. In the north, Huntley, Errol, the earl Marshal, and Glamis, had now
deserted the royal cause; and the junction of such distant troops as continued
their attachment was attended with necessary delay. In the impatience of
irresolution James was led to commit his fortunes to a battle. Glencairn, and
other peers of the west, having joined the royal army, the king advanced to
meet the rebels, who had passed the Carron; and a field, about a mile south of
the famous scene of Bannocburn, was to be the spot of this civil conslict It is
called Little Canglar, on the east side of Sauchy-burn. Nimmo's Stirlingshire,
226.
. The army of the peers was apparently superior in number to the royal
battalions: 18 June
but the cowardice, and instantaneous flight, of the king terminated the
action, with small effusion of blood. It was in vain to defend a cause thus
betrayed by its patron; and the adverse ranks shrunk from the horrors of mutual
slaughter. Yet a few showers of arrows had darkened the air, and the long
spears of Annandale had made an impression on his array, before James left the
field: Glencairn, Ruthven, Erskine, and a few others of rank, were slain; and
many were wounded Fetrer. 400. Lindsay, 142. Buch. XII, 61. The date also
appears in the chartulary of Glasgow, MS. Harl. 4631.
.

As the king, in his slight, was about to pass the rivulet Bannocburn, at the
hamlet of Miltown Nimmo, 230.
, a woman, who was drawing water, alarmed at his appearance, and rapidity,
fled, and left her pitcher, which startled the steed, or disordered his career,
so that the unexperienced rider fell from the saddle, and oppressed with the
weight of his armor fainted away. A miller and his wife conveyed their unknown
sovereign into a corner of the mill; and, to conceal the stranger from any
pursuers, they covered him with a cloth. Some time after he resumed his senses;
but perceiving himself much hurt, and very weak, he called for a priest to hear
his confession: and to his blunt hosts, who enquired his name and quality, his
impatience answered, "I was your king this morning." The woman upon this ran
into the road, wringing her hands, and calling aloud for a priest to the king.
It so chanced that some of the rebels were in the neighborhood, engaged in
disorderly pursuit; and a priest, one of lord Gray's followers as is said,
riding up, exclaimed, "I am a priest, where is the king?" Being conducted to
the place, he knew his sovereign; and kneeling enquired if he thought he might
survive, by the help of surgery, to which James answered, "I believe that I
might; but let me have a priest to hear my confession, and to bring me the
eucharist." The priest, it is averred, heard his confession; and then stabbed
the unfortunate monarch: whose weakness deserved a milder fate than to fall the
victim of a lawless aristocracy, more inimical to public order, and prosperity,
than the feeble despotism of their sovereign Ferrer. f. 400, Lesley, 329,
Lindsay, 143, 144, Buch. XII, 61. Nimmo, 230, says the house, where this
atrocious deed was committed, is still in existence, and is called Beton's
miln, probably from its proprietor at the time.
.

On this important event some reflections naturally arise. Had James been
victorious, the power of the Scottish aristocracy might have been crushed for
ever; and, weak and despotic as he was, it would have been better for the
people to have had one tyrant than many. But this monarch, (if we set the
dubious murder of his brother aside,) was more weak than vicious; and even when
his feebleness and impolicy are mentioned, it is rather in a relative than in a
positive view, for his conduct was chiefly blameable, because ill-adapted to
the ferocious times and people, which required, in the character of sovereign,
the duties of a magistrate, and the valor and skill of a general. Had James
lived a century or two later, his faults would perhaps have escaped
observation. But the conduct of the rebellious peers, whose sanguinary lust of
power, and eagerness to continue their lawless rapine, opposed the son in open
combat against his father, that last infamy of civil war, cannot be too
severely reprobated. They excite horror, while the monarch attracts a
reverential compassion. Loyalty, in some cases only the virtue of a slave, is
in many the truest patriotism; and it is no wonder that men of eminent sense
and integrity have manifested an attachment to the house of Stuart, approaching
even to enthusiasm. For its interests, in opposition to those of that wild,
ignorant, and ferocious aristocracy, which long continued to disgrace Scotland,
were those of the country at large. The exuberant power of the peers, ever
eager to gratify their private ambition at the expense of the nation, was the
sole spring of the noted misfortunes of the house of Stuart. A long reign It is
remarkable that some historians hint that James IV fell not at Flodden, but by
the hands of some one of his peers; and perhaps a theorist might infer that the
cannon which destroyed the second James was not overcharged without design. But
the deaths of James I, the III, the V, were caused solely by the aristocracy.
, a stable government, would have circumscribed their ruinous sway, would have
prevented their plans of public plunder; and they sighed for a minority, a
regency, the peculiar season of their arrogance, of their spoil. The regency of
Robert duke of Albany had taught them the sweets of sharing the royal power,
domains, and revenue; and had contributed to the separation of their interests
from those of the monarch, whose influence rested on their support, and whose
limited wealth and authority could little withstand their continued
encroachments. Yet by uncandid or superficial observers, the desire of our
kings to resume their just magistracy, and to enforce equal laws, has been
interpreted as a design to overturn the aristocracy, while the royal measures
were solely those of defense. But as the peers really possessed the chief
power, it is no wonder that historians living at the period, flattered, as
usual, the leading authority; and have diffused over their pages calumnies
against their sovereigns, easy to form and difficult to eradicate. In England,
and in France, the fall of the aristocracy about this time was occasioned by
chance, by the revolution of human affairs; in the former country by the wars
of York and Lancaster, in which most of the ancient noble families perished; in
the latter by a similar destruction in the struggles against England: no power
of the sovereign could have effectuated so vast a plan, even in those more
civilized countries: and to impute such a design to the successive princes of
the house of Stuart, seems the excess of system and theory, the bane of
historical veracity.

James III fell the victim of the ambition of others, and not of his own. He
had held the scepter nearly twenty-eight years, though his age amounted not to
thirty-six. His issue were James his heir; a second James marquis of Ormond,
and afterward duke of Ross, and archbishop of St. Andrews; John earl of Mar.
No female progeny survived to represent the graces, or mild virtues, of their
mother Crawf. Stuarts, 43, corrected by Stewart's Genesis 79.
.

BOOK IX. A RETROSPECT OF THE STATE OF SCOTLAND, DURING THE REIGNS OF JAMES II,
AND III.
Sect. 1. State of the people, and of civilization -- 2. Government, laws,
tactics -- 3. Agriculture, useful arts -- 4. Commerce, money, navigation -- 5.
Ecclesiastic history, literature, language -- 6. Ornamental arts, manners,
dress.

SECTION I. State of the people, and of civilization.
THE origin, 1437 -- 1488
and progress, of civilization seem more to depend on fortuitous circumstances,
than upon any exertion of human power, or wisdom. In India, and Egypt,
countries distinguished by the first dawn of science, the natural fertility of
the soil redeemed much time from labor; and gave leisure to the mind to build
speculations of knowledge and improvement, of art and luxury. Yet that much
depends upon the ability of the governors, may be judged from the example of
the lawgivers of antiquity, and of Peter the great, and others in modern times.

No theme can be more important than the means of diffusing civilization in a
barbarous country, yet the richest libraries will be found to present no
disquisition on this grand topic. Sir Walter Raleigh has observed that "the
wisdom of one age is the foolishness of another;" and the remark is peculiarly
verified in the labyrinths of fruitless science, while the paths of useful
knowledge are seldom explored. Many eminent writers have recently reviewed the
progress of society, from the forest to the city, from the feeble canoe to the
wooden fortress which conveys a thousand mariners, and thunders its mandates in
the most distant seas: but the sacred plans of improving whole nations, of
educating the barbaric mind to industry and peace, of speedily advancing a
community from rudeness to refinement, have not yet attracted the attention
which their high importance demands. The very theory would afford useful views,
and expand political and moral knowledge: but leaving this vast theme to the
sedulous labor of philosophy, the present object only warrants a few brief
reflections.

Amid the various questions concerning government, it has rarely been discussed
to what particular stages of society the different forms are best adapted. One
of the chief intentions of government, and society, is to advance the national
wisdom and prosperity; and it seems a self-evident proposition that a democracy
of savages, or barbarians, would be a mere anarchy; and that equality of
ignorance, and equality of misery, would be among the most sacred rights of its
constitution. As the advantages of laws would be unknown, it would be vain to
expect a lawgiver to arise; and the more sagacious could only consolidate the
mass by the cement of some degrading superstition, in itself the very strongest
obstacle to knowledge and improvement. But the habits of man forbid such a
state to exist, except in theory; and an aristocracy of chiefs and of priests,
of strength and of wisdom, is the earliest stage of society yet discovered in
any country. Even here the smallness of the communities, their jarring
interests, their continual conflicts, present an insuperable barrier to
improvement; and such is the path of providence in drawing good from evil, that
the first tyrant who overcomes all the others, and usurps the style of monarch,
may be hailed as the father of his country. Superstition, the execration of
civilized nations, is in this stage most useful, as uniting the people in one
great body politic, and as assisting the imperfection of the laws. The blended
tribes aspire to be a nation, the government assumes a stable form; the monarch
must employ the most able men in the country, or invite foreign talents, to
render his authority lasting and respectable; and the court thus becomes a
focus of civilization, which must enlarge the more rapidly in proportion to the
ascendancy of the regal power. Uncivilized nations may be regarded as in a
state of infancy, incapable of judging what is for their benefit; and
exertions, even of despotism, to render a nation more happy, may, it is
believed, be pardoned by the warmest advocate for universal democracy.

Such have been the uniform steps of civilization, in all ancient and modern
nations. The democracies of Greece had passed through the ordeal of monarchy:
and if the republican form of government be ever found convenient and durable,
in a large country, even after the invention of representation, it must be when
the national character has been enlightened, and improved in a superlative
degree.

No error can be more fatal to the balance of historical truth, than the
estimation of ancient times by modern ideas. An institution, eminently useful
at one period, may at another become most pernicious; and the bane of one epoch
may become come the felicity of another. While in a barbaric country the regal
power forms the chief engine of civilization and prosperity, and an ignorant
aristocracy the grand obstacle to these important ends, in a more advanced
period an enlightened aristocracy may diffuse multiplied rays through the
national mass, and kindle the flame of industry and improvement in the most
remote corners of a wide empire: may by their presence and example vanquish
prejudices, irradicable by the laws or regal power, or by any democratic
scheme, in which the people may assert their right to ignorance and fanaticism.
In short, whatever form of government most promotes domestic comfort, and
universal prosperity, during any particular period of the national progress,
may be regarded as the most eligible, without attention to any universal
theory, or predilection for particular constitutions. A barbarous commonwealth
(if such ever existed without an aristocracy) could only become enlightened by
the conquest of civilized states: Sparta, and Poland, loudly proclaim the
disadvantages of an ignorant aristocracy, destructive of all art, science, and
national advancement: that despotism is the worst of all forms for a civilized
people, the desolated regions of the east murmur with a melancholy echo.

The state of Scotland continues to present a considerable degree of barbarism
during the reigns of James II and III. The laudable efforts of the first James,
to introduce public order, were followed by fatal minorities, and confusions;
and the aristocratic storms again ruined the welfare of the community. In
impressive language Bowar, who flourished in the minority of James II, bewails
the misery of his country. "Long appears to us, O king, the time of thy arrival
at majority, when thou may be able to deliver us, confounded as we are with
daily tyranny, oppressed with rapine and spoil; when thou may dictate laws,
and exercise justice, that the poor, who among us have no helper but God and
thee, may be freed from the hand of the powerful. May thou remember that
thou art a legistator in order that thou may crush the robber, and restrain
those who deal in rapine." "The groans of the humble, and the miseries of the
poor, whom I myself, who write this, have seen this very day, in my own
neighborhood, stripped of their garments, and inhumanely despoiled of their
domestic utensils, constrain me to exclaim with him who says, 'I have seen the
injuries which are done, the tears of the innocent, and no comforter; and that
the destitute cannot resist violence. I have praised the dead more than the
living: and happier than both have I esteemed the unborn, the sole strangers to
the evils of this world.' And in another passage, comparing the reign of James
I with his own times, "Woe to us miserable wretches, exposed to rapine and
injury, how can we endure to live, who enjoyed such prosperity in the days of
that most illustrious king, and now by a sad change of fortune experience the
complete reverse Cont. Fordun. 473, 474, 512.
!"

It is remarkable that this contemporary author clearly indicates the monarch
as the legislator, a circumstance which confirms the idea formerly advanced
that the king and his council prepared the laws, which afterward received the
sanction of parliament. Nor did James II fail in the hopes which Bowar
entertained; for numerous are his laws calculated for the advantage of the
poor. The preceding pages present the more memorable ordinances, but a brief
recapitulation may not be improper. The strict observation of universal
internal peace, with the privilege of demanding a surety from the turbulent;
the equal administration of justice; the punishment of those who assist
infringers of the law: the security of leases, for the safety "of the poor
people who labor the ground," whatever change lords might happen: the
privilege to farmers of church lands, not to be expelled on a vacancy of the
benefice: the severe decrees against despoliation Parl. 1450, 1469, etc. the
privilege to farmers of church lands occurs in a charter of 1450. Harl. 4631,
Vol. I.
. A singular act merits transcription; "It is statute and ordained, for the
away-putting of sornars, over-lyars, and masterful beggars, with horse, hounds,
or other goods, that all officers, sheriffs, barons, aldermen, baillies, as
well within the burgh as without, take an inquisition at every court which they
hold concerning these matters: and if any such persons be found, that their
horses, hounds, or other goods, be escheated to the king; and their persons
secured till his will be known. And also that the sheriffs, baillies, and
officers, inquire at every court, if there be any pretended fools, bards, or
other such like vagabonds; and if any be found, that they be put in custody, or
in irons, for their trespass, as long as they have wherewith to live, and when
they have not, their ear to be nailed to the trone, or a tree, then cut off,
and they banished the country; to which if they return, they shall be hanged
Parl. 1450, c. 21.
." This forcible lodging of some of the pretended great, and idle, upon the
poor, was a notable grievance; and they are deservedly placed with contempt in
the same statute which condemns pretended fools, and highland bards. By another
statute these sornars are punished with death. The country, though long since
delivered from such oppressive lodgers, still classes sturdy beggars among its
grievances See the valuable Statistical Account of Scotland, by Sir John
Sinclair, Passim.
.

This prince also regulated the customs exacted at fairs, but apparently not
with a sufficient liberality to trade. James III justly extended the
prohibition, and forbad any exaction from the poor who carried their little
articles to the fairs 1469, c. 34.
. Jean Bonhomme has, in all ages, left a great part of his fleece, either on
the brambles of aristocratic oppression, or shorn by the polished scizzars of
taxation, often only a circuitous mode of oligarchic avarice and extortion. The
regulation of the hospitals for the sickly poor, and other statutes of humane
import, confer honor on the intentions of the legislature.

James III ordered copper coin to be issued, for the convenience of the
indigent; that on account of the holidays "and divine service," no distress for
rent should take place, till three days after Whitsunday and Martinmas: that
the proprietors of ferry-boats be restricted to certain freights: that persons
advancing to the army refrain from injuring grass, or corn 1469, c. 35. 1474,
c. 62. 1481, c. 82.
.

Of the laws concerning the buroughs, passed in these two reigns, some account
has already been given in the historical narrative. The municipal authority
became an oligarchy in the reign of James III, on pretense "that great
contention had arisen, through the multitude and clamor of common simple
persons 1469, c. 30.
:" and this form was unhappily to continue, because a few are more easily
influenced by government, than a great number. But it is surely the genuine
interest of a government to stand upon as wide a basis as possible: and for the
fake of a few to render a number discontented, cannot be an act of political
prudence.

Edinburgh is, at this period, by an English contemporary historian styled a
very rich town Cont. Ann. Croyland ap. Gale, Vol. I, p. 563, "ditissimum
oppidum." The author blames Gloucester for not sacking it in 1482; while he
took Berwick, which cost England annually 10,000 marks, "perditio non
acquisitio." The remark of this old writer on benevslences is curious: "ubi per
benevolentiam quilibet daret id quod vellet, imo verius quod nollet," p. 558.
On the 16th April 1452, the king, for the friendship he bore to the earl of
Orkney, exempted Edinburgh from the customs on salt. Scotst. Call.


. The city and barony of Glasgow were, in 1450, granted to the bishop, and his
successors, blanch for a red rose: and archbishop Beton was to date "from my
city of Glasgow Scotst. Call. and see reign of James V.
." But the prosperity of the latter city was to commence during the usurpation
of Cormwell.

A poem written in the latter part of the reign of James III, or beginning of
that of James IV, presents curious intelligence concerning the manners of the
citizens The Tales of the Priests of Peebles, in Scarce Scottish Poems
reprinted, London 1792, Vol. I. P. 9.
. A question is proposed, Why the wealth of burgesses commonly expires with
their immediate heirs? The reasons assigned are, that their fathers begin in
rigid poverty, "with good luck, and a halfpenny, and a lamb's skin;" then
proceed to the situation of a peddler, who, when his pack becomes worth forty
Scottish pounds, buys a large horse, then a cart. The next stage is a shop in
town; with a counter, chests, and Flemish coffers. He becomes a merchant, and
goes to sea with exports and imports; marries a rich wise; his cupboard of
plate is worth three thousand pounds; his gowns and other garments are gay,
silk on sundays, green or gray cloth at other times; while his wife is arrayed
in scarlet. He dies; and his heir succeeds to opulence unacquired by labor.
The son is nurtured in luxury, wears rich rings, and is disgusted to hear that
his father sold sheepskins: keeps many servants, spends his time in the
tavern, or playing at hazard; till sinking into penury, he become the follower
of some lord's son at court.

In the same poem the maladministration of justice is repeatedly mentioned, as
a chief cause of the oppression of the poor. The coroners, the justices, the
serjands or mairs, derived their impious emoluments by extortion, on various
pretexts, from the more thriving yeomen, till they reduced them to poverty, or
forced them to leave their jurisdictions, when their successors suffered the
same fate. Bribes alone could secure an audience; an honest farmer would be
accused of theft, or rapine; and the fine imposed was measured by the
prosperity of his industry Ibid. p. 12, 24, etc.
. The very laws intended for the protection of the poor were converted into
instruments of their oppression; while the repeated statutes for the due
administration of justice were eluded during the regal sway, and fell asleep
during a minority. Even so late as Mary's reign, the balance of justice was
commonly used in weighing which bribe was heaviest. It was reserved for England
to set the first example to the world, of complete and impartial justice, one
of the chief blessings of civilized society: and though the expense of the law
be great, that of a potent bribe might far exceed it, while equality of wealth
could alone secure an equitable decision.

The Burgundian historian, in describing the marriage of Mary of Gelder,
mentions the manners and dress of the common people as very rude. "There are
even," says he, "many among them who seem to be altogether savages De Coucy, at
the end of the history by Jean Chartier, Paris 1661, folio, p. 575.
." The contrast between a polished Burgundian, of the most splendid court in
Europe at the time, and a Scottish highlander, must indeed have been striking.

Of this barbarism the want of education was a chief source; a defect which
Scotland has since supplied, in a most laudable manner, by innumerable schools,
where the mind may be cultivated at an expense accessible by the most indigent.
It is only to be regretted that so little attention is paid to the salaries of
the humble teachers; who, while their income ought not to raise them above
their office of educating the poor, ought however to be enabled to preserve the
ease, and respect, due to so useful an order of men.

The dress of the common people continued a long time in the state described in
the former retrospect. The sumptuary law of James II ordained that no burghers,
except bearing a municipal office, shall wear gowns of silk, or scarlet cloth,
or decked with mertrick furs. The regulation is extended to their wives, and
daughters; who are moreover to use no gowns with long trains, except on
holidays; and to wear "short kerchiefs with little hoods, as are used in
Flanders, England, and other countries." Inferior barons, and gentlemen are
alike restricted. None of the clergy are to wear gowns of scarlet, or mertrick
furs, except they be dignitaries of a cathedral, or collegiate church, or
doctors; or such as may yearly spend two hundred marks, or English nobles. And
with regard to the commons, "that no laborers, nor husbandmen, wear on the
work day other than gray or white; and on the holiday only light blue, green,
or red: and their wives the same, and kerchiefs of their own making: and that
it exceed not the price of forty pence the eln. And that no woman come to
church, or market, with her face mussalled, or covered, that she may not be
known, under the penalty of forfeiting the head dress 1458, c. 70.
."

SECTION II. Government, Laws, Tactics.
TO the information already presented on these subjects, in the preceding
retrospect, and in the course of the narrative, the abundance of materials may
present large and important additions.

The able contemporary Fortescue, in his treatise on the Dominium Regale and
the Dominium Politicum et Regale MS. Harl. 1757, and printed at London 1714,
8vo. but his whole works deserve republication.
; the former a government in which the king makes the laws, or absolute
monarchy; the second when he rules by the laws made by the people, or limited
monarchy; classes Scotland under the latter description. "The king of Scots,"
says he, "reigns over his people by this law, to wit regimine politico et
regali." He then proceeds to show the misery of France, because the laws were
made, and taxes imposed, without summoning the three estates of the kingdom:
that cowardice alone preserved France from insurrection, while the English
being rich never arose, except against injustice The gens de guerre ruined the
French commons. Jaligny, 409.
; and their liberties being secured by parliaments, industry and wealth
followed. After discussing the revenue, and expenses, of England, among the
latter of which he mentions the borders toward Scotland, and the garrison of
Calais as exorbitant articles, he observes that the nobles of France were so
powerful, that no authority dared to tax them; and that great danger would
arise if England permitted subjects to attain such preeminence. He adds that
the king of Scots who last died, had only from apprehensions of his rebelling
expelled Douglas, "whose livelihood, and might, were nearly equivalent to his
own." In this the venerable chief justice was misinformed, as the reader has
seen that more than apprehensions existed.

It has already been remarked that in the treaty with France 1484, it was
agreed that on a failure of immediate heirs, the succession to either crown
should be determined by the prelates and nobles. By an act of 1466, it was
decreed that the dowry of the future queen should be "a third of the king's
rents of assize, that is to say of lands and customs ONLY Cap. 2.
." This would seem to imply that the dower of Mary of Gelder had extended to
one third of the whole royal revenue.

A most important topic, the constitution of the Scottish parliament, has been
reserved for this epoch, as a centrical point, upon which the various
information bears. Only desultory knowledge could have been acquired, by
dividing the minute authorities into different periods; and the interesting
nature of the subject will excuse some length in the discussion. Till the year
1587, when the representation of the shires was fixed and ascertained, there is
hardly a variation in the model of the Scottish parliament: and the present view
will of course anticipate a century, as well as revert to the records of
preceding ages. Nor till the present period are the collective materials
sufficiently ample, to authorize accurate disquisition; though the statutes
themselves assume a regular form, at the commencement of the actual reign of
the first James.

Reserving till another place any remarks on the two superior states of the
kingdom, the clergy and barons, it shall here be observed that the burgesses
are first mentioned, so far as our imperfect records afford positive evidence,
in the year 1326 Abercr. I, 635, from a grant of a tax in the Advocates
library. Robertson I, 79. Wight on parliaments, Edin. 1784, 4to, 405.
. Whether they appeared before, is rather a question of antiquarian curiosity,
than of real importance; and the cause of enlightened freedom requires no
support from the barbaric usages of dark ages. Suffice it to observe that, as
all the freemen of a burgh could not appear in parliament, they selected
persons for that purpose, and instituted the first example of REPRESENTATION,
that grand secret of modern government, and which forms a basis of liberty
unknown to all the ancient states.

The able reign of Robert the great was unhappily followed by the disturbed
minority of his son David II. Yet the reign of this feeble prince presents some
documents concerning the state of parliament, which shall here be mentioned, as
unknown to former writers, and as preparatory to the consideration of the
national council, under his successors of the Stuart family.

In the parliament held at Perth, on the thirteenth of January 1365, the names
of the members are given, forming, it is believed, the earliest example of what
is called the roll. The bishops are followed by the abbots of Dunfermlin,
Arbroth, Paisley, Scone, Kilwinning, Coupar. Among the peers is John Stuart
lord of Kyle. After many knights, are twelve persons without designation, and a
general clause of "the other persons usually called;" nor are the commissioners
of the burghs specified 4to. Register, f. v. 40, in the State Paper office
London, when perused by the author some years ago; now, as he is informed, in a
more appropriated repository the Register Office at Edinburgh.
.

The general council at Scone, 20th of July 1366, consisted of the bishops,
abbots, priors, free-tenants in capite, "and from each burgh certain burgesses
summoned for especial reasons Ibid. f. v. 44, "qui ad hoc fuerunt ex causa
summoniti."
." In that held at the same place, on the 27th of September 1367, the three
communities of the kingdom being called, "certain persons were chosen by them
to hold a parliament, leave being given to the others, on account of the
harvest season, to return to their homes." From the clergy were selected
sixteen; from the lords fourteen, at the head of whom is the Steward; and there
were absent, from contumacy, the earls of March, Ross, and Douglas. The burghs
are only Edinburgh, Aberdeen, Perth, Montrose, Haddington, and Linlithgow;
their selected delegates thirteen. The object of discussion was the royal
revenue: and the king is empowered to send ambassadors, and levy the expense by
a tax, without recourse to another parliament. Ibid. fol. v. 50.
.

In that of Perth, 6th of March 1368, a few were contumaciously absent; but by
the consent of the three communities, on account of the inconvenience and
scarcity of the season, "certain persons were elected to hold the parliament,
leave being given to the others to return." Seven bishops, and nine others, are
chosen for the clergy; among the latter are William Biggar rector of Errol and
chamberlain of Scotland, and the procurators of the bishops of Aberdeen and
Ross; but as it was found that fewer were sufficient, the number was abridged.
For the barons are the Steward, the earls of Mar and March, and the procurator
of earl Douglas, with thirteen landed gentlemen; and eight others, perhaps for
the burghs Ibid. fol. 52. The excuse is in these words, "propter importunitatem
et caristiam temporis."
.

At the parliament of Scone, 12th June 1368, appeared "the prelates, lords, and
burgesses, who would or could be personally present; others represented by
their commissaries; others being absent from contumacy." Among other acts, it
was ordained that all processes of appeal be presented to the chancellor,
before the meeting of parliament; and that the parties should appear in the
parliament next following to hear the decision Ibid. f. 54. "Aliis per
commissarios comparentibus." The term is here applied to procurators in general.
.

In the last general council recorded of David II, and held at Perth on the
18th of February 1370, the burgesses present are mentioned to have been
specially summoned for certain causes. Of the lords three were absent from
contumacy, Mar, John of the Isles, and Gillespic Cambel Ibid. f. v. 55.
.

The model of this noted parliament being imitated by the kings of the Stuart
line, as mentioned in their statutes, it is proper to lend it due illustration.
The preamble bears that, as the chief purport of this general council was to
consider the state of the realm, the royal revenue, and some points relating to
the administration of justice, it was not expedient that all the members should
attend: for which reason some were elected, "BY THE GENERAL AND UNANIMOUS
CONSENT AND ASSENT OF THE THREE COMMUNITIES ASSEMBLED, to order those things
that concern common justice, such as the contradicted judgments (or appeals,)
questions, and other complaints, which ought to be discussed and determined by
parliament. And others were elected, by the SAME CONSENT AND ASSENT OF THE
COMMUNITIES, to treat and deliberate on certain SPECIAL, and SECRET, affairs of
the king and kingdom, before they came to the knowledge of the said general
council Ibid. "PER GENERALEM ET UNANIMUM CONSENSUM ET ASSENSUM TRIUM
COMMUNITATUM CONGREGATARUM, ad ea quae concernunt communem justiciam, videlicet
judicia contradicta, questiones, et querelas alias, quae per parlamentum
debuerant terminari, discutiendas et determinandas. Et alii, PER EARUNDEM
CONSENSUM ET ASSENSUM COMMUNITATUM, electi ad tractandum et deliberandum super
certis et SPECIALIBUS, et SECRETIS, Regis et Regni negotiis, antequam veniant
ad notitiam dicti consilii generalis." Lord Pitmedden, about the beginning of
this century, had made some inaccurate extracts from this invaluable register,
and the above is among them. See lord Hailes's Annals, II, 262.


."

For the matters concerning the administration of justice were chosen six of
the clergy; ten knights, and four others, for the barons; and seven burgesses.

For the secret affairs three clergy; and ten others, among whom the Steward,
and the earls of Carrick and March are first named, and the last is Duncan
Wallace, "one of the attorneys of the earl of Douglas." It is specially added
that the king may name any others.

This, as far as appears, was the very first institution of the famous LORDS OF
THE ARTICLES, originally only a committee for secret affairs, selected by the
voice of the whole legislative body. But the power assigned to the king, of
adding any members he thought proper, led to great abuses.

After the accession of the house of Stuart the earliest memorable parliament
is that of Scone, 2d March 1372, in the first year of Robert II. The burgesses
present continued to be specially summoned, ex causa, for a certain cause. And
as the general council is held for purposes relating to the king and realm, and
the administration of common justice, "in imitation of the order and method
which were observed in the parliament held at Perth, in the time of king David
of venerable memory, and of his reign the fortieth year," [18 Feb. 1370,] some
were chosen BY THE GENERAL AND UNANIMOUS CONSENT AND ASSENT OF THE THREE
COMMUNITIES, for matters concerning common justice. And others, "BY THE CONSENT
AND ASSENT OF THE SAID COMMUNITIES, to treat and deliberate on certain SPECIAL
affairs of the king and kingdom, before they come to the knowledge of the
general council." The other members were dismissed. For the names of those
chosen we are referred to another register. It is remarkable that in this
parliament the plea of secrecy is omitted; and the lords of the articles are
only chosen for SPECIAL affairs. Ibid. f. v. 58. "Imitando videlicet ordinem
illum et modum, qui servabatur in parlamento tento apud Perth, tempore
venerandae memoriae domim Regis David, anno regni ipsius quadragesimo.".... "Et
alii, PER CONSENSUM ET ASSENSUM EARUNDEM COMMUNITATUM, electi ad tractandum et
deliberandum super certis SPECIALIBUS Regis et Regni negotiis, antequam
perveniant ad notitiam concilii generalis." The statutes of David II are
inaccurately copied in a bad hand; but the writing of those of Robert II is
greatly improved; whence this passage serves to illustrate the genuine reading
of the former.


.

The parliament of Robert III, in February 1401, only bears that there were
present the bishops, [abbots,] priors, dukes, earls, barons, "freeholders, and
burgesses who hold of our lord the king in capite Apud Skene Reg. Maj.
." But that the institution of the lords of the articles continued an
inveterate usage, appears from the parliament of Perth, 26th May 1424, the
first of James I Acts edit. 1566, fol. 1. "electae fuerunt certae perfonae ad
articulos datos per dominum Regem determinandos, data caeteris licentia
recedendi." Before they were only to treat and deliberate; now to determine.
; and the first, it is believed, in which the style of the ARTICLES appears;
and from numerous succeeding parliaments. It is also certain that the usage of
dismissing the other members, after the committees of justice and of the
articles had been selected, was continued to the parliament of 1424, if not
long after: so that the prolongation of the session, after the appointment of
these committees, was a mere stretch of the prerogative, as well as the latter
corrupt mode of choosing the lords of the articles. At what precise epoch the
committee of justice was divided into two, 1 ad judicia, or of judgments in
criminal cases, and 2. ad causas, or of civil causes and lawsuits in the last
appeal, does not appear: but such was the method in the reign of James III
Records of Parliament, Register Office, passim.
. Yet even at this period the lords of the articles were modestly named last,
after the two former committees had been appointed; not first, as was
afterward the usage, when the lords of the articles were named by the
influence of the court, whose demands usurped a preference over the
administration of justice.

The steps that led to this radical alteration of the constitution of the
Scottish parliament, which was at first to preclude the power of debate, by only
requiring the sanction of a full parliament to decrees already adjusted; and
was afterward to make that assembly a mere instrument of the crown; deserve
particular investigation. The chief cause was the indolence and avarice of the
members, who regarded their attendance in parliament, to which they were not
only bound by their tenures, but under a sine of ten pounds for absence, as a
most heavy constraint and intolerable burden. Even in England at this period
committees were frequently appointed and leave given to the other members to
depart See Rolls of Parliament. Edward III, in 1340, ordered that in every
parliament a prelate, two earls, and two barons, should sit to judge appeals,
14 E. 3 cap. 5. Barrington on the Statutes, p. 244. And see Wight, 98.
. The sole distinction was, that in Scotland the custom by a political solecism
remained, while the parliament itself continued in full session. This
apparently slight difference, and the equally slight circumstance, that in
England the members were too numerous to meet in one room, decided the
destinies of the two kingdoms. England had a free parliament for discussion,
and a house of commons: Scotland an influenced parliament for assent, and her
commons were overpowered by the presence of the superior orders.

From the advantage which was afterward taken of this institution of lords of
the articles, it would seem a device of some cunning Augustus, to sap the
freedom of his country. It was, on the contrary, the mere product of chance and
weakness. The appointment of committees, and dismission of the other members,
in September 1367 and March 1368, the first on account of the harvest, the
second an unexpectedly severe season and scarcity, evince the progress of
chance: and the character of David II, and his hatred, at the time, to the
Stuarts, who were to be the heirs of his power, show the want of design. The
unanimous consent and assent, of the whole three estates assembled, testifies
that they exulted in their deliverance from the slavery of attending in
parliament, and regarded the eighteenth day of February, thirteen hundred and
seventy, as a jubilee of freedom!

The subsequent statutes, which illustrate the constitution of parliament, are
far from numerous. The most memorable is the next in chronological order, that
of James I, in March 1428 Acts, f. v. 17.
.

"The king, with consent of the whole general council, has ordained that the
small barons, and free-tenants, need not come to the parliament, or general
council, provided that each sheriffdom send two, or more, wise men, chosen at
the head court of the sheriffdom, according to its extent, except the
sheriffdoms of Clackmanan and Kinross, which may only send one member for each.

"These members shall be called Commissaries of the shire: and, by these
Commissaries of all the shires shall be chosen a wise man; and expert, called
the Common Speaker of the parliament, who shall propose all and sundry
necessities and causes, pertaining to the Commons, in the parliament or general
council The Common Speaker is a mere abbreviated phrase for the Commons'
Speaker, or Speaker of the Commons. It could never be intended that a
commissioner of the shire should supplant the chancellor, and become general
speaker of the parliament.
.

"The Commissaries shall have full and entire power from the rest of the
sheriffdom, testified by the seal of the sheriff, and those of several barons
of the shire, to hear, treat, and finally to determine, all causes to be
proposed in the council or parliament.

"Which Commissaries, and Speaker, shall have their expense defrayed by those
of each shire who owe appearance in the parliament or council, an equal
assessment being laid on every pound of rent, except those of bishops, abbots,
priors, dukes, earls, lords of parliament, and banrents, whom the king directs
to be summoned and admitted to parliament by his special precept."

Such is this remarkable statute, the intentions of which are supposed never to
have been fulfilled till 1587; when it was revived and enforced, and the first
regular representation for counties commenced in Scotland. It is evident that
this great monarch wished to establish a House of Commons, on the English
model, and to lay the foundations of genuine liberty, by dividing the landed
gentlemen from the peers, and thus strengthening the third estate, which only
consisted of a few burgesses, unable to contend against the whole landed
interest united, a French noblesse, instead of a distinct order of noblemen
like those of England. But when this act was revived in 1587 Cap. 113.
, the clause concerning the Common Speaker, or Speaker of the Commons, was
carefully omitted: and thus the chief intention was eluded, and the
commissaries of the shires, and burghs, continued to sit in the same house with
the peers.

It has already been observed in the historical narrative that, in 1458, it was
enacted that no freeholder shall be constrained to attend as a member of
parliament, if he hold of the king "under the sum of twenty pounds" in land. In
1504 the exemption is, under "one hundred marks of the extent that now is;" and
an extent implies annual value. Twenty pounds in 1458, Scottish money being to
the English as one to three, and its power being to the present as ten to one,
may nearly equal seventy pounds sterling of modern currency. In 1504 the coin
was as one to four, and one hundred marks might equal one hundred and sixty of
our pounds. The English parliament had enacted, in 1429, that none should vote
for knight of the shire, who had not freeholds of the value of forty shillings:
but in Scotland it was esteemed a great privilege to be exempted from sitting
in parliament; and voting could not be enforced even by the united efforts of
the monarch and legislative body.

From 1504 till 1587 there are no statutes concerning the constitution of
parliament.

To return to the consideration of the period under review, we have seen that
in 1469, an oligarchic plan of appointing the council, and magistrates of
burghs, was instituted, and the parliament was compared with common courts of
justice: and in 1482 the mention of the parliament of Paris indicates that the
French idea of a parliament was, by the court, preferred to the English. The
numerous clergy present at a Scottish parliament, and the want of an opposition,
are features delineated and explained in the preceding retrospect.

In 1488, as has already been observed, the titled nobles of Scotland amounted
to about forty. The ducal denominations were mostly confined to the royal
family: the others were earls and lords. But these greater barons had no
privileges above the smaller: all were peers, or pares, in courts of justice: a
lord and a lard are the same, and the latin only admitted dominus for either:
the lard, or lord, was designed from his estate; and his wife was lady by the
same designation even down to modern times. For distinction the titled lords
were created and styled lords of parliament. While there was no house of
commons, there was no house of peers: every landed gentleman holding of the
crown might sit and vote; but he could not be constrained to attend except his
estate amounted to a certain sum.

Had the great plan of James I been carried into execution, as much additional
respect would have accrued to the peers, as to the commons: greater luster,
more important privileges, would have arisen to the former, as well as to the
latter. A distinct legislative capacity, a marked line of separation from the
landed gentlemen, might have gratified the pride, and stimulated the abilities,
of the peers; while the esquires, united with the burgesses, might have learned
by degrees the eminent advantages which commerce and agriculture derive from
each other.

The lesser barons or lairds, corresponding with the English LORDS of manors,
form such a singular and amphibious class, in the Scottish parliament, that they
excite curiosity and disquisition. The roll of parliament, 1472, will give us
an idea of their proportion to the other members; which seems to have greatly
exceeded that of the roll of 1365 abovementioned.

"On the 18th day of February, in the presence of our sovereign lord the king;
and the bishops, abbots, priors; and the noble dukes, earls, lords, barons,
freeholders, and commissaries of the burghs, underwritten:

Alexander duke of Albany. Bishops.
Dunkeld Aberdeen Ross Orkney
Abbots
Arbroath Melrose Holyroodhouse Paisley Scone Dryburgh
Priors
Portmoak Restenoth Coldingham May
Earls.
The Chancellor Errol Marshal Huntley Crawford Morton Argyle Rothes
Lords.
Innermeth Erskine Haliburton Seton Borthwick Darnley Lindsay Gray Forbes
Kilmauris Kennedy Hamilton Monipeny Salton
Barons (or Lairds)
Sanquhar Bewfort Haltoun Craigmillar Restalrig
Barons
Dundas Bargeny Bass Caldor Luss Terreagles Elliotstoun Ruthven Sauchie
Elphinston Guthrie Torthorwald Corstorphin Edmondston Dalhousie
Barons
Bothiok Pittarrow Abercromby Erolet Rusky Carns Cranston Halkerston Boil Ker
Gask Dron Hume Balcolmy.
Commissaries of the Burghs.
Edinburth Young and Bonkil. Aberdeen Knowls. Stirling Walter Stuart.
Linlithgow Fowlis and Forest. Haddington Girnlaw. Dumfries Welsh. Air Multrar.
Dundee Monorgound and Guthrie Kaim's Essays on Brit. Ant. p. 125. In the
inaccurate extracts from the records of parliament, made by Sir James Balfour
in the last century, and published by Carmichael at Edinburgh 1791, 4to, we
find p. 58, five lairds, Stobhall, Tullibardin, Elliotstoun, Halkston,
restalring "for the small barons" in 1479: yet in p. 59 we find many others
present. And in April 1481, p. 65, he only names eight of these barons. But
these extracts being chiefly for the purpose of settling dates of creations,
and precedencies, their imperfection is most excuseable.
.

In this parliament the lesser barons almost equal in number the clergy and
peers. The rolls indeed seem imperfect, for none, apparently, remains which
enumerates more than about eighty member; while, in a stature of 1458, they are
estimated, as we have seen, at about one hundred and ninety: and this, though
one of the most ample, omits no less than twenty of the burghs. But it is not
the number of the lairds, or tenants in capite, which surprises: it is their
fewness which merits investigation.

An idle tradition prevailed in the middle ages, that one of our monarchs
distributed all the lands of Scotland among his great barons, reserving none
for himself, except the Moot-hill of Scone. This tradition, though vague,
expressed the state of the country, chiefly divided into large territories, the
potentates of which held of the king; while their numerous vassals, enjoying
greater or smaller allotments, held of their lords. Hence the numerous charters
of confirmation in our records, only lending the royal sanction to charters
granted by the barons: and a list of the tenants in capite, including even the
smaller, would not, it is believed, for the writers who might be expected to
illustrate this topic, prefer declamation on the feudal system; a rich mine,
but already exhausted by the labors of Montesquieu, and other able authors The
learned Craig ought to be named among the chief, his work De Feud's being the
exuberant, and often the silent, source of the riches of more modern authors.
The reader who wishes to study this important topic, so long the destiny of
Europe, may begin with that great work; if the prefer not to ascend to the
original anothors, Gerardus Niger or Capagistus, and Obertus de Orto, two
Milanese of consideration, who about the year 1170 composed the books De Usibus
Feudorum, the early standard of feudal law. See Craig, lib. I. tit. 6. 3, 4, 5,
etc. But the editions are so scarce as not to occur in the most ample
catalogues.
. Those parts of our history, and antiquites, which are clear, have been
illustrated with great force and precision; while the obscure even require a
taper to make the "darkness visible."

In England the baron was a lord, a peer: in Scotland he was only a lord, a
man of landed property: the word indeed originally only implies a man of
courage, a chief Leges Langob. and in modern Spanish Varon is either A MAN or a
noble; not to mention the French baron et femme. In like manner the term Iarl,
or Earl, apparently introduced by the Danish conquest of England in the
eleventh century, only signified originally a man; thus Iarl -- wagh, via viri.
Sticrnhook de June Sneonum, p. 297. It corresponds with the German carl, a
strong, man
. From Domesday Book it appears that the immediate vassals of the crown
amounted, after the conquest, to about seven hundred, exclusive of the
eccesiastic fees Dalr. on feudal property, 313.
: of these seven hundred a few were earls and lords; the remainder would in
Scotland have been termed barons or lairds. In the latter kingdom it may seem
that the immediate vassals of the crown could not, before the reign of David I,
exceed two hundred; and the profuse donations of that prince to the church must
have diminished the number of lay-fees.

These vassals of the crown, or tenants in capite, were however speedily to be
multiplied by various causes. New donations of the regal demesne, forfeitures
of great fiefs, afterward divided into smaller, gifts of land by vassals
themselves to their followers, coheirship, and at length purchase by the
acquisitions of commerce or chance, were among the operations which increased
the number of the vassals in chief. Hence in the reign of Henry III of England,
representatives appear for the counties at the same time with those of the
burghs: and so rapid was the progress of liberty in that fortunate kingdom
that, from the first appearance of representation for the conties, all and had
a right to vote who held lands, or tenements, of whatever lord or superior;
while in Scotland, when this representation was attempted in 1428 and
established in 1587, the privilege, or servitude, of voting was confined to the
freeholders of the crown.

One great cause which defeated the representation for counties in Scotland,
and rendered even that for the burghs irregular and incomplete, was the avarice
of the freeholders, and citizens, which shrunk from paying the costage, or
salaries of the representatives. And they not only abhorred the duty, or
bondage as they supposed, of sitting in parliament, but they even detested the
trouble of giving their votes. Another cause was, that the members of
parliament had no privileges whatever, not even the peers themselves considered
in that capacity; while the political wisdom of England had stimulated
emulation, and had inspired respect for the meanest member of the national
council, by the freedom from arrest, and other immunities. Had James I, in his
eager wish to render the nation free, industrious, and happy, assigned special
privileges to the representatives of counties and burghs, it is probable he
might have succeeded in establishing two houses, and an excellent constitution.
The struggle is singular; the court insisted on diffusing some degree of
freedom; and the people opposed their deliverance with surprising zeal and
perseverance.

To return to the consideration of the barons or lairds, they were hardly to be
distinguished, either in common or legal language, from the titled nobility.
They were not only denominated from their estates; but to a late period they
used a titular signature, as well as the peers. Peer, and peerage, do not
indeed appear to be Scottish terms: in England, when a lord of parliament was
created, he was styled a PEER, but there seems no vestige of this usage in
Scotland; and there being no house of peers or equals, to which he could be
called, the nobles were peers of the realm, and not peers of parliament. The
term peerage is indeed vague, even at present; an English peerage is an
inelective hereditary right to sit in parliament; while a Scottish peerage is
only a right to vote for sixteen representatives The reader who is desirous to
see a clear subject embarrassed by a strange mixture of new names and old
ideas, and old names and new ideas, joined with a similar confusion of
chronology, may consult Wallace on ancient Peerages, Edin. 1785, 8vo.
. In strict propriety the word has no connection with the parliament or general
council; it is an honor at first territorial, and passing with the land like a
Scottish lairdship; afterward personal and hereditary; but ever implying power,
territory, rank, precedence, investiture by the monarch, distinction of seat
and dress on solemn occasions. In France the twelve peers seem ot have
succeeded the comites, or companion of the early monarchs, after the latter
title had dwindled into the count or earl; and acknowledging no superior but
the sovereign, they bore the humble and proud title of peers or equals. The
Normans introduced the term into England; where it was to be extended to all
who were solemnly ennobled by the king, and thereby attained a right of sitting
in the upper house, only known in that country, and thence styled the House of
Peers. But in Scotland the peers having at no period a separate house, and
after the extinction of the Scottish parliament by the Union, having only a
right to select sixteen of their number; the title remains in its original
state, quite distinct from any reference to parliament.

The Banrents, or Bannerets, were an intermediate order, between the peers and
the larids; possessing estates of such extent, and of so many knights fees,
that they could lead a great number of followers to the field, whence they had
a title to display a banner The standard was confined to the king or general;
the banner to peers and potent chiefs: the guidon was a small flag with two
peaks or points, and superior to the pencill or penon which every knight might
put on his lance. See Gross hist. of Engl. army 11, 258.
. They were also distinguished by their peculiar enseigny, or cri de guerre;
and by supporters to their armorial bearings.

But the Scottish barons, or lairds, had none of these high distinctions.
However small their freeholds, they had a title to sit in parliament, as
appears from the above acts, exempting those under a certain revenue from any
constraint for appearance. In civil matters they could decide questions of
debt, and many of possession within their baronies; regulate work and wages;
and enforce the payment of their rents. All criminal cases fell under the
cognizance of the lord, except treason, and the four pleas of the crown: he
had the power of pit and gallows, or drowning female and hanging male culprits,
convicted of theft or robbery; and his jurisdiction comprised many penal
statutes Erskine Principles of Sc. Law, b. I, t. 4, 14
.

On the other hand numerous were the distinctions between the lord and the
lord. The latter had no permanent denomination, no personal honor, his
existence was merely territorial: he had no solemn investiture, no fixed rank,
no precedence, nor was he addressed with any appropriated term. His tenants
indeed called him Master, not landlord, but this was a slavish relic of the
days of villenage: and hence apparently the Scottish phrase of Master, for the
heir apparent to an estate, thus Master of Huntley, of Darnley, and the like,
frequent in our history and records, and still retained where there is no
second title.

The same causes which operated in England were, by slower degrees, to increase
the number of the Scottish tenants in capite. Money being scarce, gifts and
rewards were commonly assigned in lands; and even a messenger of good tidings
was recompensed by a small estate Scotst. Call. passim. This important catalogue
was, some years ago, discovered by the author in the Harleian library; and is
now, it is believed, printing in Scotland. The first volume is a transcript,
but Sir John Scott clerk of the Register has avouched the others by his
signature at the end of every quire. The charters extend from 1309 to 1587, or
later.
. The nobles and lairds maintained their friends, and secured the fidelity of
their followers, by similar donations In that singular work of poetry in prose,
"A true history of several honorable families of the name of Scott, by Capt.
Walter Scott," Edin. 1688, 1776, 4to, we find p. 45, an account of numerous
pensioners of Scott of Buccleugh, twenty three of his own name, all enjoying
grants of lands. Clanship easily spread when surnames were hardly known; and to
assume a name was to secure an inheritance. There is a fund of odd sense in
that book; among other points the military poet says, The rear is the second
place, if soldiers be but stout,
They are sure to have the van, if the word be face about!



: but the tenure being from themselves, as superiors, the number of persons
entitled to sit in parliament, or vote, had representatives been established,
was little swelled by their alienations. An inborn preference which most men
give to land above all other kinds of property, the desire of retirement ease
and a rural life, so natural to the busy citizen, conspired to render the
purchase of land a great object of ambition to the industrious merchant, and to
the fortunate adventurer. Entails were unknown in Scotland, till the
seventeenth century; a deed of taillie merely regulating the manner of
succession, and commonly altering it from heirs general to heirs male Dalr. on
feudal property, 162, 163, where it is also shown that Craig, who wrote about
the year 1600, knew nothing of entails in the modern sense. It was in the reign
of Charles II that they began to be frequent in Scotland. Ib. 165. In the reign
of James VI the lairds amounted to about one thousand. "Certain Matters," etc.
1594.
: but other obstacles prevented the free acquisition of land, so essential to
the circulation of the blood of the state. An able judge even supposes that the
jus retracius prevailed, by which a right of redemption exposed the purchaser
to an uncertainty in his property, a bar at once to its enjoyment and
improvement. While the famous statute of Quia Emptores was to diffuse wealth
and cultivation through England; in the adjacent kingdom the heritable
proprietor was to be distinguished by the heritable sterility of his
possessions, and by a firm entail of indolence and poverty. Yet by degrees
commerce and industry were to assert their rights, private vices were to become
public benefits; and landed prodigality was to minister to the national
advancement. And though many of the purchased lands held of the under lords,
there is little room to doubt that the freeholders of the crown were increased
by this progress of society: but a just estimate of their number could only be
formed from an enumeration of the charters in the register at various periods,
a toil perhaps surpassing the value of the information.

That no representatives for the counties appeared till 1587, is sufficiently
clear from the silence of the statutes, and records: and the act of James II,
concerning the parliamentary dress, is mute concerning the commissioners of the
shires, or even the lesser barons in general, though most particular in regard
to the earls, lords, and burgesses. It is hence to be inferred that the lairds
appeared in parliament in their usual dress; nor does it appear that, in latter
times, the representatives of shires were distinguishable by their apparel from
the burgesses.

To close this discussion concerning the lesser barons, the length of which can
only be excused by their importance in the national and constitutional scale,
and the singularity of their rank in society, when compared with more civilized
governments, it shall only be further observed, that the term lord has become
of no respect, and is even ironically applied to the portioner of land, whose
estate is half a field, but who joins the industry of an artisan to the healthy
pursuits of his little agriculture. For the denomination, being territorial, is
only honorable in proportion to the territory; while the English term Esquire,
assigned to any man who bears a shield, or in other words has an armorial
blazon, is a personal distinction, extended to opulence, to eminence of
talents, to fortunate industry, as well as to considerable possessions of land.

In passing to the last division of the national council, the Burgesses, it is
first to be observed that the Royal Burghs alone had a right, or rather, to
speak in the language of the times, were burdened by their tenures from the
crown with the heavy duty of sending representatives to parliament. The Burghs
of Barony, or those that held of great barons whether temporal or spiritual,
were exempt from this slavery: Glasgow for instance though a burgh of some
consequence, even then, as holding of the bishop, sent no commissioner. To
those already mentioned, in the above roll, may be added Berwick, Jedburgh,
Selkirk, Peebles, Lanark, Dunbar, Kinghorn, Forfar, Brechin, Wigton,
Kirkudbright, Irvin, Dunbarton, North Berwick, In-verkeithing, Coupar, Perth,
Montrose, and others See Carm. 59, part. 1479. In 1682 they amounted to sixty.
Present Skate of Scotland, London 1682, 8vo, p. 131 -- 134.
; so that the representatives for the burghs might have amounted to between
thirty and forty, if another singular practice had not prevailed, that of many
of the burghs appointing the representatives of the others to be proxies; every
method of exemption from attendance being sedulously practiced, in order to
avoid the trouble and expense.

As the session of a parliament commonly lasted only a few days, the chief
magistrates of the burghs could attend, without a long absence from their duty;
and it appears that they were generally the representatives. The oligarchic
form of municipality, introduced by James III, necessarily confined the
election to the town-council, the body of the burgesses or freemen being
excluded. Hence it is computed that there are not in Scotland, at this day,
above three thousand voters for national representatives, either of counties or
towns Dalr. 330.
.

In the earliest Scottish parliaments, of which we have any record, it appears
that deputies for the burghs attended, to settle the proportion of taxes, which
the towns were to bear: and it is not improbable that the magistrates of the
principal burghs may be included in the sapientes, probi homines, or
preud-hommes, and tota communitas regni, of the most ancient national councils
For those of Scotland see the Statuta Willielmi, et Alexandri Secundi, apud
Skene Reg. Maj.
. Many ancient English customs may be traced in more modern Scottish usages; and
for this reason the study of the latter is important to science in both
kingdoms. That the magistrates of the chief towns were, in an appropriated
sense, members of the national council before the reign of Henry III in
England, and Robert I in Scotland, there is unhappily no positive proof: but
that they attended, especially in cases of taxation, and probably at the bar,
there is some proof, and every reason to infer. In Scotland there were neither
towns nor commerce, till a comparatively late period; but the usages are
evidently of English origin, constant intercourse, and an amity seldom
interrupted, having prevailed between the nations, till the base and unkingly
conduct of Edward I forced Scotland into the arms of France. Now in England, as
in other European kingdoms, no representatives from towns could appear in early
times; and the numerous barbaric codes of laws, though most minute in other
points, are, it is believed, completely silent, not only on this head, but on
municipal regulation. The reason is clear; it was because the barbarians who
overturned the Roman empire detested the civic life; and preserved their
ancient rural manners, and occupations. The towns being conquered, had no right
to expect a representation in the national assemblies of their victors, held in
ample plains under the canopy of heaven; and it was to the contempt and
indifference of the conquerors, that they were commonly indebted for such
privileges as they retained, as the right of electing their own magistrates,
and other minute relics of freedom. When the Saxons, when the Normans
conquered England, the same causes must have operated; the English
representatives of London must have made a strange appearance in an assembly of
Norman freeholders, to whose language and laws they were absolute strangers.
But the magistrates might be called to the bar, to advise and give their
consent to the best manner of proportioning a tax, and enforcing its collection
in their respective towns, the language of money being very audible and clear.

On looking into the history of the Scottish parliaments, we accordingly sind
the burgesses specially mentioned on the occasion of a tax imposed by William
Fordun, I, 529, A. D. 1211.
. Even in the reign of James II, as will afterward appear in this retrospect,
they sat at the bar of the national council: in that of James III several acts
bear to be passed by the clergy and lords: in 1504 a special statute appears,
ordaining "that the commissaries and heads-men of the burghs be warned when
taxes or contributions are given, to have their advice therein, as one of the
three estates of the realm Cap. 85.
." In 1560 we find ten provosts of the chief towns among the lords of the
articles Robertson Append. No IV.
. As the statutes are silent concerning the mode of election, and
representation, for burghs, it would seem that one or two of the magistrates
were nominated by the others, or by the council.

The Royal Burghs were indeed bound by their tenures, as holding in chief of
the crown, to attend the parliament; but as proxies were allowed, and the fine
itself for absence was only ten pounds, the tenure was neglected and illuded.
Nor could the incorporation of a burgh by royal charter be an usage of much
antiquity in Scotland, perhaps not more ancient than the reign of David I.

So much for the Burgesses, the only real commons of Scotland; the lesser
barons having weakly preferred an insignificant mixture with the peers to the
noble ambition of heading a separate assembly. Modern party has embroiled many
of the questions on this subject; a whig wishing to increase the antiquity and
power of the commons, while a tory endeavors to diminish them: but to plain
sense, and cool reason, the topic is only important as illustrative of history;
nor can the discussion of barbaric customs hinder, or advance, the cause of
enlightened freedom.

Having thus considered the several classes of men, which composed the three
estates of the national council, one of the most interesting objects in modern
history; some other particulars remain to be stated, in order to present clear
information concerning its constitution, and procedure.

The number of the members, we have seen, amounted to about one hundred and
ninety; but from the rolls there never appears more than half the number; the
others being absent from sickness, distance, feuds, nonage, especial affairs,
or other reasonable causes; and some from contumacy, or an opposition to the
measures of the court at the time. Even in modern times to secure the
attendance of a certain number, in a national council, the members ought to
double that number. James I ordered, in 1426, that no prelate, earl, baron, or
freeholder, should appear by a procurator, except on proving a lawful cause of
absence Cap. 52. The act of 1504 allows procurators to appear for the lesser
Barons. Mr. Wight, p. 57, seems rightly to infer that both the statutes, of
1458, and 1504, only absolve the persons from attendance, on condition that
they sent proxies.
. It would seem that the procurators are omitted in the rolls, and often indeed
one member might appear for many; but sometimes a lawyer was proxy for an
absent peer; and the omission might be according to the forms, or intended to
discountenance the practice. At any rate the omission of the procurators must
considerably abbreviate the rolls of parliament.

It was a royal prerogative to summon the general council, which was done by
letters, under the signet, to the clerical members, and greater barons; and by
precepts from chancery to the sheriffs, for general summonses to all members
resident in each shire. During a minority this prerogative was exerted by the
council of regency; but few or no permanent laws were ever passed, except when
the sovereign had attained the years of majority prescribed by law.

The members having, a day or two before, arrived in the city or town where the
parliament was to be held, on the morning of the meeting they assembled at an
appointed place, and proceeded on horseback in grant state to their hall. This
procession was called the Riding of the Parliament, and was a singularity
retained to the latest period of the Scottish legislature. Amid the sound of
numerous trumpets, and the armorial displays of heralds, first appeared the
commissioners of the burghs, then the lesser barons; followed by the lords, the
bishops, the earls, the archbishops, the dukes. Three chosen peers bore the
crown, scepter, and sword, before the monarch, who was attended by his guards.
At the door of the hall sat the lord high constable, to receive the members as
they alighted, and probably in his original office of giving orders concerning
the stabling of their horses till their return See the prints of the Riding of
the Scottish parliament in the reign of Charles II.
.

The clergy probably took their seats on the right, the peers on the left of
the throne, as in England: and so numerous were the former, that the lesser
barons present would merely complete the left ranks. At the bottom, near, or
perhaps without, the bar, sat the commissioners of the burghs. The clerk of the
register was apparently the clerk of parliament: and it is to be inferred that
he, and some other officers of state, sat in the middle before the throne The
author of the Present State of Scotland, 1682, says the Chancellor, and other
officers of state, sat under the throne; and below them the Lords of Session or
judges: in the middle were two tables, one bearing the regalia by which sat the
Constable and Marshall; at the other was the clerk of register, with his deputy
clerks who are the clerks of parliament. P. 84, 85. In Call. B. V, 266, is an
account of the Scottish parliament in the reign of James VI. At that time the
members continued in town while the lords of the articles sat, being a week or
two, and all met on the last day to approve or condemn. Parliament was either
deserted or current; the former case required a proclamation of forty days
before another could be held; the latter only of fifteen days.


.

The roll being called, and some other formalities arranged, the chancellor, or
sometimes the secretary, made a short speech; and as they were commonly
churchmen, it was in the nature of a sermon of the time, seasoned with latin
quotations from scripture. The three estates then proceeded to their chief
office, the appointment of commitees of justice, and of the articles; who being
selected, the other members were at liberty to depart to their respective
homes: and often did not assemble till next year, when they gave their sanction
to the laws prepared by the committees. But it also often happened that the
statutes and ordinances were already fashioned by the chancellor, and other
officers of state, or could easily be forwarded; so that the members remained
in the town, and even continued their session occasionally from five to fifteen
days, the last of which was appropriated to the pronunciation of the decisions
of the committee of justice, in presence of the whole house The vote of Non
liquet was latterly allowed, as in the Roman senate; but the usual votes were
approve or not approve; (Pres. State 87, 88,) an expression rather belonging to
sanction than debate.
.

As the members were inelective, the commissioners of the burghs alone
excepted, the prorogation, or dissolution, of the parliament could not be
alternatives of great consequence. In England, at this period, a parliament
seldom sat above one session of twenty or thirty days; but sometimes three
sessions were known. The general form of the Scottish parliament seems to have
been annual; and the magistrates, who represented the towns, being commonly of
yearly continuance in office, it may be difficult to point out an instance of a
prorogation from one year to another: though those of two or three months in
the same year are not unfrequent. A curious instance of the prorogation of a
parliament, followed by its dissolution, occurs in the records. In the
turbulent last year of the reign of James III, a parliament met in January, and
was prorogued to May. But on the 17th February 1488, James issued the following
order. "We do you to wit that our sovereign lord, by the advice of his council,
has for certain reasonable and great causes, deserted and dissolved his
parliament, which was formerly prorogued till the fifth day of May next to
come: and has ordained a new general parliament, to be set, and proclaimed to
be holden at Edinburgh the twelfth day of May next to come, with continuation
of days; and general precepts to pass to all lords, prelates, barons,
frecholders, and commissaries; and with special letters under his signet to all
the prelates, and great lords of his realm, to show and declare to them the
cause of the sitting of his said parliament." These special letters it is to be
presumed, James did not direct to his enemies: and it is even probable that
they were never sent to members in the opposition; an omission which might be
regarded as a hint that their absence would be more agreeable.

After the parliament, the Privy Council attracts the greatest attention by its
dignity and importance. The nature of this meeting has been already explained
in the preceding retrospect, where it is observed that it succeeded the Aula
Regis, or King's Court. This court, anciently held in a hall of the palace, has
been by some authors confounded with the nationa council; and the vague
synonymes, and impure latinity, of the writers of the middle ages, have
sometimes blended the terms curia and consilium, so as to occasion a doubt
whether the latter be a general or privy council; and whether the former be a
senate or parliament in the classic acceptance, or an affected substitute for
the curtis or court of the king. The explanations of glossarists are also
arbitrary, and often derived from a single sentence, without considering the
scope of preceding and succeeding paragraphs, or the affected sense in which a
particular Kaims' Essay on Brit. Ant. p. 54.
writer may use a particular expression. That the king's court was merely of
consultation, and of judicature in particular cases, like the succeeding privy
council, there is every reason to infer; and if the parliament be styled the
royal court, in barbaric latinity, it is an abuse of terms. The king's
baron-courts were a kind of inquests, consisting of the great officers of the
crown, and other chief barons to judge on important crimes and causes: even
they differed much from the courts held by the barons themselves, because the
monarch, however controuled and impoverished by the great barons, yet
maintained during the feudal ages a sublime and superlative character in the
constitution, as the fountain of honor, the general, and chief magistrate, of
the state. But from these courts the parliament, or general council, was
distinguished in many ways. 1. It succeeded the general assemblies of the
German tribes, mentioned by Tacitus, who says that on smaller matters, or
particular cases, the nobles met and decided; while in larger the whole
community assembled to determine on affairs of general interest Germ. c. xi.
. The former was the king's baron-court; the latter a parliament: the former
was a meeting of the notables; the latter of the states general. 2. The aula
regis, or king's baron-court, though perhaps the former consisted only of the
chief officers of state, the latter added the great barons, yet whether the
same, or distinct, never possessed any legislative power. 3. The states general
often opposed the royal will; and the English parliament even deposed Richard
II; attributes which no fancy can ascribe to the king's own courts, which
existed only in virtue of his authority. 4. The king's courts met in his
palaces, while no parliament ever sat in a royal mansion; but in convents,
abbeys, guildhalls, and other detached places Dr. Gilbert Stuart on the Public
Law and Constitution of Scotland, p. 81, 107, edit. 1784. It is to be regreted
that the useful information, and solid argument, sometimes presented in this
work, should be distorted by the author's personal animosity against Dr.
Robertson a writer of great talents. Dr. Stuart's style is also too turgid, and
declamatory, to present clear information on obscure topics; and the abominable
plan, or rather confusion, invented by Bail, who emptied his commonplace book
on his dictionary, has been unhappily followed by both Robertson and Stuart, in
their enquiries on the progress of society, etc. while the short text, and long
notes at the end, not only present a most unclassical mode of composition, but
seem merely calculated to dismember and confuse a subject, and oppress the
patience of the reader.
. It may be added that the tenure in capite was not a right to sit in
parliament; it was on the contrary an obligation, in order that the national
council, in which the sovereign appeared in his greatest luster, might be
numerously attended, and not exhibit symptoms of disaffection by the rarity of
the members. Before the feudal tenures prevailed, there can be no doubt but
that every freeman had a right to appear in the general assembly, while the
king's court was sacred to the chiefs; and supposing a barony allodial, or free
from tenure, that circumstance could not have operated against the right of its
possessor to appear in the national council. But the small tribes, general
assemblies, and idle life, of the ancient Germans, being followed by wide
kingdoms in which no general assembly could be held, and by various
occupations, it became necessary to enforce attendance by tenure, and fines;
means from which the question of right, acquired by tenure, is extremely remote.

In the more ancient periods of Scottish history the kings were the chief judges
in fact, as well as in law; and sat, at particular times, before a gate of the
palace to hear and determine causes, especially those of the poor. This
judicature was, in more polished times, exerted by the monarch, in conjunction
with his privy council: but it was chiefly used in punishing riots, and in
other special cases which demanded a speedy remedy, and could not be deferred
till the meeting of a parliament, the last court of resort. In the last century
it was to usurp the odious powers of a star chamber, and its fall was matter of
national exultation.

Such numerous minorities occur in the history of the Scottish monarchs, that
the state of the government at those periods deserves much attention, and will
be found explained in several passages of the historical narration. It appears
that the privy council retained its chief powers under a Council of Regency,
though the officers of state were often the principal members of both.

These Officers of State themselves claim the next consideration; and their
original importance in the government, and in the national history, demands
that particular attention should be paid to their distinct duties and
privileges.

In Scotland those of chief consequence at this period were the Lieutenant
General of the Kingdom; the Steward, an office now held by the prince, and
little exerted; the Constable; the Marshall; the Chancellor; the Great
Chamberlain; the Treasurer; the Justiciary; the Admiral; the Master of the
Household; the Privy Seal: the Comptroller; the Secretary. Among those of
smaller moment may be named the Clerk of the Register; the Treasurer depute;
the King's Advocate; the Justice Clerk; the King's Chamberlain.

The first named of these offices, though almost unknown to all writers on our
constitution, was doubtless the second in the kingdom, and almost amounted to a
regency during a weak reign or a minority. The Lieutenant General commanded the
whole military array and force of the realm; being a substitute for the king
himself, in his high capacity of general of the nation. We have seen the
ambitious Robert duke of Albany appear in the synonymous characters of
lieutenant general, and governor of the kingdom, during the reign of Robert III
his brother. The potent earls of Douglas held this office in the minority of
the second James: and it appears at intervals in the minority, and reign, of
James V.

The stewardship, upon the accession of the House of Stuart, merged in the
principality. As David duke of Rothsay was the sole prince of that family, who
came to majority after the accession of the family, the kings held the lands
and privileges of the office: and James IV, in the parliament of 1490, was to
order that all the freeholders of the steward-lands "should appear an answer
in the parliaments, and court of circuit, with their suits and presence, in a
proper manner, till our sovereign lord have a son, who shall be immediate
betwixt the king and them, to answer for them in the said parliaments, and
courts of justiciary: and suit-rolls to be made thereupon, which shall endure
till the prince be born Cap. 16. Mr. Wight, p. 63, seems to understand that the
prince was the natural representative of his tenants in parliament; and see his
appendix, p. 468, for a paper showing that noblemen were understood to
represent their lands, even so late as 1681. A curious topic too ample for
discussion here, as leading to great questions; whether the nobles were not at
first considered as representing their tenants; the origin of representatives
for shires, after a county had ceased to be synonymous with an earldom; and
others of similar import.
." A statute requiring the explanation of some legal antiquary.

The Constable, originally as the name implies, the officer who had charge of
the royal stables, arose by degrees to be commander in chief under the
sovereign; and continued in that high rank in France, even in the century now
under view. His office in Scotland appears to have been vague, and titular; and
was confined to the arrangement of the royal camp, a duty which seldom
occurred; to the reception of the members of parliament at the door of their
hall; and other objects of more luster than utility. The noble family of Hay
have long inherited this office; but we have seen it usurped for a season by
Boyd earl of Arran: yet he might perhaps appear as a delegate for the aged earl
of Errol.

The Marshall was master of the horse; as the Seneschall, Styward, or Steward,
was of the herds and flocks, the chief wealth of early times. The marshall
ought to have arranged the army in battle: and he was the chief judge in the
courts of chivalry, to determine points of honor and arms. He was also
considered as a commander in the field; and the French marechals long retained
the office. The hereditary marshalsy of Scotland continued for centuries in the
family of Keith.

In the reign of James III the Chancellor arose to a precedence next to the
prince of the blood. He was president and speaker of parliament; examined, and
passed, charters under the great seal; was president of the privy council,
where and in the committees of parliament, he exercised great juridical
functions. In short he had the chief rank in civil affairs, as the Lieutenant
General had in military.

The Great Chamberlain, an office originally joined with that of Treasurer,
collected the royal revenues, and accounted for the expenditure. His
jurisdiction, as appears from the Iter Camerarii, was very extensive: and a
great proportion of the revenue arising from the customs, and other duties paid
by the royal burghs, they were committed to his particular charge. The
management of the magistrates, the use made of the property of the towns, the
complaints and disputes of the burgesses and craftsmen, the prices of
provisions, the rules of barter and sale, were among the objects of his
authority See the Iter Camerarii in Skene; and Stuart, p. 33.
. The collection of the royal revenues, and his power over the collectors, were
also sources of great influence. But the power of the Chamberlain over the
Burghs was considerably restricted by the Court of Four Burghs, consisting of
commissioners from these towns, who were summoned extraordinarily to hear
appeals from the Chamberlain's circuit courts: but their ancient annual meeting
was at Haddington 4to. Reg. f. 53.
. These four burghs were Edinburgh, Stirling, Roxburgh, and Berwick; till the
two latter falling into the hands of the English, it was ordered in the
parliament of March 1368 that Lanark and Linlithgow be substituted, reserving
the rights of the former when retaken Ibid.
. The meeting of commissioners of the burghs at Inverkeithing, authorized by
James III to form mercantile regulations, seems little to have increased their
importance in national scale.

Latterly the office and power of the chamberlain were shared by the Treasurer,
who received and expended such of the royal revenues, as belonged to the
private expense of the king and his family. This office was introduced in 1424
by James I, on his return from England Crawf. Off. 252.
.

The Justiciary was originally an officer of great power, as appears from the
Iter Justiciarii. His jurisdiction was both civil and criminal; and he held
circuit courts twice in the year. Treason, and the four pleas of the crown,
were specially reserved for his cognizance. But while the Justiza of Arragon
was to control the monarchs, the Scottish Justiciary never attained any
preeminence above other officers of state. On the contrary his power was
divided; there being often a Justiciary for the counties south of the Forth and
Clyde, and another for the north The statutes, by their frequent mention of the
Justices, seem to indicate more; yet the deputies of the Justiciaries may be
implied.
. Till the office was assigned hereditarily to the noble family of Argyle by
James V, it had been held by Sir Robert Lauder of Bass, and other names hardly
known in history. And when Charles I withdrew it from Argyle it passed to Sir
Thomas Hope, and afterward to Sir Ludovic Stuart, men of talents, but far
remote from the character of Spanish Justizas. It is sometimes useful to
collate domestic customs with foreign; but to form general views of the feudal
system, and afterward apply them to particular countries, without a profound
and laborious study of their history, is a practice pregnant with errors. The
feudal system of each European kingdom forms quite a distinct province. It is
easier indeed to draw materials from the literature of France, England, and
other enlightened countries, than to search into obscure chronicles, old
manuscripts, and records, for the genuine history of the Scottish constitution.
But an infinite confusion arises from an injudicious mixture of our history,
and antiquities, even with those of England: they ought sedulously to be kept
apart; and the skillful reader may afterward himself compare the topics, as
treated by the historians, lawyers, and antiquaries of the sister nations.

It is to be regretted that we have so few materials for the history of the
next important office, that of Admiral: nor to the notices, scattered in the
historical narrative, can any thing be here added. His jurisdiction in maritime
affairs, in the reign of James III, appears from the reference of the English
to his judgment, concerning the capture of vassels, and compensations on that
account. In latter times he was Justice-general upon the seas, on fresh waters
within flood-mark, and in all harbors and creeks; his authority extended to
all maritime causes, comprehending questions of charter-parties, freights,
salvages, bottomries, and the like. His delegate is the judge of the high court
of admiralty; and he may appoint inferior deputies for districts, but their
sentences are subject to the revisal of the high court. The admiral's
jurisdiction is supreme, and no question can be transferred even to the
session, except by suspension or reduction. Even many mercantile cases are by
usage submitted to the admiral Erskine, Principles, b. I, t. 3, 18.
.

The lord Privy Seal was an officer of considerable confidence, who put the
royal signet to gifts of movables, and other small grants not requiring
seizin. The Secretary wrote the royal letters, and managed several private
departments of business; latterly he came to be an officer of high rank and
importance, and his frequent access to the royal ear gave him such influence
that he almost rivalled the chancellor.

The Master of the Household, Magister Hospitii, superintended the royal
domestics; and the Comptroller shared the former offices of the chamberlain,
and treasurer, by regulating the expenses and checking the account, and
supplying temporary advances of money.

The clerk of the register, or master of the rolls, had the care of the records
and charters, and was clerk of parliament. The treasurer-depute's duty is
explained by his appellation. Royal causes, and prosecutions for crimes,
especially treason, were prerogatives of the king's advocate. The
justice-clerk, or clerk of justiciary, was an assessor to the Justiciary, to
assist him in points of law; and the lord justice-clerk remains an office of
importance. The king's chamberlain, or private chamberlain, was an officer of
great favor and trust; Sir William Crichton held this place, while Sir John
Forester was great chamberlain; and the former was more in confidence with
James I, than the latter.

In passing from the constitution, and court, to the administration of justice,
the following ordinance of James II may be added to the intelligence concerning
the Mairs and Serjands. "Our sovereign lord, and his three estates, ordain and
determine that if any of his Officiars, or Sheriffs, Mairs, Baillies, Crowners,
Serjands, Provosts of Burghs, and their deputies, either in town or country, be
found faulty or negligent in the execution of their offices, and the offense
may be legally proved or notoriously known; if the said office belong to him in
fee or heritage, he shall lose his office, and the prosit thereof, for a year
and a day, and be punished by the king in his person, and effects according to
the trespass: if his office be not of inheritance, he shall entirely abandon
it, and be punished in his person according to his trespass, at the royal
pleasure 1458, c. 76.
."

It is a chief object of these retrospects to retrieve from the darkness of
antiquity such information as may have escaped former research. The duties of
the sheriff have been frequently explained; but the Coroner, an officer of high
importance in various stages of our history, seems unknown to our legal or
antiquarian enquiries. His function may be illustrated by the following
statutes, which at the same time throw a strong light on the administration of
justice, at the period of the last parliament of James III.

"It is thought expedient, and ordained, for the advancement of justice, the
bringing in of trespassors to law, and their punishment, that in time to come
when the Crowner receives his porteous Porteous, or Portas, in its original
meaning is a breviary, or small book of divine offices of such a size as to be
easily carried abroad: portiforium. It is here a list of criminals.
and traistis, if there be any persons disobedient, whom he dares not, nor is
it in his power to arrest, in that case the Crowner shall pass to the lord and
baron of the barony where they dwell. And if he dwell not within a barony, he
shall pass to the sheriff of the shire, and show his porteous, that he has such
persons therein mentioned, and enquire if the lord, baron, or sheriff, will be
surety and pledge for these persons, to produce them at the circuit. If they
consent, he shall deliver to them the names that they may become pledges, by
writings sealed and subscribed. And if they refuse to be sureties, he shall
require the lord, baron, or sheriff, in the king's name, either to pass, or
send their officers, with their followers and servants in sufficient number,
with the said Crowner, or assist and aid him in making the arrest, or seizing
him who will not become surety, till he be brought to the sheriff, to be
retained till the circuit. Any lord, baron, or sheriff refusing, to forfeit ten
pounds to the king, the Crowner proving the offense 1487, c. 99.
." -- "It is thought expedient for the punishment of criminals, who escape from
the Crowner, that in future he shall bring such to the sheriff, who shall keep
them prisoners on our sovereign lord's expense, till the next circuit, and then
present them to the Justiciary. The sheriff shall be allowed from the exchequer
threepence a day for each, on bringing a certificate from the Justiciary. If
the sheriff refuse to receive the criminals brought by the Crowner, he shall
incur the danger and unlaw be liable to punishment and fine.
of the Justiciary-circuit, to the fourth court, as a surety should do in
default of producing the person arrested Ibid. c. 101.
." -- "It is ordained that because the Crowners in times past, through
erroneous custom and abuse of the law, after a criminal was convicted before
the Justiciary, and condemned to death, would immediately pass or send to
escheat the effects of such criminals, though belonging to the king, and
appropriate a part of the corn, cattle, and other effects, neither in law nor
reason appertaining to their office. Therefore it is decreed that in future no
Crowner pretend to take any such effects, till the sheriff or his deputy shall
pass or send, examine the effects, and allot the Crowner his share, the
remainder to be delivered to the king's treasurer; nor shall the sheriff
deliver more to the Crowner than his legal portion. Punishment, as of robbery
Ibid. 102.
." Another statute ordains that, on the last day of the circuit, the Justiciary
shall appoint a jury to examine if the sheriff and coroner have done their
duty: and another decrees to the latter a young laboring horse, if any be,
among the effects of an executed malefactor Ibid. 108.
.

From other evidence it appears that the family of the Neilsons had, in the
reign of James V, been heritable coroners of Bute for two hundred years: and in
1535 Hugh earl of Eglinton was appointed Coroner of the county of Cunningham,
on the resignation of Cunningham of Caprinton Scotstarvet's Calendars of
Charters, sub anno 1535.
. During the civil commotions, in the reign of Charles I, the military force of
each county was led by a Crowner Baillie's Letters and Journals, 1639-1660,
Edin. 1775, 2 vols. 8vo. passim: a book full of curious and important
information, and the remainder promised by the editor, particularly the obscure
period 1649-1660, would be highly acceptable.
, a term which appears to have been succeeded by that of Colonel.

In 1475 gifts of lieutenancy were issued by James III to Lennox, Argyle,
Athole, Huntley, of various sheriffdoms in which their estates lay. Nor were
the clergy averse to such secular authority; among other instances the abbot of
Kilwinning obtained the power of chamberlain over all the abbeylands, and the
repledging of the tenants from any other judicatory Scotst. Call. Dec. 1475,
Jan. 1473. At 1476 Scotstarvet records a charter to William Thane of Caldor of
the thanage of Caldor, and many other lands, but all in thanage-ward: qu.
tanistry holding, if the heir minor, the chief to be the nearest male relation
capable of arms; or implying the military services of ALL the tenants, as usual
before knights fees, feu-farm or soccage, came in use?
.

The court of Session had been instituted by James I in 1425. Its members were
nominated by the king from the estates of parliament; and it was termed the
Session because its meetings were fixed at certain periods and places. James II
ordained particular regulations concerning this court; but as its members only
served by rotation, and without salary, it was at once ignorant and negligent;
and was at length to be exchanged for a daily council, appointed by the
patriotic parliament of 1504. It is to be regreted that James I did not found
courts upon the English model; but perhaps the penury of the country afforded
no funds for salaries; perhaps the confined nature of the regal jurisdiction,
or some other circumstances prevented such an attempt.

But the power of the session, the justiciaries, the sheriff and coroner, was
greatly restricted by the Regalities, or Lordships Palatine. Their jurisdiction
was royal, as the name implies; in civil affairs it equalled that of the
sheriff; and in criminal it even comprised the four pleas of the crown, murder,
robbery, rape, and fire-raising, rivalling that of the Justiciaries over every
crime, except treason. The lord of regality could repledge, or reclaim, all
criminals subject to his jurisdiction, even from the courts of the Justiciaries
Erskine Principles, b. I, t. 4, 4.
. These extravagant grants, incompatible with the regular administration of
justice, had been lavished by the royal favor; or extorted by the power of
several great barons, when they had themselves expelled the English from their
territories, or had rendered some eminent public service. In 1455 an attempt
was made to prevent any further grants of regality, by subjecting them to the
consent of parliament Acts, c. 43.
; but the practice was as inveterate as it was imprudent. The ecclesiastic
lords, ever desirous of exemption from any authority save that of the pope, are
supposed to have set the first example of regalities; the temporal authority
was delegated to a Bailiff, and often hereditary. Regalities continued to be
granted, and confirmed; and the charters of hereditary sheriffdom to the peers
and chiefs within their lordships, were almost tantamount, and became so
numerous as to extend over all the country. When regality lands were forfeited,
the king appointed stewards over them with similar powers; hence the hereditary
stewards of Strathern, Menteith, Annandale, Kirkudbright: while over baronial
lands in the crown only Bailiffs were nominated, as in Kyle, Carric,
Cunningham, and even the last-named offices were to be held hereditarily by
peers. Happy country, thus filled with hereditary wisdom and hereditary justice!

Nor must the Spiritual Courts be omitted, which before the reformation were to
become great grievances. They originally sprung from the confidence which piety
reposed in the bishops; who were entrusted with the care of estates, and orphan
children. Hence their claim to judge in testaments and legacies: and marriage
being a sacrament, administered by ecclesiastics since the twelfth century,
prior to which it was merely a civil contract, all questions of divorce, breach
of vows, and the like, passed to the ecclesiastic courts; from which no appeal
lay except to the metropolitan, or finally to the pontiff. Tithes and patronage
were natural objects of church decision, and notaries were appointed by the
pope: but scandal, and any affairs confirmed by an oath, though liable to
ecclesiastic jurisdiction, might in all ages seem secular questions. The
bishops were supposed to be occupied in divine duties, and delegated their
power to officials or commissaries: but the court was styled the Bishop's
Court, or Curia Christianitatis, and also the Consistorial Court, from the
consistory, or court of appeals held by the Roman emperors Erskine, b. I, t. 5,
23. For the abuses of the Consistorial Courts see Lindsay's Play, p. 164, 170.
.

Two statutes of James II, concerning the administration of justice, deserve
particular attention. "The three estates have ordained that the Justices on the
south side of the Scottish sea (the firth of Forth) hold their courts of circuit
twice in the year; and in like manner on the north; according to ancient use
and custom. And so also lords of regality within their regalities, and the
king's baillies of his regalities. And that the king himself, till the due
course of justice be restored, pass to every town where the circuit is held, or
to its vicinity, as his council shall think convenient 1440, c. 5.
." -- "It is ordained and decreed that in all circuits of justice, sheriff
courts, and generally all courts spiritual and temporal, all persons,
freeholders and others, shall attend in a sober and quiet manner. And that no
man bring with him more persons than are in his daily household, and family
service. And when he arrives at his lodging, he and they shall lay aside their
weapons and armor, if any they bring; and wear no weapon except a knife. And
if any be at open enmity, and allege fear of his life, the sheriff shall
require law-burrows, or legal surety, from both; and prohibit them in the royal
name to disturb the king's peace, on pain of incurring the law, which the king
shall execute without remission on the infringer. If the sheriff be negligent
he shall be punished, according to the statute ordained for reforming the
faults of officers of justice 1458, c. 82.
." In 1487 the lords and commons in vain engaged not to support any criminal
friends, or relations, at the bar: but the offense was to continue common in
the succeeding century cap. 98.
.

James III in 1469 ordered that if the Justice, Sheriff, Steward, Bailie, or
Baron, Provost or Baillie of burghs, refuse to execute justice the complainant
shall repair to the king in council, who shall punish the offending magistrate
by the penalties there mentioned cap. 27.
. Among the grievances of this reign the abuses of the court of Session appear
to have been one of the chief. The want of regular intermediate civil courts,
between that of the sheriff and the king's council, must have led to much
inconvenience, and maladministration; the power of the privy council having
been ever esteemed one of the grand defects of the Scottish constitution, being
an arbitrary star chamber uncontrouled by genuine justice or equity. With all
its imperfections the court of session, consisting of all the members of
parliament in rotation, must have been an institution far more free and
impartial.

Some regulations appear concerning inquests, and juries on criminal causes;
but the want of juries in civil cases was to continue a disgraceful contrast
between English and Scottish jurisdiction.

Among the means of preserving the public peace, the letters of Law-burrows
must not be omitted. The term is derived from borgh, a pledge or surety, which
any person, in fear of another's violence, had a title to demand, that he
should not be injured in his person, family, or estate Erskine, b. iv, t. 1, 21.
. He who refused to grant such security was liable to high penalties: when
granted, the sureties became amenable in the terms of the following statute of
1466. "Concerning law-burrows it is enacted, that if they be infringed on any
bishop, abbot, or prelate of the church, earl, or lord of parliament, with
their personal hurt, or that of their servants, the sureties of the infringer
shall pay to our sovereign lord a sine of one hundred pounds. If on any knight,
baron, squire, or clergyman of large benefice, fifty pounds. If on a burgess,
yeoman, or priest, thirty pounds. Together with due compensation to the party
injured. Unless the sureties produce the infringer before the king or the
sheriff, within forty days. The king to have the fines of all law-burrows
broken, that shall fall within the jurisdiction of his own officers, either in
town or country: and the lords of regalities and baronies to have those taken
in their lands, by them or their officers, according to their ancient
infeofments and privileges cap. 5.
."

One of the last statutes of James III is in the following terms. "The three
estates have committed the full power of the whole parliament to the persons
underwritten, (they do not appear,) to advise, confer, and report to the next
parliament or general council, concerning the reduction of the king's laws,
Regiam Majestatem, acts, statutes, and other books, to be bound in one volume,
and authorized; and the others to be destroyed. Four persons to be appointed
for each of the three estates. The prelates to bear the expense of the clerical
members: the barons of those they shall appoint: and the burghs that of their
commissaries 1487, c. 115.
." In like manner James I had appointed a committee of six of each of the
estates, to examine, and amend, "the books of law, that is to say Regiam
Majestatem, and Quoniam Attachiamenta 1426, c. 54.
." It has been shown by skilful judges that the work quaintly styled Regiam
Majestatem is a transcript of Glanville's production. It was probably brought
into Scotland by David II, who was greatly attached to England, and desired to
bequeath his scepter to an English heir; and by an artful incorporation of some
genuine laws of Daivd I, Scotland was prepared to receive it as a code of that
illustrious monarch. The feeble reigns of Robert II and III, and above all the
tumultuous regencies of the dukes of Albany, had so far obliterated the very
memory of the laws, that the error had in the reign of the first James taken
deep root, and was to shoot vigorously See Sir D. Dalrymple's Examination of
some of the arguments for the antiquity of Regiam Majestatem, Edin. 1769, 4to;
and the Observations on the Regiam Majestatem, 8vo, written by John Davidson,
Esquire. a venerable promoter of the study of Scottish history and antiquities, who
assisted Dr. Robertson in 1757, and continues his laudable researches though
now in his seventy-seventh year.

While Sir David's arguments prove that the Regiam Majestatem could not exist
before the reign of David II, he yet inclines to deny that it is so late as
that epoch, because in the reign of James I it was esteemed an ancient and
authentic code: but this argument is answered in the text, and ignorant ages
are such complete strangers to any standard of antiquity, that the Leges
Malcolmi, a then recent forgery, were supposed to be laws of Malcom I! To our
old historians, Fordun and Winton, the Regiam Majestatem is unknown, and it is
most probable that David II, when attempting to settle the succession of his
crown on a son of Edward III, endeavored silently to assimilate to Scottish
laws with the English, by its introduction. Yet failing, the book lurked in MS.
in one or two monasteries, when James I, equally desirous of benefiting his
kingdom by an emulation of English polity, revived it: but Craig, a superlative
judge, testifies that it never was a code of Scottish law, and that it has not
even the least connection with the usages or forensic practice of Scotland. Lib.
I, t. 8, 7.

Sir David's second argument, p. 36, that the Regiam Majestatem is more ancient
than the time of David II, is so singular that it shall be transcribed entire.

"To this I add another chronological argument, which appears to have some
weight. Cardinal Wardlaw, secretary to David II, died in 1389. His nephew,
Henry Wardlaw, was promoted by him to the rectory of Kilbride, and the
precentorship of the cathedral of Glasgow. He was made bishop of St. Andrew's
in 1404: and was chancellor of Scotland during the whole reign of James I. It
will be admitted that the statute 54, par. 3. James I, 1425, [1426,] was either
drawn up by him, or under his direction. Now as bishop Wardlaw was beneficed by
his uncle, it is probable that he had come to man's estate before 1389, when
his uncle died. Bishop Wardlaw, educated under the Cardinal secretary to David
II, must have known whether Regiam Majestatem was an ancient, or a very modern,
composition. This 54th statute shows that he considered it as an ancient
composition: and hence, independent of all other arguments, there arises a
cogent reason for believing that Regiam Majestatem was not compiled by the
command of David II."

This argument is of too delicate, too feeble a texture: it forgets that the
forgery might have happened early in the reign of David; that it might be a
state secret; that the book may not even be older than the reign of James I, no
more ancient MS. or reference being known; that this last prince was a rational
admirer of English polity, and might wish to introduce it by a holy fraud; that
the chancellor or secretary might in consequence even interpolate, or alter,
the statute, a complaint not unknown. But why waste discussion? What must be
the reader's surprise when he sees this cogent argument completely overturned,
only by reminding him that Henry Wardlaw, far from being chancellor, "during
the whole reign of James I," never was chancellor at all? It was John Cameron,
bishop of Glasgow, who was chancellor during all that reign, (Crawf. Off. 25:)
and the continued favor of James to this able and respectable prelate, says
more in his favor than is sufficient to confute the fables of Boyce.

The Cromarty MS. of the Regiam Majestatem, in the Advocate's Library,
concerning the antiquity of which Sir David hesitates to pronounce, is written
about 1450, as appears from a sac-simile now before me, and from the opinion of
a skilful inspector


. The Quoniam Attachiamenta, or Baronial Laws, seem chiefly of genuine
indigenous birth. But an edition of our authentic ancient laws, with an ample
dissertation on the subject, is reserved for enlightened times, of more acute
and suspicious judgment than those of James I, or III. The code, of infinite
importance to philosophy, history and antiquities, would probably embrace, 1.
The genuine laws of David I, forming many pages in the Regiam Majestatem, not
to be found in Glanville: 2. The Laws of the Burghs, apparently ordained by
David I: 3. Those of the Baronial courts: 4. The Statuta Gildae: 5. The Iter
Camerarii, and the Iter Justiciarii: 6. The Forest Laws. The acts of Robert I,
David II, and the two latter Robert, admit of easy and certain authentication:
those of William and Alexander II, for none have yet arisen of the third
Alexander, would require more sedulous care to complete the series; which
demands neither eminence of talents, nor excess of labor, but is essential to
the national science and reputation The canons of the councils, published by
Wilkins, and those of John Cameron bishop of Glasgow, MS. formerly mentioned,
ought to be added, as forming the ecclesiastical law of the kingdom. One small
volume would contain the whole. For laws anterior to Robert I, see Ayloffe's
Calendars, p. 335, where the Leges Burgorum Scotiae are specially mentioned.


.

The obscurity attending the reign of James II, the important service which the
house of Hamilton rendered to that prince, its subsequent connection with the
royal family, and ambition latterly to reach the diadem itself, will apologize
for presenting the less learned reader with a translation of the interesting
erection of Hamilton in 1445, into a hereditary lordship of parliament, or what
would now be termed a peerage; nor is the grant without intrinsic value and
curiosity to the antiquary and man of science, as a specimen of the
constitutional forms, and law language of the period.

"James by the grace of God king of Scots, to all honest men of his whole
realm, clergy and laity, greeting. Know ye that we, with the mature
deliberation of our parliament, held at Edinburgh on the twenty eighth day of
June, and of our reign the ninth year, have given, granted, and have by this
our present charter confirmed, to our beloved cousin James lord (lord) of
Hamilton knight, all and singular the lands of the baronies of Cadyhow and of
Mawchane, and the superiority of the lands of Hamilton-farm, and the lands of
Corbaskat, with the appendages, lying in the sheriffdom of Lanark and barony of
Kinneil, and with the appendages lying in the sheriffdom of Linlithgow. Which
lands, and superiority, were formerly the hereditary property of the said
James; and which he, not moved by force or fear, nor led by error, but of his
own free will, did restore, and purely and simply resign, by staff and baton,
in the presence of the three estates of our kingdom, into our hands, we then
sitting on our throne in parliament, in royal state and majesty; and he
perpetually quitted all right and claim, which he might have, or acquire, to
the said lands, superiority, or appendages, for himself and his heirs. All
which baronies, lands, superiority, and appendages, we create, join, and unite
into one real free and entire Lordship, which shall in all future times be
styled and denominated the Lordship of Hamilton. And the manor-house of the
said James, now called the Orchard, situated in the barony of Cadyhow, shall be
in future the principal and capital message of all the above baronies,
superiority, and lands, with appendages, of all the above Lordship, and shall
be styled and denominated Hamilton. And we create and name the said James an
hereditary lord of our parliament. To have, and to hold, all and sundry the
baronies, superiority, and lands above mentioned, (the said James having before
of us, as baron of Kilbride, held in capite the superiority of the lands of
Hamilton-farm, and the lands of Corbaskat,) by the said James, and his heirs,
of us, our heirs and successors, kings of Scotland in fee, and perpetual
inheritance; with all their ancient boundaries and divisions, with all and
singular the liberties, commodities, and conveniences, and just appendages,
named or not named, above ground or beneath, far and near, anywise belonging to
the said baronies, superiority, and lands; of all the said lordship of
Hamilton, or accruing to them in future; as freely, quietly, entirely,
honorably, well, and in peace, in all respects, as the said James, or any of
his predecessors, held of us, or our ancestors, the barony superiority and
lands of the whole lordship of Hamilton, or of us as baron of Kilbride the
superiority of Hamilton-farm and lands of Corbaskat, before his said
resignation. The said James performing to us, our heirs and successors, kings
of Scotland, the services due and wont. In testimony whereof we have ordered
our great seal to be appended to this charter, before these witnesses, the
reverend fathers in God John, James, John, John, and Michael, bishops of
Glasgow, Dunkeld, Moray, Brechin, and Dunblane; William, David, Archibald,
Hugh, and Alexander, earls of Douglas, Crawford, Moray, Ormond, and Huntley,
and our dearest cousins; Duncan, Patrick, William, Herbert, and Alexander,
lords Campbell, Graham, Somerville, Maxwell, and Montgomery: John Dalrimpill,
John Scrogs, and James Parklee, burgesses commissioners of Edinburgh, Aberdeen,
and Linlithgow; masters William Turnbull keeper of our privy seal, John Shevis,
clerk of the rolls and register, and John Railstone our secretary. At Edinburgh
the third day of July, in the year of our Lord one thousand four hundred and
forty five, and of our reign the ninth year Davidson, Chamberlain's accounts
1329, etc. Edin. 1771, 4to, p. 27, 28, from the family archives.
."

At the time of this erection the house of Douglas was in the plenitude of its
power; and the Hamiltons having ever been attached to that great family, the
source of favor becomes evident; nor is it matter of surprise that lord
Hamilton at first followed Douglas, against his sovereign. After the fall of
that house, and the marriage with the princess, the Hamiltons were to become
one of the most potent families of Scotland; and in the sixteenth and
seventeenth centuries that of Argyle could alone contest the superiority.

To the observations formerly given on TACTICS little can be added. In a
parliament of 1456 James II ordered, "that all men who have lands or goods be
ready, horsed and accoutred as their lands and effects will afford, for the
defense of the realm, at the command of the king....... And that every man,
whose effects extend to twenty marks, be provided at least with a jack with
sleeves to the hands, or splents; and a pricked hat, a sword, and a buckler, a
bow and a sheaf of arrows if he can procure them, if not an axe; and a targe
either of leather, or firm board, with two bands upon the back cap. 56.
."

James III in 1471 ordained, "that no merchants should import spears less than
six elns in length, and that no bowyer in the kingdom should make them of
shorter size... that every yeoman, who cannot use the bow, shall have a good
axe, and a targe of leather, to resist the English arrows, which will only cost
the value of the hyde cap. 45.
." By both parliaments carts of war are ordered to be provided, which bore two
patereros or small cannon; a machine probably derived from the Flemings or
French; and which Henry VIII was, from the Scottish example, to introduce into
the English army They are represented in the Coudray picture. Gross hist. of
Engl. army, 2 vols. 4to, II, 330, a work unlike Daniel on the French, and
without plan or chronology. The statute of James II concerning the carts of war
is in these terms, "It is thocht speidfull that the king make requeist to
certane of the greit burrowis of the land, that are of any mycht, to make cartis
of weir; and in ilk cart two gunnis, and ilk ane to have two chalmers, with the
remanent of the graith that efferis thairto; and ane cunnand man to schute
them. And gif they have no craft in the schuting of them as now, they may
leir or the time come that will be neidful to them." Acts edit. 1566, fol. 38.


. In 1481 the spears are ordered to be five elns and a half in length; and the
jacks, or leathern tunics, to extend below the knee; the targe of timber, or
leather, to be made after the form of one sent to every sheriff cap. 81.
.

While the defensive armor of the commons was the jack and targe, the leaders
were arrayed in plate armor of complete steel, which had succeeded the mail or
interwoven rings. The helmet had a visor to turn up, for sight; and a bever to
turn down, to admit drink or food: sometimes they both went up in divisions
under the front of the helmet, so as to leave the face open. The gorget, for
the throat or neck, resembled a flat basin open in the middle. The cuirass
covered the body; and had projections to defend the shoulders from the violent
down-stroke of the axe or two handed sword, as the crest defended the head;
these projections were termed pass-guards. To allow motion to the thighs the
culet, or garde-des-reines, a short steel petticoat was contrived. The arms
were protected by the brasers; the thighs by the quissets; the legs by the
greaves; the gauntlets, splents, and other pieces, need hardly be enumerated.
Even the horse had his armor of appropriated denominations; and all his front
was particularly protected from the spear, or sword: the chafron, or cheveron,
with a projecting point, covered his forehead; the poitrinal his breast; the
criniere his neck: the buttock-pieces were more rarely used, an embroidered
cloth commonly displaying the heraldic bearings of his master See Gross on
Armor 1786, 4to: and his Hist. of the Engl. Army, 2 vols. 4to. Patten, in
1548, says the Scottish gentry were not distinguishable from the common
soldiers, having jacks and doublets of white leather, and chains of latien (a
shining mixture of brass and tin,) around their thighs and arms, to protect
them from cuts.


.

The assassination of James I probably led to the institution of the royal
guard, which appears under his successor, and James III; but which James IV was
probably to discontinue, as on its revival by Albany, in the minority of the
fifth James, it was regarded as a novelty. Concerning the number, or pay of the
officers and soldiers, nothing arises till the last mentioned reign.

The Scottish guards of France were apparently instituted between the years 1453
and 1461; though they may be as ancient as 1445, when the gendarmerie were
restored. In the following century the captain was generally a Frenchman: till
1612 many of the soldiers were Scots; under Louis XIV most were French: yet
even in the middle of this century, when the watch was changed, the answer was
Hamir, a corruption of "I am here Daniel Milice Francoise, Amst. 1724, 2 vols.
4to. Vol. II, p. 84 -- 87. Daniel's English is hhay hamier!
."

If we except the royal guard, and a few occasional garrisons on the frontiers,
Scotland was a stranger to any permanent troops, till the Restoration. France,
her ally, had long set the example of standing forces, at first the prop of a
government, and latterly the ruin. The connection between that country and
Scotland may warrant a brief digression on the origin of an institution, which
has produced such memorable effects on the political arrangements of Europe.
The original feudal array of France generally served for three months, on their
own charges: the period was afterward restricted to forty days, exclusive of
the time occupied in joining the army or returning. About the year 1200 Philip
Augustus had a paid militia, each fief furnishing and defraying the expense of
an apportioned number of soldiers; the defaulter was not only constrained to
pay the sum required for the service, but a fine: and in 1392 Charles VI
extended the penalty to the forfeiture of the fief. The communes, communitates,
or parishes and burghs, also furnished and paid their proportions. The soldats,
or soudoyers of Froissart, had fixed wages; and the officers and men sold
themselves to any state engaged in war. But their disorders becoming excessive,
Charles V terminated them, and raised the gendarmerie, the soldiery of the
sovereign, who paid the noble leaders from the royal treasury, they providing
the men. In the weak reign of Charles VI the disorders returned; Charles VII
reestablished the gendarmerie about 1445. He maintained fifteen troops, of 100
lances each; and persuaded the burgesses and yeomanry to defray the expense,
for their own benefit and protection, for the former gendarmerie had been
lodged on them: each lance had five followers; so the whole number was nine
thousand. But there were also volunteers who served at their own expense, in
the hope of succeeding on a vacancy: so that the troop, or company, sometimes
amounted to 1200 horse. They were lodged in the towns, only twenty or twenty
five being allotted to one place; and their utility was soon perceived by the
prevention of public ravages and disorders, and the consequent restoration of
agriculture and commerce. They were all gentlemen, led by the nobles, who were
ambitious to be captains of the gendarmerie, instead of leading their feudal
force, which henceforth was never raised except when the Arriere Ban was
summoned. This institution maintained its purity till the reign of Francis I,
when modern soldiery appeared Daniel I, 55 -- 156. Gross, Eng. Army I, 330,
observes that Edward III paid his troops in Normandy, sixpence to a horseman,
three pence to an archer. At that time the dress of the Welsh soldiers was only
a tunic and mantle Ib. II, 2.
.

Nor must it be omitted that Charles VII ordered every parish to maintain one
archer, who had certain immunities Daniel, I, 172.
; an example worthy of the imitation of the Scottish sovereigns, in their
anxiety to promote archery, as a band of one thousand, trained and eminently
skilled, might have afforded no mean aid in battle, and might have kindled
universal emulation.

From the numbers of the Scottish army perhaps the only materials arise, from
which the population of the country may be vaguely estimated: but unhappily the
variations are so great that no accuracy can be expected. Bowar computes the
array in 1436 at 400,000, half horse half foot, including all between the age
of sixteen and sixty, capable of arms, excepting only herds, officers and
servants of prelates, and some excused from necessity or merit Cont. Ford. II,
502.
. Supposing the array a sixth of the population, the incredible number of two
millions, four hundred thousand, would result. Other general arrays are
computed at one hundred thousand; which supposing every eighth person appeared,
gives the probable number of eight hundred thousand. The present population
exceeds a million and a half, and it has been gradually increasing in this
century: in the middle ages the most rational computation would be a million,
yielding an array of eighty thousand effective men; but sometimes doubled by a
disorderly rabble of unarmed peasants and boys.

SECTION III. Agriculture, Useful Arts.
THE information on these important topics continues lamentably barren; and the
acts of parliament present almost the only authentic evidence.

The statute of James II, 1458, permitting lands to be let in feu, free from
military service, was a notable introduction to improvement Lindsay in his
Play, p. 254, says the custom was derived from France, Be set in few after the
form of France.
. The same prince had before ordained that a mortgagee of lands should not
reduce the rents, in order to prolong his possession after his demand had been
cleared 1450, c. 18.
. An ordinance of James III also deserves notice: "Concerning new inventions,
and selling of lands by charter and seizin, and taking again of reversions, and
the buyer may sell the land again to another person; it is now seen expedient
in this present parliament, and according to law and conscience, that the first
seller have recourse to the lands, sold by him under reversion, into whatsoever
hands they may come, on paying the money, and showing the deed of reversion;
and have the same privilege and freedom against the holder of the lands, as
against the first purchaser. And because such deeds of reversion may chance to
be lost, our sovereign lord shall order them to be registered in his register,
on paying the expense, half a mark each; and the extract shall have the same
force as the principal reversion 1469, c. 28.
."

Lord Kaims supposes that the law of Scotland, even in that century, did not
permit the absolute sale of lands, or houses, except in cases of poverty, and
where the apparent heir could not purchase Hist. Law Tracts, p. 103, 427.
. This restraint must greatly have impeded the progress of improvement, to
which the free and frequent alienation of estates so much contributes; a new
and monied possessor having many incitements, unknown to the indolence and
routine of hereditary holders.

Severe statutes were issued against those forestallers, who detained their
corn from the market, in expectation of a scarcity. In August 1452 it was
ordered that all the corn in the kingdom should be thrashed out before the last
day of May then next, and that none should keep more in a granary than was
sufficient for their family. The measures were regulated in 1458; the firlot,
containing eighteen pints, was to be sixteen inches and a half in the recipient
diameter; the half firlot, and peck, to follow in proportion Cap. 37, 73.
.

A parliament, held in July 1454, ordered every encouragement to foreign
merchants importing grain; and to Scottish merchants bringing it from England
Cap. 40.
. The act for that purpose in 1477 allows, as has already been mentioned, that
the chief support of the country was by foreign importation. The low state, and
slow progress, of agriculture may be further judged of from the statute of
James II, 1458, ordering that every man, using a plough of eight oxen, should
sow every year at the least one firlot of wheat, half a firlot of pease, and
forty beans, under a penalty of ten shillings to the baron Cap. 81.
: a mere transcript of a statute of James I in 1426.

The same parliament of 1458 decreed that no fences should be made of stakes,
sticks, or hewn wood, but only of lyand wood, a term not absolutely clear Cap.
87.
. Ordinances also appear for the destruction of eagles, bustards, kites, hawks,
and particularly wolves: for the latter purpose the sheriff or bailiff of the
county, where any appear, is to collect the people to hunt them; and the slayer
of the wolf is to receive one penny from every householder in the parish 1458,
cap. 84, 87.
. The burning of heath, from March till Michaelmas, is prohibited under the
penalty of five pounds, that the standing corn may not be damaged 1477, c. 76.
. In 1477 the legislature condescended to ordain that a smith, who injured a
horse in the shoeing, should supply another till he were sound; or if
irremediable, should exchange him Ib. c. 79.
.

The sowing of broom is ordered by a statute of 1458: it is still mashed, and
given to cattle in a scarcity of other food. The same act orders the
freeholders, when they grant their yearly leases at Whitsunday, to insist on
their tenants' planting wood and trees, and making hedges Cap. 80.
. But these regulations seem to have had little effect; and a tenant liable to
be turned out every year, must have had little spirit to plant or improve. Had
the legislature ordered long leases, their skill and patriotism would have been
more apparent. Even now the Scottish peasantry object to hedges, because
forsooth they shelter flocks of birds, who injure the grain; while the warmth
and protection from the wind, supply double the store devoured by these
intruders. So the use of oxen in agriculture is objected to by the servants,
because they cannot ride them. When we perceive what mean interests, and
prejudices, oppose improvements in enlightened ages, there is less room to
wonder at the slow progress of darker times.

An old chronicle has the following articles of intelligence. "1439. Was the
dear summer, for the boll of meal was at twenty four shillings, and the boll of
malt at two marks, and the boll of wheat at thirty shillings; and many died of
famine." In 1482, after the king's imprisonment in the castle of Edinburgh,
"the corn became more cheap, for the boll, that was at four pounds, was then
sold for thirty shillings of white (pure) silver Chron. end of Winton 17 D XX.
The numerals in the last words are not clear, and may be xxii not xxx.
." The learned Ruddiman estimates a boll of wheat in 1424 at two shillings; of
rye, barley, and pease, at one shilling and four pence; of oats at six pence:
an ox six shillings and eight pence; a horse thirteen and four pence Introd. ad
Andersoni Dipl. but his authority is the taxation act of James I, (see
Appendix;) and it is probable the articles are not estimated at full price.
. Even in 1523 the boll of meal was at thirteen shillings and four pence. The
above scarcities must of course have been enormous, and show the incredible
distress of the country in times of internal commotion; the value of the
commonest provisions being increased about twenty fold, as if the English
quarter were to rise from sixty shillings to sixty pounds!

Concerning the Useful Arts little information appears. Special regulations
were issued, in 1458, concerning works in gold and silver; the standard purity
of which is to be ascertained by a mark, stamped on it by the deacon of the
craft Cap. 65.
. In 1484 three marks were ordered; one of the artificer, one of the deacon,
the third of the town. No dyer of cloth is permitted to exercise the trade of a
draper; and the measure of cloth is to be computed exclusive of the selvage
1484, c. 96. 1458, c. 66. 1469, c. 32.
. Till a late epoch, Flanders was to supply Scotland with most of the articles
of useful art and manufacture.

SECTION IV. Commerce, Money, Navigation.
THE state of commerce in Scotland at this period may best be estimated from
the following lines of a noted old English poem, apparently written in the
reign of Edward IV. It is entitled The Bibel of English Policy; and contains a
number of just observations on the political interests of England, with some
account of the trade of most countries Extant in Harl. MS. 4011; and published
by Hakluyt, Vol. I. It is quoted by Seldom in his Mare Clausum, for the noted
lines, Four things our noble shows to me;
King, ship, swerd, and powar of the sea.

. That of Scotland is thus described.

"Of the comoditees of Scotland, and drapyng of her wolle in Flandres.

Also over all Scotland the comoditees
Are selles, hides, and of wolle the flees.
All this must pass by us away,
Into Flaundres by England, this is no nay.
And all her wolle is draped for to selle
In the towns of Poperyng, and of Belle;
Which the duke of Gloucester, in grate ire,
For her falshede set upon a fire.
And yet thai of Belle and Poperyng
Could never drape her wolle, for any thing,
But yef they had English wolle with all;
Our goodly wolle it is so generalle,
Nedfull to hem of Spayn, and Scotland als,
And other costs: this is not falls;
The worthi marchauntis, I do upon ydoo,
That this is true ye wot well how.
For the staple of that marchaundie
Of Scotland is Flaundres truly.
Than the Scotts ben charged at sye,
Out of Flaundres with litell mercerye,
And great plente of haberdashe ware,
And with cart wheles bare,
And barowes are laden in substance;
Thus must rude ware ben her chevesance.
So may they not forbere this Flemysh land,
Therefore yef we would manly take on hond
To keep the sea fro Flaundres, and fro Spayn,
And fro Scotland, and fro Litell Bretaigne,
We should right sone have pease, for all her bostes,
For they must needs pass by our English costs."
The main objects discoverable from those rude rimes are, that the chief
exports of Scotland were fells or skins, hides, and wool; that the wool was
manufactured at Popering and Bell, or Baileul, towns on the southern Flemish
coast, between Dunkirk and Calais; that to make fine cloth it was necessary to
mingle it with some English wool: and that the Scottish imports from Flanders
were mercery, but more haberdashery, cart-wheels, and wheel-barrows.

Further hints concerning commerce may be derived from the statutes. Salmon
formed an important article of export; in 1487 it was ordered that each barrel
should be capable of containing fourteen gallons; and that each burgh dealing
in that article should have three iron hoops, to measure the cask, which is
afterward to be marked with a hot iron. Cattle were not allowed to be sold
into England, except for ready money 1487, c. 110. 1451, c. 35.
. Many other regulations concerning merchandise have already been stated, in
narrating the transactions of the parliaments. It is singular that an act of
1458 Cap. 67.
, bearing that merchants must be burgesses worth at least three serplaiths of
wool, is only enacted by the clergy and barons; the interest of the burgesses
being esteemed a ground for excluding them from the deliberation.

A statute of 1467 considerably illustrates the subject. "It is ordained that
in future no ship be freighted without a charter-party, containing the
following agreements; namely that the master of the ship shall find a
sufficient steersman, tymmer-men, and ship-men sit for the service. That the
master gratuitously furnish the merchants with sire, water, and salt. If there
happen any contention or dispute between the master and the merchants, they
shall abide by the jurisdiction and decree of the town to which the ship is
freighted. That no merchant's goods be torn or spoiled by improper stowage, nor
anywise injured by the master or his servants, on penalty of losing the
freight, over and above compensation for the damage. That the master stow no
goods upon the upper deck, else they shall bear no freight; and no goods under
deck, that may injure the others in a tempest. That every ship exceeding five
lasts of goods shall pay to the chaplain of the nation in the foreign port, one
sack; and under five lasts, half a sack; on the penalty of five pounds to the
king. No drink money is to be paid to the master, or his agents. Each ship,
homeward bound, shall bring one tun of materials, for the church-work of the
town to which it is freighted Cap. 14. A lost was about twelve barrels, or two
sacks of wool. Sec Skene Gloff. voce Serplath.
."

Concerning foreign merchants an important regulation was issued by James III,
in his last parliament 1487. "For the common profit of the whole realm, and to
excite strangers of other realms to visit this, with grain and other
merchandise, to support the king's subjects; it is ordained, that in future all
strangers be treated honorably, with all favor, at whatever port they arrive.
That none of our sovereign lord's officers, nor other subjects, disturb them,
or arrest their persons, ships, or goods; but they shall have full liberty and
freedom to dispose of their goods, and sell them to freemen, without
compulsion or violence: nor shall any price be set upon their goods, except in
fair bargain and sale. That no new customs, impositions, nor exactions, be
levied on them, but solely the ancient duties. And when any articles are wanted
for the king, that his comptroller, or receiver, after the price has been
settled, shall have as much of the first and best, as is necessary; for which
immediate payment shall be made, that the strangers may not suffer by the
delay. That in future no person, under pretense of purchasing for the king,
take goods from strangers, to sell again, under the penalty of exile, and
escheat of movables. And any strangers now in the realm, complaining of any
goods taken from them, or any injury, shall have immediate payment and
compensation, according to justice: and in like manner any now absent, who may
arrive with complaints, shall receive compensation and justice, against any
person in the kingdom: so that by the administration of justice, and favorable
treatment of all strangers, they may be excited to return, to the great utility
of the whole kingdom Cap. 114.
."

The same monarch, about 1476, grants a passport to some Florentine merchants
Scotst. Call. 1476.
. Commerce was now in a flourishing condition in many countries: France, the
ally of Scotland, had beheld Jaques Coeur, goldsmith or banker to the king,
attain enormous wealth by industrious trade. In the reign of James II John
Dalrymple had the singular title of the king's merchant Ibid. Jan. and Aug.
1459.
; and perhaps carried on commerce for his sovereign's behoof. It has already
been stated that James III had ships, his own private property; one of which
was taken by a vessel belonging to the duke of Gloucester. Nor were the bishops,
and barons, averse to this laudable spirit of adventure.

Of the annual value of the customs, and extent of the trade, no evidence
remains In 1365 the customs on wool were valued at eight thousand marks yearly,
4to Register, f. 41.
; and any further illustrations of the state of commerce must be reserved till
another retrospect, after remarking that the collector of the customs is, in
the statutes, termed the customer: and that sums arising from them were offen
assigned by the monarch, as annuities of compensation or reward.

The nominal value of the Scottish money, compared to the English, was about one
to two, till 1451, when it became as one to two and a half; and five years
after as one to three. In 1467 it was about one to three and a half: and at
last, in 1475, as one to four: in which state it continued till the reign of
Mary. The gold coin has St. Andrew on one side, and the arms of Scotland on the
other; and from the latter it was termed the Lion; it also bore the name of
Demi, because in the time of James I it weighed half the English noble. James
III coined gold Unicorns, so called because that animal was chosen as the
supporter of the Scottish armorial bearings; apparently by this prince, the
supporter of the Stewart's arms having been a stag For the coin see Anderson's
Dipl. with Ruddiman's introduction; and Essay on Medals, London 1789, 2 vols.
8vo.
. It is almost unnecessary to mention that the devices, imputed to our
monarchs, and retailed by our later historians, are the futile inventions of
the last century They are quoted by Abercromby from one Keape's Genealogies
written about 1680. Granger and Guthrie repeat the idle fictions. Anderson
gravely publishes them with the coins!
.

The silver denominations were groats, half-groats, and pennies. Cochran, in
the reign of James III, issued base groats and pennies; the former were called
placks, and only passed for threepence; in 1482 this corrupt coin was revoked
Lindsay, 120. Chron. end of Winton, sub anno.
.

The copper coinage of Scotland commences in 1466. Of James III there are only
farthings: of his successor pennies, halfpence, and farthings. A little silver
is mingled, so as to constitute what is called billon.

The statutes show that English, French, and Flemish coins were not unfrequent
in currency.

Concerning Navigation little can be added till the reign of James IV, though
the Scottish navy commenced in that of his predecessor, when Wood and Barton
began to distinguish themselves. In 1458 the rates imposed for repairing the
harbor of Dundee were, ten shillings on every ship; five shillings on a
crayer, buss, barge, or ballinger; twelve pence on every fercost; and sixpence
on large boats Anderson Dict. of Commerce, I, 277.
. Other circumstances may be found in the text and notes of the narrative.

SECTION V. Ecclesiastic History, Literature, Language.
THE few incidents of ecclesiastic history are mostly interwoven in the
preceding books. Deservedly jealous of the papal power, our kings continued to
guard, by repeated statutes, the liberties of the Scottish church, which in some
measure corresponded with those of the Gallican. In 1471 the purchase of any
benefice or office at Rome was declared treason Cap. 44.
; that avaricious court contriving at this period to draw immense sums from
most European kingdoms, by the sale of benefices, by arbitrary taxations,
indulgences, and other arts: but the expense of the bulls of confirmation was
to continue a severe tax on the Scottish bishops and abbots.

The clergy loudly exclaimed against James III, for quashing the freedom of
election, and assuming into his own hands the nomination to vacant benefices,
which he sometimes sold to laymen. This right was to become a considerable
source of influence to the crown, when no minority intervened; but it was
perhaps one cause of the enmity betrayed by Mair, Boyce, and other ecclesiastic
writers, against the royal family and prerogative. The avarice of the pope, a
churchman, would have been more tolerable to them than that of their sovereign;
and the injury of their holy monopoly was an unpardonable oftence. James I had,
in his first parliament, ordered that no clergyman should pass or send an agent
out of the realm, without permission; and that no benefices should be purchased
Cap. 13, 14.
: but the royal nomination seems rarely to have been exercised till the reign
of James III; and the wealth of the church, which was at least equivalent to
that of all the lay-interest, became a great object of state intrigue. In 1481
"it is ordained by the king and his three estates, concerning the privilege of
the crown, used and observed in all times past, in the presentation to
benefices during a vacancy in the sees of bishops, that our sovereign lord, and
his successors, shall in future, during the vacation of a see, have power to
present to benefices, till the bishop show his bulls to the king's highness and
to the chapter. And in case that our sovereign lord, of his special grace and
favor, admit any prelate to his temporalities before he show his bulls, such
admission shall imply no prejudice nor harm to his highness, concerning the
said privilege and right of presentation Cap. 85.
."

While even the penury of Scotland was taxed to pamper papal avarice, and
luxury, the miseries of other kingdoms were extreme. On the enquiry into the
causes of the poverty of France, instituted in the States General held at Tours
in 1484, though the Tiers-Etat chiefly consisted of clergy and maistres, it was
agreed that the chief cause was the avarice of the popes, Alexander and Martin,
which had drained the kingdom of not less than two millions of gold: much of
the coin had also passed to England, and none remained in France except foreign
money. The bishoprics of France at that time amounting to one hundred and one,
the abbeys and conventual priories to more than three thousand, the effects of
papal extortion were very extensive; and it is ordered that no legate be be in
future admitted to pillage the kingdom Jaligny hist. de Charles VIII, Paris
1684, folio, p. 399 -- 409. See in the same work, p. 598, a papal;
dispensation, mentioning the days of each month, on which Anne duchess of
Bourbon might obtain remission of all sins, committed by her, or by any ten
persons whom she might name. No religious system even perverted morality so
much as the roman catholic; pardon for sins is ever a dangerous tenet; a better
creed would prevent crimes by denying any celestial pardon.
.

It is not a little remarkable that the papal dominions themselves, at a time
when all the wealth of Europe was pouring into them, were almost a desert; a
striking instance of the absurd and heterogeneous nature of ecclesiastic power
in temporal affairs. The state of the church lands in Scotland remains in
obscurity; but while the clergy sometimes aspired to commerce, they do not
appear to have advanced agriculture.

Ecclesiastic censures, and excommunication, beginning to be despised in the
reign of James II, they were enforced by secular penalties 1443, c. 7. 1449, c.
11.
. In 1469 the power of appointing notaries in civil causes was assumed by the
king, though the German emperor had before been understood to possess that
prerogative. Yet the regal notaries are to be examined by the bishops; and the
papal notaries retain their power. 1469, c. 31.
.

The eloquence of the pulpit remained in a low condition. Some judgment of it
may be formed from the latin oration of Whitlaw to Richard III, in which he
quotes Virgil, Statius, Cicero, and Seneca; and among other arguments for peace
says, "Christ was born in peace, was buried in peace, sleeped in peace, and
rested in peace." Yet in England at that period Dr. Shaw, and Friar Pinke, were
celebrated preachers at St. Paul's cross, in the popular idiom to a popular
audience; and perhaps instituted the execrable example of political sermons, by
promoting the sanguinary usurpation of Richard. In delineating the character of
bishop Kennedy, Lindsay says "he caused all parsons and vicars, to remain at
their parish churches, for instruction and edifying of their flocks, and caused
them to preach the word of God unto the people, and to visit them when they
were sick. And also the said bishop visited every church within his diocese,
four times in the year, and preached to the parishioners the word of God truly;
and enquired of them if they were duly instructed in the word of God, by their
parson and vicar, and if their sacraments were duly administered, and if the
poor were sustained, and the youth educated and taught, conformably to the
order that was taken in the church of God. And where he found that order was
not followed he made great punishment, to the effect that God's glory might
shine through all the country within his diocese; giving good example to all
future archbishops, and churchmen in general, to cause the patrimony of the
church of God be used for the glory of God, and the common benefit of the poor
P. 110, edit. 1778, 8vo. That sermons were common in the vulgar tongue before
the reformation also appears from the Diarium Vazstenense, p. 150, where in
1489 the bishop of Lincopen "fecit sermonem ad populum in vuigari."
."

The remainder of the character of this venerable prelate may well interest the
reader, as a picture of ecclesiastic worth, drawn in simple and pleasing
colors. "He was a man well learned in the civil laws, and of great experience
in them; and by his genius, literature, knowledge, lengthened practice, and
years, he knew the nature of Scotishmen so well, that he was the most able of
all the lords of Scotland, spiritual or temporal, to give any wise counsel, or
an answer when the time occurred, before the prince or the council; and
specially in the time of parliament, or when the ambassadors of other countries
came for their affairs, there was none so able as he to give them answer,
conformably to their petition, and the desires of their masters. When any
commotions occurred in the realm, he showed equal wisdom; for he gave counsel
to king James II, when he was ready to depart out of Scotland, for fear of the
earl of Douglas who had gathered against him to the number of forty thousand
men, ready to give him battle, or else to chase him out of the realm." Lindsay
adds that the bishop led the king into his oratory; and after prayers produced
a sheaf of arrows, not to be broken when joined, but easily fractured apart:
from this demonstration of an Esopian apologue he showed that the power of the
aristocracy must be assailed by degrees Ibid. Lindsay is so fond of this story,
that he has interpolated it into his translation of Boyce's reign of James II,
p. 82 -- 84; and repeats it here at full length.
.

The state of the church may also be estimated from the old poem before quoted
Priests of Peebles, ubi supra, p. 16, 17.
. One of the questions is, Why the pious bishops, and clergy, of former times,
exercised all good works, and performed miracles; while no such practice or
power, appeared among their successors? The answer is, that anciently the
bishops were chosen by the people, after invocation of the Holy Ghost, either
from among the clergy of that chapter, or by selecting from those of all the
kingdom the person most proper for that particular see: that now they are
appointed by the king, and introduced by the sole hand of power; so that they
can work no miracles, except by the special assistance of the devil: that no
man procures a benefice by merit, literature, or even birth, but solely by
gold, simony being accounted no transgression: and the Holy Ghost having no
hand in the election, his precious gifts were in consequence not imparted;
while the regal inspiration could only confer the love of gold, a gift of no
miraculous nature: and the bishops being themselves shorn, they practiced the
shearing of their flocks with great affiduity and success; this being the
genuine meaning of the symbolic ecclesiastical tonsure.

While the bishops, and many abbots, were lords as having seats in parliament,
the inferior clergy were distinguished by the titles of Master and Sir; the
former perhaps appropriated to a Master of Arts, the latter to one who had
passed all his degrees, or possessed a considerable benefice. When Mary of
Gelder came to Scotland, Gerard Boot monk of the Chartreuse, her confessor
attended her; on a voyage to Flanders he was taken by the English and robbed.
In recompense Henry VI orders him a present of twenty yards of fine black cloth
Rymer's Unprinted Papers, British Museum, No. 4610, art. 67.
.

Though the repeated internal commotions were unfavourable to the progress of
literature, yet several writers arose during this period. Margaret the
dauphinefs, as has already appeared, was a poetess in French; and perhaps some
of her ballads and rondeaux may lurk in the libraries of France. Holland, the
author of the Houlat, wrote about 1450; Henry the Rimer, a strolling poet,
repeated his fables concerning Wallace, about 1460 or 1470: and about the same
period Clerk of Tranent seems to have composed his metrical romances on the
adventures of Gawin, a knight of Arthur's court For the poets in general see
the various volumes of ancient Scottish poetry published by the author.
. The riming prophecies, ascribed to Merlin, Beda, and others, were of English
growth; but were adopted in Scotland with all the credulity of a dark period,
and had even their influence on public measures, these books of the Sybil being
consulted and repeated, in this and the following century, with great
confidence in the application of the prediction They are the best remains of
the English poetry of the fifteenth century; and there is an excellent MS in
the marquis of Lansdowne's library.
.

Holland and Clerk build their stanza in a singular manner; and the
alliteration, and frequent recurrence of the same rhyme, render their poetry
affected and obscure.

In the middis of Maii, at morn as I went,
Throw mirth markit on mold, till a grene meid;
The blemis blywest of blee fro the sone blent,
That all brychnit about the bordouris on breid.
With alkin herbis off air, that war in erd lent,
The fieldis flowryschit, and fretful of fairheid.
So soft was the seasons our sovrane down sent,
Throw the greabill gift off his godheid,
That all was amiable ower the air, and the erd.
Thus throw the clifts so clear
Above, but fallow or fere,
I waikit till a riweir,
That ryallye rer'd Holland's Houlat, Scottish Poems Reprinted, III, 147.
.
Nor in the list of poets must the author of the Tales of the Priests of
Peebles be forgotten, whose homely rimes reflect considerable light on the
manners of the age.

The chief chronicler of this period was Bowar, the enlarger and continuator of
Fordon's work. He wrote in the year 1444 P. 490: in the 14th year of the age of
James II, born in 1430.
; and Scottish history is indebted to his labor, though his deplorable defect
of judgment render his work a mere chaos of materials, mingled with eccentric
digressions, and excursive reading. Yet from these the state of learning in the
country may be estimated. He quotes upwards of one hundred authors, and among
them many latin classics; but former compilations no doubt supplied him with
much of his erudition. The common use of paper rapidly increased the number of
manuscripts: and the invention of printing was still more to serve the cause of
science.

Bowar had unhappily no successor till John Mair wrote in 1521: and for the
affairs of the fifteenth century we are indebted to the researches of Lindsay,
Ferrerius, Lesley, and Buchanan, who do not indicate their sources of
information. Yet apparently short chronicles were written, and preserved in the
monasteries, till they perished in the violence of the reformation, or
mouldered amid the neglect of literature, in the succeeding century of
ecclesiastic dispute and fanaticism. In his last chapter Bowar says he desists
from writing, lest he might seem to flatter the living actors; and he closes
with the following advice. "It is properly ordered in most countries, and as I
have heard in England, that every monastery of royal foundation should have its
appropriated scribe, to narrate the more memorable events, that occur during
each reign, in that and the neighboring countries, according to strict truth,
and chronology. On the death of a king, these chroniclers proceed to the first
general council, and produce their labors; which are referred to the
examination of the most sagacious and skillful, who from the whole digest one
summary chronicle. The books are then returned to the libraries of the
monasteries, as authentic chronicles deserving of faith, lest by the lapse of
time the memory of events should perish in the kingdom. So would I advise our
king to order, lest if the present work should be lost, which heaven forbid,
the memory of popes, kings, peers, and illustrious men, should also perish;
with the incitements to virtue, or the cautions against faults, which are
afforded by the perusal of their actions P. 516, 517.
." This advice was unhappily not followed: and our monarchs, amid their
patronage of the arts, seem little to have attended to the utility and glory of
national history. The monastic cellar was better replenished than the library;
and the jolly inhabitants preferred one terrestrial beauty to all the nine
muses. In France, as has appeared in narrating the events of 1448, there was a
chronicler at St. Denis, who inserted narratives upon the oaths of the
relators: and indeed every historian ought to write as if he had made a solemn
asseveration, in the presence of God and his country, that truth shall be his
sole pursuit. The judicious Fortescue informs us that the chronicler of St.
Albans wrote, at the end of every month, what had happened in its course: and
that this work, which was called Flores Chronicarum, was of more authority than
any in England Declaration of Sir John Fortescue on certain writings sent from
scotland, against the title of Edward IV to the English crown. MS. Harl. 1757.
.

In the other departments of science little appears. Sir Gilbert Hay, formerly
chamberlain to Charles VII of France, in 1456 translated Bonet's Arbre des
Batailles, a once popular book of arms and heraldry, into Scottish, at the
request of William Sinclair earl of Orkney and chancellor Mackenzie's lives Sc.
writers from the MS. in his possession.
.

For the language of this epoch the appendix may be consulted, where several
papers in Scottish will be found. In general there is little difference, in the
speech of England or Scotland, between this and the following century; and the
spelling is as little redundant.

SECTION VI. Ornamental Arts, Manners, Dress.
THE Gothic architecture had now attained its greatest perfection, in
sublimity, richness, and variety. About 1444 William Sinclair, the celebrated
earl of Orkney, founded a collegiate church at Roslin, four miles from
Edinburgh, for a provost, six prebendaries, and two singing boys Bowar, 541,
says it was building when he wrote, 1444. Crawf. Off. 34, dates the foundation
1441. And see Spottiswoode, Rel. Houses, p. 288. If the remaining chapel be the
chief fabric, it can hardly be called a collegiate church.
. A chapel, which remains entire, is a gem of Gothic architecture, universally
known and admired.

James III was so fond of this art that Cochran, an architect, became his chief
favorite. Besides the great hall in the castle of Stirling, he founded the
royal chapel there, an institution of great magnificence for that age Lindsay,
etc.
. The dean was to be the queen's confessor, and to have episcopal jurisdiction:
this dignity was first annexed to the provostry of Kirkheugh near St. Andrew's,
another royal chapel; and afterward to the bishopric of Galloway. There were
besides a sub-dean, sacristan, chanter, treasurer, chancellor, archdeacon,
sixteen chaplains, and six singing boys, with a master of music. The endowments
consisted of two abbeys, numerous churches, and lands. James IV was to maintain
and enlarge the institution; and to procure the papal confirmation
Spottiswoode, ib.
. The architecture, and decorations, apparently corresponded with the greatness
of the revenue annexed, and with the royal favor and piety.

In the year 1458 bishop Kennedy founded St. Salvator's college in St.
Andrew's: and erected a magnificent tomb for himself in which he was interred
in 1466 Ibid.
. This tomb is a favorable specimen of the state of the arts at that period.
But a Turkish custom, of a plain stone, with a large hole or two to collect
rainwater, that the birds may find drink, breathes more of christian humility
and charity.

The large golden medal of James III, appended to the shrine of St. John at
Amiens, and minutely described by Du Cange, was probably the production of an
Italian or Flemish artist. That some eminent foreign painter had also visited
Scotland about 1482, appears from the celebrated picture at Kensington, in the
form of a folding altar piece, painted on both sides, or in four compartments.
The first represents the king kneeling; behind him is his son, a youth about
twelve years of age, which ascertains the date; and St. Andrew the patron saint
of Scotland. The royal crown is not arched, nor was apparently till the reign
of James V, when new regalia were ordered, but it has high fleurons of great
richness; the robe is of a lilac hue furred with ermine; the vest, cloth of
gold. In the second compartment the queen appears, also kneeling, in a kirtle
of cloth of gold, and blue robe; her head-dress one blaze of gold and jewels:
the arms depicted with exact heraldry indicate the daughter of Denmark; and
behind her is a personage in plate-armour, apparently her father in the
character of St. Canute, the patron of his kingdom.

Of the two compartments, on the reverse of this grand piece, one represents
the Trinity. In the other an ecclesiastic kneels; but his heraldry of three
buckles and a cheveron can hardly be traced, except to the obscure family of
Bonkil in the Merse It may be Sir William Rogers, or some other eminent
foreigner.
. Behind is a kind of organ, with two angels, not of ideal beauty, and perhaps
portraits of the king's two sisters, Mary lady Hamilton, and Margaret then
unmarried; a conjecture supported by the uncommon ornament of a coronet on the
head of one of the angels. Hardly can any kingdom in Europe boast of a more
noble family picture of this early epoch: and it is in itself a convincing
specimen of the attention of James III to the arts The style of painting, as
usual in such early pieces, is that of the miniatures in manuscripts enlarged,
originally the productions of monks and nuns. In that curious work the Diarium
Vazstenense, published by Benzelius at Upsal 1721, 410, being a minute
chronicle of events happening at Wadstena, on the Wetter lake, in a convent of
monks and nuns united, a privilege peculiar to frigid regions, the following
notices occur, concerning the arts nourished by the monasteries. "1477.
Dominica infra octavas b. Martini, obiit soror Botildis Paedhers dotter, quae
fuit bona scriptrix, et scripsit magna volumina, missalia et alia."

"1487. In tertia dominica post octavas epiphaniae Domini, Dn. Henricus episc.
Lincopensis consecravit unam virginem in sororem, nomine Christinam
Henriksdotter, natam Upsaliae, et unum fratrem laicum, nomine Gerardum, natione
Theotonicum, qui novit sculpere et depingere."

"1491. In die S. S. Cosmae et Damiani transibant fratres Petrus Ingemari
sacerdos, et Gerardus laicus, versus Lubeck, ad faciendum imprimi libros
coelestes Revelationum S. Birgittae. Et post annum evolutum, impressis et
perfectis octingentis voluminibus in papyro, et sedecim duntaxat in pergameno,
redierunt in monasterium suum, anno Dn. 1492, circa festum S. Katharinae
virginis et martyris."

"1520. In crastino S. Gregorii obiit soror Christina Hanssadotter Braska, anno
a sua professione lxvii. Haec fuit bona scriptrix, et scripserat plurimos
libros. Deo gratias."

The unicorns, or gold coins, of James III are of good artists for the time.
For the seals of this and preceding periods may be consulted the work of Mr.
Astle on the subject; and the drawings, preserved in some MS. collections by
Sir James Balfour, in the Harleian library. The seals of the middle ages in
general are well illustrated by Manni, Osservazioni Istoriche sopra i Sigilli,
Florence 1739 -- 1744, 6 vols. 4to.


.

In describing the character of that prince, Ferrerius mentions that he not
only loved literature, and invited John Ireland a celebrated Scottish doctor of
the Sorbonne into his kingdom, and rewarded his talents with a rich benefice;
but extended his patronage to music in particular. William Roger, an excellent
English musician, having attended the ambassadors of Edward IV into Scotland in
1474, James was delighted with his performances; and persuading him to remain
in his court, raised him to knighthood. "Under the instruction of this man, the
most celebrated of his profession, numerous eminent musicians arose in the
court of Scotland: and, even so late as 1529, many great musicians boasted that
they were of his school f. 391.
."

Holland, in his poem of the Houlat or owl, apparently a satire on James II, by
a partizan of the house of Douglas, mentions no less than twenty five kinds of
musical instruments Scottish Poems, 1792, Vol. III, p. 179.
.

In proceeding to consider the state of Manners, the military exercises attract
the first notice. To promote the practice of archery, the games of football,
and the golf, continued under strong prohibition. Yet the highlanders appear to
have been the chief archers in the ancient Scottish armies, while the lowlanders
preferred the spear. In describing the army of James III, in 1488, Lindsay
enumerates no less than ten thousand highlanders with bows, under the earls of
Huntley and Athole The author of the Present State of Scotland, 1682, mentions,
p. 6, bows and arrows as the chief weapons of the highlanders, even of that
period.
. Repeated statutes were ineffectual to introduce archery in the lowlands. One
of the most precise is that of James II, in his noted parliament of 1458. "It
is decreed and ordained that the displays of weapons be held by the lords and
barons, spiritual and temporal, four times in the year: and that the football
and golf be utterly cried down, and not to be used. That the bow-marks be made,
a pair of buts at every parish church, and shooting be practiced. That every
man shoot six shots at the least; and that two pence be levied upon the absent,
for drink to the shooters. The practice to last from Easter till All Saints;
and all to be ready by next midsummer. That there be a bowyer, and fletcher, in
every chief town of a shire; the town to furnish them with the necessary
materials to serve the country. The penalty on football and golf, a fine to the
baron; and if he neglect, the king's officers shall levy it. If the parish be
large, there shall be three, four, or five bow-marks, in the most convenient
places; and that all men exceeding twelve and under fifty years of age practice
archery Cap. 64
."

Among the great the chief exercise of arms was the solemn tournament, which
might almost be classed under the head of Tactics, did that science comprize
the preparations for war. These grand displays of martial skill were seldom
undertaken by any, save those who had been solemnly invested with the order of
knighthood, an institution forming a kind of fraternal society throughout
Europe, and which contributed not a little to divest war of its horrors, to
abate national animosity, and to promote the intercourse and consequent
civilization of remote kingdoms.

Knights were generally created with great solemnity by the king himself;
sometimes by the general, or other aged knights of eminent fame before a
battle. The ancient oath administered in Scotland has been preserved, and
deserves insertion, as a curious relic of the spirit of chivalry.

1. "I shall fortify and defend the christian religion, to the uttermost of my
power.

2. "I shall be loyal and true ot my sovereign lord the king; to all orders of
chivalry, and to the noble office of arms.

3. "I shall fortify and defend justice at my power; and that without favor or
enmity.

4. "I shall never flee from my sovereign lord the king; nor from his
lieutenants, in time of affray of battle.

5. "I shall defend my native realm from all aliens and strangers.

6. "I shall defend the just action and quarrel of all ladies of honor, of all
true and friendless widows of orphans, and of maidens of good fame.

7. "I shall do diligence, wheresoever I hear that there are any murderers,
traitors, or masterful robbers, who oppress the king's lieges, and poor people,
to bring them to the law at my power.

8. "I shall maintain and uphold the noble state of chivalry, with horse,
armor, and other knightly habiliments; and shall help and succor those of the
same order, at my power, if they have need.

9. "I shall enquire and seek, to have the knowledge and understanding of all
the articles, and points, contained in the books of chivalry.

"All these premises to observe, keep, and fulfill, I oblige me; so help me God
by my own hand, and by God himself From a book entitled "Certain matters
composed together," Edin. 1594, 4to, being a kind of Scottish court calendar.
The oath occurs sign. F. 2, v. whence it is copied in Selden's Titles of
Honor, and Drummond's works. There are however modern interpolations, here
omitted, as art. 1, "and Christ's holy evangel, presently preached in this
realm," an addition by the reformers: art. 4, "the king's majesty."
."

The Scottish knights continued to vye with any in Europe. The celebrated
tourney of 1449 has already been briefly mentioned in the historical narrative,
but a minute account of that noted contest shall here be translated, as
literally as possible, from the Memoirs of Olivier de la March, a contemporary
Burgundian writer; as a picture of manners, delineated in plain and simple
colors Live. I. c. 17; p. 271 -- 274, edit. Gand 1566, 4to. Meriadet was a
squire of Bretagne, ib. p. 265. Jaques de Lalain was at length killed by a
cannon-shot in 1453, p. 394: the church and mansion of Lalain were in Hainault,
a noted country of warriors.
.

"When Messire Jaques de Lalain saw that there was no further occasion for him
there, he returned, and sound the good duke of Burgundy in his city of Lille,
who received him favorably: but he soon took leave of the duke, and set our
for Scotland. He was accompanied by Messire Simon de Lalain his uncle, and
Herve de Meriadet, and many other worthy men; and so far as I understand
Messire James Douglas, brother of the earl of Douglas, and the said Messire
Jaques de Lalain, had formerly wished to meet in arms, and had sought each
other for that purpose. At the instance of the said Messire James Douglas
battle was permitted by the king, between him and M. Jaques de Lalain: but the
affair grew and multiplied so that a conflict to outrance was concluded on, of
three noble Scotishmen, against M. Simon and M. Jaques de Lalain, and Herve de
Meriadet, all to fight at once before the king of Scotland. And when the day of
the conflict came, the king most honorably received them in the lists: and
though I was not myself a spectator, yet I must recount the ceremonies, for
example to future times. For three memorable things occur, besides the battle,
which was most fiercely disputed on both sides."

"The first was, that when the three belonging to the court of Burgundy were
all armed, and each his coat of arms on his back, ready to enter into battle,
M. Jaques de Lalain spoke to M. Simon his uncle, and to Meriadet, and said,
"Messieurs and my brothers in the conflict, you know that it is my enterprise
which has led us into this kingdom, and that in consequence the battle has been
granted to M. James Douglas; and although each of us may assist his comrade, I
beg and request you that, whatever befall me this day, none of you attempt to
succor me, for it would seem that you had passed the sea, and entered into
this conflict only to assist me; and that you did not hold or know me a man
able to sustain the assault and combat of one knight, and hence less account
will be held of me and my knighthood."

"After this request sallied from the pavilions the champions in armor,
furnished with axes, lances, swords, daggers; and they had leave either to
throw or push their lances as they chose."

"The two Messires James Douglas and Jaques de Lalain were in the middle, to
encounter each other, which they did. On the right was M. Simon de Lalain, who
was to engage a Scottish squire, and Meriadet was to meet a knight of high power
and fame; but they found themselves transverse, so that the knight was opposite
to M. Simon: and then Meriadet, (who desired to assail him who was appointed,
without regard to the strength or fame of his antagonist,) passed across, to
place himself before M. Simon, and meet his man. But the good knight coldly and
firmly turned toward Meriadet, and said, "Brother let each keep himself to his
opponent; and I shall do well if it please God." So Meriadet resumed his rank
before his antagonist: and this is the second thing which I desired to
commemorate."

"The champions began to advance each against the other; and because that the
three on the part of Burgundy doubted least the place might be too confined,
for so many lances, they all three threw their lances behind them, (the third
cause of my recital;) and seized their axes, and rushed on the Scots, who came
within push of lance, but that availed them nothing. Though all fought at once,
I shall rehearse the adventures one after the other."

"The two Messires James, Douglas and de Lalain, met each other, and approached
so nigh, that of all their weapons there remained none save a dagger, which the
Scottish knight held. The said M. Jaques de Lalain seized him by the arm, near
his hand which held the dagger, so closely, that the Scot could not avail
himself of it; and he held the other arm below the arm-pit so that they turned
each other round the lists for a long time."

"M. Simon de Lalain and the Scottish knight were strong champions, and neither
of them skilled in warding blows of the axe: like two valiant knights they
attacked each other of often, that in a short time they had crushed the visors
of their basinets, and their weapons and armor, with mutual blows; and the
fight seemed equal."

"On the other side was Herve de Meriadet, whom the Scotishman attacked with
the push of lance; but Meriadet turned off the blow with the but end of his
axe, so that the lance fell from the Scot's hands: and Meriadet pursued him so
keenly that, before the Scot could undo his axe, he came within his guard, and
with one blow felled him to the earth. Meriadet then left the Scot to arise,
who was quick, light, and of great spirit, and arose speedily, and ran to
Meriadet for the second time. Meriadet, (who was one of the most redoubted
squires of his time for strength, lightness, coolness and skill in arms and in
wrestling,) received the assault with great composure, then returned it, and
again struck him to the ground with his axe; when the Scot again attempted to
rise, but Meriadet struck him on the back with his hand and knee, and made him
fall flat on the sand. And notwithstanding the request which Messire Jaques de
Lalain had made, the said Meriadet, seeing the struggle of the two knights,
advanced to assist the said Jaques; but the king of Scots threw down his baton,
and they were parted. Now though it be against my plan, and though I write of
this combat without having seen it, I nevertheless report it truly, by the
report of the Scots and of our party."

Such is this curious contemporary relation. Other valuable materials
concerning the manners of this period, may be found in the annals of De Coucy,
another Burgundian coeval historian, who probably attended Mary of Gelder to
Scotland in 1449, as before mentioned. On her landing, the clergy, citizens,
and people of Leith, were ready to receive her; and she thence proceeded on
horseback, behind the lord of Vere, to Edinburgh, where about ten thousand
people advanced to meet her. A bishop, and the chancellor, conducted her to the
monastery of the Jacobins, or Gray Friars. After the king's first visit on
thursday, the countesses of Orkney, and March, and another, attended on her by
the royal command. When she had sufficiently refreshed herself from the
fatigues of the voyage, James, on the following wednesday, sent to appoint the
next day for the wedding; and presented her with two hackneys worth about
thirty French crowns. On thursday, the wedding day, the king came on horseback,
and was dressed in a gray robe lined with white cloth, boots and spurs. The
queen was clothed with a robe of violet color, lined with ermine; in a strange
fashion, says De Coucy, if compared with those of France; and her long hair
hanging down. The coronation of the queen immediately followed the marriage
Hist. par De Coucy in the edition of Jean Chartier, Paris 1661, folio, p. 574
-- 578.
. From some of the preceding circumstances it would rather appear that James II
was austere in manners, and expense; and reversed his father's magnificence,
which was unpopular in a penurious country, and was imputed to an English
education.

At the festival, which followed the solemnity, the first dish was the figure
of a boar's head painted, and stuck full of hards, or coarse bits of flax,
which was served up in an enormous platter, surrounded with thirty two banners,
bearing the arms of the king and chief nobles. The flax was then kindled, amid
the joy and acclamations of the numerous and brilliant assembly in the hall. A
ship of silver, exquisitely wrought, was then introduced, probably containing
salt and spices in distinct compartments. The earl of Orkney then entered,
accompanied by four knights, preceding the first service: and every service was
brought by about thirty or forty persons all bearing dishes. At the second
table the countess of Orkney, and other ladies, sat with the lord of Vere. At a
third was a patriarch, says De coucy, perhaps a papal legate, or foreign
visitant, or some Scotishman enjoying a titular dignity; three bishops, an
abbot, and other churchmen; the five dignitaries drinking out of a large hanap,
or bowl of wood, without spilling any: the wine, and other liquors, being as
abundant as seawater. The dinner continued about five hours, there being
neither dancing nor supper. On the following days there was excellent cheer in
their way, proceeds this author, which was very rude and strange, when compared
with that of France. In five or six days Vere set out on his return; and the
king made some presents. The queen weeped at their departure, though Isabel de
Lalain, and two or three other women, and as many men of her country, were left
to serve her Ibid.
.

In the reign of James III, the author of the old poem before quoted represents
his three priests as enjoying their collation at Peebles, consisting of three
roasted capons with sauce, and many other meats; and imputes to their desire of
privacy that they had only a boy to serve them. A roundel or round table,
covered with a fair cloth, stands before them; and neither bread nor liquor are
wanting. Taverns, and dice, are reprobated; and a merchant's cupboard of plate
is estimated at three thousand Scottish pounds, or about seven thousand five
hundred of modern sterling currency P. 3, 11, 10. Besides plate, mazer cups are
mentioned by the Scottish poets. This substance, corresponding with the French
madre, appears to be china, or earthen ware, painted like the old vases
ridiculously ascribed to Raphael.
.

The advances of luxury among the aristocracy, and clergy, may also be
estimated by that of concomitant crimes. The two statutes of 1450, against
domestic and foreign importers of poisons, show that profligacy had made more
rapid strides than civilization. Another sort of poison, bad wine, was
interdicted by a statute of 1482, declaring the penalty of death to any
importer, seller, or composer of corrupted or mixed liquor 1450, c. 30, 31.
1482, c. 89.
.

Game and hunting were luxuries of the great. In 1458 it is ordered that none
destroy the nests or eggs, or fowls themselves when moulting; nor kill hares or
rabbits in the season of snow, on pain of indictment. A penalty of ten pounds
is in 1474, imposed on stealers of hounds or hawks, trained or untrained; or
even taking eggs, or young hawks, out of nests in another person's property:
that for robbing the nests of partridges or wild ducks is forty shillings. The
slaughter of does, roes, or deer, in time of snow, or their young under a
year's growth, is punished by indictment, and a fine of ten pounds: and the
stealing of deer or roes from enclosures or parks, rabbits, pigeons, or fish in
ponds or ditches, is made liable to the same punishment as any other act of
theft 1458, c. 84. 1474, c. 60, 61.
.

To diversify the prolixity of a life of idleness, and relieve the formalities
of ceremony, were objects attempted by the maintenance of a regular fool, who
however had generally sense enough to respect his master. He was distinguished
by his party colored coat, his cap with large ears and bells, and his club or
bauble, ornamented with grotesque allusions to his profession. The minstrels
and choristers were musicians, so termed because in the middle ages church
music was the only branch of the art which was regularly cultivated. But
Lindsay mentions that a part of the choristers of the chapel-royal at Stirling
always attended James III, "to make him merry P. 136.
;" and it appears that the ecclesiastic musicians did not disdain strains of
recreation. In Holland's poem the minstrels are solely occupied in singing
hymns, accompanied with numerous musical instruments Scottish Poems, 1792, III,
177.
. The poets, composers of songs and romances, were generally of the clerical
order: the term of minstrel was afterward applied to any musician, but the
only strolling poets were the Irish or highland bards, whose rude manners are
depicted by Holland, and who are classed in the statutes with common vagabonds:
while James III so highly favored minstrels, or musicians, that he permitted
them to equal knights or heralds in their apparel. Holland's Irish bard sings a
wild song, and fabulous genealogy, in his native language: and afterward
fights with two fools, his proper equals and companions Ibid. 180, 181.
.

The character of RIMER, or poet, was as superior to that of minstrel, as the
jugler was beneath it. In Holland's curious production the juglour merely
exhibits feats of manual magic; a view of hunting is followed by a sea fight:
the king's cup is suddenly changed; a gray goose becomes a gold garland, sand
becomes silver; and the like experiments of common adepts Ib. 179. The vague
appellations, and corrupt latinity, of the middle ages confound remote
characters, as the minstrel and jugler, etc.
.

Yet the belief in real magic, and witchcraft, was now prevalent both in
England and Scotland. The duchess of Gloucester had been imprisoned as a witch
In 1442: and see many writs in Rymer De sortilegis capiendis.
: and about thirty years after we find many witches and magicians condemned to
the flames in Scotland, for conspiring with Mar against the king's life. This
new folly was to vegetate, and flourish, for near three centuries.

The manners of the great may be further illustrated from the Tales of the
Priests of Peebles. One question is, why the peers have so much degenerated
from their ancestors in virtue, wisdom, and valor? The answer is, that the
royal officers of justice diminish the privileges of the lords, by indicting
and fining their tenants for pretended crimes; so that the latter are reduced
to poverty, and unable to arm themselves properly to attend their masters in
war, or to pay their rents in peace. The peers in consequence become poor
themselves, and endeavor to replenish their coffers by unworthy marriages with
the opulent bastard-daughters of priests, or heiresses of merchants; or by
selling the right of marriage of their sons to rich commoners Ut supra, p. 12,
13.
. But this satire rather refers to the artful avarice of James III; and seems
to evince that a great cause of the conspiracy of the peers was their
impoverishment, occasioned by his exactions on pretense of the administration
of justice; which, as appears from the statutes themselves, was never in a
worse state than under his reign.

The Dress of this period may best be illustrated from several statutes on the
subject. The following is of August 1455 Cap. 47.
.

"Concerning the habits of the Earls, Lords of Parliament, Commissioners of
Burghs, and Advocates, to be used in the parliament or general council, it is
ordained,

"That all Earls shall use mantles of brown granit (or fine cloth,) open
before, lined with white furr, and trimmed in front with same furring, of a
hand's breadth and down to the belt; with little hoods of the same cloth,
pendent on the shoulders.

"And the other Lords of Parliament shall have a mantle of red, open in like
manner before, lined with silk, or furred with cristie gray, griece, or purray,
(some furs inferior to the ermine worn by earls;) with a hood of the same
cloth, furred as the lining.

"And all Commissioners of Burghs each to have a pair of clokes (a cloak) of
blue cloth, furred to the feet, open on the right shoulder; the fur of
proportional value; and a hood of the same.

"Whatever Earl, Lord of Parliament, or Commissioner of the Burghs, shall enter
the parliament or general council, except dressed as above, shall instantly
deposit a fine of ten pounds to the king.

"In every burgh, where a parliament or general council is to be held, there
shall be erected at the bar three tiers of benches, each higher than the other,
for the commissioners of the burghs to sit upon; under the penalty of ten
pounds to be raised on the town where the parliament or general council shall
be held.

"All men hired as fore-speakers (or advocates) shall wear green habits, in the
form of a short tunic, (tunikil) the sleeves to be open like those of a tabard.
Any advocate otherwise appearing before the parliament or general council, and
speaking for a reward, shall forfeit five pounds to the king."

The curiosity of this statute may excuse a few remarks. The brown granit, worn
by the earls, was perhaps a tawny fine cloth, a color fashionable in this
century, till it was supplanted by a brighter tint scarlet; a term
corresponding to granit, and applied by metonymy to the fineness of the cloth
or to its color. The common people, as has been already mentioned, were
allowed to wear on holidays light blue, green, or red; tartan being as yet
little known or confined to the great: but the finest cloths appear to have
been generally dyed tawny or scarlet; while purple and crimson were tints
almost confined to velvets, and silks, and appropriated to princes. May it not
be inferred, from the particular order for seats to the commissioners of the
burghs, either within or without the bar, for the expression is dubious, that
they were sometimes obliged to stand in the presence of the haughty clergy and
aristocracy?

In 1458 this act was confirmed; with the addition that the king should order
patterns of all the dresses to be made Cap. 68.
. The sumptuary law of the same year has already been stated in the first
section of this retrospect: it permits the dignified or rich clergy to wear
gowns of scarlet with costly furs.

James III in 1471 ordered that, considering the great penury of the realm, and
the expense of importing silk, none should wear it in doublets, gowns, or
clokes, whose revenue was under one hundred pounds Scottish money in landed
rent, excepting knights, minstrels, and heralds: and that women, whose husbands
came not within the above descriptions, should not use silk in linings, but
only in making the collar and sleeves Cap. 46.
. The dress of this prince, and his queen, has been already described.

The gowns and mantles were sometimes indecently short at this period, as
appears from a penalty imposed by an English statute of the twenty-second year
of Edward IV. The doublet and hose were long to remain in the same form: but
shoes, more than six inches broad at the toes, began to succeed the other
extreme of long peaks. Louis XI of France, 1461 -- 1483, appears in those broad
shoes See Camden's Remains, art. Apparel: and Montsaucon Mon. de la mon. Fr.
.

On the 24th of June 1470 occurs a charter of the lands of Kilmarnoc, and
others, forfeited by lord Boyd, to Margaret of Denmark, the queen, during her
life, "for her robes, and to supply her with the ornaments of her head-dress
Scotst. Call.
." Other minute particulars may be traced in the treasurer's account for 1474,
reprinted in the appendix. James Homel the king's tailor, and a favorite
afterward executed at Lauder bridge, has four elns of French black to make a
long gown for the king, which is lined with sustian. Hose of white cloth;
shirts of fine holland; chamlet gowns, lined with lamb-skin; socks of white
cloth; doublets and hose, lined with broad-cloth; a pair of spurs valued at
four shillings; two elns of velvet to make two tippets, and furs to line them;
a long mantle of velvet; a bonnet at fifteen shillings; and two hats at ten
shillings each; a satin jacket lined with lamb-skin; gray cloth for long socks;
black satin to cover a prayer book; velvet for a chesabel to his closet, and
for his brigintynis; knobs of gold for his saddle; a chymna or grate for his
closet; ribbons for his doublet and sleeves; pillows covered with broad-cloth;
drugs from Flanders; an eln of scarlet for his petticoat; a gown of cloth of
gold, lined with satin, presented to an English herald who attended the
embassy; gloves, muchis or caps; are among the articles provided for the king.

For the queen are pattens and corks; livery gowns lined with gray for six
ladies of her chamber on a pilgrimage to Whithern; satin for her turrats; black
cloth for a sliding gown; velvet for another gown; leathern gloves; a cloak and
capite bern of black, lined with Scottish cloth; eight elns of broad cloth to
cover a bathing vat, and three for a sheet to put around her while bathing;
hose of black cloth; seven elns of crimson satin for a kirtle, and to cover
bonnets of tire; a grate for her closet; band-leather for furring her gloves;
five elns of cristy gray, at thirty shillings the eln, to line a gown of black
damask; blue velvet to cover her stirrup-irons; half an eln of double tartan to
line her riding collars; satin for tippets and collars; seven pounds for more
than a year's shoes; satin for stomachers, and ermine to line them; twenty-six
bestes of greece to line a tippet; ten pounds thirteen shillings and four pence
"for a mass book to her altar, at her command, by captain John Cat," who
probably brought it from Flanders.

The chief articles for the prince, then a babe of two years, are shirts and
caps of holland cloth; coats of brown lined with white cloth, and some of the
latter for his cradle; fine broad cloth for his sheets, or rather blankets;
white hose and petticoats, and lawn caps; French brown cloth, and tartan with
buckram-binding for his cradle; English russet for a gown to his nurse; white
fustian for blankets, and broad cloth for sheets; a coat of satin, and a gown
of cloth of gold, lined with blue tartan.

These minute particulars will be excused, as they contribute more to
illustrate the state of manners, and dress, than the most elaborate
disquisition.

APPENDIX.
No I. Letter from the Earl of Douglas and Mar to Richard II. probably in 1377.
Cotton Library, Vesp. F. VII, f. 34.
TRES noble et peussant prince, Jeo monstre par voi de compleinte a vous,
Seigneur, et a votre bonne Consaile, par cestes mes lettres, comment que John
Mercer mon homme ore ad estee par grant temps tribuleez, et annoieez
torcenousement, deinz votre roialme, contre la virtue de noz grantz trews,
comunement tailliez et accordez perentre les roialms: parla ou i will rienz ne
mespristes, mes que i will es ses loials marchandises retournant en sa payse, par
force de mere et tempeste seut dejettuz au terre, et arrestez par vos subgitz;
et uncore par le Conte de Northumbreland detenuz en prison. Au quoi, tres noble
prince, vous pleas avoir regards et consideration; et par voz lettres au dit
Conte fair commander expressement, que le dit John mon homme soit delivrez
franchement, sanz lui plus travailler et riot fair. Kar au proscheine joer de
march, si ceo vous pourra pleer, i will sera present, pour y demonstrer devant
voz deputeez, que i will ny ad rien trespassee ne mesprise en celle part, si Dieu
pleast. Oultre ceo, tres noble prince, touchantz meistre Thomas Mercer, mon
clerk, pour qui jeo escriva au votre noblesse devant celle temps, et monstre...
lement a vous, Seigneur, et a votre dit consaille, les damages, costages, et
perdes, qile ad sustenue et fait durant sa arreste forpris; sez tribulations,
annoys, et tortz, qui amontent au deux centz marcs de sterling. et oultre; des
queux vous please luy fair avoir redress et restorance en due maniere; ou
aultrement celuy, ou ceux, qui luy arresteint, commander pour comparer
personalement au dite joer de march, pour le charge soubtzaler devant voz
deputeez susditz, ou le dit mon clerk sera pressed pour respondre et receiver
semblable maniere, selont les usages des joers des marches, par voi de reason,
si Dieu pleast. Tres noble prince, ceo qui vous pleira de commander, pour estre
fait cellendroit, me deignetz lesser savir par vos lettres, oe le portour du
cestes. Que luy toute peussant Dieu, par sa tressantisme grace, votre noblesce
veulle demesner au vie perdurable. Esc. le xvime joer de Novembre 7 Rich. II, a
note of Sir Robert Cotton.
.

Le Conte de Douglas et de Mar.

( Directed, Au tresnoble et peussant prince le roy d'Engleterre.)

No II. Extrcts from the Chamberlian's Roll, anno 1377. Register Office,
Edinburgh.
Note. Part of it is considerably becayed.
COMPOTUM Johannis Lyoune Domini de Glamys, Came. Scocie, reddit. apud Dunde,
xviii die marci, Anno Dni millmo, ccc, Sepruag. Septimo, de omnibus receptis
suis, et expensis, pro officio Came. in Cama Regis, a tempore introitus sui in
dicto Officio, viz. a vicesimo die Octobris, Anno Dni Millimo cccmo lxxmo viimo
usque in diem hujus Compoti.

Idem onerat se in primis de xiii li. vi s. viii d. rec. a vic. de Kyncardyne.

Summa patet.

Item, Idem onerat se de iii s. viii d. rec. a Ball. de Edynburgh. Et de xlvi
s. iiii d. rec. a Ball. de Ruglen. Et de viii li. xv s. x d. receptis a Ball.
de Innerkethyne. Et de iii li. v s. vi d. receptis a Ball. de Dunbret. Et de
xxii s. viii d. rec. a Ball. de Monros. Et de viii lib. xv s. vi d. ob.
receptis a Ball. de Abden. Et de xiiii li. ii s. viii d. receptis a Ball. de
Innernyss. Et de xx li. recept. a Ball. de Haddyngton. Et de iii li. iiii s.
viii d. receptis per Ball. de Forfar.

Summa hujus Recept. lxi li. xvi s. x d. ob.

Item, Idem onerat se de cc li. recept per Custumar. de Lythco. Et de xiiii li.
xix s. ii d. ob. receptis per eosdem Custumar. Et de cc l. li. rec. per
Custumar. de Edynburgh. Et de clxviii li. xiii s. iiii d. recept. per Andream
Bet, depotorem dicte Custume. Et de ccxxiii li. xvi s. rec. per Custumar. de
Hadyngton. Et de clxxi li. xvii s. xi d receptis per Custumar. de North Berwyk.
Et de xxxvi li. xiii s. ix d. recept. per Custumar. de Dunbar. Et de xvii li.
vi s. viii d. per Alexrum de Cokburn, depoit. de Hadyngton et de Dunbar. Et de
iiii li. iii s. iiii d. recept. per Custumar. de Stryvelyne. Et de c. iiii xx,
xii li. iii s. ob. recept. per Custumar. de Monros. Et de xxviii li. xi s. vi
d. ob. rec. per Custumar. Sancti Andree. Et de xiii li. x s. ii d. ob. receptis
per Custumar. de Dunde. Et de lxvii li. vi s. viii d. receptis per Patricium de
Innerpesyr, depoit. dicte Custume de Dunde. Et de ccc xxxix li. x s. vi d. ob.
recept. per Custumar. de Abden. Et de cc lxi li. iii s. vii d. recept. per
Willm de Leth, Depoitor. de Abden. Et de lvii li. vi s. viii d. receptis per
Custumar. de Innernyss.

Summa hujus Recepti M. M. xxxvii li. s. v d. ob.

Item, idem onerat se de xiii li. vi s. viii d. recept. per David de Foulertoun
a una Eschaet.

Summa patet.

Et ii li. hic per exitus Curie Compot. quod non fuerunt tent. Itinera Came.
post decessum Dni Walteri de Byggar nuper Came. prout in Septem Burg. que nuper
tenuit Computans, de quibus non potuit levare exitus ante diem hujus Compoti,
propter temporis brevitatem.

Summa totalis hujus Onerationis M. M. C. xxv li. xii s. viii d.

Expens. ejusdem. In primis Compotat in liberac. fact. Dno. nro. Regi, ad
proprios usus suos, ut patet per quatuor pecia literarum, sub Signeto Anuli,
iii c xxxii li. xv s. iiii d. Et in liberac. fact. Dne Regine, in part
Solucionis sum sibi assignate, ut patet per tria pecia literarum ipsuis Dne
Regine, de receptis ejusdem super Compotum, c l li. xv s. ii d. Et Compotat. in
liberac. fact. Johi. de Dispensis, Clerico liberac. Domus Dni nostri Regis, ad
expens. ejusdem Domus, ut patet per quindecim pecia literarum ipsius Clerici,
de recept. ejusdem super Compotum, et per duas lras dni Alani de Largis,
clerici liberac. ejusdem, super Compotum, c xxix li. iii s. x d. ob. de quibus
responderunt. Et eidem Johi de Dispens. clerico liberacionis ad expens. ejusdem
Domus, ut patet per tria pcia Sup. pecia.
literarum ipsius Clerici, de recept. ejusd. super Compotum, ix li. ix s. vi d.
de quibus respondebit. Et dno Alano de Largys, tunc Clerico liberac. Domus Dni.
nostri Regis, ad expens. ejusdem Domus, ut patet per quinque pecia lrum ipsius
Clerici de recept. ejusd. super Compotum, xv li. ix s. de quibus ren^dit. Et in
liberac. factis Dno David Bell, Clerico Gardrob, pro diversis receptis in
dictam Gardrob, ut patet per tria pecia literarum ipsius Dni David de receptis
ejusdem super Compotum, liiii s. x d. super quibus ren^debit. Et in liberat.
factis Dno nostro Regi, ad proprios usus suos, ut patet per unam literam sub
Signeto suo, xii li. xvii s.

Summa hujus expens. vi c liii li. vi s. i d. ob.

Item, Idem Computat in Soluc. fact. Mro Rich cementario, in part solucionis
sibi faciend. pro factura tumbe Dni nostri Regis qui nunc est, xiii li. vi s.
viii d. Et Johi de Roos, ad Construccionem Turris.
tris de Clony, xxxviii li. xiii s. iiii d. de quibus respondebit. Et Dno
Comiti de Fyf, percipienti per annum, ad Custodiam et sustentacionem Castri de
Strivelyne, in partem Solucionis dicte sum de anno hujus Compoti, ipso Comite
fatente rec. super Compotum, lxvi li. xiii s. iiii d. Et Dno Roberto de
Danyelstoun militi, percipienti per annum per literas Regis ejus super Compotum
pro tempore vite Octoginta li. pro Custodia Castri de Dunbret: de tempore hujus
Compoti, ipso fatente recept. super Compotum, xxvi li. xiii s. iiii d. vidz. in
partem solucionis dicte sum. Et Willmo de Fentoun pro uno termino xx li. Et
Dno Jacobo de Douglas, filio Dni Comitis de Douglas, in partem solucionis sum
sibi debit. liii li. vi s. viii d. Et Mro Jacobo Monetario, de dono Regis, iiii
li. vi s. Et Dno Patricio de Grahame, Dno Symoni de Ketnys, et Johi Marc,
Nunciis missis in Angliam, c li. Et Dno Abbati de Abbroth, pro Comite Moravie,
cui Rex tenebatur in una summa pecunie xii li. Et Dno Jacobo de Lyndesay
percipienti per annum, pro tempore vite sue, viginti li. pro feodo Vicecom. de
Lanark, de tempore hujus Compoti xx li. Et Patricio de Innyrpesyr, Depotatio
apud Dunde, pro suo servicio, vi li. xiii s. iiii d. Et eidem pro superexpens:
suis Compoti sui redditi de dicto Depoito, xiii li. xviii s. viii d.

Summa hujus Expens. iii c. lxxv li. xi s. iiii d.

Item, Idem Compotat in Solucione facta Magro Johi de Peblys, Archidiac. Sti
Andree, pro pensione sibi assignat: namque suscepit Officium Canc: de anno vz
lxxmo sexto, xiii li. vi s. viii d. et Johi Rollok percipienti per annum ex
infeodacione Regis hereditar. ut patet in Rotulis Compotorum preceden. de anno
hujus Compot. x li. Et Johi Gray, clerico rotulorum et Registri Regis,
percipienti per annum Viginti libr. pro predicto officio, pro tempore vite, de
Anno hujus Compoti xx li. Et Dno Alano de Largis, clerico probacionis domus
Regis, pro feodo suo, de Anno hujus Compoti xl li. Et dompno David Bell,
Clerico Gardrob. pro feodo suo de Anno hujus Compoti, et de Anno precedent. de
quo non percepit feodum, xx li. Et Johi de Dispens. clerico libcionis pro feodo
suo xx li. Et in Expens. Auditorum Compotorum, et in vadiis Garconum et
equorum, pro temporibus Scaccarii, c xxxiii li. vi s. viii d. Inf. Compotorum,
vadiis garconum et equor. Clerici Rotulorum et Registri. Et in expensis Dni
Jacobi de Lyndesay unius Auditorum Compot. infra predictam fummam non Comput.
xxvi li. xiii s. iiii d. Et in Curialitate servientium v li. Et clerico
Rotulorum et Registri pro Roba sua xl. s. Et hostiario pro Roba sua xl. s. Et
Clericis scribentibus v li. Et in feodo simplici serviencium in domo Regis, xvi
li. xvi s. iiii d. Et Ade Page v li. Et pro Scaccario et Compotorio ejusdem xxi
s. viii d. Et pro reparacione domus in qua tentum fuit Scaccarium, xvi s. vi d.
Et Cristino de Gardroba pro suo servicio, liii s. iiii d. Et fissori et
Peilipario, paramentoribus Regis Apud Edynburgh, iii li. xviii s. Et fratribus
Minoribus de Dunde de gratia ad presens xl s. Et Mro Simoni de Ketnys, pro
pensione sibi Assignat. de uno termino hujus Count. v li. Et Domino David Bell
Clerico Gardrob. pro aliquibus receptis in Gardrob. et expenditis, ut patet per
unam literam suam, de receptis Ostens. super Compotum, lvii s. Et Thome
Acarsane, Ministrallo Regis, percipienti per Annum, pro tempore vite sue, pro
suo servicio, december libr. ut patet per literas Regis directas Camer. de
precepto, et ipsius Thome de recept. ostens. super Compotum de uno termino
hujus Comp. v li. Et Carpentariis et Cementariis Castri de Strevyllyne, pro
feodis suis de uno termino hujus Comp. xi li. xiii s. iiii d. Et pro pargameno
x s. Et Waltero de Tulach, Considerato labor suo ad presens, de gratia
Auditorum iii li. vi s. viii d. Et in Solucione facta pro lampadis emptis, et
recept. per Dominum David Bell, ad expens. Domini Comitis de Carryk, nuper
fact. apud Melros, xxxi s. Et in quibusdam minutis expensis examinat. Super
Compot. xxvi s. Et Johi Lyoune Camer. Scocie constituto pro tempore vite Sue,
Capienti per Annum ducentas libras Sterlingorum, ut patet per litteras sub
Magno Sigillo Regis, on^s super Compotum, pro dicto officio, licet in ipso non
ministravit pro Anno, tamen de Voluntate et Concessione Regis, per unam literam
signatam anulo suo, o^ns super Count. de tempore hujus Com. cc li.

Summa hujus Vc. lx li. iii s. vi d. Summa tot expens. M. Vc. iiii xx viii li.
xix s. xi d. ob. Et sic debet Vc. xxxvi li. xii s. viii d. ob.

No III. Annabella queen of Scotland to Richard II. 28th May 1394. Vesp. F.
VII, f. 38, n. 2.
A TRES haut et tres puissant prince, Richard par la grace de Dieu Roy
d'Engleterre, notre trescher cousin, A. par ycelle mesme grace Royne d'Escoce,
salut, et entier dilection. Trescher Cousin, des bonnes nouvelles de votre
fainte, et prosperitee de corpse, sicomme nous avons entendu par vos aimables
lettres, et la relacion de votre escuier Jehan Dorwell, nous sommes treslees,
et en avons grant comfort. Si prions a Dieu qu'il la face tousdiz continuer,
selon ce que myelx voidriez. Et pour ce que nous tenons, qu'il vous fera
plaisir tout mesmes oyr de nous, vueillez savoir qu'au faisance de cestes, nous
estions en bonne sainttie, la Dieu mercy. Trescher Cousin, touchant la marriage
enter aucuns noz enfans, et aucunes prochaines de votre sanc, pour la traitie
du quelle, comme vos lettres font mention, vous avez ordine pour envoyer dens
Kelcou certaines persons de votre consail, pour traiter fur celle matier, a
les octaves de la Trinite, vueillez savoir, que pour la brevetee de temps,
depuis que mon tres souverain Seigneur le Roy a receu vos lettres, et
consideree le retourner du dit votre escuier devers vous, aveque fes lettres de
respons, il nous est avis, que de votre part le dit jour ne se pourra tenir
bonnement; car a venir de dit escuier en noz partiez, mon tres souverain
seigneur le Roy adonque estoit en les lontaignes parties d'Escoce, si que votre
escuier ne se povoit atteigner a sa presence devant le xix jour de May. Si que
mon dit soverain le Roy vous a devisee un autre jour assez covenable, pour la
dicte traitie; sicomme ses lettres a vous envoieez pourportent; pour la quel
jour vueillez fair addresser aucuns de votre consail pour y etre, pour fair a
laid de Dieu bonne conclusion sur la dicte matiere; car certes la bonne
conclusion de celle traitie est, et sera, mout greable a mon seigneur et
souverain, et a nous. Trescher cousin notre Seigneur vous vueille tousdiz
garder, et vous donit bonne vie et longue. Esc. a Edinburgh, le xxviii jour de
May.

No IV. The same to the same, 1st August 1394. Vesp. F. VII, f. 39, n. 1.
A TRES haut et puissant prince, R. par la grace de Dieu Roy d'Engleterre,
notre tres cher cousin, A. par mesmes ycelle grace Royne d'Escoce, salutz, et
dilection. De votres aimables lettres, a nous presentees par notre bien ame
Douglas le heraud d'armes, nous vous remercions mercions entierement, et de
cuer. Par les quelles nous avons entendu votre bonne estate, et sauntee, a
grant plaisir et confort de nous. Et tres cher cousin, quand au tratie touchant
le marriage a fair par enter aucuns procheins de votre sanc, et aucuns des
enfans de Roi mon seignour et de nous, vuelliez savoir, quil est greable au Roi
mon dit seignour, et a nous; sicomme il vous a signify par ces lettres. Et par
especial que pour tant que la dicte tratie ne se poira tenire le tierce jour de
Juilee darrein passee, pour certaines et resonables causes contenus es vous
lettres, envoiez au Roi mon feignour susdit, vous estes assentuez que une
austre jour de mesmes la tratie se preigne, le premier jour d'Octobre prochein
venand; le quele est greable au Roi mon seignour avaunt dict, et a nous; et vous
amercions de tout notre volentee, et de cuer: et prions cherement que vous
vuelliez continuer la dicte tratie, et fair tenire le dict jour; quar il est
la volentee de Roi mon seignour sus dicte, et de nous, quant en nous est, que
la dicte jour se teigne sans defaut. Et tres cher cousin, nous vous requerons,
et prions cherment, qu'il ne displaise a votre hautesse, que nous n'avons plus
tossed escript a vous; quar nous estremez gisant malade d'enfant masquil, a non
James; et sommes bien et graciousment delivre, la grace de Dieu et de notre
dame. Et ausi pour ceo que le Roi mon dict seignour estoit, a la venu de vous
lettres, esloignees es Isles de son roialme, nous ne receivon pas ces lettres
envoiez a nous sur ceste matiere, tang le darrein jour de Juillie darrein
passee. Tres haut et puissant prince, le seint esprit vous vueil toutz jours
garder. Done soubs notre seal, a labbay de Dunfermelyn, le premier jour
d'Auoust.

No V. David Prince of Scotland, Earl of Carric, (and afterward Duke of
Rothsay,) to John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster, about 1398. Vesp. F. VII, f. 68,
n. 2.
HAULT et puissant prince, mon tres chier et tres ame cousin. Quant a la matier
de quoi vous, et l'evesque de Saint Andreu, avez parlez, jay entendu, et veu ce
que vous avez avysez en icelle matier, et le raportera au Roi mon seignour: et
selons ce bon luy semblera, procedera a la avansement du busoigne, a laid de
Dieu, en la maniere comme vous avez touchie, ou en aultre; au temps contenu en
votre escript, ou pluys tossed, sy bonnement fair se pourra. Hault et puissant
prince, sil y a chose au votre plaisance, que fair puisse affiablement, le me
vueilliez certifier. Et luy Dieu tout puissant vous ait en sa tressantissime
guard. Esct. a Melross, le xvii jour de Marz.

David, aisne filz du Roy d'Escoce, Conte de Carryk.

No VI. George Dunbar Earl of March to Henry IV, 18th February, 1400. Vesp. F.
VII, f. 22.
EXCELLENT, mychty, and noble prince, like yhour realte to wit, that I am
greatly wrangit be the Duc of Rothesay; the quhilk spousit my douchter, and now
again his oblisyng to me, made be his lettre and his seal, and agaynes the law
of halikirc, spouses ane other wife, as it is said. Of the quhilk wrang and
defowle, to me and my douchter in swilk manner done, I as ane of yhour poer kyn,
gif it like yhow, requer yhow of help and suppowall, fore swilk honest service
as I may do, after my power, to yhour noble lordship, and to yhour land. Fore
tretee of the quhilk matter, will yho dedeyn to charge the lord the
Fournivalle, or the earl of Westmerland, at yhour liking, to the march, with
swilk gudely haste as yhow like; qwar that I may have spekyng with quhilk of
thaim that yho will send, and schew him clerly mine intent; the quhilk I darr
nocht discover to nane ather bot till ane of thaim, because of kyn, and the
great lowtee that I traist in thaim; and, as I suppose, yhe traist in thaim on
the the other part. Alsa, noble prince, will yhe dedeyn to grant, and to send me,
yhour sauf conduyt, endurand quhill the fest of the nativite of Seint John the
Baptist, fore a hundredth knichts, and squiers, and servants, gudes, horse, and
harnais, als well within wallit town, as withowt, or in qwat other reasonable
manner that yhow like, fore travaillyng and dwelling within yhour land, gif I
hafe myster. And, excellent prince, syn that I claim to be of kyn till yhow,
and it peraventour nocht knawen on yhour part, I schew it to your lordship be
this my lettre, that gif Dame Alice the Bewmont was yhour graunde dame, Dame
Marjory Comyne, hyrr full sister, was my graunde dame on the the other side; sa
that I am bot of the feirde degree of kyn till yhow; the quhilk in alde time was
callit neir. And syn I am in swilk degree till yhow, I requer yhow as be way of
tendirness thareof, and fore my service in manner as I hafe before writyn, that
yhe will vouchesauf till help me, and suppowell me, till get amends of the
wrangs and the defowle that is done me; sendand till me, gif yhow like, yhour
answer of this with all gudely haste. And, noble prince, mervaile yhe nocht
that I write my lettres in English, for that is mare clear to mine
understandyng than latyne, or fraunch. Excellent, mychty, and noble prince, the
haly Trinite hafe yhow evirmar in keeping. Writyn at my castle of Dunbarr, the
xviii day of Feverer.

Le Count de la March d'Escoce.

Directed, Au tres excellent, et tres puissant, et tres noble prince, le Roy
d'Engleterre.

No VII. Christiana Countess of March to Henry IV, probably in 1404. Vesp. F.
VII, f. 96, n. 2.
MON tres excellent, et tres redoute Souvereigne Seigneur, Jeo me necommande au
vous sy entierment, come creature terren poet penser, ou diviser au Roy du
monde coronne; vous esmerciant humblement as genoilles, de les hauts graces et
benefices, que vous m'avez faits devant ces beures; vous suppliant piement de
votre gracieus continuance, et nomement de le gracieus refreschement que vous
meneoiastes darreynement, Dieux vous eurent greez la ou jeo ne puisse. Non pur
ceo, non tres gracieus seigneur, vous pleis savoir que monseigneur mon baron,
et moy, avoins este en taunt duresce et distresce, puysque nous fuymes exclus
de notre pays, que encore jeo suy remys en grant debt; de quelle sans votre
gracieus eide, et sucour, ne me puisse deliverer. Et ore la pestilence est
taunt fort et dure, la ou nous sumes, que jeo suy molt paorous, que jeo morra
en le grant debt que jeo suy encorrue: et pour nulle traitie que nous poons
fair, ne poons avoir suffrance de nos enemies, pour nous treer a notre fortres
de Colbrandespath, pour illoex attendre tantque la mortalite soit cesse. Et
pour celle cause jeo emprie humblement a votre haut Royal Majefte, que vous me
pleisez avoir en remembrance, quant vous verrez loisir, et me eider que permy
votre gracieus re...enement jeo puisse eftre engettez de le debt qui me face
tristes. Outre ceo, tres redoubte et mon tres gracieus seigneur, nous portons
grant enemyte pour la mort de Sir Henr. Percy; issuit que sovent fois est
grasne a mon baron, et ses gents, qils vueillient estre morts, sils ne se
retrehent horse du pays; issuit que les gents le dit Sir Henr., ne facent rien
fors escontent confortables novelx de vous, pour alors fair la malice qui eft
form en leurs coers. Et mon tres gracieus et tres souvereigne seigneur,
touchant la pris de nos gents par ceux attendants au Count de Douglas, deignets
ent donner credence al porteur dicestes; et sur ceo que vous pleisez ordener
tiell remedy, sicomme le dit portour vous dirra par bouche. Et pry
sovereignement al tres benoit Dieux de ciel, qil vous ottroie long vie, ene
tout encresment de honor et joy ensemble, ene victory de vos enemies, et apres
cest mortell vie vous rent la regne de gloire. Amen.

Votre humble oratrice la Countess de la March d'Escoce

Directed, A mon tres excellent, et tres redoubte Seigneur, le Roy d'Engleterre.

No VIII. James of Douglas, Warden of the Marches, probably to Henry IV in
1405. Vesp. F. VII, f. 17.
HE, excellent, and rycht mychty prince, Likit to your henes to wit, me haff
resavit your honorabile lettres to me, send be a Reverend Fadir the Abbot of
Calkow, contenand that it is well knawin that trewis war taken and schorne Sworn.
a late, betwix the rewmys of Ingland and Scotland; and forthi yhu mervalis
greatly that my men, be my will and assent, has byrnde the town of Berwike, and
in other certain places within the rewme of Inglande; in brekyng fully the
said trewis, in my defaute, and nothing in yhours; and als again my ath, made
in streynthning of the same trewis: of the qwhilke yhe desire rather that
amends war made, than any mar harm war done, tharfor requirande me to do yhou
to wit qwhethir I will gere refourme the said attemptats, or qwhat my full
will be to do o that matter. Anente the qwhilkys, He and Excellent Prince,
qwhar yhe say yhu mervalys greatly that my men, be my will and assent, has
brennede the town of Berwik, the qwhilk is within Scotland, and other places
in Inglande, in brekyng fully of the said trewis, I understand that giff yhour
he excellent war clerly enfourmyte of the brennyng, slachtyr, and taking of
prisoners and Scottis schippis, that is done be yhour men to Scottysmen, within
the said trewis, in diverse places of Scotland, before the brynnyng of Berwike;
the qwhilk skathis our liege lord the King, and his lieges, has patiently
tholyte in the keeping of the said trewis, and chargit me til ask, and ger be
askyte be my deputs redress tharof; the qwhilk my deputs has askyte at dayis of
march, and nane has gotyne; methink o resoune yhe sulde erar put blame and
punition to the doarys of the said trespass, done again the trewis in swilke
manner, and callys thaim rather brekars of the true, than me that has tholyte sa
mikylle injur so lang, and nane amends gottyn. Bot it is like that the great
attemptats, that yhour men dois again the trewis, is well concelyte fra yhour
audience, for I suppos and yhe wist it, yhe wald of yhour he worschipe ger it
be refourmyte and redressit, as the cause requiryt. For lang before the brynning
of Berwike, yhour men com within our lord the Kings awin propir land of
Arane, and I Will Malasch, and til his castle of Brathwike, and brynt his
chapelle, and other diverse places of that land; and tuke and rawnsounde the
captain of the said castelle, and slow his sone, and heryde all that thai
mycht ourtake. And alsua thai hade takyne, before that tym certain Scotts
schippis chargit with marchandis, and the marchands tharof, in the contrer of
the said trewis: of the quhilk reparacioun and redress has been askyte before
the brennyng of Berwike, and nane gottyne. And qwhar yhe say that Berwike, that
stands in Scotland, the qwhilk town yhe call yhouris in yhour said lettres,
and certain lands of yhouris within Inglande, was brende be my men, my will
and my assent, brekand the trewis in my defaute, and nocht in yhouris, and in
the contrar of my athe: thar to I answer in this manner, that qwhat time it like
to our liege lord the King, and to yhour he excellent, to ordane redress to be
made be his commissaris, and yhouris, of all attemptats done of aythir side, I
fall with the help of Good make it well kennyt, that I haff trewly kepit my
athe, and the trewis, as afferys to me of resoun. And quhaever ensourmyt yhour
excellence, that I hade brokyn my athe, it hade been fayrar for him to haffe
send me that querell into wyrt, undir his selle, and till haff taken answer
greable, as asserit to him under my scelle again, than sua untrewly in my
absence till enfourme yhour excellence: for I trayst he has said mar in my
absence, than he dar awow in my presens; for nocht displece yhour honor,
learys sulde be lytille alowit with any sic worshipful king as yhe ar. And
qwhar yhe say in yhour said lettres that yhe desir rather amends of attemptats
done again the trewis, than any mar harm war done, tharfor to that I answer in
this manner, that qwhen yhour said lettres came to me, our lord the King was
passit in the north partis of Scotland, and I with all gudly have fend yhour
lettres til him; of the qwhilk at the making of their letteris I hade nane
answer. Never the latt qwhen I hade understandyne yhour lettres, I gert cry in
diverse placis the trewis to be kepit, traystand that it should be sua done on
the the other part, aftyr the qwhilk cry yhour men of Inglande has rydyne in
Scotland with great company, like in fere of were; and has heryde Lawadyr
dalle, Tewy dalle, and a part of Etryke forest, the qwhilke at the making of
their letteris was tholyt, and nocht don tharfor. And foringiffe the trewis sall
stand, it lies to yhour heenes to se for chaftying of trespassouris, and for
amends of attemptats done, and that be tym: and qwhat the wochesaff of your
heenes to do, twychand the forsayde materis, yhe would certify me be your
lettres with al gudly have. He almychty prince, the haly gast you haff in his
yhemsal evirmar. Wyrtyn at Eddynburgh, under my selle, the xxvi day of July.

Jamis of Douglas wardane of the march.

( Directed. To ane excellent, and a mychty prince, King of Inglande.)

No IX. Commission by Robert duke of Albany, Regent of Scotland, to his
ambassadors sent into England, 26th May 1414. Vesp. F. VII, f. 114, 11.2.
ROBERTUS Regis Scocie genitus dux Albaniae, comes de Fife et de Menteth, et
regni predicti Gubernator, universis ad quorum noticiam presents literae
pervenerint, salutem in Domino. Noverit universitas vestra, quod nos de
fidelitate, circumspectione, et industria, dilectorum et fidelium nostrorum,
Roberti de Maxwelle de Caldarwodde militis, consanguinei nostri, et Magistri
Roberti de Lanyne, prepositi Sancti Andree, in decretis licenciati, before
confidentes, ipsos fecimus, constituimus, et ordinavimus, facimus que
constituimus, et per presents ordinamus, pariter ex certa scientia et
deliberato consilio, nostros ambaxiatores, commissarios, et nuncios speciales.
Dantes et concedentes eisdem nostram plenariam potestatem, et mandatum
speciale, ad tractand. concordand. et concludend. cum serenissimo principe
Henrico Rege Anglie, seu commissariis suis quibuscunque sufficientem potestatem
habentibus ab eodem, super deliberacione carissimi filii nostri Murdaci Steuart
militis. Et ad omnia et singula faciend. gerend. concordand. concludend. et
solvend. que circa filii nostri deliberacionem necessaria fiunt seu
quomodolibet optima, etiam si mandatum exigant magis speciale, ratum, certum,
stabile, atque firmum promittentes nos per perpetuum habituros, quicquid dicti
commissarii nostri in premissis, vel aliquo premissorum duxerint faciend. Dat.
sub testimonio sigilli nostri, apud mancrium nostrum de Falklande mensis Maii
die xxvi, Anno Dni. Millesimo ccccmo quarto decimo, et gubernationis nostrae
anno ix.

No X. Indenture between Murdac duke of Albany Regent of Scotland, and
Alexander earl of Mar, 16th November 1420. A copy in Sir James Balfour's
collections, MS. Harl. 4694, 22.
Indentur betwix Murdack Dvck of Albaney, and Alexander Earll of Mar.
THIS indenture made at Perth, the xvi day of the mounth of November, in the
yeir of our lord a thousand, four hundereth, and twenty, betwix hie excellent
and mighty prince Murtheu Dvck of Albaney earll of Fife and Menteith and
Governor of Scotland, one the ane pairt; and a vorschipful lord, Sir Alexander
Steuart Earl of Mar and Garivach, on the tothir pairt; Conteins and beirs
vitness, that it is fully accordit betwix them, in form and manner as after
sall follou: and that is to say, that the forsaid Earll of Mar is become man of
spalen, duelling, and reveneu, till the forsaid dvck of Albany Governor of
Scotland, for all the terms of his lyffe, before and agains all uthirs deidlyk
persons; his alleigance aught till our lord the king allenerlie outane. And he
salle giffe his letter therupone till our forsaid lord the Governor, in deu
form under his saille, for certane good deeds done till him be our said lord
the Governor. Alsua it is accordit, that our said lord the Governor sall gife
to his darrest cusin forsaid the Earll of Mar, the tenth Taken?
half of the profitts of the Justry of Aberdenie, Bamffe, and Inernesse, and
als often as they be haldin, outtane the corns and victuals of men and horse, in
the halding of the said ayeirs. And the said Earll of Mar sall do all hes
bisness and diligence till bring justris, till the honor and profit of the
said lord the Governor, for beath there profit. Alsua our lord the Governor
sall gif hes letters patents till the said Earll of Mar of power to be
steadhaldand till him, after the tennor of the letters the quhilks the said
Earll head of umquhilum our lord the Governor, quhom God assoyle. Alsua the
forsaid lord the Governor as assentit, and sall gife hes confirmatione till
his cusin sir Thomas Steuart, upon the infeftment that the said Earll of Mar
makes till the said Sir Thomas hes sone, apone the lands of Mar and Garevach,
if it sa beies that the said Earll of Mar shares a confirmatione of our lord
the King till our lord the Governor, givin till him and hes heirs and
assignais, apone the lands of Mar and Garivach forsaids; for the quhilk
confirmatione to be given to the said Sir Thomas, through our lord the
Governor that nou is, and for uther good deids done of befortyme till the said
Sir Thomas, through our said lord the Governor, the said Sir Thomas is become
mane till the said lord the Governor, of spalen, duelling, and reveneu, for
all the times of hes lyffe, before and agains all uther deadlyk persons, hes
alleagence aught to the King allanerlie outane; and thereupon sall gife his
Letters of Retenewe in deu form till our lord the Governor. Alsua it is
accordit that our lord the Governor sall giff his letters, baunde, and sealle,
till his forsaid cusin the Earll of Mar, of mantinance help and suppleie, in all form and in effect, as quhilum our lord the governor hes fader did before
time, bot fraud or gyle. Alsua it is accordit betwix the forsaid lord the
Governor, and hes darrest cusin the Earll of Mar, that sen Valter Steuart the
sone, and ayire appirand, of our forsaid lord the Governor is oblisched till
the forsaid lord his fader, that he sall not tak in marriage the daughter of Sir
Robert Erskeine, vithout the consent of hes forsaid lord and fader, our forsaid
lord the Governor is oblisched, and oblidges him be this indenture till hes
said cusin the Earl of Mar, that he sall naught gife hes consent till the
fulfillan of the said marriage, vithout vittining, and consent, of the said Earl
of Mar. And alsua it is accordit that our said lord the Governor hes given to
hes forsaid cusin the Earl of Mar, the profitts command of the lands of
Badenach, Urquart, and Strathowne, ay till the time that they may be set to
profitt; and fra thensfurth our forsaid lord till have the taken halse of the
profitt command of the said lands, and the forsaid erl his cusin the the other
halffe of the profitt of the lands, endurand the time of the said earl's live.
And alsua the said Earl is oblischit, and obless him be this indenture, that he
sall do al his goodly bussiness and diligence to bring and set the said
lands of Badenacht, Urquart, and Strathowen, vith the pertinents, till the
may profitt that he may, and vithin als short time as he may, bot fraud or
gyle. In the vitnising of the quhilks things, leillie and trewlie for to be
keipet, bot fraud and gyle, the sealls of the forsaid lord the Governor, and
of the forsaid Earll of Mar hes cusin, to their indentures interchangablie are
toput, the day, yeir, and place, forsaids.

No. XI. Annual Revenues of the Hostages for James I, 1424. Rymer X, 327.
JACOBUS Rex..... tradidit, dedit, et liberavit, pro securitate solutionis
summae quadraginta Milium librarum, bonae et legalis monetae Angliae, ad locum,
dies, et terminos, in dicto appunctuamento contenta; ac plenae et integrae
executionis et complementi omnium et singulorum, in praedicto appunctuamento
contentorum, obsides, et personas obsidum, aestimatas per partem dicti Jacobi
Regis in valor annuuo reddituum ad summas infrascriptas; videlicet,

David, primogenitum, et haeredem, comitis Atholiae, reddituatum ad xii C.
Marc. Thomam Comitem Moraviae, ad M. Marc. Alexandrum Comitem Crawfurdiae, ad
M. Marc. Duncanum Dominum de Argill, ad xv C. Marc. Willielmum, primogenitum et
haeredem Domini de Dalketh, ad xv C. Marc. Gilbertum, primogenitum et haeredem
Willielmi Constabularii Scotiae, ad viii C. Marc. Robertum Marescallum Scotiae,
ad viii C. Marc. Robertum dominum de Erskyn, ad M. Marc. Walterum dominum de
Driltone, ad viii C. Marc. Thomam Boyd de Kilmernoch, ad D. Marc. Dominum
Patricium de Dunbarre, Dominum de Camnok, ad D. Marc. Alexandrum Duminum de
Gordonne, ad iv C. Marc. Obsides alias concordatos, ac vice et loco aliorum
absentium etiam alias concordatorum obsidum, quorum nomina continentur in
quadam cedula, dicto appunctuamento annexa. Dominum Willielmum de Abbirnethy,
ad D. Marc. Jacobum de Dunbarre, Dominum de Frendrath, ad D. Marc. Andream Gray
de Foullis, ad vi C. Marc. Dominum Robertum de Levinston, ad iv C. Marc.
Johannem Lyndesay, ad D. Marc. Dominum Robertum de Lille, ad iii C. Marc.
Jacobum Dominum de Caldor, ad iv C. Marc. Jacobum Dominum de Cadyo, ad D. Marc.
Dominum Willielmum de Rothvane, ad iv C. Marc. Williemum Olyfaunt, Dominum de
Abirdalgy..... Georgium, primogenitum et haeredem Hugonis Cambell, ad iii C.
Marc. Robertum primogenitum et haeredem Domini Roberti de Martalent, ad iv C.
Marc. David Meignes, ad ii C. Marc. David de Ogilby, ad ii C. Marc. Patricium
primogenitum et haeredem Domini Johannis Lion, ad iii C. Marc.
No XII. Acts for Taxes, 1424 and 1431.
Scottish Acts of Parliament, edit. 1566. fol. iii. 1 parl. James I, 26 May 1424.
Of finance to be maid for the Kingis costage in Ingland. Ca. X.
ITEM, It was consentit, throw the Estatis and Parliament, that for the fynance
and payment to be maid in Ingland, for our Souerane Lordis costage, and
delyvering of his hostageis being in Ingland, their falbe resit ane YIELD
Subsidy.
, or maa, gif it misteris, throw the haill kynrik, alsweill throw the
regalyteis, as throw uther landis. For it were grevous, and greit charge on the
commonis, to raise the hail finance at anis, it is accordit that a YIELD be
rasit, that is to say xii d. of ilk pund; and that the landis, rentis, maillis,
and gudis of lordis, within their proper domanis, both corn and catell. Bot
for the extent of the proper domanis they sall not pay, drawin oxin, reddin
horse, and utensillis of hows, alanerlie, outtaking the burgessis in like manner
of their gudis and rentis.

Of the manner of taxatioun to be maid in the realm. Ca. XI.
ITEM, Their ar taxis ordanit, throw the counfall of Parliament, upone the
Cattle and Corn, to be raisit to the Kingis finance to be maid in Ingland. In
the first YIELD now concludit, the boll of quheit is taxit to ii s. Alswa the
boll of rye, beir, and peis, to xvi d. the boll of aittis vi d. And this of all
corn that is now in hows, or in stak, the lordis purviance to their howshald
alanerlie owttane; and the grene corn that is naw upone the erd growand sall
remain untaxit, quhil it cume of the erd. Alswa the beistis ar taxit one this
manner. The Kow and her followar, of two yeir auld, to vi s. viii d. Item ane
Woodder, or ane You, ilk ane to xii d. Item Gymmer, Dunmund, and Gaittis, ilk
ane to xii d. Item ane drawin Ox, of three yeir auld or elder, to vi s. viii d.
Alswa the wild Meir, with her followar of three yeir, to x s. A Colt of three
yeir auld, or elder, to ane mark.

This is the manner that landis and gudis sall be taxit. That ilk schiref within
his schirefdome sall gar call before him all the barronis, and fre haldarris of
the King, and with counsall of tham he sall cheis leill men and discreit, and
sic as he will answer for; the quhilks sall abyd knawlege before the King gif
they have done their deuoir, at the end of the taxation; and that als money
personis as may sufficiently extent the cuntre, and na ma, for eschewing of
cost; and that all schirefis be sworn to the king or his deputis that they
sall lelely and trewly gar this extent be fulfillit, of all the landis, and
gudis, in form as is above written; and that the extentouris sall be sworn
befoir the Barronis of the schirefdome, that they sall do their full power to
the said extent: and they sall have with thaim the paroche Priest, and that he
be chargit be his Bischop till inform thaim lelely of all the gudis of the
parochin; and that their be maid a buke of the said extent, contenand the namis
of ilk town in special, and the names of ilk person dwelland in they townis,
and their gudis followand their names. And that their buikis be presnetit to
the Kingis Auditouris at Perth, the day limit thairto, that is to say the xii
day of Julij nixt to cum. Alswa quhair their is ane greit schirefdome, their be
chosin be sicht of the Baronis leill discrete men to keip them.

Alswa that all the landis of the kinrike be taxit, after as they ar of avale
now, and that but fraud or gyle. Alswa that all gudis be taxit and payit,
after the valu of the money that now is. Alswa that na exceptioun be maid in
this taxatioun to na man, nouther of det nor of male: bot all the gudis ay
quhair they be fundin, to pay the said YIELD, after the taxatioun, both of
Clerkis, Baronis, and Burgesses. Alswa it is seen speidful that all taxatouris,
the time of their extent, warn all manner of man, that of all their gudis that are taxit, both of beistis, corn, and uther gudis, within xv dayis nixt after
following the taxt, the payment be reddie in silver and gold, as is befoir
writtin. And gif at the end of the said xv dayis the payment be not reddy, the
officiaris of ilk schirefdome sall tak of ilk man that warnis payment, a Kow
for v s. a You or a Wedder for xii d. a Gait, a Gimmer, or a Dunmund, for viii
d. a wild Meir and her follower for x s. a Colt of three yeir auld, or mair of
eild, xiiis, iv d. a boll of quheit xii d. a boll of rye or peis viii d. a boll
of aittis iii d. And gif the Schiref takis their gudis he sall gar the lord of
the land, gif he may be gottin, pay the taxt to the King, and deliver the gudis
till him. And gif he will not, the Schirese, sall gar sell the gudis at the
nixt markat day, or send them to the King, on the Kingis coist, quhair the
King till his deputis ordanis.

ITEM, It is ordanit and seen speidful, that the Prelatis gar taxt their
rentis, and kirkis in this manner. That is to say ilk Bishope in ilk Denrie of
his Diocie, gar his Official and his Dene summund all the Tennentis and
frehalders befoir him, and cheis Taxatouris, and charge them in manner and
form as is befoir writtin; to the saidis day and place. And gif the Schiref
sendis any man on the Baronis behalf, that he be resavit with them and se
their taxatioun. And that the Official gar warn the Schiref, quhen he will
cheis his taxatouris, and make taxatioun of kirkis landis, gudis, and rentis,
befoir said. And quhair a kirk man payis the haill valor of his beneficis,
that all the fruits of his kirk of the yeir followand be fre.

Alswa anent the taxatioun of Burgesses gudis, and rentis, it is seen speidfull
that ilk Alderman and Baillies of Burrowis call befoir them the Burgessis, and
gar cheis leill and true men in manner as is befoir said, takand with them the
Curat of the town, chargeit be the greit aith throw the Bischop. And that the
Schiref send als on the Barronis behalf a lele man, to beir lele witness to
their taxt; to the quhilk he salbe sworn lelylie with them. And that they
warn the Schiref to send that man to the day that they cheis their taxatouris.
Alswa the Prelatis, the Schireffis, the Aldermen of townis, sall taxt and
ordane the coistis of all Officiaris, that sall laubour about this YIELD
rasing, be their lautie that they aucht to the King, and their coistis to be
taken of the haill taxt. Alswa the yield rasit to the King mot be allowit to
them in the yield foirsaid.

Alswa that their be ordanit in ilk Scherifdome, and chosin be the Schireffis
and the Barronis, good lele and discreit men, to taxt the foirsaid rentis and
gudis. And that with the Clerkis their be ordanit lawit men be the Schireffis,
and with lawit men clerkis be the clergy, to see and beir witness that all
thingis be lelylie done, and rychtswa within Regalyis. And that ilk cuntrie
releif uther. Alswa that the Schireff depute certane men to be with the
Baillies, and taxatouris of the Burrowis, to see that all manner of gudis,
alsweill corn, cattle, as uthers gudis, be lelylie taxt, and presentit to the
auditouris ordanit thairto, till appeir at Perth the xii day of July nixt to
cum. Of the quhilkis auditouris their ar the namis; the Bischoppis of Dunkeldin,
Dumblane, the Abbottis of Balmerinach, Sanct Columbis Inche, Master John
Scheves, the Earl of Athole, Schir Patrik of Dunbar, Williame Borthwich,
Patrick Ogilwy, James of Douglas of Balwany, and William of Erskin of Kinnoull.

Ibid. folio verso xxij, 10 Parl. J. I, 15 Oct. 1431.
For the resisting of Rebellouris in the North. Ca. cxlvi.
For the resisting of the King's rebellouris in the North land, and the costage
to be maid thairupone, it is fullely consentit be the Three Estatis, ordanit and
concludit, that their be liftit and resit ane Contributioun; that is to say of
all landis of the realm, quhair the YIELD of two pennies was resit, their be
now x d. resit; and quhair the two d. was not rasit their be now xii d. rasit
of ilk pund. And this Contributioun to be taken throw all the realm, of all
mailis of landis, and rentis of haly kirk, as of temporal Lordis; na gudis of
lordis na Burgessis outtane, saifand the extent of the mailis of the Lordis
proper domanis haldin in their awin hands, mailis of Burgessis housis within
Burrowis inhabit be them self, and with their proper gudis, of the quhilkis
they tak na maill; riddin horse, and drawin oxin except allanerly, of the
quhilkis na yield salbe rasit. Attoure this Contributioun salbe taxit and rasit
with all celeritie possibill, brocht and deliuerit to the auditouris of it,
that is to say the Abbotts of Balmerinouch, St. Columbis Inche, Schir Johne
Scrimgeour, Johne of Fyfe of Abirdene; quhilkis sall begin their comptis on the
morn nixt after the Purificatioun of our Lady nixt to cum, at Perth, gif the
pestilence be not their, gif it beis their at Sanctandros. The quhilkis
auditouris sall put this Contributioun in a kissed of iiii keyis, of the quhilkis
keyis ilk ane of them sall have ane. And that kissed to remane in the Castle of
Sanctandros, under the keiping of the Bischop and the Prioure. And in caise
that peax beis maid in the menetyme, this Contributioun sall remane under the
samin keiping in depois, to the commoun proffeit and use. The quhilk done the
King commandit till continow the Parliament, till monounday the xii Sic: xxii?
which was monday.
day of the foirsaid month and yeir.

No XIII. The contemporary account of the murder of James I.
FROM a MS. formerly belonging to Mr. Thoresby of Leeds, (see Nicolson's
Scottish Historical Library;) now, Aug. 1790, to Mr. Jackson of Clement's Lane,
Lombard Street: written about 1440 As appears from the writing, and from a
translation in the same MS. after this tract, of a book of morals by 'John of
Wiegnay, out of Frenshe into English, by your humble servytoure John
Shirley, at the full noble, honorable, and renomed cite of London, so as
feblesse would suffice, in his great and last age, the year of our lord a
thousand, sour hundredth forty.' This John Shirley is the translator of this
account of James's murder from a latin relation, probably published in Scotland
by authority. See the end.


.

Here following begynnythe a full lamentable cronycle, of the death and false
murdure of James Steward, last King of Scotys, naught long agone prisoner in
England, the times of the Kings Henrye the Fifte and Henry the Sixte.
The death of the King of Scotis.
ROBERT STEWARD, the king of Scotis, had ii sonnys; of the which the eldere
was a semely mane of person, and knight, clepid the duke of Roseye; and the
younger, clepid James Steward, that was bote of years young, and mean of
stature. This Duke of Roseye perseyved in his reason the greet age of the King
his fadir, the ympotencye of his lymmes and membirs, the febilenese of his
person that sore vexed hyme in his age, begane unlawefully to tak upon him the
Royal guvernance. Thurghe the which presumcion, orguyle and pruyde, he wexe
full of viciousnes in his lyvyng, as in dispusellyng and defowlyng of young
madyns; and in brekyng the ordire of weddelok, by his foul ambicious lust of
that voluptenus lust of advoutre. Wherefore the Lords and the Nobles of the
Rewme of Scotland, considering that vicious lyvyng of that said Duke * * * * *
* * * * * * * * * a leaf torn out * * * * * * * * * * * * These traturs furters,
and contractes, ended by the counsel and consent of both the parties of the
Kings, the King of Scotts had leve enlagissid, and had saufecondit of his
master the king of England, (for so the King of Scotts clepid him,) to
return safe and sownde ayene ynto his region of Scotteland.

Of whose cumyng the Earl Douglas and the Earl of Bowgham John Stuart, son of
Robert duke of Albany, and constable of France.
, fully advertised to hemselfe in thaire own misgovernance, he being King and
absent, ne durst not abide his home-cumyng, for fere of the pitous death of
the Duke of Rosey his brother, whom they haved so mischevously murdured
unlawfully in prisone, as before this cronycle made clear memory, they ordeynd
hem, for dowte of their lyvys, with a great nowmber of their frendis and
subjectes, with all the possibilite, to pass the sea ynto France. From whense
they come never; bott both they, with many other worshipfule capitaignes,
knyghts, and swyers, and lords of the Armynakes and Scotts, all enmyes to the
King of England, were slain and takyne at the bataile of Vernoile in Perch,
withyne the revme of France, by that noble and so excellent prince John of
Loncaster, Duke of Bedeford, thene the Regent of France, to whom that day God
granted the disconfitoure, and victory of the feld.

Remanyng at their home the Duke of Albayne, the Earl of Leynys, the Earl of
Manthet, Watir Stuard, and other many lords of Scotteland, thynkyng that they
were so neghe of the Kings blood of Scotts, and demyng also in their
conseites that [thai] hade not offended their King in no wise; bot so abode
still in the land the Kyng's cumyng home out of England ynto Scotteland. Whom
all, with many other of their afinite, the said King of Scottis let arrest,
and hem severally in diverse castle full hard prisoned, till he had fondon
means and wais for to do hem lawfully to death, as false traitors, because of
the false murdure of his brother the duke of Rosay. Whose death the people of the
land sore grutched, and mowrnid; seying that they suppoised and ymagynd that
the King did rather that vigorious execucion upon the Lords of his kyne for
the covetise of their possessions, and goods, thane for any other rightful
cause, althofe he fond colourabill wais to serve his intent in the contrary.

All those things thus done, the said king of Scotts, noght stanchid of his
unsacionable and gredi avarice, ordeynd that tallage, and other imposicions
upon his people, gretter and more chargeant then ever were acustumyd before that
time. So that the comoners of his land secretly clepid him not rightwes, bot a
tirannous prince, what for the outrageus imposicions importables of use, on
taxes and tallages, upon his pour subjectes and people. But after the wisdom
of some philisophers the comone langage of the peiple often spekith without
reason. Nevertheless many of the Lords of that land, dredyng sore of the harm
that might betide, drowghe hem to counsel how they might withstand and resist
the Kings tyranye, sith he hade so litill pite of the death done to hyme of
his Lords, many of hem being so negh of his royal blood, and also of the
gredi covatise that he oppressid and enpoverisid his comonalte. Withal the
King being present in his said cownesell, rose up with a maneli swollon heart a
knight, clepid Sir Robert Grame, a great gentilman and an Earls sune, a mane of
great wit and eloquence, wundir futtilye wittyd, and expert in the law: saying
these words opynly to the Lords, Sirs, if ye woll firmly stand by that at I
shall say to the King, in your audience, I trust to God that we shall find a
good remedy and help. To the which sayng the Lords cosentid: and said that
they trustyng holly in his prudent and discret manchode, would conform and
consent, in hie and low, to mayntene all that he would tak on hand to say, for
the general we will of hem, and of all that land, in that matter by him than mevid.

Upon this the King let to somond a parliament of the iii astatis of his
rewme, where this same Sir Robert Grame, fully set and asurid and purposid to
perform that at he had behight and promysid unto the Lords, as is before
rehersid. He rose upe with a great courage, with a violent chere and
countenance, set hands upon the King sayng these words, I arrest you in the
name of all the three astates of your reume, here now assemblid in this present
parliament, for right as your liege people be bundun and sworn to obey your
Majeste noble riall, in the same wise been ye sworn and ensurid to keep your
people, to keep and guverne your law, so that ye do hem no wrong, bot in all
right mantene and defend hem. And there and then forthwith the said Sir Robert
Grame, asuryng him fully in the promise made unto him by the said Lords, said,
"Is hit not thus as I say?" Unto the which sayng none of all the astates before
rehersid would, ne durst speak oone word, bot kapid silence. The King therewith
percevyng all this presumptuous rebellion, and wirchyng of the said Sir Robert
Grame, greatly movyd and stirryd against him, as that reason would, let do him
arrest, and commandid to put him in sure and hard prisone.

This Sir Robert Grame, seeing himself thus desavyd there of the said Lords,
spoke and said in this wise, "He that serves a common mane, he serves by short
procese of time." After this the King exiled this Sir Robert Grame; and all
his haritages and goods deemed as forfaturs to the King.

Upon his exile this Sir Robert Grame took his [way] ynto the cuntreis of the
Wild Scottis, wherthat he conspired and ymagynd how that he might destruye his
King. And furthwith he renounsed his legeance, and by words, and by writing,
he defied hem, seying that he had destruyd him, his wif, and his childerne, his
haritages, and all his other gods, by his cruel tyranny. Wherefore he said he
would slay him [with] his own hands as his mortal enmye, if were he might se
time, and find wais and means. Thereto the King, hugely vexid in his spretes
with the traturous and malicious rebellion of the said Sir Robert Grame, did
make an opyn proclamacion by all the rewme of Scotteland that whosoever might slay
or tak hyme, and bring him to the Kings presence, should have iii thousand
demyes of gold, every piece worth half an Englissh Noble.

Nocht long after this the King let so ordeyne his parliament in due form, at
Edenbourghe, somunde in the year of our lord A Thousand, Four Hundredth, Six
and Thirtye, in the fest of All Hallowen. To the which parliament the said Sir
Robert Grame stired a full cruel vengance ayene the King, sent privy messages
and letturs to certain men and servantes of the Duke of Albayne, whom the
King a litill before hade done rigorusly to death, lich as hit is entitild here
before, opynly, that if they consent and faver him, he would uttirly take upon
him for to slay the King, lest through his tirannye and covetise he would destruy
this reume of Scotteland: and the corone of the land shall be yovon to Sir
Robert Stuard, which is the Kyng's cosyn, and next of the right of the corone,
bot if the King had a sune; the same Robert's fadir then liggyng in hostage
to the King of England, for the said James King of Scotts, in the tower of
London, till that his fynaunce were fully content and paid. And the said Sir
Robert's grantesire, the Earl of Athetelles, of that treison and counsel as
hit was said; and by himself secretly desirid and covetid to have the corone.
For which causes the same Sir Robert Grame was half the better consentid to
bring thaire purpos to effect. For this Sir Robert Stuard did ever abide in
the kings presence, full famulier about hyme at all hours, and most privey
above all other; and was a full gentill squire, fressh, lusty, and right
amyable. Whom the King entierly loved as his own sone; and for the tendure
love that he had to hyme he made [hym] Constable of all his host, and.... at
the sege of Edenbourgh Sic. Roxburgh.
.

After this the King sodanly avisid made a solemn fest of the Cristynmes at
Perth, which is clepid Sant John's town, which is from Edenbourgh on that other
side of the Scottesh See, the which is vulgarly clepid the Water of Lethe. In
the myddis of the way their arose a woman of Yreland, that clepid herself as a
suthsayer. The which anon as she saw the King, she cried with loud voise,
sayng thus, "My Lord King, and ye pase this water, ye shall never turn ayane
on lyve." The King heryng this was astonyed of her wordis; for bot a litill to
fore he had red in a prophecy, that in the self same year the King of Scotts
should be slain. And therwithall the King as he rode clepid to him oone of his
knyghtis, and gave him in comaundment to torn ayane to speak with that woman,
and ask of here what sheo would, and what thing sheo meant with her loud cryyng?
And sheo began, and told him as ye hafe hard of the King of Scotts, if he
passed that water. As now the king askid her how sheo knew that? And sheo said
that Huthart told her so. "sire," quod ho, men may calant y tak non head of
yond woman's words, for sheo nys bot a drunkine fule, and wot not what sheo
says. And so with his folk passid the water, clepid the Scottisshe See, toward
Saint Johnnes town, bott iiii miles from the cuntreth of the Wild Scotts;
where, in a close of Blakfriars withowt the said town, the king held a great
fest.

Where upon a day, as the King played at the chesses with oone of his knyghtis,
whom in playng wise he clepid King of Love, for he was a lusti man, full
amorous, and much medeled him with loves' art. And as hit came the King to
mind of the prophecy spokyne tofore, the King said to this knight, "Sir King
of Love," quod he, hit is not long agone fith I redd a prophecy, spokyne of
tofore, that I saw how that his year should a king be slain in this land. And
ye wot well Sir Alexander, there be no mo kings in this reume bot ye and I;
and therefore I cownesell you that ye be well ware, for I let you wit that I
shall ordeyne for my sure keeping sufficiently, I trust to God, so I am undir
your kynghood and in the service of Love. And thus the King in his solas played
with the knight.

Withyn short time after this, the King being in his chambur, talkyng and
playng with the Lords, knyghtis, and squyers, that were abowte hyme, spak of
many dyvers matters. Among was there a squire that was right acceptable to the
King, that speak, and said, "For sothe My Lord," quod he, me dremed varelye to
night that Sir Robert Grame should hafe slain you. And that heryng the Earl of
Orkeney thoo warnyd the squire, that he should hald his peace, and tell nane
such tales in the Kings presence. And therewith the King herying this squyers
dreme, remembered himself how that same night how Heo?
had a sweyvyn slepyng; and semyd to him varaly that a cruel serpent, and an
horribill tode, assailid him furiously in his kynges-chambur; and how he was
sore afright and aferd of him, and that he had nothing wherewith he might
socoure and defend himself, bot oonly a pair of tanges that studyn in the
chymneth.

And many other tokyns, and tails, liche to this, the which now may well be
demyd by varay demonstracions, and also pronosticacions to the King, of his
death and murdur, had he or the time of his death fell. Also oone of kings
traitors, clepid Cristofere Chawmebur, that was a squire of the Dukes house of
Albayne, iii times he drugh him to the Kings presence, for he would haf
plainly opynd, and told him of the purpos of all the traitors, that were
about to murdure hyme, because that the King withowt any cause hatid him
rightfully This, and several other sentences, are most obscurely expressed.
. And thus, as hit is said by the old wise fadirs, many years or we were borne,
what thing that destyned to a person, be hit late be hit sone, at the last ever
hit cumyth.

Thus, after this, cane fast apporoch the night, in the which the said James
Stward king of Scotts should falsely him unwittyng, suffure his horribill death
by murdure; this which is pite that any gentill or good man to thynk upon. so
both before soper, and long aftire ynto quarter of the night, in the which the
Earl of Athetelles, and Robert Stward, were about the King; where they were
occupied at the playng of the chesse, at the tables, in redyng of Romans, in
syngyng, and pypyng, in harpyng; and in other honest solaces, of great
pleasance and disport. Therewith came the said woman of Yreland, that clepid
herself a dyvenourese, and entered the Kings court, till that she came streght
to the Kings chambur door, where sheo stood, and abode because that hit was
shitte. And fast sheo knokyd till at the last the ussher opyng the dure;
marvelyng of that woman's being there that time of the night, and askyng here
what sheo would? Let me in Sire, quod sheo, for I haf sumwhat to say, and to
tell unto the King; for I am the same woman that noght long agone desirid to
haf spokyn with him, at the Lith, when he should pass the Scottish See. The
ussher went in, and told him of this woman. "Yea," quod the King, "let her cume
to morrow:" because that he was occupied with such disportes at that time, him
lit not to entend her as hen. The ussher came ayane to the chamber door, to
the said woman; and there he told her that the King was besye in playng; and
bid her cum so ayane upon the morrow. "Well," said the woman, hit shall repent
you all, that ye will not let me speak now with the King. Thereat the ussher
lughe, and held her bot a fule, chargyng her to go her way. And therwithall
sheo went thens.

Withyn an owre the King askid the voidee, and drank, the travers in the
chambure edraw, and every man depairtid and went to rist. Than Robert Stward,
that was right famylier with the King, and had all his commandementes in the
chamber, was the laft that departid; and he knew well the false purveid
theison, and was consentid thereto, and therefore left the Kings chamburs door
opyne; and had brussed and blundird the lokes of hem, in such wise that no man
might shute hem. And about mydnyght he laid certain plaunches, and hurdelles,
over the diches of the diche that environd the gardyne of the chambure, upon
which the said traitors entered. That is to say the forsaid Sir Robert Grame,
with other of his covyne ynto the nowmbre of Three Hundredth persons; the King
that same time there stondyng in his night gown, all unclothid save his shirt,
his cape, his comb, his coverchif, his furrid pynsons Slippers.
upon the form, and the foot sheet; so stondyng afor the chymney playng with
the Qwene, and other ladis and gentilwomen with here; cast offe his night
gown, for to have gone to bed.

But he harkynd, and hard great noise without, and great clateryng of harnych,
and men armyd, with great sight of torches. Than he remembered him, and ymagynd
anon that hit should be [the] false tratours knight, his deedy enemy, Sir
Robert Grame. And suddenly the Qwene, with all the other ladis and gentilwomen,
rane to the chawmber dure, and fond hit opyne; and they would have shitt hit,
bot the lokes were so blundrid, that they nethir cowth ne might shut hit. The
King prayed hem to keep the same door as well as they might, and he would do all
his might to kept him to withstond the false malice of his traitors and enmys;
he suppoisyng to have brestyn the farrements of the chaumbur wyndos, bot they
were so sqware, and strongli sowdid in the stonys with moltyne led, that they
might not be brostyne for him, withowtyn more and strenger help. For which
cause he was ugly astonyed, and in his mind kouth thynk on none other socoure,
bot start to the chymney, and took the tongues of yren that men rightid the fire
with, in time of need; and undir his fete he myghtily breast up a plaunch of
the chaumbur flore, and therwithall cuverid him ayane, and entered adowne low
beneth amongis the ordure of the privay, that was all of hard stone, and none
wyndow ne isshue thereupon, save a litill square hole, even at the side of the
bothum of the pryvay, that at the making thereof old time was levid opyne to
cleanse and ferme the said privay. By the which the King might well escapid; bot
he maid to let stop hit well iii days before hard with stone, because that
whane he played there at the pawme, the ballis that he played with often ran in
at that foul hole, for there was ordenyd withowt a fair playng place for the
King.

And so there for the King nether reschows, ne remedy, bot there he must abide,
ellas the while! The traitors withowt laid at the chaumbur dors, and at the
privay door also, with wawis, with levours, and with axes, that at the last
they brak up all, and entered, (because the durs were not fast shut,) with
swerdes, axis, glavis, bills, and other terribill and ferefull wepons. Among
the great prese of the which traitors, there was a fair lady sore hurt in the
bak; and other gentilwemen hurt and sore wondid. With the which the ladis, and
all the women, maid a sorrowful skrye, and rane away for the hidos fere of tho
boistous and merciles men of arms. The traitors furiously passed forth ynto
the chaumbures, and found the Qwene so dismayed and abassid of that horribill
and ferfull guvernance, that she cowth nether speak, ne withdraw here. And as
sho stood there so astonyd, as a cryature that had lost here kyndly reason, oone
of the traitors wowndid here full vilanysly, and would have slain here, ne had
not been oone of Sir Robert Grame's sons, that thus spek to him and said, What
woll ye dow, for shame of your self! to the Qwene? Sheo is bot a womane. Let
us go and sech the King. And then not wityng well what sheo did, or should do,
for that ferfull and terribill affray, fledd in her kirtill, her mantell
hangyng about her; the other ladies in a corner of the chaumbur, cryyng and
weeping, all distraite made a pitous and lamentable nose with full hevy lokyng
and chere.

And there the traitors sought the King in all the chaumbur abowte, in the
withdrawyng chaumburs, in the litters, undir the presses, the fourmes, the
chares, and all other places, bot long they besily sought the King. Bot they
couth not find him, for they nether knew ne remembered the privay. The King
heryng of long time no noise, ne stiryng of the traitors, wend and demyd that
they had all begone, cried to the women that they should cume with shettes, and
draw him up out of that uncleyne place of the privay. The women at his calling
came fast to the pryvay door, that was not shutt, and so tha opynd hit with
labure. And as they were abowteward to help upe the King, oone of the ladis,
clepid Elizabeth Douglas, fell ynto the pryvay to the King. Therewith oone of
the said traitors, called Robert Sic.
Chaumbur, suppoisid varaly since they couth not find, in none of all the said
chaumburs, the King, that he of nessessite had hyd him in the pryvay. And
therefore he said to his felawes, "Sirs" quod he, whereto stond we thus idill,
and lose owre time, as for the cause that we be cumne forehid? Cumith on forth
with me, and I shall redily tell you where the King is. For the same Thomas Sic.
Chaumbur had been before right familier with the King in all places; and
therefore knew he well all the pryvay corners of thoo chaumburs. And so he went
forth streght to the same pryvay where the King was, and persavyd well an saw
how a plaunch of the flure was brokyn up, and lift hit up, and with a torch
lokyd ynne, and saw the King there, and a woman with hyme. Sayng to his felows,
Sirs the spows is foundon, wherefore we been cumne, and all this night haf
carold here. Therwithall oone of the said tirantes and traitors, clepid Sir
John Hall, descendid down to the King, with a great knyf in his hand; and the
King, dowtyng him sore of his lif, kaught him myghtily by the shuldurs, and
with full great violence cast him under his fete. For the King was, of his
parsone and stature, a mane right manly strong. And seyyng another of that
Hallis brethyrne that the King had the betture of him, went down ynto the
pryvay also, for to destroy the King. And anon as he was there descendid, the
King kaught him manly by the nek, and cast him above that other; and so he
defowlid hem both undir hyme, that all a long month after men might see how
strongly the King had holdyn hem by the throtes. And gretely the King strogild
with hem, for to have berevyd them their knyvys; by the which labur his handis
were all forkute. Bot and the King had been in any wise armyd, he might well
have escapid their malice, by the length of his fightyng with thoo ii false
traitors. For, if the King might any while lengar have savyd hymslefe, his
servantes, and much other people of the town, by sum fortune should haf had
sum knawclege thereof, and so haf cumne to his socoure help. Bot, ellas the
while, hit wol not be! Fortune was to him adverse, as in preserwyng of his life
any longer.

Therwithall that odyus and false traitor Sir Robert Grame, seeing the King
labord so sore with thoo two false traitors, which he had cast undir his fete,
and that he were faint and weary, and that he was weponelese, the more pite was,
descenden down also ynto the pryvey to the King, with an horribill and mortal
wepone in his hand. And then the King cried him mercy. "Thou cruel tirant,"
quod Grame to him, thou hadest nevyr mercy of lords borne of thy blood, ne of
non other gentilman, that came in thy dawnger. Therefore no mercy shall thou have
here. Thane said the King, I beseech the that, for the salvacion of my soul, ye
woll let me have a confessore. Quod the said Grame, Thou shall never have other
confessore bot this same swerd. And therwithall he smote him thorogh the body,
and therwithall the good king fell down and lamentable with a pitous voice he
cried him often mercy, and behight to gyf him half his kyngdam, and much other
good, to save his lif. And then the said Grame, seeing his King and Soveran Lord
ynfortuned with so much deseyse, angwesh, and sorrow, would hafe so levyd, and
done him no more harm. The other traitors above, perceyvyng that, said onto
the said Sir Robert, We behote the faithfully, bot if thou fle him, or thou
depart, thou shall dye for him on owre handys sone dowtlese. And then the said
Sir Robert, with the other two that descendid first down, fell upon that noble
prince, and in full horribill and cruel wise they murdrid him. Ellas for
sorrow, that so ynmefurably cruelte and vengance should be done to that worthy
prince, fer hit was reportid by true persons that saw him deed, that he had
sixtene dedely wounds in his breast, withowtyn many and other y dyverse places
of his body.

And hit is rehersid and remembered, in the historiall and true cronicles of
Scotteland, that in the self same place, by old time passed, there haf been iii
kings of Scotts slain A fable. Not one king is commemorated as having been
slain at Perth.
.

And whene this abominable and horrible homycidie, and false treason of this
cruel murdur, was thus done, the said traitors fought the Qwene; and in their
furous crueltye would hafe slain her, in the same wise. Bot God, of his grace
and goddnes, preservyd and keep here out of their handis. And upon this the
noise arose, and sprang out, both ynto the court, and ynto the town, of that
horribill doing and faite, of that at the faid traitors had done. And anon
forthwith all the Kings servantes, that were logid in his said court, and all
the other people of the same town, with oone will and oone assent, as the
Kings true men, and his liege subjectes, comone with force and arms, with
many a torch, and other lightis, and approached the Kings court. And whene the
traitors hard the noise and ^omore of those comones, they with all ha^t
possibill fled. Bot yet in their withdrawyng, or thaye were fully passed the
diches of the Kings place, a worthy knight that was called Sir Davy Dunbarre,
he allone, ascried and pursued hem, and with his own hand sloghe oone of hem,
and another he sore woundid. And as he faught with them in thaire fleyng, they
kut of three of his fyngurs of his oone hand, and sore woundid him upon his head.
And they slogh an other young mane of the Kyngys chaumbur, that was good grome.

And in this wise Sir Robert Grame, with all the other traitors, escapid, and
droghe hem to the o^ntreth of the Wild Scotts. And they said among hemselfe,
Ellas why sloghe we not the Qwene also; for and we had so done we should have
been out of much disease, and trobill, which we been now lich to have. With
here we have cause gretely to dread here, lest sheo woll pursue, and labor
for to do vengance upon hus. And soth hit was the Qwene did such diligence and
pursuet, ayanst the said felonouce traitors, that withyne a month next aftir
that so abhomynable murdure, they were all takyn, and byhedid at Edynburghe.
The Qwene did hirselfe great worship for here true acquitable. Hit has not often
been seen, so suddenly vengaunce takyn upon so horribill and a cruel ded.

For furst was takyn Sir Robert Stuard, and Cristofere Chaumbur, and lad ynto
strong prisone withyne the Castle of Edynburgh; and after by the sentance of
the law they were drawn, and hangid, and quarterd. Furst there was ordenyd a
cart, whereupon was set a crose of great heght, that was maid of tree. To the
which cross the said Robert Stuward was fast boundon, stondyng upright all
nakid, boundon to the bak of the same, nothing upon hem bot their pryvay
clothes. The hongman there stondyng above with hem, havyng in his handis a
pair sharp tangis, with the which he twitched and all to tare their skin
and flessh, that the blood in full great quantite ran down from hem, that
pite was to see. For they suffird patiently all the cruel pains of
turmentrye, that they put hem to; and said unto the said hongman, Dowe whatever
ye will, for we been gilti, and haf well deservyd hit this payneful death, and
inwyse, and much more. And thus were they ladd, pynched and payned, by all the
streets, and through out Edynbugh. At the last they lad on hegh, before the
Counecell-hows, clepid the Gildhall, there abydyng an our and more, that all
the people pyght behold and wondir on hem. After that they were drawin with
horses, all the town, till they came till a place where was set ane heghe
ynstrument of tymbire, upon which balastriars and bowyers usyn to hong their
harnysshid bows to dry ayanst the sun. Where the said hongman took a rope,
and knyt hit fast about their birstes, undre thaire harmeholes, and drew hem
to the heghest place of that ynstrument; and they there so hongyng confessid
opunly to all the world all the conspiration of the Kings death, from point to
point. And from these they were carried ynto the middis of the marketh place
there, where was ordyned an hie skaffald, upon which with an old rusty axe the
said hongman smot of their hedes, and there quartard hem. And in this wise was
exsecucion done upon hem both, and their heddes set upe of the gates of Sent
Johannes Town.

Soon after this was takyn the Earl of Athetelles, by the Earl of Angwis; and
laid ynto the castle of Edenburghe to prisone. This same Earl of Athetelles
was endited, arreyned, and dampened. Bot because of that this was nighe the
feste of Pascue, the cross was takyn adowne; and he lad to the polour in the
town, and there was he fast boundon, and a corone of papir put upon his head,
the which was all abowte depaynetid with jubettes, and for the more dispite and
shame to him was writyne with these words, TRAITOR, TRAITOR, TRAITOR. The
Busshope of Urbinate, legate of owre Holy Fadir the Pope, then being in
Scotteland, upon his ambassite, hard their confessions. And then evyn forthwith
the said Earl of Athetelles was heded; bot he went alwas to have grace and
pardon, unto the time that the hangman had him upon the skaffald, to be there
and then hedid. For he confessid, and said that he was not in no wise
consentyng ne assentyng to the Kings death; but that he knew thereof long, and
kept hit counesell, because that Sir Robert Stuward, that was oone of the
grettest traitors, was his sons son, and therefore he told hit not to the
King. Bot yet nevyre the less when this Sir Robert wist thereof, and told hit
to the Earl of Athetelles of the Kings death, he blamyd hyme sore, and defendid
him that in no wise should he be consentyng to none such murdure of his Soveran
Lord: weynyng veraly that nether he, ne none of all the other, the which been
rehersid before, would never have done that murdure in effect. And so the said
Earl told, and confessid, at his lyvys end; and his head, coroned with a corone
of yryne, stondyng upon a spear shaft in the myddis of Edenburghe.

After this Sir Robert Grame, with many other traitors of his coveene, being
in captyvyte, were ladde to the town of Strivellen, and there were they
tourmented and put to the death. The said Sir Robert Grame stondyng there, at
the where he was tofore enditid of treison before the Justice and the law there,
upon his araynment, said plainly that they had no law to do him to death, for
he said he had not offendit, bot slain the King his dedely enmye; for by his
letturs, sealed with his seal of arms, long time before he had defied the
King, and renouncid his legeaunce, for causes reasonables as he said. And if
they would do him law after the statuytes of arms, they should delyver him, and
let him go qwite, because the King would have destruyd him if he had might. And
thus in that he said he did no wrong nor sin, bot ooly that he sloughe Gods
criature, his enemy. All these reasons nether couth ne might suffice for his
excuse, the which he perceyvyd well in all wise of their wirchynges. This same
Sir Robert Grame, with manly heart and well avisid, as a mane well ynstructe in
law and letture, said these words standing at the bare afor the Juges, all the
pople there assembled for that cause the self time. O ye all so sinful,
wreched, and mercilese Scottisshe folk, without prudens, and full replet of
unavisid folly, I know well that I shall now dye, and ma not escape your
venomous judicial hands; for by will, and not be right ne law, ye have
dampened my body to the death, the which God suffrethe me at this time to
resave of you, for no desairt of this accusacion that ye condemn me ynne
now, bot for other offenses and trespass, that I in the vain times of my youth
have displeasid hyme ynne. Yet dout y not that ye shall se the day and the
time, that ye shall pray for my soul, for the great good that I have done to
you, and to all this reaume of Scottland, that I have thus slain and delyveryd
you of so cruel a tirant, the grettest enemy the Scotts or Scottland might
have, considering his unstaunchable covetise, in his youth, against all nature,
his tirannye ynmesurable, without pite or mercy to sibbe or to freme, to hie or
to law, to pour or to rich.

All these things the said Sir Robert Grame, with many other ynconvenyences, he
rehersid there ayanst the King; the which rehersale wole be ynne Scotteland
many a year here after. For he was a mane of great heart and manhood, and full
discrete, and a great legister of law positive, and canone, and civlle both.
Yet for all that, at the last he was dampened there by the Juges of the death.
This was the sentance of the jugesment there should be brought a cart, in the
mydward of the which there should be set fast a tree uperight, longer then a
mane; and with that same knyf that he sloughe the King withal, was his hand
all upon heghe nalid fast to that tree, and so was he had thorough out the
town. That edoone the hangmane was commandid, with that same knyfe, to kut of
that hand from the arm. After that he was nalid nakynd, as he was first borne
of his modir, drawn thurghe the town withowte coerture of any part of his
body, as nature brought him forth from his modirs womb, and in the same wise
ladd thorgh all the streets of that town; and the tourmentours on every side
him, with hookid ynstrumentes of yryne, fuyre hot all red glowyng, they
pynchid and twynched his theghis, his legs, his arms, his sides, his bake,
his shuldurs, his neke, his womb, and over all his body, that was full seek
and pitous to look upon, where they suppoisid most to anoye hyme and greve, that
hit was to any man's kind to sorofull and pitous sight, and to abhomynable to
se. With the ymportible pain of turment, he cried then pitously with dedely
voice, for the panys and pasions that he so suffird, sayng to them that they
did that durise to him against the law; this that ye done to me is oonly by
rigor of ynmesurable tyranny. All the world may clepe you Scotts tirantes,
for manekynd may not with the lif suffur ne yndure the paynefull and tiranuous
tourmentrye that ye put me unto. I doubt me full sore that, and ye continue
thus your tourmentes upon my wretched person, that for the pain ye will
constrayne me to renye my Creature. And if I so do I appell you afor God, the
Hie and Chyf Juge of all manekynde after there deserts at the unyversal dome,
that ye been the varay cause of the loss of my saul.

Thurghe the which speech some of the Lords, so abidyng upon the execucion of
this said Sir Robert Grame, moevid of pite let tak him down. And as he was all
nakyd lappid in a rough Scottisshe mantell, and caft him ayane, with a great
violence, ynto sore and full hard prisone.

In the mean time many of the other traitors were boweld all qwik, and
afterward were quarterd, as well they that receyvid the said Sir Robert, as
they that were with him. Whane the exsecution of the said traison was done, and
many of tha that were with him at the day of the King confessid, whane they
were spokyne to go with the said Sir Robert Grame, hit was not told unto him of
no purpos that was said unto hem that they should go with him, to ravisshe a
fair lady out of the Kings house, whame the said Sir Robert Stuward should
have weddid the next day following.

And after this they ladd aftsounes the said Sir Robert Grame to the place
where he should dye. And sodeynely they droughe away the mantall, to the which
all his wounds were hardyned, and clave fast with his blood dried thereto;
forwith the said pain he feel down in a swonyng, and so lay along on the
ground more than a quarter of an owre. And then he revivid, and qwykynd ayane,
seeing that ryvyng away so sodeinly adn rudely of that mantell was to him
gretter pain than any other that [he] had suffird before. And after this, for
the more grefe and sorrow to hyme, they boweld his son all quyke, and
quarterd. him afor his eene, and drew out his heart of his body: the which
heart lepe thrice more than a foot of heghte, after hit was drawn owte of his
body: and in semblable wise the hangmane droughe owte all his bowelles, and
quarterd him, and many other moo after hyme.

Bot the last of all Thomas Halle was hedid; for as hit was knawen and veraly
wist by proof he was the pryncipall and the fynell cause of the Kings death.
The said Chaumbur had the strengyst heart of all the other, for he never
repentid him of the Kings death. The head of him, and the right hand, stand
fast nalid at Edenburghe, undir the Earls head of Athetelles.

And thus endyn these sorofull and pitous chronicles: and all mean say that the
unsacionable covetise was the ground and cause of the Kings death. Therefore
princes should take heed, and draw it to their memory of Maistre Johanes de
Moigne counsel, thus said in French langage, Il nest pas sires de son pays,
quy de son people n'est amez, the which is thusmuche to meene, in our Englesshe
tongue, 'A great prince may have no more vice, ne hyme to greve thanne avarice.
He nys no lord in his cuntre, that of his mean has no lufe.' Leve ye me,

For well may he be called a Lord,
Wham that his people love of record.
Merk this well I you beseech.
Adieux. To God I you beteche.
And thus now here endethe this most pitevous cronicle, of th'orribill death
of the King of Scotts, translated out of Latyne into our moders Englisshe
tongue, by your simple subget John Shirley, in his last age, after his simple
understondyng, which he recommendethe to your supportacione and correccion, as
that your gentilnese vowchethe safe for his excuse, etc.
No XIV. Coronation Oath, and Oaths of fidelity and homage, 1445 See page 160
of this volume. In the MS. of our old laws here quoted these curious forms
occur just before the Schip Lawis.
. MS. Harl. 4700.
Forma Juramenti Regis suis tribus statibus, etc.
I SALL be lele and true to God and Haly Kirk, and to the Three Estatis of my
realm. And ilk estate keep, defend, and govern, in their awn fredome and
privilege, at my gudly power, eftir the lawis and custumis of the realm. The
law, custume, and statutis of the realm, neither to eik, nor to myniss, without
the consent of the Three Estatis. And nathing to wirk, na use, tuiching the
commoun proffit of the realm, but consent of the Three Estatis. The law and
statuts, maid be my forbearis, keip and use in all puncts, at all my power,
till all my leigis in all things, sa that thai repung nocht agane the faith. Sa
help me God, and this halydome, etc.

Forma fidelitatis prelatorum.
I sall be lele and true to you, my Liege Lord, Schir James King of Scottis.
And sall nocht heir your scaith, nor se it, but I sall lat it, at all my power,
and warn you thereof. Your consell heil that ye schaw me: The best consale I can
to gif to you, quhen ye charge me in verbo Dei. And als help me God, and haly
ewangelis etc.

Juramentum Baronum, et ipsorum bomagii juramentum.
I B. becumis your man as my King, in land, lif, licht, and lym, and warldlis
honor, fewtie, and lawtie, aganis all that leif and dee may; your consale
celand that ye schaw to me. The best consale gevand, geif ye charge me. Your
scaith nor dishonor to heir, nor se, bot I sall lat it, at all my gudlie
power, and warn you thereof. Sa help me God etc.

Forma fidelitatis Juramenti Regi.
I sall be lele and true to you, my Liege Lord, Schir James King of Scotland. I
sall another heir your scaith, nor se it, bot I sall lat it at my power, and
warn you thereof. Your consell schewin to me I sall conceille. The best consall
I can I sall gif you, quhen ye charge me therewith. Sa help me God etc.

Their foirsaid aithis was maid in the parliament begunnyng at Perth, the xiiij
day of Junij, the yer etc. xlv, and continewit to Edinburgh, as eftir followis.
Their was gevin dome apoun the King's rebelloris. Schir James Stewart knycht
was lauchfully summond to compeir before our soveran lord the King, and his
parliament, for crime committit till his Majesty, and for rebellioun: quhilk
summonds lauchfully previt, and he diverse tymis callit, and nocht comperit, The
parliament has decretit and determynit that all and sindry movable guds, lands,
and possessiouns, pertening to him, ar the King's eschet, less than he be cum
within yeir and day, and underga the law, and that was gevin for dome Follow
the oaths of baillies, and burgesses, of fidelity to the king, and to the
interests of the town, etc. The close of the baillie's is, "Sa help me God, and
mine awn hand, and this halidome, and all halydomes, and all that God maid on vi
days, and vii nychts, under erd and abone."
, etc.

No XV. Ordinances of War, issued by William earl of Douglas in 1448. Titus F.
XIII, f. v. 39.
The Statuts of Scotland to be observed in time of war, etc. set down at
Linclodane, by all the lords, freholders, and best borderers of Scotland, Anno
Domini 1448; by the comaundment of Earl William of Duglasse, which were used
in the time of black Archibald of Duglas, and Archibald his son.

Earl William of Duglasse caused all the lards and borderers to swear, that
they shoud observe and keep etc. the statuts ensuinge.

Earl William of Duglasse, the lords, and eldest borderers, made certane
offenses treason etc. which were nocht treason before.

No manner of person shall entercomon with any English man or woman, either in
England or Scotland, nor with any prisoner that shall enter into Scotland,
without special license of the Warden, or his deputy.

When ane host enters into Scotland Sic. England.
, if any for coveteousnes depart from the host, the goods that he gets
shall be to the governor, or divided amongst the complaynees; and himself to
be used as a traitor.

If any do depart from his lord or master, in his outgoying or home coming,
shall be deemed a traitor.

Noe person shall steal, or forrey, without direction of the chieftaine, nor
speak with any Englishman without leave of the governor of the host, under
pain of treason.

When the host alighteth, if any contrary to commandment remain on
horseback, this offense is treason; and the goods which such offenders get,
or prisoners which they tak, the two parts shall be his masters, and the third
the governor's of the host.

The hinderors of ordering the host, and disobedience to the officers
appointed for that purpose, (sic) Treason. MS. Harl. 4700.


After that the Scotts intend an invasion into England, or the Englishmen into
Scotland, whosoever let his prisoner pass out of Scotland to go home into
England, shall be deemed a traitor.

In any chase if ane tak his fellowe's horse, and either pursue wherbie he
takes prisoners or other goods, the owner of that horse shall have the moytie:
which horse if the taker bring him not back, and tie him to the stak where he
found him, yt is treason, either see if as soon as he comes home, he proclaim not
that horse at the market cross, and deliver him to the sheriff or steward of
that place, it is treason.

Whosoever after he be once in the field depart, and abides not the
uttermost, his goods are forfeited, and he shall be deemed a traitor.

Whosoever receaveth a prisoner's horse, or other goods from any, after it be
known to appertene to him, shall restore them again, and be reputed a traitor.

If any traitor be apprehended, and fraudulently enlarged, this offense is
treason; but if he be brought to the Warden, the bringer of him shall be
rewarded with v lib Not to swell the appendix unnecessarily this old abstract
is given; the ordinances at large, dated Lincluden 18 Dec. 1448, may be found
in the body of the Scottish Laws, MS. Harl. 4700.
.

No XVI. Extracts from the Chamberlain's Roll, anno 1449. Register Office,
Edinburgh.
Note. Part of this Roll also is lost.
COMPOTUM Patricii Lawmondsoun, Coronatoris de Cowell, et Receptoris firmarum
terrarum Domini Regis, infra Dominium de Cowell, Reddit. apud Linlithgw, die
ultimo mensis Junii, Anno Dni, etc. quadragesimo nono, de omnibus Receptis suis
et expensis, per firmas et exitus dictarum terrarum Domini Regis dicti Dominii;
a die vicesimo nono mensis Augusti Anni Dni, etc. quadragesimi Octavi, usque in
diem hujus Compoti.

Idem Compotans onerat se inprimis de lv s. v d. ob. pro Arierag: ultimi
Compoti, sui, ut patet in pede ejusdem.

Summa Arierag: patet.

Item, Idem Compotans onerat se de xviii. li. de firmis terre de Dunnune de
duobus terminis infra hoc Compotum. Et de xiii. li. vi s. viii d. de firmis
tercie partis terre de Glenrowell, de dictis duobus terminis infra hoc Compotum.

Summa hujus Oneris xxxi li. vi s. viii d.

Item, Idem onerat se de xliiii Martis pro firmis duarum partium dicte terre de
Glenrowell, de dictis duobus terminis hujus Compoti.

Summa hujus oneris patet.

Item, idem onerat se de xxxi li. iiii s. iii d. de firmis terrarum quondam
Duncani Lawmondsoun, tam in proprietate quam in tenandia, in manibus regis
existen. ratione ward, per mortem quondam dicti Duncani, de duobus annis hujus
Compoti. Et de liii s. iiii d. de firmis terre de Collart, in manibus Regis
existentibus ratione ward, per mortem quondam Gilberti de Galbraith de termino
pentecostes ultimo preterito.

Summa hujus oneris xxxiii li. xvii s. vii d. Summa tot: oneracionis preter
arierag: lxv li. iiii s. iii d. xliiii martis.

Summa tot: oneracionis cum arierag: lxvii li. xix s. viii d. ob. xliiii Marts.

Et non onerat se de aliquibus aliis wardis, releviis, maritagiis, finibus, aut
Eschaetis; nec de Curiarum Suarum exitibus, quia nichil plus accidit per tempus
Compoti ut asserit Compotans in suo Juramento.

Expen: Ejusdem. In primis alloc. Compotans per receptionem Roberti de
Calentare pro Custodia turris de Dunnune, de anno Compoti xviii li. Et per
receptionem ejusdem Roberti de Calentar de firmis tercie partis terre de
Glendrewel, de duobus terminis hujus Compoti, in partem solucionis pensionis
sibi assignat. pro custodia Castri de Dunbertane xiii li. vi s. viii d. de
quibus omnibus dictus Robertus respondebit. Et allocat: eidem de firmis
terrarum M'chorle Jacen. infra vic. de Ergaile, que est tenendia quondam
Duncani Lawmondsoun, recept. per vicecomitem de Ergaile, de duobus terminis
hujus Compoti, existent. in manibus Regis, ratione ward, v li. vi s. viii d.
pro quibus idem vicecomes respondebit.

Summa Expensar. xxxvi li. xiii s. iiii d. Et sic restat xxxi li. vi s. iiii d.
ob.

De qua Summa Compotans dicit se satisfecisse Roberto de Calentare supra dicto,
in partem pensionis sibi debit. pro Custodia Castri de Dunbertane, sub periculo
Compotantis, lv s. v d. ob. de quibus idem Robertus respondebit. Et allocat
Compotans per receptionem ejusdem Roberti, de firmis terre de Collart, in
manibus Regis existent. ratione ward, ut supra, liii s. iiii d. pro quibus
eciam idem Robertus respondedit. Et alloc. eidem per solucionem factam Roberto
de Levyngstoun, Compotorum Rotulatori, ad Expen. Domicilii, per recepcionem
clerici Registri, xxiiii li. xvii s. vii d. de quibus idem Rotulator
respondebit.

Summa hujus Alloc. xxx li. vi s. iiii d. ob. Et sic debet Compotans, de claro,
xx s. xliiii martas.

COMPOTUM Nigelli Jacobi, Camerarii de Bute, et de Arrane, reddit. Apud
Linlithgw, nono die mensis Julii, Anno Dn^i, etc quadragesimo nono, de omnibus
receptis suis et expens. per firmas et exitus terrarum Domini Regis de Bute,
Arane, et de Cumbray, a die penultimo mensis Augusti, Anni Dni, etc.
quadragesimi Octavi, usque in diem hujus Compoti. Et sic de duobus terminis
infra hoc Compotum.

Idem Compotans onerat se, etc. etc.

Expen. ejusdem. In primis allocat Compotans per solucionem sactam duobus
Capellanis, celebran. in Castro de Bute, et in Capella Sancte Brigide extra
Castrum, infeodatis ab Antiquo percipien. Annuatim de firmis dicte Insule de
Bute, duodecim libras quinque solidos et quatuor denarios, in ploenam
Solucionem feodorum suorum de Anno Compoti, ut patet per literas dictorum
Capellanorum de recept. onerosas super Compotum, xii li. v s. iiii d. Et
Constabulario Castri de Bute, percipien. Annuatim de firmis supra dictis, pro
feodo suo, quinque libras in plenam solucionem dicti feodi sui, de Anno Compoti
v li. Et Janitori dicti Castri, percipien. Annuatim quadraginta solidos, pro
feodo suo, in plenam solucionem dicti feodi sui, de Anno Compoti xl s. Et
Granitario de Bute, pro feodo suo de Anno Compoti xl. s. Et duobus Vigilibus,
pro feodis suis per idem tempus, xiii s. iiii d. Et Custodi Insule de Littil
Cumray, pro feodo suo per idem tempus, xx s. Et Camerario de Bute et Arane, pro
feodo suo per idem tempus, vii li. Et Janitori, Granitario, duobus Vigilibus et
Custodi de Litil Cumray supradictis percipien. Annuatim quinque Celdr. farine
Avenatice prec. Celdr. xxii s. in plenam Solucionem duorum terminorum Compoti
viii li. Et alloc. eidem, de firmis terre de Stowlogmor, et Donacione Regis
facta Christino Leche, ut patet per litera^ Regis sub Signeto direct. Compotan.
usque ad contrarium mandatum duratur: Als onerosas super Compotum de Anno
Compoti iii li. vi s. viii d. Et per alloc. factam husbandis Insularum de Bute
et de Arane, pro quadraginta Mailmartis receptis ab eisdem, de Anno, etc.
quadragesimo nono, et liberat. Roberto de Levyngstoun, Compotorum Rotulatori,
ad expensas Domicilii Regis allocand. pro qualibet marta quinque solidos, x li.
de quibus martis respondebit. Et de firmis terre de Barrone, Allocat. Johi Scot
Cursori Dn^i Regis, Regis, in partem solucionis feodi sui, xvi s. viii d. Et
eidem Johanni Scot, in Complementum feodi sui de Anno Compoti, xxiii s. iiii d.
Et Eugenio Scot Cursori Regis, pro feodo suo de Anno Compoti xl s. Et allocat.
Compotan. pro Agitacione dictarum quadraginta Martarum de Bute et de Arane ad
le Torwood xx s. Et allocat eidem de firmis terrarum de Pen^ycastel, Knokan,
Rawneger, Correknokdow, Cranschant, Knokankelly, et Glastere, assignat. Willm^o
Stewart, pro Custodia Castri de Braithwik, de Anno Compoti viii li. xvi s. viii
d. Et allocat Compotan. per solucionem factam Roberto de Levyngstoun Compotorum
Rotulatori, ad expens. Domicilii Regis, ut patet per literas suas de recept.
onerosas super Compotum xxxvi li. de quibus respondebit. Et allocat eidem per
solucionem factam Roberto de Levyngstoune Compotorom Rotulatori, ad expen.
Domicilii Regis super Compotum per receptionem Clerici Registri xl li. de
quibus respondebit. Et per solucionem factam Johi Stewart Vicecomiti de Bute,
nunc desuncto, pro feodo suo in Officio Vicecomitis de Bute, percipien. per
Annum per Cartam Regis Roberti Secundi, pro tempore vite, Sexdecim libras
tresdecim Solidos et quatuor denarios, in plenam solucionem feodi sui de Anno
Compoti, Jacobo Stewart filio ejus primogenito faten^ recept super Compotum xvi
li. xiii s. iiii d. Et per solucionem factam predicto quondam Johi Stewart,
percipien. Annuatim pro Custodia Castri de Rothsay quadraginta libras, in
plenam solucionem dicti feodi sui, de Anno Compoti, prefato Jacobo faten.
recept. super Compotum xl li. Et allocat eidem de firmis terrarum de Loche de
Katagill, duarum Couregithes, Pen^y reach, Altgowloch, Macharmor, Achagallane,
et Machirbeg, in Insula de Arane, occupat. per Reginaldum M'Alexander, de Anno
Compoti xiiii li. vi s. viii d. Et alloc. eid. de firmis predict. terrarum
predictar. occupat per dictum Reginald, que non suerunt sibi alloc. de Anno,
etc. quadragesimo Octavo xl s.

Summa Expen. ii c. xiiii li. ii s. et Sic Restat vii li. xi s. iiii d.

Item, Idem Compotans de Ordeo onerat se in primis, etc. etc.

Expen. ejusdem. In primis allocat. per liberacionem factam Roberto de
Calentare, Capitaneo Castri de Dunbretane, in undecim celdris, et duabus bollis
ordei, sibi venditis et deliberatis, de mandato Compotorum Rotulatoris, faten.
mandatum super Compotum, de quibus dictus Robertus de Calentare dedit Compotum
celdra sibi vendita pro quatuor libris xi celdr. ii boll. ordei. Et allocat
Compotan. pro quatuor libris pecunie recept. per Compotorum Rotulatorem pro una
celdra ordei, i celdra ordei, pro quibus quatuor libris idem Rotulator
respondebit. Et pro ordeo Grassume terre de Scoulogmor, remiss. per Regem
Cristino Leche de Anno Compoti, v boll. ordei. Et Compotan. pro feodo suo de
ordeo utrusque Insule, sibi ut asserit Annuatim per suum juramentum debit. i
celdr. viii boll. ordei. Et per remissionem factam Johi Scott Cursori Regis, ex
gratia et elemosina ejusdem, de ordeo debito de terra quam habet ad firmam de
Anno Compoti, 1 boll. i. f. ordei. Et allocat eidem de ordeo grassume terre de
Cranschaunt, et de Knockankelle, vii boll ordei Wmo. Stewart. Et de ordeo
debit. de terris quas occupat Reginaldus M'Alexander, in Insula de Arane, qui
nichil vult Solvere Compotanti, vii boll. ordei.

Summa Expensar. etc. etc.

Item, idem Compotans de Male marts onerat se inprimis de xxxvii martis, ii
quartar. unius mart, pro Arrerag. ultimi Compoti sui, etc. etc.

Expens. ejusdem. Inprimis alloc. Compotans per liberacionem factam Roberto de
Levingstoune Compotorum Rotulatori, ad usus et expen. Domicilii Regis, faten.
Recept. super Compotum xl. martes, pro quibus respondebit; et pro feodo
Constabularii Castri de Bute de Anno Compoti, ii martes. Et Janitori Castri de
Bute, pro feodo suo de Anno Compoti, i mart. Et Camerario de Bute pro feodo suo
de Anno Compoti ii mart. Et de terris assignatis Willmo Stewart de Anno Compoti
ii martes cum demid. mart. Et de terris quas habet Constabularius Castri, pro
feodo suo de Anno precedente hoc Compotum, in quo nunc fuit sibi Allocat. i
mart cum dimid. Et de Anno hujus Compoti i mart cum dimid. mart. Et ex
elemosina Regis, et consideratione Auditorum, Johanni Scot Cursori Regis, de
terra quam habet ad firmam i marta. Et de martis debitis de terris quas occupat
Reginaldus M'Alexander, in Insula de Arane, iiii marts et i quart unius mart.

Summa Expensarum lv mart et iii quartar. unius mart. Et sic reftant xxxix
marts et ii quartar. unius mart.

COMPOTUM Johannis de Fiffe, Receptoris Reddituum et firmarum Domini nostri
Regis, infra Vicecomitatus de Aberdene et de Banff, reddit apud Linlithgw die
vicesimo tercio mensis Julij, Anno Dni, etc. quadragesimo nono, de omnibus
Receptis suis et expensis, per firmas, exitus et redditus terrarum Dni Regis
infra dictos Vicecomitatus, a decimo sexto die mensis Septembris, Anni Dni,
etc. quadragesimi octavi, usque in diem hujus Compoti.

Idem Compotans onerat se in primis de 1 c. lix li. viii s. ii d. ob. pro
Arrerag. ultimi Compoti sui, cum quibus summis fuit oneratus in ultimo Compoto
suo, in quo nec exposuit, nec se in aliquo exoneravit, ut patet in pede dicti
Compoti sui.

Summa Arrerag. patet.

Item, Idem onerat se de xx s. de firmis terre de Kynnardy, existent. in
manibus Regis ratione ward, dempta tercia debit. sponse quondam Gilberti de
Haia, et secundis decimis debitis Domino Episcopo Aberdonen. de termino Beati
Martini ultimo preterito. Et nunc de termino Pentecostes ultimo preterito, quod
dicti quondam Gilberti here is viz. Andreas de Haya recuperavit saysinam ante
Pentecost. Et de xxxvi s. de firmis tercie partis terre de Rothybrishane, que
fuit Sponse quondam Johannis Duncani in warda existent. dempt. secunda decima
debit Dn^o Episcopo Aberdonen. de Anno hujus Compoti.

Summa hujus oneracionis lvi s.

Et Memorand. quod terre de Bochrum et de Kyninmonde, jacen. infra
Vicecomitatum de Banff, sunt de proprietate Domini Regis, et quondam concesse
domino Willmo de Forbes, et nunc sunt occupate per Dominum Comitem de Huntle.
Super quibus consulendus est Rex. Et terre de Abiryheldy, que sunt de
proprietate Regis, infra Vicecomitatum de Aberdene, et jacent in Stradee, et
occupat. per dictum Comitem. Et quod terre de Blareschenoch valent annuatim
December libras. Et unus Annuus Redditus quinquaginta trium solidorum et quatuor
denariorum, in Culane, sunt de proprietate Regis, infra Vicecomitatum de Banff,
per Eschaetam quondam Dni Willmi de Lindesay, et conceduntur Johi de Alloway.

Summa totalis oneracionis, 1 c. lxii li. iiii s. ii d. ob. cum Arreragiis.

Expense ejusdem. Inprimis allocat Compotans per remissionem factam per Regem
Willmo de Setoun, de Relevio terrarum de Aldmeldrum, debit. per Saisinam datam
Sponse dicti Willmi, xiii li. vi s. viii d. Et per remissionem factam per Regem
Domino Alexandro Comiti de Crawfurde, de relevio terrarum suarum de
Tulybrothoch, et de Tulynahilt ix li. Et per solucionem factam Roberto de
Levyngstoune Compotorum Rotulatori, ad expen. Domicilii Regis, per Receptionem
Clerici Registri super Compotum, xxvi li. xiiii s. iiii d. de quibus
respondebit. Et allocat eidem pro secundis Decimis quadraginta librarum de
tribus partibus relevii terrarum de Aldmeldrum prescript. debit. Dn^o Episcopo
Aberdonen. iiii li. Et de duabus marcis, pro quarta part relevii dictarum
terrarum de Aldmeldrum, satisfaciet Domino Episcopo Willmus de Setoun, et ejus
Sponsa. Et allocat. Compotans pro secundis Decimis debitis Domino Episcopo
Aberdon. de relevio terrarum de Uldny, per Saisinam Datam Reginaldo de Uldny,
xxvi s. viii d.

Summa Expensarum liiii li. vi s. viii d. Et sic restat 1 c. vii li. xvii s. vi
d. ob.

No XVII. Letter James II to Charles VII of France, 8 July, 1455.
Lucae D'Achery Spicilegium, sive Collectio Veterum aliquot Scriptorum, etc.
Editio nova a De la Bar. Paris 1723, fol. Vol. III. p. 801 Apparently from
the French archives.
.
Jacobi Scotiae Regis ad Carolum VII Regem Francorum.
CHRISTIANISSIMO et excellentissimo Principi, Carolo Dei gratia Francorum
illustrissimo Regi, fratri, et confoederato nostro amantissimo, Jacobus eadem
gratia Rex Scotorum, cum recommendatione ac dilectione votivis, feliciter
triumphare. Christianissime Princeps, frater ct confoederate amantissime,
Ambassiatam nostram ad vestrae Majestatis praesentiam nuperrime destinatam,
Reverendum videlicet in Christo patrem Thomam Episcopum Candidae Casae, Joannem
dominum Lindessay de Byris, nostrum consanguineum, et Joannem Arons
Archidiaconum Glasguensem, decretorum doctorem, nostros Consiliarios intime
confisos, cum suis litteris credentiis, et aliis ex part nostra commissis, ad
eandem vestram Majestatem credimus pervenisse; ac ipsam de nostra prosperitate,
et Regni nostri statu, potissime vero de rebellione Jacobi olim Comitis de
Douglas, suorumque fratrum et complicium, deque ipsorum nefandissimis
proditionibus et conspirationibus, contra nostram Majestatem; de iis saltem,
quae ante ipsorum ambaxiatorum recessum, per eosdem proditores gesta fuere, ad
plenum informasse. Verum quia Vestram Christianissimam Majestatem de nostris
votivis successibus semper audire, et certiorari avidam fore cognoscimus,
praefati Jacobi, suorumque fratrum et complicium, sinistros eventus novissime
recurrentes, presenti scripto duximus explicandos.

Dum enim praefati conspiratores in suis maleficiis, induratis animis,
perseverarent, nos ad castrum de Abercorne, quod dicto Jacobo pertinebat,
respicientes, attendentes etiam quod illud nobis verisimiliter magis nocere
poterat, pro eo quod Regni nostri pomerio de facile resisti poterat, idcirco
illuc cum nostro exercitu, in hebdomada Paschali, personaliter nos contulimus;
ibidemque fixis tentoriis obsidionem firmavimus, et ab eodem non recessimus,
donec infra unius mensis spatium, turribus ejusdem castri per circuitum ex
continuo machinarum ictu collapsis, per insultus, scalas, et arma bellica,
muros ipsius potenter ascendimus; ipsiusque adversariis resistere minime
valentibus, cepimus, et ad terram funditus prosterni fecimus. Principales vero
rebels, qui in eodem castro inventi fuerunt, poena suspendii justificavimus;
caeteris vero minoribus, qui nostram misericordiam implorabant, vitam gratiose
concessimus.

Praefatus vero Jacobus, nobis circa dicti castri obsidionem occupatis, videns
se auxilio et assistentia subditorum nostrorum fidelium destitutum, infra
limits regni nostri expectare non audens, ad parts Angliae, quatuor quinque
personis associatus, se contulit: tribus fratribus suis Archimbaldo videlicet
Comite Moraviae, Hugone Comite de Ormonde, et Joanne de Douglas de Balvany
juniore, in fronteriis Marchiarum nostrarum versus Angliam, in partibus
videlicet de Osdaile, post se relictis: qui dum in eisdem partibus
depraedationes et homicidia in nostros fideles exercerent, nobiles et fideles
nostri ejusdem patriae, in marchis et fronteriis regni nostri commorantes,
contra eosdem insurrexerunt, et ipsos viriliter insequentes apprehenderunt.
Sicque primo die mensis Maij ultimo praeteriti, inito lethali conflictu,
praesati conspiratores terga sunt dare coacti: ubi praefatus Comes Moraviae
cecidit mortuus, cujus caput abscissum statim nobis, in dicta obsidione castri
de Abercorne existentibus, per nostros fideles est transmissum. Dictus vero
Comes de Ormonde, ibidem captus, et ad nos destinatus, poena capitali extat
condemnatus. Tertius vero frater ad parts Angliae se retraxit.

Quibus sic feliciter expeditis, castrum de Douglas, praefati Jacobi
principale, et castrum de Strathavane, caeteraque praefati Jacobi fortalitia,
per inhabitants, qui nostram misericordiam implorabant, nobis sunt reddita; et
solo coaequata, excepto dumtaxat castro de Trese Trefe. On the Dee Galloway.
For the Acts of Parliament, 1455, have misled the author, p. 231. Gross, or
Cardonnel, may be consulted for the ruins of Tretf castle.
, per nostros fideles impraesentiarum obsesso; quod Domino concedente in brevi
obtinere speramus.

Sic igitur, divina disponente clementia, rebus prospere succedentibus, Regno
nostro, absque quacumque Baronum aut subditorum nostrorum rebellione, feliciter
presidemus; praesatis conspiratoribus extinctis penitus, et expulsis. Haec
omnia scribimus ad vestrae Majestatis gaudium singular; quia quemadmodum nos
vestrae Majestatis honorem, et commodum, libenter amplectimur, sic eamdem
vestram Majestatem vice mutua diligere nos, et nostra, minime dubitamus.

Insuper V. Christianissimae Majestati innotescimus, qualiter per nonnullos
fideles nostros in fronteriis marchiarum nostrarum contra Anglicos commorantes,
(qui notitiam oppidi nostri Berlbits Berwik.
, per eosdem Anglicos a longo tempore injuriose detenti, optime habere
noscuntur,) suerimus informati, quod si cum exercitu nostro, subito et ex
inopinato, illuc accederemus, ipsum oppidum absque difficultate capere
potuissemus. Dumque cirea hujus rei exequutionem nostram providentiam
faceremus, accidit quod quidam Anglicus, qui in regnum nostrum venerat sub
nostro salvo conductu, et qui sacramento magno adstrictus erat quod non
recederet sine nostra licentia petita et obtenta, quamdam etiam praesumptionem
seu sufpicationem habens de nostro proposito antedicto, subito ad parts
Angliae se contulit, et nostrum propositum praefatis Anglicis patefecit. Sicque
factum est quod cum ad praefatum oppidum cum exercitu nostro copioso venimus,
sperantes Anglicos de nostro adventu omnino fuisse inscios, reperimus ibidem
inimicos in armatorum numero copioso, tam per terram quam per mare, ad ejusdem
oppidi defensionem confluxisse. Propter quod nostrum propositum illa vice ad
effectum perducere commode non poteramus: sed isto nonobstante, Divina favente
clementia, cum adjutorio etiam vestrae Christianissimae Majestatis, proponimus
brevi praefatum oppidum cum tali ac tanta provisione expugnare, quod inimicis
praedictis nobis resistendi non erit plena facultas.

Super qua materia, et aliis nostrum honorem et commodum intime concernentibus,
ordinavimus dilectum nostrum Herraldum Rothissay, latorem praesentium, nostra
intention plene instructum; cui ac etiam aliis Ambaxiatoribus nostris
transmissis, fidem indubiam, et expeditionem celerem et gratiosam, abhibere
dignetur vestra Christianissima Majestas, fratemitasque carissima memorata;
quam omnium Regum Princeps dirigat atque regat. Scriptum Camburg Edinburg.
VIII. Julij.

No XVIII. Forfeiture of the Douglases, 1455. MS. Adv. Lib. A. 4.7 A collection
by Sir Lewis Stuart in the time of Charles I. This copy must have been taken by
a very incorrect scribe.
.
COMITES, magnates, protores Procuratores?
, Barons Comitatuum, et Burgorum Commissarii, in Parliamento apud Burgh de
Edinburgh tento, et inchoato nono die Mensis Junii, Anno Domini Millesimo
quadringentesimo quinquagesimo quinto, universis et singulis ad quorum notitias
presents litere pervenerint, salutem in omnium Salvatore. Vestrae universitati
Notum facimus, quod excolentissimus princeps Dominus noster, Dominus Jacobus
Rex Scottorum illustrissimus, decimo die Mensis et anni predicti, Coram nobis
in pretorio Burgi de Edr. in parliamento prefato, presentari et perlegi fecit
quasdam literas Summonitionis Capelle Regie, sub sigillo officii Canciliarie
dicti S. D. N. Regis, Sigillatas sufficienter, et legittime indorsatas, Jacobo
de Livingstoune Vicecomiti de Lanark in ea part directas, et suo etiam sigillo
in testimonium executionis earund. sigillat. pro Summonitione Jacobi Douglas,
olim Comitis de Douglas, etc. emanatas. Post quarum literarum, et earund.
indorsationis lecturam, dictus Jacobus de Douglas, virtute dictarum literarum
legittime et peremptory Summonitus suit, ut luculenter apparebat per
productionem quatuor testium, viz. Lion herald armorum Regis, Roberti de
Broyse, Henrici de Livingstoune, et Roberti de Dalyell, rpoductorum per dictum
Jacobum Livingstoune, et magno interveniente sacramento asserentium ipsos
presents fuisse, vicesimo quarto die mensis Aprilis, anno predicto cum Jacobus
de Livingstoune executionem debitam dictarum Literarum summonitionis Capelle
Regie fecit apud Douglas, Strathaven, et Crucem burgi de Lanark.

Cum vero, dicta probatione rite et legittime facta, dictus Jacobus de Douglas.
sepe Vocatus ad Comparend. personaliter coram dicto S. D. N. Rege, suisque
Regni Statibus, dicto decimo die Junii in Parliamento, et ad Respondend. dicto
S. D. N. Regi pro proditoriis munitionibus et sortificationibus turrium and
fortaliciarum de Treve, Douglas, Strathaven, et Abercorne; et pro proditoriis
legiis et Confederationibus, per ipsum Jacobum etiam factis cum Anglicis, in
Corone Regie lesionem; et pro dicta conspiratione proditoria, and insurrectione
cum multitudine armatorum gentium, hostiliter et per modum guerre, prope burgum
de Lanark, contra Regem. Et pro ejusd. Jacobi prodictoriis auxiliis,
manutenentiae sui fidens assistentiis and supportationibus, prestitis et
adhibitis suis fratribus, et eorum complicibus, in eodum prodictoriis
Rebellionibus, etc. per ipsos factis; et pro rapiis per ipsum factis de grangia
Henrici Dni. Abernethi, Justiciarii Dni Degis, et pro dicti Jacobi auxilio et
supportatione fact. Roberto de Douglas, in exhereditatione Regis, et
successorum suorum, in quantum in ipso Jacobo extitat, de terris de Strabrok,
jure et hereditarie spectantibus: et pro incendiis et * * per ipsum Jacobum
factis super Grangia de Coliden, et pro art et part incendiorum burgi de
Dalkeith, et rapinarum Bonorum Inhabitantium dictum burgum; et pro quam
pluribus proditoriis Rebellionibus, Criminibus, et transgressionibus, per
dictum Jacobum contra Dominum nostrum Regem; et supra suis legiis et subditis
in Domini nostri Regis opprobrium et contemptum, ac suorum legiorum damnum
immodicum, et gravamen, Commiss. et perpetrat.

Quum quidem Jacobus sepe vocatus non Comparuit, deinde Lancelotus de
Abernethie, prolocutor dicti Domini nostri Regis, ad proband. et Clare
deliberand. dictum Jacobum de Douglas Commisisse et perpetrasse predictas
traditiones in diversis transgressionibus predictis per ipsum Jacobum
perpetrat. produxit quam plures rations, allegationes, acta et statuta
Parliamentorum, et Jura Communia tam Canonica quam Civilia in scriptis redacta.
Quibus auditis et intellectis, post longam Communicationem inter nos habitam,
Comperimus dictum Jacobum prodictoriam Commississe traditionem, in omnibus
articulis precedentibus prodictoriam traditionem tangen. juxta Acta et Statuta
Parliamentorum, ac jura communia Canonica et Civilia: ac etiam ipsum Jacobum de
Douglas Criminosum et reum in omnibus aliis transgressionibus antedictis.

Tunc vero, remotis omnibus et singulis dominis Prelatis dicti parliamenti, ac
ceteris Clericis infra sacros ordinis Constitutis quibuscunque, datum fuit pro
judicio, per os David Dempster de Carraldstone, Judicatorem Curie parliamenti,
quod dictus Jacobus de Douglas pro dictis suis proditoriis Criminibus per ipsum
perpetrat. FORISFECIT et perpetuo et vitam, et a se et ab ejus heredibus suas
terras, redditus et possessiones, superioritates, et officia, cum pertinentiis;
et omnia bona sua, mobilia et immobilia, ad usum et utilitatem Domini nostri
Regis suorum successorum et assignatorum hereditarie pro perpetuo applicand.

Postea vero de mandato Regis * * * * * dicto * * proprio prefata Beatrix
probatam legitimam Executionem earund. clare approban. ad ostend. Domino nostro
Regi Proditoriam munitionem, et fortificationem, Castrorum de Abercorne,
Douglas, et Strathaven; et pro proditoria impositione Rebellium Regis in dict.
Castro de Abercorne, et pro art et part incendior. Villarum de Kincavill,
Bonytoune, et Warnestoune, ac art et part Rapinarum et depredationum bonorum
tenentium dictarum terranrum; et pro suis proditoriis consiliis auxiliis et
supportationibus quam maximis [per eandem] Beatricem adhibitis suis filiis,
Jacobo, Archibaldo, Hugoni, et Joanni de Douglas, et eorum complicibus, in
eorum proditoriis criminibus, et transgressionibus perpetrat. tam in
contractibus et ligiis proditorie cum Anglicis, quam in aliis proditoriis
actionibus per ipsos perpetrat. Predictaque Beatrice sepe vocata, et non
comparente, auditis igitur et declaratis ex ordine nobis predictis criminibus,
et aliis quam pluribus maleficiis, per ipsam perpetratis, comperimus ipsam
Commississe proditoriam traditionem * * pro predictis criminibus maleficiis et
trangressionibus, per dictam Beatricem, ut premittitur, Contra Regiam
Majestatem * * perpetratis, ipsam ream * * * * * ac vitam; terrarum,
possessionum, et bonorum, et suorum omnium madiisse subiisse?
forisfalturam. Per os dicti Judicatoris Curie Parliamenti datum fuit pro
Judicio, quod dicta Beatrix pro suis proditoriis, et notoriis criminibus per
ipsam perpetratis, forisfecit vitam, et a se et heredibus suis, terras, annuos
reditus, et possessiones, superioritates, et officia, ac omnia bona sua mobilia
et immobilia dicto Domino Regi, suisque successoribus assignatis, et
hereditarie pro perpetuo applicand. et sic dictum fuit pro Judicio.

Indictione vero post hoc dicto, duodecimo Junii, declarat. fuit etiam quod
Archibaldus, pretensus Comes Moravie, Commississet proditoriam traditionem, in
munitione et fortificatione Castrorum de Lochindore, et Tarnan. contra Regem et
Leges, et Statuta Regni, et dict. et fact. et quod Commississet proditoriam
traditionem, pro suis proditoriis assistentiis supra dictis. Per os dicti
Judicatoris Curie Parliamenti datum fuit pro judicio quod omnes et singule
terre, reditus, possessiones, superioritates, et officia, et bona mobilia et
immobilia, dicti Archibaldi de Douglas, de jure [essent] dicti S. D. N. Regis,
tanquam sua Eschaeta; et cum ipso S. D. N. Rege suisque successoribus et
assignatis, remanere debent pro perpetuo. Et sic datum fuit pro judicio per
dictum David Judicatorem Curie Parliamenti.

Incontinen. vero Joannes de Douglas de Balvenne, frater germanus dicti Jacobi
de Douglas, ostensis et intellectis literis summonitionis ejusd. legitime
executis, et debita Executione earund. facta et probata, per testes predictors,
et alios fide dignos, Vocatus fuit ad Comparend. coram Domino N. Rege et nobis,
dicto duodecimo die Junii. Summonitus fuit ad Comparend. dicto die ad
respondend. super criminibus, et singulis proditoriis transgressionibus infra
script. viz. pro prodita munitione Castri de Abercorne, et pro proditoriis
ligis et confederationibus per ipsum Joannem factis cum Anglicis; pro
proditoriis ligis, criminibus, supportationibus prestitis et adhibitis Jacobo
de Douglas, et suis fratribus, et eorum proditoriis et notoriis Rebellionibus
per ipsos perpetratis. Quo Joanne sepe vacato et non comparente, Auditis
testificationibus Corone ac * * * * * transgressionibus, prodictoriam
traditionem: et ipsum Joannem etiam reum et criminosum esse, et fuisse, in
certis criminalibus actionibus predictis, per dictum Joannem de Douglas
perpetratis, Vitae, terrarum suarum, reddituum et possessionum, ac bonorum
mobilium et immobilium Judiccsse Subiisse?
forisfacturam. Et ipsas terras, possessiones, et omnia mobilia et immobilia,
dicto domino nostro Regi, suisque successoribus et assignatis, hereditarie pro
perpetuo appropriari debere. Ideo remotis Clericis, prelatis, ut premittitur,
per os dicti Judicatoris Curie Parliamenti datum fuit pro judicio, quod dictus
Joannes Douglas de Balvenie forisfecit Vitam, et a se et suis haeredibus suas
terras, superioritates et officia, redditus et possessiones, ac omnia bona
mobilia et immobilia dicto Domino nostro Regi, suisque haeredibus et
successoribus, et assignatis, pro perpetuo appropriand.

In quorum omnium et singulorum fidem et testimonium premissorum sigilla nostra
[apposuimus.] Joannis Comitis Atholie. Georgii Angusie Comitis. Malesii Comitis
de Menteith. Willmi Comitis de Errol Constabularii Scotie. Joannis domini
Lorne. Thomae domini Erskine. Colini domini Campbell. Patricii domini Grahame.
Willmi domini Sommervelle. Alexandri domini Montgomerie. Roberti domini
Maxwell. Georgii domini Leslie. Patricii domini Glamis. Jacobi domini Hameltun.
Andreae domini lie Gray. Roberti domini Boyd. Willmi. domini Borthwick. Una cum
sigillis Jacobi de * * Willmi Haig de Colibre, procurator. Joannis Comitis
Rossie, domini Insularum: et sigillo Majori Joannis * * * procuratoris
Alexandri Comitis de Huntlie. Sigillum Communium burgen. de Hadingtone, pro
part Commissariorum Burgorum in dicto Parliamento, presentibus sunt appensa.
Et ad plenariam premissorum obedientiam, sigilla Revernedorum in Christo
patrum, Jacobi, Thomae, Thomae, Roberti, et Georgii, Sancti Andreae, Dunkelden.
Rossen. Dunblane, et Lesmoren. et Ecclefiae Venerabilium in Christo Patrium
Willielmi Prioris Sancti Andreae, et nonnullorum Abbatum, presentibus sunt
appensa. Apud Edr. decimo die Mensis Junii, Anno Dni Millesimo,
quandringentesimo, quinquagesimo quinto.

No XIX. An Account Charge and Discharge, of John Bishop of Glasgow, Treasurer
to James III, for the Year 1474 From Borthwick's Remarks on British
Antiquities, Edin. 1776, 8vo: the only curious article in the work.
.
CHARGE.

The compter's charge for compositions of charters, wards, marriages, escheats,
remissions, etc. for this year, extends to L. 3240:19:9 Scots.

DISCHARGE.

Expenses for the King's person.
L. s. d. Deliverit to James Homyl, the 13th day of August, 4 elne of Franche
balke, for a side gown to the King, fra Wat Bertram, price 42 s. the elne, the
sum 8 8 0 Item, To James Homel, to buy 10 elne of fustin, to line the samyn
gown, price 3 s. the elne, 1 10 0 Item, to James Homel, to buy graith for the
King's vellum doublet, 0 10 0 Item, To Andrew Balfour, an half elne of graith
to line the King's short gown, 0 12 0 Fra the same, two elne of quhite, to
line two pair of hoss to the King, price elne twantie pennies, sum, 0 3 4 Item,
Fra the samyn, an elne of black, to eke forth (to widen) the lyning of the
King's gown, 0 6 0 Item, Coft (bought) fra Will. of Carkettel, be Androu
Balfoure, and deliverit to Rob. Sheves, for three sarks (shirts) to the King,
3d Septembris, 10 elne and ane half of small (fine) holland cloth, price elne
13 s. 4 d. sum, 7 0 0 Item, Fra Isabell Williamsone, 3d Septembris, and
deliverit to Rob. Sheves, 13 elne of small holland cloth, for three sarks, and
a curch (cap), price elne 12 s. sum, 7 16 0 Item, Fra Thomas Brown, 4th
Septembris, three quarters of blew, for harnessing to the King's sadellis, price
12 s. 0 12 0 Item, Fra the samyn, an elne of quhite, for the samyn twantie
penies, 0 1 8 Item, Fra Tom. Crown, for the samyne harnessing, an elne and a
half of read, price 0 9 0 Item, Fra David Quiltitch's wife, 3 unce of silk, for
the samyne, price of the unce 5 s. 0 15 0 Item, Given to James Saddilar, for a
saddil to the King's trompis, coft be Androu Balfoure, fra the said James,
price 45 s. 2 5 0 Item, Given to a skynner, 7th Septembris, for a lyning of
lam-skinnies, cofe be Androu Balfoure, to line a gown of chamlot to the King,
price 34 s. 1 14 0 Item, Fra Thom. Malcolme, and elne and ane half of quhite,
for fute sokks to the King, price elne 2 s. 0 3 0 Item, Fra David Quiteheid, be
Androu Balfoure, 5 elne of braide clath, to turse the King's doublatts and his
hoss, price of the elne 18 d. 0 7 6 Item, Given to Archibald of Edmonstoune,
12th Septembris to buy a pair of spurrs to the King, 4s. 0 4 0 Item, To a child
of the chalmer, 4 elne of braid clath for two sarks, price elne 3 s. 0 12 0
Item, By the King's command, 5 quarters of bukacy, for a doublatt to littill
Bell, 10 s. 0 10 0 Item, For braid clath to the samyne, 18 d. 0 1 6 Item, For a
quarter of blak, to make a jakat to Bell, 8 s. 0 8 0 Item, For a quarter of
satyne, to bind Bell's doublatt, 6 s. 0 6 0 Item, Be Androu Balfoure, 20
Octobris, fra David Goldsmith, 8 elne of small ribbons, for the King, 2 s. 0 2
0 Item, Be the said Androu, 24 Octobris, fra Will of Kirketill, 10 elne of
canves, to make Nikky and Bell a bed to lie on in the King's chalmer, price of
the elne 16 s. sum 0 13 4 Item, Fra Thome of Stanly, be the said Androu, ane
elne and ane half of balk, for 2 pair of hoss to the King, price 38 s. 2 17 0
Item, Fra John Malcolme, 2 elne of quhite, to line the King's hoss, price elne
18 d. 0 3 0 Item, Fra David Quhiteheid, 3 Decembris, 2 elne of vallouss, for
two tippats to the King, price 55 s. 5 10 0 Item, Fra Thome of Yare, and
deliverit to Archibald of Edmonstoune, 17 Decembris, 2 elne and ane half of
vallouss, for a fute mantile to the King, price elne 45 s. sum 5 12 6 Item, Fra
Thome Cant, 24 bestes of greece, to line a tippat to the King, price of the best
13 d. sum 1 6 0 Item, Fra Thome Cant, be Androu Balfoure, 20 Decembris, a bonet
to the King, price 15 s. 0 15 0 Item, For 2 hattis to the King, coft fra
Karnies, price 20 s. 1 0 0 Item, Given to Sandy Balfoure the schevar, for
certane clath schorn be him to the King and the Queen, and the King's sister,
and the heusmen, fra Pasche to Yule, (that is, from Easter to Christmas), 2 0 0
Item, Given to a skynner, for the lyning of lam-skinnis, to the King's jakat of
sating, 0 6 0 Item, Given to James Homyll, 3 Januarius, to buy 3 elne of gray,
for lang sokks to the King, 0 5 0 Item, Given to Will. Scheves, to pay for the
sewing of the King's sarks, laid down by him before 3 Septembris, 0 12 0 Item,
for silk to the samyne, 0 3 0 Item, Fra Thome of Stanley, half an elne of black
Sating, to cover an orisone buke to the King, 0 13 4 Item, For a hat to the
King, taken by Johne of Murray at Yule, 0 12 0 Item, Fra ane elne and ane half
of vellouss, for a chesabell to the King's closat, price 45 s. 3 7 6 Item, Fra
Isabell Williamsone, primo Martii, half ane elne of vellouss, to the King's
brigintynis, 25 s. 1 5 0 Item, Fra Will. of Rend, 4 pyrnis of gold, for the
King's knappis to the harnessing, price of the pyrn, 12 s. sum 2 8 0 Item, Fra
Will. of Rend, 16 elne of Holland-clath, for sarks to the King, price elne 10
s. 8 0 0 Item, Given to Robyne Huntar, 20 Junii, to buy a chymna to the King's
closat, 18 s. 0 18 0 Item, Fra Thome Cant, to the King Pasche evin, a bonat, 0
16 0 Item, For the King, 5 elne of ribbanis for his doublat, 0 3 4 Item, Fra
David Quhiteheid, for grene ginger, taken at diverse times, be Kirkaldy and Will.
Pringell, at the command of Will. Schevas, sen the comptar's last count to the
26th day of Julii last, 2 6 Item, Fra Will. of Rend, 6 elne of small braid
clath, for covers to the King's codbers, (pillows), price elne 4 s. sum 1 4 0
Item, Fra David Malwyne, three elne and ane half of gray, for a clok to the
King, price elne 10 s. sum 1 15 0 Item, The 27th day of Julii, to a Flemyng of
Brugess, for certane potigaries, coft to the King be Master William Shevas,
Archdene of Sanct Androis, 12 7 0 Item, Given Jame Broune sadillar, at the
King's command, the 26th Augusti, ane and ane half henry-noble of gold, to
gilt a small harnessing to the King, 2 0 0 Item, Given to a tailyour that makes
the King's hoss, for certane lyning, making, and uther warkmanship, worcht be
him, as his bill beirs, presentit to the comptar be Androu Balfoure, 28
Augusti, 4 13 6 Item, Fra Isabell Williamsone, 6 Octobris, 6 quarters of
vellous, for covering of a sword and two tippats, price of the elne 3s. 4 10 0
Item, A pyrn of gold, for a skawburn to the samyn, 0 10 0 Item, Given to Androu
Balfoure, a ferding of a noble, to gilt a chaip to the King's sword, 0 7 6
Item, Fra Johne of Yare, 13 Octobris, ane elne of skarlett, for a petticote to
the King, 2 10 0 Item, The samyn time, fra Isabell Williamsone, an quarter of
read crammasay vellous, for the covering of the litil bering sword, 1 0 0 Item,
Fra Thome of Stanly, 16 elne of small ribbanis, for the King's doublat sleiffs,
price the elne 3 d. sum 0 4 0 Item, Fra Will. of Kerketill, 26 Octobris, 4 elne
and ane half of sating, to line a gown of clath of gold to the King, the
quhilk was gevin to the herald of Inglande, at the passing of the ambasters,
price elne 30 s. 6 15 0 Item, Given to Rob. Raa, 4 Novembris, for certane
gluffs coft to the King and Queen, as a bill beris, subscrivit with the King's
hand, 1 10 0 Item, Fra Will. of Kerkettil, 8 Novembris, ane elne of
holland-clath, for muchis (caps) to the King, 0 10 0 Item, Given to Gely
Brusour, 20 Novembris, for a bag, silk, gold, and werk thereof, to the King, 1
0 0 Summa totalis, L. 118 18 6

Things taken for the Quenis person.

L. s. d. Imprimis, To Caldwell in here chalmer, to pay for patynis and corks,
0 12 0 Item, To Androu Balfoure, 20 Augusti, for livery gowns to sex ladies of
the Quenis chalmer, at here passing to Quhiteherene, 21 elne of gray, fra David
Gill, price of elne 10 s. 10 10 0 Item, Fra Henry Caunt, 22 Augusti, ane elne
and ane halve of satyne, for turrats to the Queen, price of the elne 26 s. 8 d.
2 0 0 Item, Fra Thome Malcolme, 26 Augusti, 28 elne of gray, to line the sex
gowns, price elne 14 d. sum 1 12 8 Item, Fra Will. of Kerkettil, the samyn
time, 6 elne of braid clath, to the samyn gowns, price elne 18 d. sum 0 9 0
Item, Fra samyn man, the samyn time, 3 elne and ane halve of blak, for a
sliding gown to the Queen, price elne 36 s. sum 6 6 0 Item, Fra the samyn, 3
elne of velouss, for the collars and sleiffs of the gentill woman's gowns,
price elne 55 s. sum 8 5 0 Item, The samyn time, fra the said Williame, 3 elne
and ane halve of vellouss, for the Quenis gown, price elne 55 s. sum 9 12 6
Item, Gevin to a skynner of Strivelinge, for a dusane of gluffs to the Queen, 0
6 0 Item, Be Androu Balfoure, fra Will. of Kerkettill, two elne and ane halve
of blak, for a clok and capite bern for the Queen, price elne 36 s. sum 4 10 0
Item, Two elne and ane halve of Scotts black, to line the samyne clok, price
elne 5 s. 0 12 6 Item, Three quarteris of blak, to fulfill forth the lynyng of
the Quenis gown, 0 3 9 Item, Fra Androu Moubra, 8 elne of braid clath, 6
Octobris, to cover a both sat to the Queen, price 2 s. 6 d. the elne 0 16 0
Item, Fra the samyn, 3 elne of braid clath, for a schete to put about the Queen
in the both fat, price elne 3 s. sum 0 9 0 Item, Fra Isabell Williamsone, be
Sandy Wardropare, in absence of Androu Balfoure, 5 Novembris, 5 quarters of
black, for hoss to the Queen, price elne 40 s. 2 10 0 Item, Be Androu Balfoure,
fra David Quhiteheid, 3 Decembris, 7 elne of cramacy satyne, for a kirtele to
the Queen, and to cover her bonats of tire, price 3 l. 10 s. sum 24 10 0 Item,
Gevin to a smyth of Leith, for a chimney to the Quenis closat, 0 18 0 Item, For
band-ledder to the Quenis furring of her gloves, 0 5 0 Item, Fra Henry Caunt,
be Androu Balfoure, 17 Aprilis, 5 elne of cristy gray, price of the elne 30 s.
to line a gown of blak damask to the Queen, sum 7 10 0 Item, Fra Thome of
Stanly, 27 Aprilis, ane quarter of blew vellous, to cover the Quenis stirrup
irons, 0 15 0 Item, Fra Will. of Rend, 7 Maii, and deliverit to Caldwell, halve
ane elne of double tartan, to line riding collars to the Queen, price 0 8 0
Item, For 5 elne of small braid clath, for two head schets, price of the elne 4
s. 1 0 0 Item, Gevin to Caldwell, 22 Junii, to buy 2 bassings for here chamber,
0 12 6 Item, Fra Isabell Williamsone, 2 elne of satyng, for tippats and
collars, and deliverit to Caldwell, price elne 30 s. sum 3 0 0 Item, Fra Will.
of Rend, ult. Julii, half ane elne and half quarter of satyng, for the Quenis
bonat of tyr, price elne 30 s. 0 18 9 Item, Fra Isabell Williamsone, 26
Augusti, half ane elne and half quarter of blak, for 2 pair of hoss to the
Queen, price elne 34 s. 1 1 3 Item, given to heed suitor, for the Quenis
schonne, fra Saint Jelys day 1 Sept.
was a year, to the 21st day of Septembre, 7 0 0 Item, Fra Will. of Kerkettil,
and deliveret to Caldwell the samyn time, ane elne of satyne, for stomoks to
the Queen, 1 10 0 Item, Fra Roger of Murray, the halve of 5 quarters of
vellous, for a tippat to the Queen, price elne 50 s. 1 11 3 Item, For armyne,
to line a stomok to the Queen, 1 5 0 Item, To Thome Skynnare, for 26 bestes of
grace, to line a tippat to the Queen, price 1 6 0 Item, For making the tippat,
and two stomoks, 0 3 0 Item, For a mess bucke to the Quenis alter, at her
command, by Captain John Cat, 10 13 4 Summa totalis, L. 113 1 6

Things cost for my Lord the Prince.

L. s. d. Imprimis, To my Lord Prince, 28 Augusti, from Robert Nut, 5 elne of
holland clath, for sarks and muchiss, price elne 10 s. sum 2 10 0 Item, Fra
Thome Malcolme, ultimo Augusti, 5 quarters of quhite, to line a cot to my
Lord, 0 2 0 Item, Fra Donald of Kyle, 3 quarters of broune for a coat, price
elne 30 s. 1 2 6 Item, The samyn time, fra Thome Malcolme, 3 elne of quhite,
for his credile, and stuff perteynyng thairto, price elne 2 s. 0 6 0 Item,
Gevin to Androu Balfoure, 12 Octobris, to buy 12 elne of lyning for a schets to
my Lord's nuriss, 0 10 4 Item, Six elne of small braid clath, for his schets,
price 4 s. sum 1 4 0 Item, tertio Februarii, for ane elne of quhite, to be hoss
to my Lord, 0 3 0 Item, From Thome of Stanly, 2 elne of laune, for my Lords
muchiss, price elne 12 s. 1 4 0 Item, Fra Thome of Yare, ane elne of Carsaye, 0
13 4 Item, 30 Februarii, for ane elne of quhite, for my Lord Prince's
pettycote, price 4 s. 0 4 0 Item, Fra Dick Forestare in Leith, 3 dusane of
Estland burds, for my Lorde's chalmer, price of the dusane 15 s. 2 5 0 Item, To
my Lord Prince, for his sarks, 3 elne of braid clath, taken fra Isabell
Williamsone's sone, price elne 4 s. 0 12 0 Item, Fra Isabell Williamsone,
quarto Aprilis, two elne and ane halve of Franche broune, to cover my Lorde's
cradile, price elne 30 s. 3 15 0 Item, For 4 elne and ane halve of tartane, for
a sparwort aboun his credill, price elne 10 s. 2 5 0 Item, Elevin elne of
braide clath, for sarks and schets taken, fra Isabell Williamsone, to my Lord
Prince, price elne 4 s. sum 2 4 0 Item, Fra Will. of Rend, to bind my Lord's
courtings, ane and a halve quarter of bukrame, 1 4 0 Item, For 8 elne of
quhite, to my Lord, for blankets, price of the elne 3 s. 1 4 0 Item, Be Androu
Balfoure, fra Thome of Yare, 28 Junii, 3 elne and ane halve of Inglis russat,
for a gown to my Lord the Prince's nuriss, price elne 24 s. 4 4 0 Item, Ten
elne of quhite fustiane, for blankets to my Lord, taken fra Will. of Rend,
price elne 2 s. 8d. sum 4 0 0 Item, 12 elne of braid clath, for a pair of
schets, taken fra Will. of Rend, price elne 2 s. 6 d. 1 10 0 Item, To my Lord
Prince, fra Will. of Kerkettill, 5 elne of braid clath to his schets in his
cradill, price 2 s. 6 d. sum 0 12 6 Item, Fra Will. of Kerkettill, 26 Julii, 8
elne of holland clath, for sarks and muchiss, price elne 10 s. 4 0 0 Item, Fra
Ifabell Williamsone, sexto Octobris, 2 elne of satyne, to his cot, price elne
36 s. 3 12 0 Item, Fra the samyn, ane elne and ane half of blew tartane, to
line his gown of a clath of gold, 1 10 0 Item, Two elne and ane halve of
quhite, for a night-cot to him, 0 5 0 Summa totalis, (Prince), L. 41 1 8
(King), 118 18 6 (Queen), 113 1 6 Sum total of the three accounts, L. 273 1 8
Due to balance, 2967 18 1

No XX. Edward IV to Dr. Legh his ambassador in Scotland, 1477. Vesp. C. XVI,
f. 121.
R.

MASTER Legh. Where as our brother and cousin the king of Scotts desires a
marriage to be had, betwixt our brother of Clarence and a sustre of the said
king of Scotts; And another marriage also to be had, between our sustre the
Duchess of Burgoign, and the Duc of Albany his brother; Ye shall say, that
forsomoch as this desir proceeds of his entier love and affection anempst us,
we thank him as hertily as we can. And forsomoch also as, aftre the old usaige
of this our royalme, noon estat ne person honnorable communeth of marriage
within the year of their doole, We therefore as yet can not convenientely speak
in this matter. Nathelas when we shall find time covenable, we shall feel their
disposicions, and theruppon show unto him the same in all goodely have.

Item, where as we have other times addressed our lettres missives unto Sir
Robert Constable, for restitucion of the goods of Thomas Yare, we now have
sent for him, by prive seal, to come unto us in his own person, and to show
cause why the faid restitucion is not done.

Item, in the matier concerning the robbery of the tenaunts of Sir John
Carlill, and other of the obeissance of our said brother king of Scotts, ye
shall say that we have written unto our brother the Duc of Gloucestre, wardeyn
of our west marches, that he shall see due reformacion to be had, according to
right and custom of the said marches.

No XXI. From the old chronicle at the end of Winton, MS. Reg. 17 D XX.
A. D. 1400. Discesit bischop Walter Traile of Sanct Androis, and the nixt yer
folowand was the batell strykin of Nesbyt muir: and that samyn yeir was the
ferd mortalyte. 1402. Was the batell of Homyldone; and the nixt yer folowand
was the batell of Schrewsbery and Coklaw. 1405. Was the desceas of king Robert
the Third. 1406. Was the brinnyng of Stirlyng. 1413. Begane the universyte in
Sanct Androis. (The batell of Hairlaw 1411.) 1419. Was the passage of the earl
of Buchan, and Wigton, in France: and that samyn yer was the dry somer; and the
nixt yer folowand was the fyft mortalyte, the qwhilk was callit the Qwhew.
1421. Was the batell of Bolgee. 1423. Was the coronatioun of James the first,
and of his spouse at Scone. 1433, And in the month of Julij, was the blak hour
general. 1436. Was the first sege of Roxburgh be king James the first: and the
nixt fasteryngs ewyn he was slain in Sanct Jonstoun, be the earl of Atholle'
sone and air, and Robert Grayme, tratours, and thear tomplices. 1436. Was the
coronatioun of king James the secund with read scheik, callit James with the
fyr in the face, he beand bot sax yer ald and ane half, in the abbay of
Halyrudhouse, quhar now his banys lyis. 1439. Was the deir summyr, for the boll
of meill was for xxiiii s. and the boll of malt for ii merkis, and the boll of
quheit for xxx s. and money deit for hungyr. 1440. Was hedyt earl Wilyem of
Dowglace, and David his brother, and Malcom Flemyng lord of Cummernald, James
the secund beand Justice. 1451. Began the universite in Glasgw, purchest be
bischoip Turnbull. And that ilk yeir was the first pardon of Glasgow, of full
remissioun, as in the yer of grace, and lestyt four months, purchest be the
samyn bischoip William Turnbull. 1454. Deit that bischoip Wilyem Turnbull, to
quhome succedit bischoip Androw Durrisdur. 1460, And third day of August, deit
king James the secund at Roxburgh, be the brekyn of on his awyn gunnis, at
straik him to deid, at the secund sege of Roxburgh; and he was erddit in
Halyrudhouse. On the sanct Laurence day, nixt folowand the deces of James the
secund, was king James the Thride his sone crownyt in Kelso, he beand ancht
yeris of eld and ane half. (1463. Jhone of Dowglace was slain in Edynburgh,
and earl James his brother was chasyt in Ingland.) 1469. James the Third of
Scotland, the xiii day of Julij, was maryit in Halyrudhouse in great dignite,
with Margaret with the king's douchter of Norway, Dasie, and Swasie, and
Denmerk: and that samyn yeir was banysyt the lord Bowde, and Schir Alexandur,
lord and knycht, was hedyt in Edynburgh. (1463. Alexander duke of Albany was
taken on the se be the Inglishmen, and honorabilly deliverit for the instance of
his brother king James be king Edward in Ingland.) 1471. Drownyt the bischoipis
of Sanct Androis' barge. 1479. King James the Thread banysit Alexander his
brother, duke of Albany: and passyt in France, and was maryit thar; and after
that come in Ingland, and maid his residence with king Edward of Ingland. And
than the king of Scotland gart sege Dunbar the Dukis castle, and the lord of
Bunterdaill was capitane, and he and his stall away be the se, and so the king
gat the castle. And that yer was money weches and warlois brint on Crag Gayt;
and Jhone the earl of Mar, the king's brother, was slain because thai said he
faworyt the weches and warlois. 1480. Raise ane great were betwix Ingland and
Scotland; and that yer the earl of Anguys with great power of Scotts passyt in
Ingland, and brynt Balmburgh, and lay three nytis and three dais in Ingland. And
that yer was great tempest of wedder, for ane great storm began at New yeir day,
and lestyt quhill the xxvi day of March: the morn after our lady day in
lenterin the storm brek. And nixt Beltyn day aftir was ewill beltyn day. 1482.
Thar was ane great hungyr and deid in Scotland, for the boll of meill was for
four punds; for thar was blak cunye in the realm, strikkin and ordinyt be king
James the Thread, half-pennys, and threepenny pennys, innumerabill, of coppir.
And thai yeid two yer, and mair. And als was great were betwix Scotland and
Ingland, and great distructioun throw the weris was of corn and catell. And
thai two things causyt bayth hungar and derth, and money pur folk deit of
hungar. And that samyn yeir, in the month of Julij, the king of Scotland
purposyt till haif passyt in Ingland with the power of Scotland, and passyt on
gaitwart to Lawdyr: and thar the lords of Scotland held thar consaill in the
kirk of Lawder, and cryit down the blak silver; and thai slew ane part of the
king's housald, and other part thai banysyt: and thai tuke the king himself,
and thai put him in the castle of Edynburgh in firm keeping, for he wrocht mair
the consaell of his housald, at war bot sympill, na he did of them that war
lordds. And he was haldyn in the castle of Edinburgh fra the Magdalyne day
quhill Michaelmess. And than the wictall grew better chaip, for the boll that
was for four punds was than for xxii s. of quhyt silver.
No XXII. Pacification of Blackness. (April 1488.) Records of Parliament,
Register Office, Edinburgh First published by Dr. Henry, in the appendix to his
fifth volume, 4to: but it had escaped the author, who little expected any thing
new in the worthy doctor's compilation from trivial authorities. It rectifies a
mistake in this work, that the prince was not then in the hands of the peers.
.
THEIR ar the articles, uppone the quhilk our Soverain Lord sall gif commissioun
under his great sele to the lordis underwritten, That is to say the Bischop of
Aberden Chancellar, the Erlis of Huntlie, Erole, Merschiale, Lord Glammys, and
Alexander Lindesay, to comone conclude and end with their lordis followand, That
is to say the Bischop of Glasgw, the Erlis of Angus, Ergile, Lord Halis, Lord
Lile, the quhilkis lordis sall haffe full commissioun of my Lord Prince, and of
all the lordis being with him.

In the first, to comone and conclude that the Kingis hie honor, estate, riale
autorite, be exaltit, conservit, and borne up; at he may exhers justice
universally to all his liegis in all the pertis of his realm.

Item. At his may noble person be at all times in honor, security, and
sredome; and at thar be prelatis, erlis, lordis, and baronis, and utheris
persons of wisdom, prudence, and of good disposition, and unsuspect to his
hienes, and evinly to all his liegis, daily about his nobil persoun, to the good
giding of his realm and lieges.

Item. That all the persons being about my Lord Prince, that has in tym bygane
done displessour to his hienes, make honorabile and agreabile amendis to his
hienes, be the wisdom and discretione of the said lordis, thar liffis,
heretage, and honouris except.

Item. That the Kingis hienes sall giff honorabill sustentatioun and levin to
my Lord Prince his sone, at the consideratione of the saidis lordis.

Item. At wise lordis, and honorabill persons of wisdom and discretioun,
evinly and of good dispositioun, sal be daily about my Lord Prince, for the good
governance of him, and securite of his person in his tender age.

Item. To aviss, comone, and conclude, how my Lord Prince sall in all times to
cum be obedient to his faider the King, and how that faiderly luff and
tenderness sall at all tymis be had betwex them.

Item. How the lordis and uthir persons being about my Lord Prince sall haf our
Soverane Lordis favoris, and grace, and hertly forgevinnys: and thar persons to
be in securite, as best can be divisit be the said lordis, for any displessour
done to the Kingis hienes in any tym bygane.

Item. At my Lord Prince sall tak in hertlie favoris all lordis spiritual and
temporale, and all utheris persons that has been with the Kingis hienes in
consale, or uthir service, now in this time of truble.

Item. At al discentions and discordis, now standand or beand betuex any lordis
or great baronis, of both the pertis, sal be drawin be the wisdom of the said
lordis to unite concord, sa that luff and favor may stand ymangis our
Soverane Lordis liegis. And peax to be had, and justice to proced; and specialy
betuix the Earl of Buchain and Lord Lile, etc.

* Signed by the king's own hand, and presented in the first parliament of
James IV.

No XXIII. Present State of the Scottish Records.
Art. I. Cursory View of the State of the Records of Scotland, transmitted to
John Pinkerton, Esquire 5 July, 1796 This paper, by a William Anderson writer or
attorney in Edinburgh, imperfect as it is, may give the reader some idea of the
subject. Of the curious and important Chamberlain's Rolls Mr. A. observes,
"independent of their being in much disorder, they are covered with dust, I
might almost say buried in it." And after the expensive erection of that
splendid edifice, the new Register Office, the following remark may surprise.
"It is a great pity that such a valuable Collection of Records should, in a
manner, be rendered entirely useless to the public, by the expense attending
the inspection of them, by the state in which they are kept, and by the want of
a small fund, to recompense the person who would undertake to examine them with
attention." The expense indeed is enormous, to judge from this attorney's bill,
which exceeded Twelve Pounds, (not Scottish money but sterling,) for a trifling
labor, which in England would have been held richly recompensed by three or
four guineas. As the importance of national records is extreme, there ought to
be in every country a literary inspector of the records, independent of the
juridical arrangement, to attend to the preservation of the more ancient, and
publish curious extracts.


.
In obedience to Mr. Pinkerton's Letter of the 26th ulto. I have consumed the
principal part of several days in going over what Notes I am possessed of, in
making enquiries at the different offices, and in examining the state of our
various Records; and now transmit to him in the following pages the information
which I have obtained.

RECORDS OF PARLIAMENT.
THE oldest volumes of the Parliamentary Record are in a state so frail, from
the waste of time, and want of proper care, that, unless the utmost attention
is paid in turning over the folios, parts of them are apt to be lost by the
operation. About five years ago, I examined every leaf of the three or four
first volumes; but since that time the Keepers, by the desire of the Lord Clerk
Register, prevent them from being handled: and Mr. William Robertson is at
present employed in making an Accurate Copy of them, that they may not be
entirely lost.

The first three Books of the Parliamentary Record are bound up in one Volume.
The two first of these Books, which contain a part of the Regiam Majestatem,
and Acts of Robert III, James I, II, III, are not original, but have been
copied in 1487. The Genuine Records of the Scots Parliament commence with the
3d Book of this Volume, in the Reign of James III, Anno 1466, and go down to
the year 1474. From this period, to the dissolution of the Scots Parliament by
the Union of the Kingdoms, the Record appears to be pretty entire. There are in
all thirty six Books, bound up in twenty six volumes, all written on good paper
and well bound. Of these however the fourteenth Book, which must have contained
some proceedings of Parliament in the minority of James VI, is missing.

In the general Register House there are also preserved several bundles of
Loose Parliamentary Records; for instance Commissions to Parliament in last
Century, and debates in Disputed Elections, etc. Besides the volumes
abovementioned there are some Decreets of Forfeiture in Parliament, in Annis
1685, and 1690 -- 5.

There are also several Records of the Committee of Estates, during the
Commonwealth and Protectorate: but for want of binding, their Condition is so
bad, that they cannot be properly looked into.

RECORDS OF SECRET COUNCIL.
Of this Record there are a considerable number of volumes; several of which
are deposited in the General Register House, in the custody of Messrs.
Robertsons -- others of them are kept in the Justiciary office by Mr. Norris.
The oldest, as Mr. Pinkerton observes, commences 6th June 1545, and ends 2d
August 1547. Many of them however are lost.

GREAT SEAL RECORD.
The oldest Record of Charters, etc. passing the Great Seal, which is now known
to exist, is a Roll of Robert I, about the 1316 A Scoticism for the year 1316.
. There are, as I am informed, twelve of these Rolls, some of which have only
about twenty, others one hundred and twenty charters. They are all written on
parchment: and the Charters they contain are granted by Robert I, David II,
Robert II, and III.

The first Book of this Record is bound in red turkey; and contains about three
hundred and twenty charters: some of them granted by David II, from the 33d, to
the 41st, year of his reign, and others granted by Robert II.

The second volume contains charters granted by King James I; but the Record of
very sew of his Charters has been preserved. It also appears that the greatest
part of the Charters by James II, and III, have been lost. Those granted by
James IV, on the contrary, seem to be complete; for there are Registered
Charters, which have been granted in every year of his long reign, which is far
from being the case with those of his predecessors. A good many also of those
granted by James V have perished. Queen Mary's seem to be tolerably entire; and
from the reign of James VI downwards, it is thought the whole are extant.

PRIVY SEAL RECORD.
The Privy Seal Record, in the General Register House, consists of about 116
volumes. It begins in the year 1499; and ends about the middle of last century.

This Record is a great repertorium of curiosity; and from this source the
accurate narrator of facts in history might reap superior advantages, as almost
every transaction within the kingdom, worthy of the smallest notice, was in
those times the object of a Royal Letter. Every improvement in science, every
invention tending to comfort or utility, was made the subject of a patent under
the Privy Seal, so that by the Investigation of this Record the introduction of
many of the arts into this kingdom, such as printing, etc. might be clearly
ascertained.

RECORDS OF SESSION.
Prior to the institution of the College of Justice, 1537 1532.
there were itinerant courts, which administered Justice in different parts of
the kingdom. The oldest Record of their decreets begins in Octr. 1478. -- These
are continued down pretty regularly, till the Court was established in its
present form. Only a few of the Acts and Decreets of the Court of Session have
been lost; but it is supposed they will never merit the investigation of an
Historian, being exceedingly voluminous, and relating to nothing but the
adjustment of private right.

RECORDS OF JUSTICIARY.
These volumes present much entertainment to the reader, who does not seriously
reflect on the singular oppression of the Criminals, particularly the poor
Witches. The first volume commences 18 November 1524. But the reasons and
arguments, and narration of facts, very seldom appear in the Record, till
toward the conclusion of that century. One or two volumes toward the
beginning are wanting.

EXCHEQUER RECORDS.
There are deposited in the Register Office, under the Custody of the Clerks in
Exchequer, the Rolls of the Chamberlain's Accounts, from 1326 downwards, to the
Amount of about 220, in a pretty regular series The Treasurer's and
Comptroller's Accounts probably commence about the year 1424, when James I
instituted the former office.
. There are not any other very old Record, in their possession. But the Messrs.
Robertsons have the charge of many documents peculiar to Exchequer; such as,
The Record of Signatures beginning in 1561, proceedings in the Court of
Exchequer anno 1584, Rentals of the Royal Property, as far back as 1479;
Accounts of Customs 1510; Accounts of the Army and Household Expense, 1511, etc.

CHANCERY.
Besides Retours of services preserved in Chancery, there are therein kept what
are called the Respondee Books, which specify the Sums due to the Crown or
Prince, at the entry of an heir, etc. etc. and collected by the Sheriffs of the
different Counties. These commence anno 1587. The Retours commence about the
year 1547: but there is a great Chasm from 1549 to 1600; and the Record is very
irregular, as many Retours, of dates both prior and posterior to 1547, have
been, and still are, recorded in these volumes.

By Decree of the Court of Session, the Record of Charters passing the Great
Seal was several years ago removed from this Office, and placed under the
Charge of the Messrs. Robertsons.

ADMIRALTY.
There exist Records of this Court, from 1597 downwards, in good Condition,
which are kept, for the greater security, in the General Register House. One or
two volumes prior to that date have perished. The Court, as it at present
stands, was established anno 1681.

COMMISSARY.
The Records of this Court are preserved from the period of its institution. At
least it was established, in its present form, by Queen Mary's Gift of the 8th
Feby 1563; and the first Minute Book of the Record commences 3 May 1564.

It is imagined that the Records of the more ancient Consistorial Courts were
either carried off, or destroyed, at the Reformation.

Besides these there are Records of Sasines, Bonds, Hornings, Adjudications,
Baptisms, Records of the General Assembly, etc. But which, it is supposed,
cannot be very beneficial to the Historian.

Perhaps I might add that a very considerable degree of accurate information
might be obtained by perusing the different chartularies of Ancient
Monasteries, which are to be found in the Lawyers Library, and elsewhere; such
as that of Aberdeen, Dryburgh, Arbroath, etc. etc. but the expense necessarily
attending investigations of that nature will, I am afraid, for ever prevent
their being performed.

Art. II. Extract from The Case of Sir James Johnstone of Westerhall, Baronet,
claiming the Titles, Honors and Dignities of Marquis of Annandale, etc.
Presented to the House of Lords, 1794.
Respecting the present State of the Public Records of Scotland.

Before stating the Evidence concerning the Relation of Matthew, the first of
the Claimant's Line, to the Family of Annandale, it is proper to observe, that
although the Records of Scotland, in so far as concerns Charters, Sasines, and
Retours, are now very regularly kept; yet it was not till the year 1617 that an
act passed, appointing a Public Register to be kept for all Sasines,
Reversions, etc. and declaring the same to be ineffectual against third
parties, unless recorded therein, within 60 days.

And with respect to the Register of Retours, it was not the practice in more
ancient times to lodge them in chancery, they remained in the hands of the
private parties; and the first Retour appearing in the Records of Chancery is
dated 1st February 1547; but there were many Retours expede after that period,
which do not appear in these Records.

The Records of the Great Seal, in which Charters were inserted, were more
regularly kept, but it frequently happened that the Parties carried away their
Charters, before they were entered in the Record; and though they sometimes
brought them back afterward to be recorded, yet very often they did not, and
the time of bringing them back was various; so that Charters are not always
recorded in the Books according to their dates, but those of a prior date are
frequently inserted after those of a posterior date.

It is material in the present Case to observe, that the Book, which has been
numbered IV, of the Records of Charters, ends with a Charter dated the 27th
June 1452, and the Book now numbered V, begins with a Charter, dated the 5th
August 1458; so that a part of the Records has been lost, as there is an
interval of six years, in which no Book now exists, in which Charters are found
recorded. A few are found in Book V. which though dated during that interval,
are inserted among posterior Charters; but only two of these are dated
preceding January 1458, one dated 25th October 1456, and another dated 6th
December that year.

It was only by an act 12th July 1672, that a Regulation was made appointing
all Charters, etc. which pass the Great and Privy Seal, to be registered in the
Registers of these Seals before the Seals be appended to them, and such
Registration to be marked thereon by the writers to the different Seals.

The Privy Seal Records are not preserved of an older date than 1499.

The Signet, properly speaking, has no Record. It is the place where the
Original Signatures or Warrants of Charters ought to be deposited, but none of
these are to be found prior to 1607; and these Signatures often remained in the
private Custody of the Keeper of the Signet, and passing to his
Representatives, were generally lost.

The Record of Sasines begins in 1617, in terms of the act of Parliament before
referred to.

The Records of Parliament are very imperfect, and many Books are wanting,
particularly about the period of 1455.

The Records of the Privy Council, are not preserved further back than 1545,
and subsequent to that year many intermediate Books are wanting.

The Record of Signatures in Exchequer begin in 1661, and although some of an
older date are preserved, yet they are few in number.

This imperfect state of the Records, is partly to be ascribed to negligence;
but it is also certain, that a great part of the ancient Records of Scodand,
were carried to England by Oliver Cromwell; and it is stated in the Report of
the Court of Session to your Lordships, 27th February 1740, that when the
Registers, which had been carried to England during the usurpation, were sent
back to Scotland by Sea after the Restoration, no less than Eighty five
hogsheads, which in a Storm were taken out of the Eagle Frigate, and put into
another vessel, were all of them lost by the wreck of that vessel.

With respect to ancient Deeds in the hands of private Individuals, besides the
Loss of many in the Calamities of War and Domestic Commotions, and by various
other Causes which prevent the preservation of Private Papers, it became less
and object in Scotland to preserve old Deeds and writings after the Act of
Parliament had passed in the year 1617, by which it was declared that 40 years
undisturbed possession, upon a Charter and Sasine, should be held as a complete
right to Lands, unless in certain cases excepted.

The greatest deficiency of the Records of Charters and Sasines and Retours, is
found to be in those prior to the year 1500.

No XXIV. Agreement in Parliament, between the Queen Dowager and the
Livingstons, 4 Sept. 1439. Crawford's Peerage P. 276 This curious paper was
omitted in its proper place, and ought to have been noticed in the text under
thy year.
.
THIS Appointment, made at Strivyline, the surd Day of the Month of September,
the Yher of our Lord M.CCCC.XXXIX, proportis, that it is accordit betwix a
right hye and mighti Princess, Jehane be the Grace of God Queen of Scotland,
on the ta part, and Sir Alexander of Livingston of Kalentar, Sir William of
Cranston, Knightis, James of Livingston, Son and Heir to the said Sir
Alexander, and John of Livingston, Brother to the aforesaid Sir Alexander, on
the the other part, with the Avyse and the Consent of the three Estates, beand
their in the general Counsele, there halden and gaderit, in form and manner
ester folowande, That is to say, In the first, touching the Declaracion of the
Fame and Worship of the foresaids Persons, for the Restriction of the said
Princess' Will and Liberte, made be thaym and their Assistance. The said
Princess, with her Counsele, has ripely examinit, and discussit, the Causes and
the Motyvis, be the whilks the forsaid Persons war stirit to withdraw the
forsaid Liberte fra her, and has considerit, and knawleges, that what thing the
said Persons did in that Matter touching her, thai did it of good zele and
motife, and of great Truth and Leaute that was in tham, bath to our Soveryne
Lord the King and his sawfte, and to the said Princess in her Worship: and in
that Matter and all utheris, Scho reputes, haldes, and trustis, tham all, and
their Assistance tharin, bath lele and true to her, doand that thing as true
Lieges aw to do for their Soveryne Lord, and her Estate and Worship, and nane
utherwyse. Item, touching the Declaracione of the Fame and Worstship of the
said Princess, the foresaid Sir Alexander, Sir William, James and John, and
their foresaid Assistentes, declaris and knawleges in their Leaute, that their
withdrawing of whilk Liberte fra her, and that thai did in that Matter, was
naught done in Vilany, na for Vilany, harm, na Sclandre, to her Person, na
for na Lak, Crime, na Fault, that thai, or any of thaim, wift or knew to her
Woman head, but anerely for the Safete of owr Soveryn Lord, the Worschip of her
Person, and the Common Good of the Reamme. Atour for sa mikle as the said
Princess, be the occasioune of whilke withdrawing of Liberte fra her, consaved
grief and displesance again the said Sir Alexander, Sir William, James and
John, and their Assistantes, considering that whilk thing was done of good zele
and motif, as before is declared, Scho has remittit, and removes, all the said
grief and displeasance, that scho consavit again thaim or any of thaim, for the
foresaid Cause, or any uther done or said in time begane: and forther out forth
that the said Princess had sulle declaracione, and varry witting of troth and
leaute, that was and is in the forsaid Sir Alexander, and all the other
Persons for written, in mare appert takin of Traiste and hartliness in time
cummyng, scho has, be the Avyse of the said three Estates, committit to the
said Sir Alexander's keeping our said Soveryne Lord the King, her derraft Son,
unto the time of his Age; and lent to him, for his Residence for the said time,
her Castle of Strivylyne, and assignit to the said Sir Alexander, to the uphald
of our said Soveryn Lord, and his Sistris, in the forsaid Castle, to his said
Age iiiim Markis of the usuale Monee of Scotland, the whilk's war asignit to
her be the said three Estates, and for the same Cause. Alsua the said Princess
sal have access to visit our said Soveryn Lord her Son, in the said Place,
with unsuspect Personis, at her liking, as is accordit betwix thaim. Item, for
the mair sikernes, the said Princess sal make sic Lordis as are her Men and
retenewe, at the desire of the said Sir Alexander, and of the Personis
besorwritten, gif the forsaid Sir Alexander and Personis their Letters under
their Sealis, that gif the said Princess cummis in the contrar of any of the
Appointment accordit in this Writ, that thai sal naught assist to her, na be in
contrar of him, na of the said Personis in tha Materis; but erar with him and
them, in the fulfilling thereof. And the said Lordis, that are Men and Retenew
to her, sal be oblyst in their said Letters, that thai sal nouther do na say,
to the said Sir Alexander, na to the said Personis, na their Assistents, na
procure to be done, na say to him, na thaim, Schame, Vilany, nar Harm, in any
wise for the forsaid Cause. Item, gif it happins, as God forebide, that our
said Soveryn Lord deceese, or that he cum to his said Eld, the said Sir
Alexander sal ressave the forsaid Princess in her forsaid Castle freely, with
money, or Few, at her Plesance; likeas he is obliste to her of before be his
Letters. Item, give it happenis the said Sir Alexander to decese within the
said Age of our forsaid Soueryn Lord, his said Son and Air, and all the Persons
forwritten, or that sal be in the said Castle, sal be obliste to delyver the
said Castle freli to her, togidder with our said Soueryn Lord, withoutten
obstakle or demand at her desire, and asking, outher be her word or her
Letters under her Sele: sa that nouther the said Sir Alexander, Sir William,
James and John, be naught the neirar the Deed, be the miene of the said
Princess, her Procuracione or Servants. To the whilkis all and sundry things
foresaid, leleli and truil^ to be kepit without Fraud or Gile, the said
Princess and Sir Alexander, Sir William, James and John, the haly Evangelis
touchit, has geven their bodily Aiths: and the said Princess and Sir
Alexander has enterchangeably to this Writ indentit, set their Seeles, togidder
with the Seeles of reuerendes Fadres in Crist, John, John, John, and Michael,
be the Grace of God Bishopis of Glasgu, Murreve, Ross, and Dunblane, for the
part of the Clergy; and the Signet of a hye and mighti Lord William Erl of
Douglas, havand the force and the effect of his Seele; the Seele of a Noble
Lord, Sir Alexander Lord of Gordon, procurit be the Lord of Crechton Chancellar
of Scotland for him, in absence of his own Seele, and for the said Lord of
Gordon for himself; and the Seele of a Noble Lord, Sir Walter Lord of Dirlton,
for the part of the Barouns; and the Seeles of James of Parcle, Commissare of
Linlithgu, and of a venerable Fader in Criste, David Abbot of Cambuskynneth,
procured be William of Cranston Burges and commissare of Edinburgh, and Andrew
Read Burges and Commissare of Innernes, Day, Year, and Place, before written,
for the part of the Burrows.

No XXV. Declaration of the Parliament concerning the slaughter of Douglas, 12
June 1452 This paper was not transmitted till the Appendix was almost printed.
For some account of the MS. whence it was copied see the Appendix to Vol. II.
. MS. Advocates Library, W 6. 44.
Declaratio Trium Regni Statuum Parliamenti, pro Rege, de morte Comitis de D.
PRELATI, Duces, Comites, Magnates, Proceres, Barons, Civitatum et Burgorum
Commissarii, tres Regni Status representantes, in parliamento apud burgum de
Ed. xiio die mensis Junii, Anno Dni. Mo iiiio lii, tento et inchoato,
presents, Universis et singulis perfidelibus, ad quorum notitias presents
literae pervenerint, Salutem in omnium Salvatore. Serenissimus Princeps,
Jacobus Dei Gratia Scotorum Rex, in dicto suo parliamento presedens, asseruit
ad ejus devenisse notitiam, quod certi emuli et rebels sui, extra et infra
regnum suum, famam suam denigrare et blasphemare conantes, temere et inique
asserere moliuntur, eundem Supremum Dominum nostrum Regem quondam Wilm. Comitem
de Douglas, sub speciali respectuatione Respectuatio, a safe conduct. Du Cange
in voce.
, et certis aliis securitatibus, occidisse. Quam blasphemiam idem Serenissimus
Dns. noster moleste ferens, Tres Status regni sui, in dicto parliamento
presents, instanter requisivit, ut ad suam innocentiam declarandam super
praemissis, ac etiam super occasionibus, causis, et motivis, mortis dicti
Comitis, veritatem inquirerent; et desuper expressam Declarationem, ad futuram
rei memoriam, sub antedicto documento conficere vellent. Tres vero Status
praedicti, attendentes praefatam requisitionem tam justam, quam potens in odore
bonae famae quam falsis et fictis blasphemiis extat * * gaudendi, ad
inquisitionem praemissorum, digesta et magna maturitate, procedentes; ac
propterea ad partem, et extra presentiam praefati Serenissimi Principis,
quaelibet pars dictorum Trium Statuum, dimittendo et in singulis domibus sibi
assignatis consedendo, ac examinationes desuper facientes, tandem ex claris
depositionibus et relationibus magnorum baronum, precipuorum militum, et
nobilium, in magno numero, coram tribus regni statibus desuper examinatorum,
Clare Constitit, et Probatum Extitit, quod praefatus quondam W. de D. se
respectuationem aliquam, aut aliquas, a dicto eximio Domino Rege, die
precedente mortem suam, illis respectuationi et securitatibus, coram
multitudine baronum, precipuorum militum, et nobilium, express renunciavit. Et
desuper ex literis, et evidentiis multis, sigillo quondam dicti Comitis
sigillatis, in Parliamento perlectis, ac aliis claris deductionibus, et
probationibus, apperte constitit de Ligis et Conspirationibus, per dictum
Comitem cum certis Regni Majoribus, in oppressionem et offensam Seren. Regiae
Majestatis factis et initis; ac rebellionibus publicis per ipsum, ac suos
fratres et accomplices, frequenter perpetratis. Necnon post multas persuasiones
dulces, tam per Regem, quam per diversos barons, et proceres, ad complacend.
et assistand. Regem contra suos rebels, eidem Woe. Comiti die mortis suae
factas; obstinatia tam perpetua, per eundem W. Comitem Serenissimo Domino Regi
ostansa, (et aliis maleficiis per eundem etiam compertis,) occasionem mortis
suae procurasse et dedisse videtur. Tres igitur Status praedicti, praemissis
attentis, Express Declarant praefatum Seren. Dom. Regem nullam
respectuationem, aut aliam securitatem, in morete dicti quondam W. Comitis
infregisse seu violasse. Ac etiam, ex praedictis Conspirationibus, Ligis,
Rebellionibus, et Maleficiis, in contemptum et offensam Serenissimae Regiae
Majestatis, inverecunde per eund. W. comitem, et suos accomplices, nequiter
gestis, et perpetratis, occasionem mortis suae procurasse et dedisse. In cujus
Declarationis fidem et testimonium, etc.

END OF THE FIRST VOLUME.

