THE VIRTUES AND EXCELLENCY OF THE American Tobacco Plant, FOR Cure of
Diseases, AND Preservation of Health: And the noxious Qualities of the TOBACCO
growing in Northern Countries.

LONDON, Printed for R. Parker, at the Unicorn under the Royal Exchange; and
sold by J. Morphew near Stationers' Hall. 1712. Price 2 d.

THE VIRTUES AND EXCELLENCY OF THE American Tobacco Plant.
THE Discovery and Conquest of America by the Spaniards, enriched Europe with
not only vast Treasures of Gold and Silver, but also discovered and furnished
us with (perhaps) much more useful and valuable things; to wit, many excellent
Specific Remedies, for the Cure of Diseases, and Preservation of Health.

Nature had been so kind to the poor ignorant Natives of that Country, as to
direct them to, and Experience taught them, the peculiar Virtues of many Herbs,
Roots, Plants, etc. growing amongst them, and how to apply them.

The Learned Physicians in no Age had ever the Knowledge of a more celebrated
Specific Remedy for any Distemper, than we in this last have found the Peruvian
Bark to be, for a never failing and sudden Cure of Intermitting Fevers and
Agues: And to which alone, since it has been generally used, more Lives have
been owing, than to any other Medicine whatsoever. So wonderful is it in its
Operation, that it looks almost like a Charm.

But above all, their Tobacco Plant deserves to be placed in the first Rank,
for its many amicable Qualities and Usefulness to Human Bodies, for the Cure of
several Distempers, Preservation of Health, and Prolongation of Life. Besides
the agreeable Diversion and Entertainment it affords to those that use it. The
Indians by their plentiful Smoking and Chawing it, find great Relief for their
inward Diseases: And in case of Wounds or Ulcers, etc. they apply the Leaf,
which eats away the proud Flesh, and inclines the Sore to heal.

It is an Opiat to those that are in Pain, makes the Poor forget their
Necessities, supplies Food to the Hungry, making them bear the Want of it
easily. It is well known how Armies have been enabled to undergo tedious
Marches, and Seamen long Voyages, with hardly any other Provision, when well
supplied with this.

It is endued with a Salutiferous Sulphur, and has also a Narcotic composing
Quality, which gives Ease, Refreshment, and Tranquillity both to the Body and
Mind Insomuch that it may seem to resemble the Famous Herb mentioned by Homer,
that had the Power to turn Sadness into Joy.

The frequent Smoking of Tobacco discharges Phlegm and other watery peccant
Humors out of the Glands. It removes Obstructions in the Vessels, by
dissolving the coagulated Juices: It promotes a due Circulation of the Blood,
and a free Perspiration, through the Pores of the whole Body, so necessary to
Health. It not only purges the Head, but with very many, operates downwards,
rendering the Bowels soluble, whereby costive Constitutions find great Benefit.

It destroys Worms in Human Bodies, and is likewise by Experience found to be a
Remedy against Leprosies, Scurvy and Itch. To which the Poor (heretofore)
inhabiting the Seacoast of this Island, were by their Eating too much Fish
very much subject: But since the smoking of Tobacco came to be much in Use
among them, they have been totally free from.

Chawing Tobacco is by many preferred to Smoking it, as being a greater Drain,
and communicating its Virtues and Warmth more effectually to the Stomach and
Brain; preserving the Teeth, killing the Worms, and altering the Juices that
occasion Pain and Rottenness in them

By the Chawing it, the Glands of the Jaws, Throat and Vessels being
continually moved and compressed, dismiss or spue out great Quantities of
Rheum, the Cause of Defluctions, Coughs, Catarrhs and Consumptions. It
communicates also a certain Impulse to the Membranes of the Lungs, which helps
their Discharge of vicious Phlegm and other Matter, apt to breed Ulcers,
Astma's, and other Distempers. It Is observed by many, That those who from their
Youth have been accustomed to chaw Tobacco, are never afflicted (or at least
very rarely) with Gout, Rheumatisms, Scurvy, or Toothache, which proceeds from
an Acrimony in the Blood or Juices, that this Plant wonderfully helps to
correct and sweeten.

As Smoking and Chawing of Tobacco, by Experience, is found to have these good
Effects; so the using it by way of Snuff is beneficial, as well as diverting,
to many Persons, (especially to such as have weak Eyes, affected with too much
Moisture.) By its gently pricking and stimulating the Membranes, it causes
Sneezing or Contractions, whereby the Glands and Channels, like so many
squeezed Sponges, dismiss their Serosities and Filth. And as it serves for a
Drain to excessive Moisture in the Eyes or Head; so when a sufficient Moisture
is wanting, its quick and noble Spirit opens the Vessels that afford Supplies
thereto; and pure Snuff put into the Corners of the Eyes is found to alter and
destroy the sharp Humors that occasion Bloodshot, etc. So beneficial is this
Powder for the Preservation of that most dear and valuable of all our Senses,
the Sight.

But Care ought to be taken, That the Snuff made use of in all these Cases be
made of only pure clean Tobacco Leaves, without any Mixture of Stiptic Earths,
or Rotten Wood, which Common Snuff-makers put thereto to deaden, color, or
else increase the Quantity.

Tobacco also is often a Remedy for Deafness, by putting a Drop of its Oil into
the Ear with Cotton Wool.

But its most useful and excellent Quality is still to be mentioned; to wit,
That it is the most sovereign Antidote and greatest Preservative against the
Plague, or other pestilential Diseases; the Smallpox, or other Infection.

The Turks and others, among whom the Plague often rages, have recourse to
nothing more effectual to avoid it, than constant Smoking of Tobacco, Chawing,
Snuffing, and burning it in their Rooms and Streets; and when the Pestilence is
among them, many stuff their Bedding and Pillows with it. The Indians where it
grows hang it about their Necks, and are seldom seen without a Pipe in their
Hand.

When the Plague raged so violently in London, in the Year 1665. it is well
known to many now living, how very few it seized of those that were constant
Smoakers and Chawers of Tobacco: And what was more remarkable, not any of those
poor People, whose Employment was to manufacture, roll, or cut Tobacco, of
which there were many Hundreds at work in several Houses within this City, were
infected.

By these and many other Instances which might be given, it is evident, that
Tobacco wonderfully helps to purify the Air, and prevent Infection; so that it
were very much to be wished, that in time of Pestilence and other infectious
Distempers, the Rich would be so charitable, as to supply the Poor with great
Stores of this most useful Drug, and sovereign Antidote in such Cases; which
may be a Means to put a stop to the raging of such Distempers, and preserve
whole Families.

But it is to be noted, there are many sorts and degrees of Tobacco Plants; and
those highly preferable, which grow in Climates and Soils natural to them,
having a light Earth and warm Sun, which gives that noble Flavor, Strength and
Virtue to that Tobacco produced in Brazil, New-Spain, Virginia and Maryland:
Whereas that Plant raised in Northern Regions (where Tobacco-Plantations have
of late mightily increased) has not only a faint, earthy Taste and Smell, but
is also very unwholsom and pernicious to those that use it. Instead of
preserving, it destroys Health; which though not so immediately and sensibly
felt by poor People of strong and robust Constitutions, yet it is certainly so
much Poison sucked into their Veins, which by Degrees consumes the Body, and
often immediately causes Vomitings, Vertigo's and Convulsions.

To conclude, All Persons who love long Life and Health, will daily have
Recourse to the American Tobacco, as a noble Remedy; and shun that of the
European Growth, as Poison.

FINIS.

