ARCANA MOOREANA; OR, A Succinct and Lucid DISCOURSE, OF THE Origin, Essence,
Situation Symptoms, Causes and Cure OF THE CHOLICK, In all its various
Denominations, different Kinds, Degrees, and Complications.

Done by Mr. John Moore, Apothecary, at the Pestle and Mortar, in
Abchurch-Lane, near ^umbard-street.

Natura legibus esse Medicinae Leges consentaneas, Medicus Remedia con^ert, non
solum naturae Minister, Sed interdum ut Opifex primarius. LONDON: Printed for
the A^^hor. 1713.

THE Epistle Dedicatory. TO THE Right Reverend Father in GOD, Dr. John Moore,
Lord Bishop of ELY.
May it please your Lordship,
AN indispensible Necessity, obliging me to vindicate my Reputation in the
Knowledge and Practice of Physic, against the Malicious Calumnies and
Detractions of my Enemies; who are only those of my own Profession, and such as
are unwarily prejudiced by their False and Scandalous Insinuations; I hope I
shall not be charged either with Vanity or Rashness in Publishing these brief
Essays; which are designed for no other end, but that by reading this little
Mannual, those that are Strangers to my Person, may be convinced, that in
Studying Physic, I have followed such Learned Guides and Patterns, by whose
Directions and Examples, and my own Experience, joined with a tolerable
Capacity, and an indefatigable Industry and Diligence, that I am legally
qualified for the Exercise of the Art I profess, maugre the inveterate Malice
of all Opposers.

My Lord, My Life and Conversation, I bless God, being unattackable, even by
Envy it self, and so being no Reproach to the Name I have the Honor to bear:
And your Lordship being Celebrated for your Exemplary Piety, Charity, and
profound Knowledge in Physic, as well as in all other Learned and useful Arts
and Sciences, and consequently a Proper and Sufficient Judge, of the Contents
of the following Treatise.

I have humbly presumed to Dedicate it to your good Lordship, in great
Sincerity, but in very plain Language; for if Nature had been more kind and
liberal to me in Eloquent and Rhetorical Expressions, I durst not have used
them to your Lordship, who takes more Delight in doing good to others, than in
reading deserved Panegyricks on your self.

And therefore if your Lordship is pleased to Pardon or Excuse my Confidence in
this Address, and favorably accept the tender of this diminutive Tract, I
shall esteem that great Condescension, as an Eternal Obligation and Honor,
conferred upon,

My good Lord, Your Lordships Most Devoted Humble Servant John Moore.

A PRACTICAL DISCOURSE, Showing the Origin, Seat, Symptoms, Cause, etc.
The Introduction in defense of the Author.
IF ever any Person upon the Face of the Universe, that Dedicated his whole Life
to the doing good, and rendering himself Beneficial to Mankind, has reason to
complain of the Ill and Barbarous usage he has encountered, from Men of his own
Profession, and others of a Superior Station, that pretend Authority to License
or Suppress, all Practioners in the Noble and Useful Arts of Pharmacy, and
Administering Physic, I am the Man; for ever since I took my leave of the Old
and Useless way of giving Physic, as too many others do, Blindfold, by
Traditional Prescriptions, and made it my whole Study and Business to keep up
an entire Correspondence and Agreement between Art and Nature, Theory and
Practice; and made exact and particular Observations in the difference of
Diseases, the variety of Symptoms, casual Accidents, and the diversity of
Constitutions in Humane Bodies; and have followed the dictates of a
well-grounded Experience, in finding out the Essence of Diseases, and the
Efficacy of Proper Medicines to Cure them. The whole Tribe of common
Practioners, and some graduated Professors of Physic, that live lazing upon
the little Knowledge that comes by Tradition, and by stuffing their Bills, and
Patients with Nauseous Repetitions, of unexperienced and consequently
ineffectual Medicines; have both unsufferably calumniated, traduced and
slandered me, with many ridiculous Stories and unjust Censures, as well as
loaded me with such hard and reproachful Names, as none but the bountiful
bestowers of them can deserve; so that I am forced, to prevent others from
being prejudiced by false Reports and malicious Insinuations, to take this way
of vindicating my Reputation, against the Insults of Envious Men, who are as
utter Strangers to my Person and Abilities, as themselves are from the common
Principles of Modesty, Civility and good Manners.

I could with great facility recriminate upon my Enemies, but I never thought a
Billings-Gate Dialect any Ornament, or an advantageous Character to a Sober
Chriftian, which is seldom used, but by a buisy sort of Tatling Animals, who
are out of Humor with every Body, because their own ill nature will not suffer
'em to be pleased with themselves. Let Maevius and Bavius then admire one
another, and rail at all the World besides; I shall for the future be
unconcerned at those who are as full of unjust Reproaches, as they are void of
good Breeding. I wish to be hated by self-interested Slanderers and their
Abettors, for the same reason for which I desire to be beloved by all
Ingenious, well meaning honest Men, under all Denominations; as for the rest, I
shall say with the Poet

Urged by the Base, I Am unconcerned the while,
At least regard it with a scornful Smile;
'Twere mean to think of Vengeance on the Vile.
However, since I know not how far their Hatred, inveterate and implacable
Malice may extend to my prejudice, among those that know not my veritable
Character, I shall here employ a few Lines to answer all the Objections they
have raised, and industriously scattered to blast my Reputation in the Practice
of Physic, which I have followed with great Success for many Years, and which
the worst of my Enemies cannot deny, without assurance enough to affirm, that
the Sun is not risen, when to their shame, it shines in their Faces from its
Illustrious Meridian.

Objections against the Author.
The first Quarter in which my professed Enemies attack me, is, That I am but an
Apothecary: It Is true, I lay claim to no greater Title, and yet cannot forbear
saying, That that Objection is Ridiculous; since being an Apothecary, well
versd in Pharmacy, in the Knowledge of Drugs, and the Composition of Medicines,
is, the most certain and regular step toward the making of a good Physician:
As has been proved by many Examples in London and other Places, where Men that
servd their Times to Apothecaries, and kept Shop many Years, have afterward
took their Degree of Doctor in one of our own Universities, and practiced with
as great Applause, and it may be with more Success, than the rest of their only
Graduated Brethren. Nor is this method unobserved in other Learned Employments;
for many Wise Men say, That the way to make an able Counselor, is, First to
educate him as a Clerk to an Attorney. Having thus blown off this ignorant and
contemptible Objection, I proceed to the Second; which is, That I never had, an
University Education, but am a mere Ignoramus, as they are pleased to Phrase
it; But how will they prove their latter Allegation? Did they ever Examine into
my Learning and Ability? Do they know my Incapacity to perform what I
undertake? If they did, without doubt I should long since have heard of it in
louder Terms, than by Private Whispers, Malicious Insinuations and Secret
Calumnies and Aspersions; but such is their Hatred, that what they dare not
aver to my Face, or attempt to prove by Argument, they liberally supply by
false Reports, and forged Clandestine Stories of my Insufficiency, against a
Thousand credible Certificates and Reputable Testimonies to the contrary; and
these I think sufficient to stop the Mouths of Detraction and Envy, in the
Opinion of all good People; and for others, that are mislead by my Numerous
Adversaries into uncharitable Censures of me; let them but consider, that my
Enemies treat me on the score of Demetrius, for my safe and short way of
Practice, and a great number of Patients diminishing their Profit, they will
not wonder that I am condemned in an Arbitrary Court, where Malice is the
Prosecuter, Interest sits as Judge, and sordid Ignorance is Foreman of the
Jury. I confess, I have not had the Advantage of an Academick Education, but am
a sincere lover of Learning, and desirous of Knowledge, and though I cannot boast
of possessing much, yet I can astute all Censorious Pedants, that by conversing
with Learned Men, and a well chosen Library, I take as much pains to increase
my Knowledge, as some of them do by insignificant Diversions, and notorious
Debaucheries, to lose what they gained, if ever they gained any thing but Words
at the University. Besides, this cavil is wholly Impertinent, since its well
known, beyond a possibility of Contradiction, that I am Master of good
Specificks, and established experimented Medicines, of my own Preparing, which
Prescribing? Physicians cannot pretend to, though of the greatest Consequence to
Mankind, and whose efficacious Virtues I am sure of, and can rely upon, in the
most difficult plunging Cases in respect of Safety, and generally with Success;
and all this confirmed by numerous Testimonies of Cured Patients, which I am of
Opinion, is all that ought t^ be required of a good Physician; and yet for want
of the empty Title of Doctor, and a Coach and Equipage, I must, it seems, be
called Quack and Emperick, by chose Doni of the Profession, who have not much
more Skill in the true Practice of Physic, which I take to be the Cure of
Diseases, than what they collect from the old exploded Methodus Medendi, which
when the World grows Wiser, will vanish into its original nothing, and give
place to solid, certain and veritable Experience in the Cure of Diseases.

And that I may contribute to this great End, of advancing useful Knowledge in
Physic, and that my Enemies may not think I am reduced to a perpetual silence
in my own just Defense, by their vain Threatenings and injurious
Misrepresentations of my Person and Capacity for the Practice of Physic, I
have taken up a resolution to Print several Discourses upon those Diseases,
that God has blessed me with the Knowledge of, and given me wonderful success
in their Cures, that have frequently baffled the Endeavors of many Eminent
Professors: And shall begin with a Treatise upon the CHOLICK.

Now in discoursing this Subject, to avoid all unnecessary and over Nice and
Curious Distinction, and Definitions, that rather puzzle Men's Intellects, than
benefit their Understandings, I shall under the general Name, vulgarly called
Cholick, treat of it as an Accidental and Particular Distemper, arising from an
evident Cause alone, and without a previous disposition in any Person
indifferently; for so, alterations in the Sex No^naturalia often raise great
commotions in the Viscera of the Belly with extremity of Pain: After that, I
shall consider this Disease in its Procartick or pre-existent Cause, as
cooperating with others that are subsequent, which will necessarily lead me to
particular Discourses upon the various kinds, and the several Species of this
Distemper under the denominations of the Cholick in the Stomach; the Hysteric
Cholick, the Scorbutic Cholick; the Iliack Passion, the Caeliack Cholick, a
Diarrhea, a Lientary, a Dysentry, etc. All which Distempers I shall treat
particularly, and to avoid Confusion and over burthening the Memory, under
every Head I shall show the Origin Seminium or Minera of each Disease; what
part of the Body is primarily affected; then proceed to the Symptoms and Method
of Cure, and conclude with some Observations and Examples, wherein my own
Medicines have been wonderfully successful; which I always keep ready prepared
by me, to dispose of, to all that think fit to come or send for them.

The Essence or Nature of the Cholick.
The Cholick called in Greek (...), in Latin Collica Passio, because by some
Physicians, it is supposed, though falsely, to have its seat wholly in some part or
other of the Second of the great Guts, called Colon; is a Vellication or severe
Griping, Twitching, Gnawing Pain in certain Parts of the Abdomen, which
commonly produce Vomitings, Cramps and Contractions, almost of all the Viscera
of the Belly: Sometimes the Navel and its Neighboring Parts are drawn inward,
accompanied with Pains as if they were boared with a Gimlet: Sometimes they
swell, being blown up with the excess of Wind: The Intestines by an inverted
Motion of the Fibers are often drawn upwards, insomuch that the Belly being
extremely bound, discharges little or nothing at all; nay, though it be
frequently provoked to do it by Glysters and Suppositories, yet it does not
easily throw out its Contents.

That the Stomach is likewise convulsed with the Duodenum and Gall Bladder,
manifestly appears from the plentiful vomiting of Yellow or Green Choler.
Sometimes the Vreters and the Bladder which contains the Urine, are so
contracted, that during the whole Fit, the Urine is either stopped, or voided
more sparingly: Besides, the Head is grieved with Vertiginous effects, either
preceding or following the invasion of this Disease, and if the Cholick
increases and becomes Inveterate, it often causes Pain in the outward Members
and terminates in a Palsy.

Its direful Effects.
Nay, the Sick commonly endures all kinds of Pains; one while burning with
intolerable Heat, another time chilled with extreme Cold; sometimes it seems to
be fixed and as it were piercing the Loins, or ^ther whiles pricking with
wandering repeated Thrusts; anon distending or beating the Loins, or only
pressing them with the sense of weight, or burning, corroding, rending Pain; or
is troubled either with a continual or interrupted Pulsation, and afterward
returning again, or wonderfully writhing and contorting any other way, scarce
to be expressed by the Patient, or explained by the Physician.

Now though all the differences occurring in this Distemper with its Original are
very difficult to be assigned, numbered, or reduced into a certain Order, and
much more to make an exact Examination of all the Symptoms and Causes, and
thence to give a sollid judgment of every one; yet I shall attempt it, by
exhibiting them from the best Authorities, and leave the choice to your own
Election, as they are most agreeable to your Reason and Experience, which is
the Mistress both of the Learned and Unskilful.

The Origin of the Cholick.
Some are of Opinion that the Origin of this Disease, proceeds from the
effervescency of vicious Blood; others from an Obstruction of the Capillary
Veins of the Stomach and Guts, by which the Blood is forced to stand still in
the Vessels, till at length after a great Distention the Vessels burst and the
Blood is effussed, which breeds a sensible Inflammation and violent Pulsation
about the Part affected. Others say it arises from an over viscous Phlegm mixed
with Choler, offensive both in its Saltish Acrimony and Volatile Oiliness, by
which the Viscous Phlegm is rarefied into Wind, and if the Excrements are
contained beyond their due time, they harden and stick to the Gut, by which the
natural Ferment is viciated, and the Windy Gusts are more rarefied, and being
shut up in the Cavity of the Gut Colon it causes a violent distension and
contraction of it.

Some again impute it the disorders and Convulsions of the Nerves running from
the Mesenterick Plexus, which vicious humors as aforesaid, lodged in the
Intestines, and those by a Foreign irritation of their Nerves, equally
attended by the successive returns of Cold, and Heat, cause tearing, wringing
and c^^^^^^cting Pains.

Others ascribe ^^s Original to the abounding Acidity and Acrimony of the
Pancreatick juice, occasioned by over sharp Food; eating raw Fruits, by Summer
Air too Hot, by Winter Air too Cold, or at least too Sharp; by Fear, Sorrow,
extreme Grief or Solicitude of Mind; by continued Watchings which consume the
Animal Spirits, and by consequence increasing the Acrimony of any Humors,
produce Hypocondriack suffocations, and also Pains, severely racking and
contorting the Guts. Now the Reasons why I cannot agree with many Physicians,
that Cholick Pains proceed from the sharp and irritative contents of the Colon,
is, because those Medicines which loosen the Belly, and copioussly expel
Featus's and the Faeces, would undoubtedly give most certain Relief, the
contrary of which too often happens, viz. That after frequent or violent
Purging, that Disease becomes worse. Nor can I agree with the Notion, that
Cholick Pains proceed only from the Pancreatick juice mixed with Choler,
because it is impossible, according to Sylvius de la Boe that the Juice of the
Pancreas in any manner or degree sour, should mix with Choler, abounding with
a bitter and volatile Salt. Therefore,

I firmly adhere to the Opinion of the Learned Dr. Willis, who with great
reason, places the Origin of this Disease among the effects of the Brain and
the Genus Nervosum, alleging, that certain Recrements of the Nervous Humor,
falling from the Brain by the Nerves, and passing thence into the Mesentry and
other Foldings of the Abdomen, are there amassed and heaped together, which if
they are so gross, thick and viscous, that they cannot be received and sent
away by the Lymphaducts, or distilled out into the Cavities of the Intestines,
by the small Branches of the Vessels, then Stagnating and being heaped together
by degrees into those Parts, they arise at length to an irritative plenitude:
And afterward that Matter becoming more degenerate, and more offensive by
Stagnation, and growing turged on some occasion; or of its own accord or else
fermenting with the Salino-fix'd Humor, sent thither from the Blood, will
torture the Patient with very troublesome and painful Corrugations in the
Branches of the Nerves and Nervous Fibers, with which the Mesentery is
innumerably furnished: Which effects of them, do seldom or never cease till the
fermenting Matter is either discussed, or expressed into the Cavities of the
Intestines, or at length by Care and the Application of proper Medicines, they
are utterly subdued.

Having thus briefly showed you the Nature of the Cholick in the direful
effects it produces, together with its Origination, I shall, according to
promise, proceed to the Place that is primarily affected in Human Bodies.

The seat of the Cholick
Senertus and Riverius, place it in the upper Orifice of the Stomach, which is
of exquisite Sense, by reason of the intermixture of Nerves, with which it is
stored from the vaga sexta, from whence Branches being communicated to the
Heart that noble Part is also affected by Consent, and disperses the Pain into
almost every part Internal and external.

Dr. Blankard, Professor of Physic, at Middleburgh, in Zealand, says, The
Cholick is a vehement Pain, proceeding from an ill disposition of the Animal
Spirits, seated in the Abdomen, but begins in the Nervous Plexus's or Foldings
of the Mesentery, and is by some Men falsely imputed to have its residence in
the Gut Colon.

Michael Etmuller, late Professor of Physic in the University of Leiptsick,
says, Cholick Pains and Gripings in the great Guts, are chiefly felt in the
Colon, especially in that part of it toward the circumference of the Belly,
upon the Left-side, where it is straightened and incurvated, and consequently more
liable to the blast and shocks of Wind, and more apt to stop the Circulation of
the Excrements, and cause their Swelling up into a hard or soft Tumor. This
Pain and Tumor is frequently imputed to the Spleen, but erroneously; for the
Colon, says he, is its usual and proper Seat; and sometimes it veers about to
the Right-side of the Belly, upon the outermost Circumference, where the same
Colon pursues its Course.

Sometimes these Pains reach only the Small Guts, and then their Station is
about the Navel and Center of the Belly, and are much more violent than those
in the Great Guts; if they range not beyond the Duodenum, or the beginning of
the Jejunum, they are felt in the Loins, and are often mistaken for Nephritick
Pains, or those caused by the Convulsion of the Mesenterick Nerves, or Tumors,
or Ulcers in the Pancreas. I dare not say any of these Opinions are Heterodox,
because sometime or other Pains do possess all the Parts above mentioned.

However, for very good Reasons grounded upon many Experiments in Anatomy, I
adhere chiefly to Doctor Willis, who says, The Part in Human Bodies primarily
affected in the Cholick, is the Mesentery, and its Nervous Foldings under the
Navel, which causes cruel Pain, as if a Stake was stuck there, or a Piercer
were making a Hole: Besides, round about, almost in the whole Abdomen, by
reason of the Intestines being variously drawn forward and backward, at the
same time in different Places, wandering Pains shoot this way and that way; and
the motion of the Fibers being discomposed or inverted, as well in those Parts
as in the primary Vessels, the Belly is in a manner always bound, and there
follows sometimes a supperssion of Urine, or very little is made. Besides, the
Duodenum the Gall Bladder with its Channels and the bottom of the Stomach being
affected with a Cramp, and their Fibers being drawn upward, a frequent Vomiting
with a copious casting up Matter of Yellow or Greenish color often happens
during the Fit.

In a Fit of the Cholick, also besides Pains of the Belly, there are likewise
violent Pains of the Loins, raging in the 1ower parts of the Back, which
certainly cannot proceed from the irritation of any Intestine; but its easy to
conceive they may arise from a Morbific Cause lodged in the Mesentery: For
inasmuch as several considerable Nerves of the Loins enter into the great
Nervous folding of the Mesentery; so from hence, not only painful Convulsions
are conveyed by consent from one Part to another; but its also probable, that
certain Recrements of the Back likewise, and of the Loins, are derived into the
Mesentery by this Passage, and that in some sort, for this reason, Scorbutical
Persons are so very obnoxious to Gripes of the Belly, and Looseness that
attends it, which confirms me in the Opinion that the Nervous Flexus of the
Mesentery, is the first Part affected with the Cholick, and that its seat is
not in the Cavities or T^nicles of the Intestines, nor the Morbifick Matter
conveyed by the Arteries, but by Nerves.

Diagnostick Symptoms.
Diagnostick Signs of the Cholick, are, very sharp Pains, sometimes moveable
and other whiles fixed to a certain place; sometimes the Pain is in the region
of the Stomach or in the Reins, sometimes above and sometimes below the Navel,
so that by the comparison of other Signs, you must distinguish between the
Cholick and Pains of the Stone or Spleen, which are frequently mistaken one for
the other, even by Physicians themselves.

Prognostic Symptoms of the Cholick.
Prognostics of the Cholick, are vulgarly enough known, that is to say, an
Accidental Cholick rising from an evident cause alone, is commonly safe, and
admits of an easy Cure; but an habitual one, is not eradicated but with great
Difficulty, as to its disposition, so that the Fits may return no more; for
sometimes the Fits themselves, notwithstanding the Application of Medicines,
are very obstinate and continue many Days, nay, Weeks and Months, and sometimes
are never cured but by Death. Thus much for signs; But since I have branched
out this Disease into several Parts, I shall take leave, once for all, to show,
how you may distinguish one Disease from another by the Urine.

Signs by the Urine.
If the Urine is Watery, it is a Nephritick Cholick, if highly tinctured toward
the middle, and colored on the Surface, and the Anus is obstinately bound;
it is a Scorbutic Cholick; if Respiration is difficult and the Breast
afflicted, it is a Hysteric Cholick; if the Convulsion of the Intestines is
accompanied with Pain extending to the Pubes and Haunch-Bone, the Womb is
disordered; if the Urine is clear and of a reddish Yellow, it is a Choleric
Cholick, if the Pain is tearing and the Urine Milky and Pale, impregnated with
a large Sediment, the Mesenterick Nerves are affected.

Causes of the common Cholick.
The Antecedent Causes of the Common Cholick, which I only treat of under this
Head, are, the Disorder and Convulsions of the Nerves running from the great
Mesenterick Plexus, which cause tearing, wringing and contracting Pains:
Sometimes occasioned by Nephritick Pains and Childbirth, when the Mesenterick
folding, being irritated, by its concourse with the Nerves of the Kidneys and
the Womb, Antecedent Cau-Causes.
pulls and contracts both the Stomach and Guts which it supplies with Nerves.
At other times they are retainers to some fixed, permanent, habitual Cause,
which though it lie hid for some time, has always an Ascendant in the Body. These
are either Hypochondriack, Hysteric or Scorbutic, as I shall further show,
when I treat particularly of those Diseases a part, and are owing to the
Convulsion of the Mesenterick Plexus, to which the Intestines are annexed,
being galled with a peccant Acid.

Procatartick Causes.
The Procatartick, or Pre-existent Cause of this Disease which co-operates with
others that are subsequent, are two fold; First, That many Recrements or
superfluous things are heaped together in the Nervous Liquor; and Secondly,
That they being admitted chiefly into the Nerves of the Viscera of the Belly,
and so conveyed into the Mesentery, there create the Morbid Minera's of this
Distemper; for the former of these generally happening by the Distemper of the
Brain, by admitting Heterogeneous Particles with the Nervous Juice into its
custody, the whole Animal Economy is so disturbed, that it cannot evacuate the
common superfluities by its ordinary Conveyance; and this causes the
incongruous Matter that cannot be sent from the Brain, to force its passage
into the Nerves of the Par vagum, which are open and ready to receive it.
Secondly, That this superfluous Matter running in this manner into the Par
vagum of the Nerves, is deposed in the Mesentery, or other foldings within the
Abdomen, and necessarily makes the Morbid seat in the Mesentery.

Evident Causes.
The evident Causes of the Cholick are also of two sorts; First, Such as being
injurious to the Brain and Genus Nervosum, cause the Morbifick Matter to super
abound: Or, Secondly by agitating the Blood and Humors, stir up the conglobated
Mass to Pain, causing more fervent and sudden effervescencies. And here some
will imagine I should proceed to discourse the many and diversified occasions,
by which the Pains of the Cholick are caused in Persons pre-disposed to them;
but that would be nauseating the Reader with Cramben biscoctum, having
sufficiently done it already, in the Paragraph ent^tuled the direful effects of
the Cholick, Page the 14th.

Cure of the Ch^lick.
And now according to the Method I have prescribed to my self, I am brought to
treat of what ought to be the Main and Principal design of every Practitioner
in Physic in all Diseases, viz. The Cure of the Disease. To compass which
great end, Three primary Indications are suggested. First, To appease the Pains
in the Fit. Secondly, To take away the Cause of the Disease that the Fits may
no more, or not so frequently return. Thirdly, To re-invigorate the Patient's
Strength, and fortify his Constitution, in order to the Comfortable enjoyment
of Life.

To appease the torturing Pains in the Paroxism, Lenifying and Emollient
Glysters only, ought to be frequently injected into the Body, that the
Corrugations of the Fibers may be mitigated, and the raging of the Spirits
appeased. To this end, Warm Milk with Sugar, or rather Molossus, or Syrup of
Violets: Also Emollient Decoctions of March-Mallows, Herb Mercury, and the
Flowers of Melilot with Oil of Almonds; also a strong Decoction of a
Sheep's-Head with the Wool on it, or Calves-Feet, are proper to be used:
Sometimes a Glyster of mear Oil of Olives or of Linseeds, have given Ease, when
others have failed. But if this sort of Glysters are ineffectual and do not
come away, or answer their end stronger must be used, to force the Humors from
the little Mouths of the Arteries. For this purpose ^et Carminative or bitter
Decoctions be prep^red, in which dissolve Electuary Diaphoenic^^,
Diacatholicon, or e Baccis Lauri, or Species Hierae, to which Liquors its
customary to add, Two or Three Ounces of the infusion of Crocus Mettalorum: Or
to a Pound of an Emollient Decoction, add of Venice Turpentine dissolved with
the Yolk of an Egg, one Ounce; or take the Urine of a Healthy Man, Venice
Turpentine dissolved, one Ounce and half, and with one Ounce of Molossus mixed
with the rest, make a Glyster. The Balsamic Particles of the Turpentine
diffused every where, are designed to remove the Morbifick or Stagnating
Matter, or incline that which is Acetous, or otherwise degenerate, to a better
Temperament.

If the Intestines are much contracted by vicious Matter lodged within them,
Purgations ought to be prohibited, for fear they promo^e the Contraction, and
lock up the Excrements closer. If this Case happens in your Practice, Whey, or
an Ounce of the Oil of Almonds, with Canary Wind and Sperma Caeti, are more
effectual than the strongest Catharticks, If the Cholick is attended with a
Tenacious viscid Humor, and a heavy boring Pain, Purgatives mixed with
attenuating Specificks are allowable; though I have observed, it is better to do
so after the Fit has made some progress, and the Symptoms are a little
mittigated, than just in the beginning, especially if the Pain is violent; but
take notice, that if the Guts are inflamed, all Laxatives of whatsoever ^ind
are extremely pernicious; for a fierc^ and very violent Cholick, if it proceed
from an Inflammation or Abscess of some of the Intestines, generally ushers in a
Mortal Iliack Passion.

External Applications.
As for External Applications against Cholicks, let the Belly and Navel be well
fomented with Liniments, of expressed Oils, mixed with those that are
Distilled. Galbanum melted and mixed with the Distilled Oils of Spike and
Amber. Plaifters made of Tachamahas, Balsam of Peru, or that of Bay Berries,
with that of Tobacco; Cataplasms of Horse-Dung, with Oil of Rue; and quilted
Bags of Millet-seeds, or of Anodyn and Aromatic Ingretlients; are like wise
applied to the Belly with good success. But if the Gripes of the Belly do not
remit by the use of these things, you must have recourse to Hypnoticks, which
being given in a sitting Dose, often gives Relief. And in continued Cholicks
notwithstanding some Men, Whose Ignorance, is as considerable as their
Insolence, loudly clamor against the use of Mercurial Medicines, yet the
raising a gentle Salivation when the Morbifick Matter is plentifully gathered
together in the Nervous Plexus's, and other places about the Abdomen, and there
sticking fast, so as not to be moved by other Medicines, Calomel may be given
to the Relief of the Patient, and without Reproach to the Physician.

The Preservative Indication.
To refresh the Strength and falling Spirits of the Sick, and to order yet a
greater Apparatus against the Disease, give Liquid Laudanum tartariz'd, at
Bedtime, in a Spoonful of the Water of Camomil Flowers, drinking after it, of
the same six Spoonfuls, and let it be repeated every other, or every third
Night. And whilst you are using these Medicines for appeasing Pains, let
Purging Remedies have their due Turns, to destroy the Seminium of the Disease,
and to prevent its return, Vomiting and Purging, and in a Hot Temperament
Ph^ebotomy ought to be used: And instead of Baths and Sudorificks, Diure^icks
may be more advantageously given.

And where the Cholick is of long continuance and obstinate, Spaw-Water coming
from Iron-Mines, are often used with good Success:

The Vital Indication.
Next, The Vital Indication ought to be joined with the Curatory, and to be now
and then interchangeably used with it: To that end, let Remedies be used which
support the Patient's Strength, refresh his ^pirits and procure certain times
of Truce against the Fits of the Disease. Let the Diseased be dusy supplied
with Cordials, Paregoricks and Hypnoticks, which in the Cholick are so
absolutely necessary, that the Patient cannot live without them, nor the
Physician justif himself, before the Tribunal of his own Conscience. In
Constitutions that are not Hot, Spirits of Heart-Horn, of Soot, of
Sal-Armoniack succinated, also Tincture of Antimony, or o^ Coral, are all very
commendable. And when the Sick is delivered from his Pains, and has recovered a
competency of Strength; to complete his Cure, I recommend traveling long
Journies on Horseback, or in a Coach, for such excitations of the Parts, will
strengthen the Bowels, shake off the Relics of the Disease, and make Life
Pleasant and Comfortable, till the devouring Teeth of Time shall destroy that
as well as every thing else.

The Author's own Remedies.
Having thus briefly given you the Nature, Origin, Seat, Symptoms, Cause and
Cure of this Excrusiating Disease called the Cholick, with the choicest
Remedies used by the most celebrated Physicians of former Ages, and the present
Time; I shall now, according to Promise, say something of my own Medicines,
that the bountiful Giver of all good things has bless d me with the Knowledge
of, and which I can depend upon, from uncontradicted Experience in many Years
Practice, for the certain Cure of this Disease, in all Cureable Cases, and for
giving Ease in the most Dangerous, whose Obstinacy and Inveteracy will not
admit, of a Perfect Cure: Which Remedies are of three, sorts, a Chimical
Elixir, an Anticholical Cordial Water, Pills, and an Electuary; all safe and
Salubrious in their Nature, and effectual in their Operations, as will be
attested by numerous Patients that have committed themselves to my Care, and
found extraordinary Benefit by them; when Men of greater Names, after long
Trials have been unsuccessful, to the infinite Trouble and great Expense of the
Diseased; both which will be prevented by the Method I take, in a happy
conjunction of Speculative and Experimental Knowledge, as the only remedy of
the Inconveniences that cramp a Successful Practice.

The Medicines I exhibit are sure, and the Knowledge I have of their virtue, is
not the effect of my Reasoning; but of my Observation, so that those that use
them will find them Successful. I say, this Knowledge is not the Fruits of my
Reason, because in reality it is not; and further, to set this Assertion right,
it cannot be so; for in the matter of Medicines, we have no other way to
follow, but that of Observation: For to offer to discover, by Reason alone, the
virtue of Medicaments, is the way never to find what we seek for I theref re
apply my self to Experience, and leave those Tricks and vain Subtilities, which
according to Quintilian, render us like those little Insects, that are never
pleased but when they are among Thorns and Briars. Its high time to shake off
this School Physic, which is good for nothing but wrangling, and attain a
positive Physic, which is of use in Practice. By positive Physic, I don't
mean one made up of Authorities, which consists in knowing the Sentiments of
diverse Authors upon a controverted Point, as in Positive Divinity: But I mean
one that consists of positive Matters of Fact, which teaches what has been
often successful in the same Circumstances; and I may be bold to say, that
Positive Physic, regulated by Method, is the true Physic.

School Physic, enables Practitioners to make smart Repartees, to come off
handsomely in a controverted Point; and the other makes us sensible and
Prudent, so as to order nothing but what is convenient: The out makes us
Headstrong and Opinionative, and the other makes us honest Physicians, who seek
for nothing but how to inform our selves, and to be useful: The one seeks for
Evas^ons how to defend himself under a Disappointment, and the other for
Medicines to Cure Distempers: The one consults his Ideas, and the other
consults his Reason and Experience: The one makes Pedants, and the other
Physicians.

A Chemical Elixir, and its Operation.
And first, my Chemical Elixir, is in its own Nature peculiarly adapted to the
Cure of the Cholick, because its innate virtues are powerful in allaying Pains,
taking away the Cause of the Disease, and re-invigorating the Patient's
Strength, and refreshing his Spirits, by which means, and not by any Narcotick
quality in the Medicine, Nature is enabled to expel the Morbifick Matter lodge d
in the Nervous Plexus's of the Mesentery, and to subdue and conquer the
Disease. This Elixir also is endued with an excellent Quality, to Purify the
Blood and Nervous Liquors, and keep them in a due and regular Crasis, in order
to prevent the engendring of Morbifick Matter; Strengthens the Brain and the
Nervous Foldings of the Abdomen, and removes the present Procatarxis of the
Cholick, and hinders the Invasions of Pains for the Future, so that they shall
seldom or never return afterward.

How to be taken, and its happy Effects.
Which Elixir is to be taken, Ten Drops at a time, when assaulted by Cholick
Pains, in Five or Six Spoonfuls of Generous Wine, smooth clear Ale, or well
brew d Table-Beer, every half Hour till the Pain is abated, and then forbear
taking any more Drops for that time, unless the Pain returns. This Quantity of
Drops is proper for Men; but the Fair Sex must take but Five or Six Drops at a
time, in Two or Three Spoonfuls of either of the above mentioned Liquors,
observing the same Rules as are given to Men. But if the Sick are inclined to
Vomit up whatever they take, let the Patient take the same quantity of Drops in
a sma^^er quantity of Liquor. Some Persons of both Sexes can take a greater
number of Drops than others; and in violent Fits of the Cholick, if the Patient
has not ease with a small number of Drops, let them add two Drops every time
they take them, till easy, then take no more that time. As to the quantity of
the Drops the Patient is the proper judge, who finding what number of Drops
best agrees with his Constitu^ion, his own Reason will induce him in all
Effects, to stick to that Quantity.

When either Man or Woman takes my Elixir in the Day time, let them lie down
upon a Bed, dispose themselves to Rest, and if they find their Stomachs any way
disordered, the longer they repose, the sooner they will find Refreshment and
Ease.

If the Sick enter into a course of taking my Elixir, to eradicate this
Distemper and put a final end to his tormenting Pains, let him take Four Drops
at Night when he is going to Bed, in a Glass of some, of the Vehicle before
named, or in Bohe Tea, and continue so to do, by adding One Drop every
successive Night, till he has imbibed 20, 30, or 40 Drops; or at least the
certain number that agrees with him, and adhere to that, till he finds himself
recovered; always lying long in Bed in the Morning, that the Elixir may the
sooner produce its desired happy Effect.

An Advertisement to Water-Drinkers.
Further, if the Sick has at any time, found some Benefit by drinking
Spaw-Water, and is desirous to continue it, because his Bowels are too Hot, let
him put Six Drops of my Elixir into half a Pint of Spaw-Water, and drink it
going to Bed, for a Month together; for, this Elixir is the best Medicine in
the World, to make all Mineral Waters pass off well and quickly by Urine or
Seige; which if they stay long in the Body, by taking up their Quarters in the
Head or Feet, they will cause the Vertigo, or Gout, as is often found by
dreadful Experience. Which may serve as a cautionary. Advertisement, to all
that accustom themselves for Diversion or Necessity sake, to drink Tunbridge,
Epsom, Dullege, Kensington, Islington, North-Hall, Bath, Northamptonshire,
Derby-shire, or York-shire-Waters, that they always carry a small Bottle of my
Elixir along with them, for prevention of such ill Accidents as frequently come
to pass, by drinking those Waters alone, and to effect more safely, certainly
and speedily their Intentions in drinking those Mineral Waters, which for want
of using my Elixir with them, generally prove ineffectual.

This Elixir, a name taken from the Arabic Word Eleeschir, signifying
Powerful, is also effectual against the Stone, Gravel, and Bloody Urine; stops
Vomiting and a Looseness, and is a proper Medicine against Chatars, Coughs, and
all Diseases incident to the Head and Breast. It continues its whole Virtue in
all Climates, and consequently is fit to be carried, as it has been, to the
East or West Indies, to any of the Northern Countries, the Mediteranean, or the
South-Seas. It will last more than Twenty Years, and no Family that has
Experienced its Virtues in many others, as well as this Distemper, will be
without it.

The Author's Cordia^ Cholick Waters.
And since in this Disease, all things, though properly enough contrived and
invented, do not agree with all Persons, nor please in in the same Form of
Composition, and that some Palates disrelish what others imbibe with Pleasure,
so there is sometimes a Necessity of changing and altering Medicines in respect
of their Form, as well as Ingredients in their Composition, that they may more
effectually operate upon the different vicious Humors, and on the various
Parts affected.

To answer all these Ends, I invented my Cordial Anticholical Water, whose
virtues far exceed the common Tincture of Steel and of Antimony and Amber, so
much extolled in the Cure of the Cholick; because after a peculiar manner, it
gives Ease by expelling the viscous Recrements in the great Mesenterick Plexus,
to which the Intestines are annexed, and allays the griping Pains that follow
the irregular Cure of Fevers, which are caused, by transferring the Morbifick
Matter to the Glandules of the Mesentery, and the subsequent irritation of its
Nerves. This Anticholical Water, or Solar Liquor, has also both a Diuretic and
Carminative Quality, and has admirable effects, both in Tender and Robust
Constitutions, and I often give it with great Success, either it self, or mixed
with other proper Specificks, as a Spur in Hot Discrasies of the Viscera with a
predominancy of adust Sulphur, as also in Flitting, Scorbutical, and irregular
Boilings of the Blood and Nervous juice, which seldom or never fails of doing
good in the most desperate Cases I have met with, in many Years Practice.

How to be taken.
This Water is to be taken by Two or Three Spoonfuls at any time, when the Sick
is grieved with the Cholick; either by it self, or put into a Glass of warm
Ale, or burnt White Wind, and being repeated as occasion requires, the
Physician will accomplish his main end, and the Patient if he is a Person of
common Ingenuity, Gratitud^ and Honesty, will not grudge his Expenc^ of Time or
Money, in purchasing so efficacious Remedy.

The Third Nostrum I employ for the Cure of the Cholick, I call Pillulae
Anticolicae, or Anticholical Pills; They are compounded of the choicest
Ingredients in the whole Materia Medica, and require a long time and great Care
and Pains in their Preparation, the Mass being an Extract and no common
Composition, as will appear in their Operation, and the happy effects produced
by them. Now you having read in the foregoing Discourse, that in some Cases,
and especially when the Intestines are much contracted by Viscous Matter
contained in them, that Purging Medicines are not to be used; and that all
other Cases, for the Cure of the Cholick, strong Catharticks are absolutely
necessary; to avoid these extremes, I have chosen the Golden mean, and so
contrived my Anticholical Pills, by mixing attenuating and mol^ifying
Ingredients with Purgatives, that they will Work but gently, though very
effectually, in order to discuss or expel the Peccant Humors by degrees,
without offering Violence to Nature, by being over hasty in the Cure, and to
that end administering over powerful Purgatives, which rather weaken the
Patient, than mitigate his Pains, or diminish his Distemper. But my Pills are
Hermetically compounded, and at the same time both throw out the sharp
offen^ing Humors, corroborate the Stomach, fortify the Spirits, and strengthen
the whole Body against the future Invasion of the Disease, as the only safe and
easy way to a perfect Cure, which these Pills, taken according to the following
Directions, very seldom ^^^ve behind them.

Directions for taking the Pills.
They are to be taken, one pill late at Night, at the time of going to Rest,
every third or fourth Night, and if that Pill does not Work pretty early in the
Morning, take one or two Pills more every two Hours till they Operate gently,
but if it makes the Patient Sick in his Stomach, and does not Purge him, let
him Dissolve an Ounce of Epsom Salt, or six Drams of the Lenitive Electuary, in
a Pint of Water Gruel, or Mutton-Broath, and drink it Blood-warm, the Pills
will have the same effect, if they are forced to be purged off; Two, Three, or
Four Stools is sufficient for one time: Keep very warm, and drink nothing cold
that Day. After taking them, let the Sick drink large draughts of thin Chicken
Broth, Mutton Broth, or Water Gruel, or for want of them Posset Drink, to
dilute the sharp Humors, cast them out, or their Acrimony being taken off,
reduce them to a better Temper: Which you will soon find, if this Course is
duly repeated, as often as there is occasion, and when there is none, take no
more Pills, for I don't give them for Lucre of Money, but to answer the
Intention of Healing, for therein consists my Interest. These Pills are good
for the Scurvy, Pains in any part of the Body, King's Evil, corrupt Humors in
any Part of the Body, the Itch, Leprofie, Old Ulcers, Worms, Gravel, Stones and
in other Cases where Purging is necessary.

The Fourth Remedy.
Those Days wherein the Patient does not Purge, I give a Cordial Electuary,
which I call Electuarium Anticolica, or my Anticholical Electuary, which is the
Fourth Remedy for the Cure of this Disease, and which seldom fails, if the
Disease is Cureable, this Electuary being endued with such rare, uncommon and
well experienc^d Virtues, agreeable to the Dictates of Nature and Art, and so
significantly adapted to the Cure of the Cholick, in all its various kinds,
where purging is necessary or unnecessary and dangerous, that the Patient will
seldom be perfectly cured without it; because as I have found by repeated
Experience, that when all other Remedies prescribed by the best Hands have been
ineffectual, this Electuary has done the Work, by corroborating the Stomach,
correcting its vicious Fermentation, retrieving its depraved Appetite, and
restoring its almost lost Tone to a regular and sanative Crasis.

Directions for taking this Electuary.
This Electuary is sometimes also to be taken in the Morning on an empty
Stomach: Its Dose is about the quantity of a Nutmeg, fasting an Hour after it,
and again at Four or Five in the Afternoon, for 10, 15, 20, or 30 Days, when
you use no Purgatives. Eat what Diet is most nourishing and sits light upon the
Stomach, and abstain from nothing so much as Milk and Stale Beer. And now I
might be Very Copious, in the Commendation and Praise of these Four Remedies,
invented by, and I believe only known to my self, and are disposed of at no
Place, but my Dwelling House; but that Persons who know me not, may not think I
harangue to promote my own Profit in selling them, I shall wave it for the
present, and leave every Man that buys and uses them, to give them what
Character they Deserve. For when I have said all I can, Wise Men will not
regard what is said of them, but what Cures have been, and may be accomplished
by them. And from hence I proceed to Observations, and Examples of Persons
cured of the Cholick, by the regular use of my before named Remedies of which
its needless to give you great Numbers, though I am plentifully furnished with
them; because the Public bas almost Weekly notice of Persons cured by me in
Certificates under the Hands of my Patien^s, well attested, and Printed in the
Public News Papers.

Examples of Persons Cured.
A Gentlewoman of good Reputation, extremely afflicted with the Cholick for many
Years, after she had taken, as she thought, the best Advice that could be given
in London, was recommended to my Care for the Cure of her Cholick. I gave her
Antimonial Emeticks, Chalybeats, Catharticks and Alcalious Medicines, but
without any effect, she continuing still in a sad and deplorable Condition.
While she was empty, she had an abatement of her Pain; but she no sooner Eat,
but her Pains returned and continued till her Food was Digested. At the same
time when she labored under this Disease, she was often overwhelmed with
Vapors; often complained of Pain between her Shoulders and in other Parts, and
well she might; for considering the Situation of the Parts, I found that when
she was full, her Stomach pressed upon the Pancreas, which is a sort of a
Pillow to keep the Stomach from rubbing against the Vertebre's of the Back, and
soon after discovered, that the Pancreas and Pilorus were the Parts affected,
occasioned by the Acidity of the Pancreas and the Unctiousness of the Gall,
which had produced an Ulcer in the Pancreas, which with the Pylorus was full of
Matter, and when I had interchangeably given her my forenamed Arcana's, she
threw out at times upward and downward, a prodigious quantity of Pus, and then
administering proper Pacificks and Healers, she was perfectly cured, retired
into the Country, where she continues in Health to this Day.

This Gentlewoman being unwilling to have her Name published, I will not
disobtige her in doing it; and shall take this opportunity to satisfy the
Public, that I never Print any Person's Name without their leave, or a
Testimony under the Patient's Hand; but if any Person seems to doubt the truth
of it, his curiosity may be satisfied by her Brother, a Merchant, who was an
Eyewitness of the Cure, and dwells at Humberton, in the Parish of Hackney, in
Middlesex.

Grace, Wife of Thomas Hogs Weaver, dwelling in Church-street, in
Coverlet-street, next House to the Sign of the Lions, was troubled with the
Cholick six whole Years together, in which time she had the Advice of several
Physicians, but they doing her no good, at last she applied her self to me, and
I cured her out of mere Charity, who has since been so grateful, as to
recommend several other Patients to me, who were in better Circumstances in
regard of Wealth, who all as well as her self have ^een perfectly Cured by the
use of my aforenamed Medicines.

A Tradesman in the City of London, who had suffered intolerable Cholical
Pains, and had taken several Medicines from his own Physician and Apothecary
for a considerable time, was induced to apply himself to me, and I gave him
Ease immediately, and in a very short time after, perfectly cured him. Those
that doubt the truth of this matter, if they think sit to enquire of me, I
shall direct them to the Person himself that was Cured, who will readily attest
the Truth of what I have here asserted, to the Satisfaction of any Person, that
is not obliged by Interest to show himself Incredulous.

The Cholick in the Stomach.
Having now finished what I had to say of an Accidental Cholick, according to
the Method proposed, I am obliged to treat of the Cholick as complicated or
joined with other Diseases, and that which leads the Van, is the Stomachical
Chotick, and that very justly, because the Minera of all Chronical Diseases are
to be sought in the Stomach: And if the upper Orifice of it, which is of
exquisite Sense, by reason of the intermixture of Nerves, with which it is
plentifully furnished from the vaga sexta, Branches whereof being communicated
to the Heart, that noble part being affected, then the Disease is called in
Greek (...) vel (...), and in Latin Cardiacus dolor, the Pain of the Heart; but
if the lower Orifice called Pylorus be affected, it is called Dolor, seu Colica
Ventriculi, Pain, or the Cholick in the Stomach, more especially if it proceed
from Wind.

Causes of the Cholick in the Stomach.
The Internal Causes of this Disease, sometimes proceed from great Oppletion and
Pain of the Stomach, sometimes from frequent and violent Vomiting, which arises
from the Chyle there degenerated into a Mass of Corruption; but oftener from the
Morbifick Matter brought thither, either by the conveyance of the Blood, or
also of the Nervous Juice, and either deposed within the Cavity of the Stomach,
or fixed in the Plexus's of the Nerves, and in the Membranes appertaining to
it. Sometimes Worms gnawing the Tunicles of the Stomach cause this Disease, or
Wind lodged in the Cavity of the Stomach, which causes Swellings and painful
Distension, or from sharp Phlegm or Green and Black Choler; whose sharp Vapors
cause Pain, or from corrupt Matter from an Imposthume in the Liver, or the
Breast, Diseases of the Stomach, and Parts adjoining; ill Humors from the
whole Body as in Fevers, Choler from the Liver, Melancholy from the Spleen,
Salt Phlegm from the Head; all these may be the Causes of the Cholick in the
Stomach.

The External Causes of this Malady, may be corrupt Nourishment, Viands too Hot
that breed Wind or Choler: Meat taken in too large quantity, Poison, or strong
sharp and dangerous Medicines uncorrected.

Symptoms of the Cholick in the Stomach.
Diagnostick Signs, are, Pain in the Ensiformis, or lower part of the
Breast Bone, which signify that the upper Orifice of the Stomach is affected
with very sharp Pain, that will not suffer the Patient to take any Rest, and
sometimes cause an inveterate Headache, the Megrim, Vertigo and the Epilepsy. In
the other Parts of the Stomach the Symptoms are not so violent, but are truly
Cholical, and exactly resemble that Disease in its utmost Latitude.

Prognostic Symptoms are ominous, for this Disease is more danger^us than any
other Disease of the Stomach, and the Danger is greater if it is accompanied
with a Fever, for in such a case, according to Hippocrates, Death is at hand.
Its least dangerous if it proceeds from Worms; though even in that, sometimes
dangerous Symptoms appear and the Patient dies. In short, the Prognostics are
usually the Symptoms of Hypocondriack Illness; and if they happen upon the
recovery of a Disease, portends its relapse; if they come from Wind that cannot
be removed a Dry Dropsy follows. If they stink horribly, they are very
Malignant and Contagious.

Cure of a Cholick in the Stomach.
The method of Curing a Stomachical Cholick, if it be not grown Obstinate,
Inveterate, and beyond the Power of Medicines to give Relief, is by considering
the Cause of the Disease, to prescribe Medicines that are proper to remove it.

If Wind is the Cause, Carminative Clysters are exhibited, to discuss it and
moderate the violent Pains in the Stomach caused by it: And if the Wind be
accompanied with flushings in the Face and excessive Heat, Spirit of Nitre
dulcisied with Spirit of Wine, and impregnated with the Virtue of Carminative
Simples after Sylvius 's Method, is said to be an incomparable Remedy.
Inveterate acid Belchings are put off, by five or six Pepper Corns being taken
every Morning Fasting. If the Wind proceed from a thick, stubborn Mucilage,
Asthmatical Syrups, and Michael 's Elixir for the Stomach are very proper; to
which you may add Externally, Fomentations with Oil of Chamomel, and of the
Carminative Seeds: Or with a mixture of Aniseed-Water, Spirit of Wine
Camphorated and Treacle.

If a Viscous stinking, or otherwise offensive matter be cast up by Vomit, and
there be suspicion that the Cause lies in the Cavity of the Stomach, it is
proper to give a gentle Vomit, of Wine of Squills, or of Salt of Vitriol; or
the offending Humors may be purged off by Stool, by Stomachical Catharticks
adapted pro re nata. But if the Matter sticks deeply and firmly within the
Membranes, or foldings of the Nerves, Diaphoreticks or Specificks that moderate
the effervescencies of the Salts are more prevalent, and ought to be
administered at proper times, as the Physician employed shall find occasion: Not
forgetting, twice or thrice a Day to apply Fomentations to the Region of the
Stomach, with Woolen Cloths dipped in the warmed Liquid Medicine last above
named, and wrung forth; for that will much contribute to the abatement of the
Patient's griping, intolerable Pains.

In the next place it will be expected that here I should say something of a
Stomachical Cholick caused by Worms gnawing the Tunicles of the Stomach, but I
shall wholly omit it at present; because the next Physical Discourse I shall
publish, shall be a Treatise of the Worms, which I am now preparing for the
Press. In the mean time, if any Person, Young or Old, that is troubled with
them, and desires to be rid of those Vexations and dangerous Inmates, that
render Life so uneasy, if he please to come or send to me, he may be supplied
with Antivermetick Medicines of my own preparing, that will effectually Eject
those vile Inhabitants, under every denomination.

The Author's own Medicines.
But to return from this Digression, the Method I have shown in the general
practice of Physic, by the best Physicians of the present Age, in the
foregoing Paragraphs, is what I observe my self, though the Medicines I give are
entirely of my own Inventing, Compounding and Preparing, and the Efficacy
whereof I can rely upon for a Cure, (if curable) of this dangerous Disease; for
though in all Cholical Distempers my Elixir, Cholick-Water, Pills and Electuary,
will have their Turns, yet am I not unprovided of other Medicines to assist
effectually in the Cure, When the Cholick is complicated with other Diseases,
and consequently indigitates the use of others, as the Cholick varies in its
Name, Cause and Parts affected.

For these Reasons and because in Stomachical Cholicks, proceeding from Viscous
stinking Matter lodged in the Cavity of the Stomach, a Vomit seems absolutely
necessary, to dislodge the offending Humor; I am always provided of an Emetick
of such an universal Virtue, that it answers all the Intentions of Nature and
Art in Vomiting, and leaves no Relics for another Invasion behind it. Which
Medicine will never lose its Virtue, and consequently may be sent to the
remotest parts of the Universe, and private Families may keep it by them to use
when they have occasion.

Where the corrupted Matter in a Stomachical Cholick sticks firm and deep
within the Membranes or Foldings of the Nerves, and indigitates the use of
Diaphoreticks, or such Medicines as moderate the effervescencies of the Salts:
For those purposes I have a Mineral Remedy, which I exhibit sometimes in
Powder, other whiles in the form of an Electuary, and at other times in a
Decoction or Syrup, as they best agree with the Patient's Palate, which works
almost miraculously in this Disease, and so cleanse, purify and strengthen the
Stomach, and assist it in the Work of Fermentation, that it expels all noxious
humors whatever, and retains what conduces to a vigorous constitution and a
durable state of Health.

These great things I am sensible my numerous Enemies, which are chiefly
Persons of my own Profession, or such unthinking People as are prejudiced by
their malicious false stories, will call idle, vain Bosting, but those that
have experienced and tried my Medicines, will do m^ justice in a modester and
juster Character, and esteem my Remedies as Non-Pareils.

The Hysterical Cholick.
This Disease being commonly known by the tormenting Pains that always accompany
it, might reasonably save me the labor of giving, and my Reader the loss of
time in perusing them: However, in compliance with my Promise, I shall give him
one of the many Observations I have made, and Examples I am able to produce.

John Gregory Cabinet-Maker, in Philip-Lane, in the Parish of St. Alphage, near
London-Wall, being grieved with the Cholick in his Stomach, attended with
extraordinary Pain in the Ensiformis, or lower part of the Breast Bone; which
was sufficient reason to induce me to be of Opinion, that the upper Orifice of
the Stomach was affected; and giving him proper Medicines of my own, he no
sooner took them according to my Directions, but he found ease immediately, and
continuing the use of them a very short time, he was restored to his former
Health, and was able to follow his Business, which he was incapable of doing
for Five Months time, before he applied himself to me, though he had taken many
Medicines of others, without receiving any Benefit by them; but now enjoys
perfect Health, the only comfort of Life.

This Disease, called by the Greeks (...), and by the Latins Vteri Stangulatio
or Colica Hystericalis, the Histerical Cholick, or Fits of the Mother, is not
to be imputed to the Ascent or Rising of the Womb, according to the vulgar
expression: Nor to the Impetuous rushing of the Blood into the Lungs; for the
effect truly called Hysterical, is chiefly and primarily Convulsive, and
depends principally on the Brain and genus Nervosum being affected, and is
produced by the explosion of the Animal Spirits as are other Convulsive
Motions, and whatever disorder or irregularities happen else about the motion
of the Blood they are only Secondary and depend on the Convulsions of the
Viscera. Nor is this Disease only frequent, but so strangely various, that it
resembles almost all the Diseases poor Mortals are inclined to, and generally
ends in an Hemiplegy, a Palsy on one side, below the Head, which obstructs the
Animal Spirits in their passage, and is exactly like an Appoplexy; whereby
corpulent and old People are destroyed, because the Cortex of the Brain is
stopped by a super abundance of Phlegm. In the violent Convulsions that happen in
an Hysterical Cholick, Women seem to have the Falling Sickness, and sometimes
struggle so violently, that though at other times their Strength is but ordinary,
they can scarce be held by all the united Strength of those that are about them.

Pathognomick Symtoms.
The Symptoms of this Disease are various and manifold, and seldom agree in
diverse Women, or happen wholly in the same manner: The most common are,
Malignant Vapors, excessive stretching or tearing Pain under the short Ribs, a
motion in the lower part of the Belly, and an Ascent, as it were, of some round
thing there, falsely imputed to the Womb, then a Belching or straining to Vomit,
a distention of the Hypocondres, and a rumbling with a Belching forth of Wind,
an uneven and for the most part short Breath, a Suffocation in the Throat, a
Giddiness, an, inversion or rolling of the Eyes, often Laughing or Weeping or
Talking Idly; sometimes a speechlessness and Immobility, with an obscure or no
Pulse, and a Cadaverous Countenance. Women of all Ages and Conditions are
Obnoxious to this Disease, Rich and Poor, Virgins, Wives, Widows, and sometimes
those Symptoms appear in Girls before Puberty, and sometimes in Old Woman after
their Menses are ceased; and some learned Physicians tells us, that even Men
are sometimes troubled with such kind of Passions. But,

Though the Hysterical Cholick often rises from the Brain, yet sometimes it comes
by a Cause beginning either in the Womb, or in other parts or the Viscera, and
in whatever part it seats it self, it presently produces such Symptoms as
belong to it, and unless the Physician is very Skilful, he will be mistaken,
and think those Symptoms come from some Essential Distemper of this or that
Part, and not from an Hysteric Cholick; therefore the Symptoms are best taken
from the Part affected. But among all the Diagnostick Signs of an Hysterical
Cholick, this is most proper and almost inseparable, viz. an Urine as clear as
Rock-Water, which Hysterical Women evacuate most plentifully, and is in almost
all of them the Pathognomick Sign of this Disease, which we call H^sterical in
Women and Hypocondriacal in Men; and Women and Men seldom Recover, till the
Citron colored Urine returns to its Amber color.

Prognostic Symptoms.
If the Female Patient, is extraordinarily troubled with Cholick griping Pains
and incessant Vomitings, joined with strong Convulsive Fits, her Menses stopped,
undergoing violent Contractions and Convulsions, about the parts of the Mouth,
and Face, and Arms, and Legs, with a Pale, Wan Countenance and trembling as she
walks, and growing every Day worse than other, her Case is very Dangerous and
seldom or never admits of Cure: But if the Convulsions cease, by administering
proper Medicines, adapted to Cholick Pains and Fits of the Mother in
Conjunction; Vapors ascending from the Womb are expelled, and the Menses
orderly flow, they are hopeful Indications.

The Procatartick or External Causes of this complicated Disease, Causes of an
Hysterical Cholick.
are violent motions of the Body, or which is oftener and worse, violent
Perturbations of the Mind from some sudden assault, either of Anger or Grief,
or such like Passions, especially as I have said already, if Urine clear as
Crystal evacuated copiousl at some certain times, makes the Diagnostick more
manifest. But to these Disorders of the Mind, which are usually the Cause of
this Disease, Emptiness of the Stomach by reason of long Fasting, is to be
added, and immoderate Bleeding, a Vomit or Purge that has wrought too much. Now
having drawn the Picture of this Disease, according to its vulgar Phenomena; in
the next place, the Internal, Efficient Causes are to be considered, as well as
I can gather them from all the Circumstances joined together: And in my Opinion
this Disease that I call an H^sterical Cholick, proceeds from a stoppage of the
Menses, a confusion of the Animal Spirits, when too many of them, and contrary
to due proportion are violently burried upon this or that part, causing
Convulsions and Pains, when they rush upon Parts of Exquisite Sense; to which
the causes of a Simple Cholick being added, you have the true Causes of this
Disease.

The general method for the Cure of this Disease, is, first to give present
Ease in the Paroxisms, and then proceed to a Cure. To accomplish both these
Intentions, it is usual in the first place to apply stinking and strong smelling
things to the Nostrils, the Effluvia's of which, repress and reduce to order
the Spirits which are grown too Wild, and apt to make exorbitant efforts; nay,
and discuss their Heterogeneous combination, and often wholly exterminate it.
Assa Faetida, Castoreum, Galbanum, tied in a fine Cloth and held to the
Nostrils are proper; also Partridges Feathers, or old Shoes burnt, or Sulphur
kindled; also the Spirit and Oil of Soot and Hartshorn often give Ease; but
the chief Indication in this Disease, is to strengthen the Blood which is the
fountain of the Spirits; which being done, the invigorated Spirits can preserve
that order which is agreeable to the Economy of the whole Body, and the
particular Parts. And therefore when the Ataxy of the Spirits has vitiated the
Humors by long continuance, you must first lessen the Humors so corrupted, by
bleeding and Purging if the Patient has sufficient strength, before you
endeavor to invigo^ate the Blood; and which indeed you can scarce do, whilst a
faeculent heap of Humors lie in the way.

If there be room for a Vomit, you must always begin with that, especially in
Cacoch^mical Persons in whom a mighty load of Viscous Phlegm sticking to the
Folds and Coats of the Stomach, hinders the Virtues of other Medicines. In a
few Days after the Vomit, unless somewhat indicates the contrary; in Women of a
Hot Temperament open a Vein in the Arm presently, or afterward if need be take
Blood from the Foot, or the Fundament by Leeches, and after these Evacuations
duly performed: always provided they be indicated, let a Purge be given three
or four Mornings after. Then to strengthen the Blood, and consequently support
the Spirits, let Chalybeates be exhibited to raise a Volatile Ferment in the
Vapid and Languid Blood, that the Spirits may be roused, which before were
pressed down by their own Weight. These Directions I think sufficient, without
prescribing particular Medicines or their Doses, for he that does not
understand what Medicines are proper, in every Disease, the quantity to be
given, and the manner How, and the time When, is unfit to practice Physic; and
for those who do not pretend to that Skill, they may have experimented
Medicines of me in most Diseases, if they either please to come themselves, or
send their Cases in Writing, or by an Intelligent Messenger.

For the Hysterical Cholick, I have such excellent and effectual Remedies, the
knowledge and use where of God and Nature has freely bestowed on me, and daily
produce such wonderful Effects by their own Native Goodness and Efficacy, that
I should be wanting in my gratitude to God, unjust to my self and injurious to
the Diseased part of Mankind, not to make them known to the inquisitive World,
since I don't pretend to a multiplicity of Medicines, or to more Art than
others of my own Profession, tho I take more care than some others of my my own
Profession do in preparing them and in possessing my self of such Medicines as
are fit, not to palliate, but to cure Diseases, speedily, safely and
thoroughly. Among which in the Cure of this Disease and Vapors which attend
it, I have a particular Secret that has been experienced to excel all others,
that I have either heard, or read of, in the whole Republic of Physic; as I
can prove by abundance of Instances, though I give here but a few.

Frances Mash, dwelling next House to the Sign of the Three Travelers in
Kent-street, Southwark, being so violently afflicted with a Hysteric Cholick,
that it was thought it would have been her Death; upon taking my Remedies,
which I freely gave her, because she was but in mean Circumstances, she was
perfectly recovered of her Distemper, and desired it might be published for the
good of all People, who suffer under the same Disease.

Mrs. Poulter, dwelling at Mr. Jackson's a Brick-Layer, in Mercer s-street,
next Door to the Sign of the Angel in Long-Acre, in the Parish of St. Martin's
in the Fields, being sore grieved with a Cholick and Vapors, insomuch that her
painful Fits continued several Nights together, to that degree that he^ Life
was despaired of by all that visited her being thought past recovery; but
applyin^ her self to me, and God giving a Ble^sin^ to my Medicines, she was
perfectly c^^ed and continues in as good Health as ever she enjoyed in her
whole Life, though she has no^ taken any Medicines for Eight or Te^ Months last
past.

A Gentlewoman of good Reputation, is, for the Public good, ready and willing
to attest the Truth of Two remarkable and e^traordinary Cures, performed by
taking m^ Medicines; one, upon her Father, who w^^ severely afflicted with the
Cholick arising from Hypocondriack Effects, which is the same Disease in Men as
Hysterical are in Women, an^ the other on her Daughter, which was purely
Cholical the Stone, and Hysterical, whos^ Cases were both thought very
dangerous, b^ some eminently Learned Physicians, wh^ attempted their Cure, but
without Success who afterward following my Directions i^ taking my Remedies,
had the benefit of a^ absolute Cure. If any Persons desire it, (...) shall
direct them to the Gentlewoman's Habitation, who will satisfy them of the Trut^
of what is above asserted.

Mary Wats, dwelling in Noble-street, nea^ Goldsmiths-Hall, being seized with
the Ston^ and an Hysteric Cholick, which kept her almos^ in continued Pains,
at times for Ten Year^ together, and was thought by her self and others
incurable, by giving her my Medicines appropriated to that Distemper, she had
Relief and an absolute Cure.

And since Experience shows, that stoppage of the Menses, or suppression of the
Courses, is one of the Causes of a Hysteric Cholick; I cannot here forbear to
acquaint the World, that I am possessed of a Powder, of a long, Curious and
Chargeable Preparation, which never fails to Cure that Distemper, whether in
Women, caused by the Veins of the Matrix being obstructed, so that the
superfluous Blood which nature ordain^d to be evacuated that way, having not a
free Passage, returns to the greater Vessels, and is circulated with be whole
Mass of Blood and Humors, by which they are in time vitiated, to the great
prejudice of the Woman's Health, in being the Original Causes of several other
Diseases as well as the Hysteric Cholick. Or if these Obstructions happen to
Virgins, and then is called the Green Sickness, the White-Fever and the White
Jaundice, because the native color in such Persons is very Pale; yet a few
Grains of this Powder taken according to my Directions, will infallibly cure
all those Diseases, as all that try it will happily Experience: And for
cleansing the Womb, and furthering Conception in Barren Women, there is not the
like Medicine (I believe) in the World.

The Scorbutic Cholick.
Colica Scorbuticus, or the Scorbutic Cholick. There Is a sort of Cachexy
reigning in our Northern Clymats, whose Symptoms chiefly appearing in the
Hypochondria, is called the Hypocondriack Evil, and when its Symptoms are very
fierce and exalted, it is named the Scurvy: An Apellation given it by the Saxons
in North Germany, who are generally afflicted with it. It Is a busy,
intermedling, encroaching Disease, that now mingles almost with all Chronical
Distempers, and passes inconceivably into all parts of the Body; which caused
Helmant to say of complicated Effects, that per ignorata seminaria, and initia
invisibilia, by unknown Seminaries, and in visible Beginnings, which is
certainly true, for in these latter times new Diseases have started up, which
were unknown to the Ancients; because they have put on other strange Symptoms
and Properties, Quibus larvati incedunt, with which they walk disguised and
deceive such Physicians, as think to Cure Diseases by following the Directions
and Precepts of the Ancients, who knew little or nothing of the unaccountable
Mixtures, Complications and Disguises, which we daily see; and yet some are so
sottish to confine themselves to such superannuated exploded Definitions,
Notions and Medicines as they have left us, who practiced when Diseases were
but few, more single, calm and gentle, and more tractable and curable than at
this Day, when its rare to sind an uncomplicated Disease, in which the Blood
and other Humors are not vitiated, by being unhappily mixed with other unseen
Maladies.

Now because the Scurvy is a lurking Disease, and consumes the Patient by
insensible or slow degrees, and its direful effects are never so much perceived
or felt, as when it intermixes it self with other Diseases, so its seldom
regarded as the principal Offender, but the the Disease is chiefly attributed
to the Concommitant Distemper that causes Pain. So it often happens, that a
continued latent Scurvy is little observed, but when its joined with the
Cholick that causes griping tormenting Pains, the Disease is called a Cholick,
and Remedies used accordingly without Success, because the Scurvy was
neglected, though scarce any effect requires a more speedy Physical help, than
the Cholick and Gripes of the Besly occasioned by the Scurvy, which makes them
more violent, and of longer continuance, by obstinately resisting the Methods
of Cure.

In the Symptoms of the Scorbutic Cholick, Symptoms of the Scorbutic Cholick.
I shall be very brief, having been very large on that Head in the foregoing
Cholicks.

The usual Signs are, high colored Urine or precipitating a Red Sandy Flesh
colored Sediment, or fastens red friable Sand upon the sides of the Urinal.
Continual Pain of the Head, Palpitation of the Heart, puffing up of the
Stomach, loathing, Vomiting, Belching, Hiccough, Cough, Tumors and Putrefaction
of the Gums with much Spitting; Looseness and blackness of the Teeth, (for the
Cure of which I have a Dentefrice which makes the Teeth as White as Ivory,) the
Breath stinks, and is sometimes fetched with great difficulty, and is seldom
free from terrible Pains of the Cholick, and trembling and looseness of the
Joints and Limbs, with Laziness and often Faint Sweats; there is also sometimes
Malignant Ulcers, dry hard Tubercles, Erisipelas, and Oedematous Tumors, with
many others, which to enumerate, were to comprehend an universal Genus of Atoms
within a very narrow Limitation.

This Disease is very hard to cure, where the Scorbutic Humor is obdurate and
predominant, and when the Cure has been too long delayed, or not treated as a
complicated Disease, many times it is very Dangerous, the Pains of the Cholick
may run into an incurable Iliack Passion, and its sullen Companion, may bring a
Dropsy, a Consumption, or other Mortal Chronical Distempers, and sometimes
Acute Diseases, as the Appoplexy Swooning, or the like; which produce sudden
Death.

Causes of a Scorbutic Cholick.
The Immediate causes of this Disease, is, a volatile Acid, that irritates the
Nerves and Membranes, sharpens the Lympha, debauches the innate Spirits of the
Parts, and perverts the equal temperature of the Blood. The Remote Causes, are,
Sea Air impregnated with Salin, Acid Vapors, Salt and Viscous Food, Laziness,
Weakness of Digestion, Infection, a Hereditary Conveyance, and the influence of
Chronical Diseases. If the Disease is recent it admits of Cure. If inveterate,
it requires a continued use of proper Medicines for a long space of time.

Cure of a Scorbutic Cholick.
The Cure of a Scorbutic Cholick, consists, in correcting and evacuating the
Crudities of the first Passages, fortifying the Stomach, retrieving the due
Crasis of the Blood, restoring all wonted Evacuations to their former Course,
and to appease excruciating Pains. In order then to compass these Ends, and
Cure this stubborn and rebellious Disease, the Sick must observe a good Diet,
without which Physical means will profit but little: And here, because in the
first place there will be a necessity (if possible) to give Ease in the Fit by
Opiates, let them always be accompanied by Antiscorbutick Specificks, of which
may be prepared diversity of good Medicines, both Chemical and Galenical. The
Volatile Salts both of Animals and Vegitables are excellent to open all
Obstructions, and Temper the Humors; also, Elixir Proprietatis, the Spirit of
Sal Armoniack, the Spirit of Nitre, and of Salt Dulcified, Salt of Steel,
Wormwood and Tartar, Oil of Juniper, Cloves and Cinnamon, are all Antiscorbutick
Specificks.

Next in order are gentle Laxitives, especially in Hot Constitutions; such are
Pills of Armoniacum, or those of Tartar mixed with sweet Mercury, to prevent or
take away Costiveness. Resinous Purgatives are to be avoided, as beings endowed
with an Astringent Quality. Raisins, Prunes, Tamarinds, and Ripe sweet Apples,
or their expressed Juice are of considerable Efficacy in this Case; but Sugar
and other sweet things ought to be carefully avoided. Rhubarb or Cream of
Tartar, sharpened with Powder of Jalap, are proper for such as are of a Moist
Juicy Constitution.

The Patient's Body being thus prepared, you ought to proceed to Alteratives,
such are Steel and all fixed Salts, or whatever subdues an Acid. To which join
Aperient, Diuretics and bitter Stomachical Aromaticks, or the Spirituous
Volatile Salts, Mynsichts Arcanum Duplicatum, is of excellent use, especially
when the Sick is troubled with Flushings and sudden Inflammations. Elixir
Proprietatis prepared with an Acid and mixed with the Spirit of Scurvigrass,
and that of Sal Ammoniac is also proper. The Tincture of Tartar mixed with the
Spirit of Sal-Armoniack, and given by degrees to Forty Drops, is a celebrated
Medicine. And as you find occasion, Fomentations, Ligatures, Ventoses,
Sternutatories, etc. are of use.

I have been long you see in discoursing the Cure of the Scorbutic Cholick,
according to the general Method of Practice, because its a stubborn Disease,
and too often of long continuance: Occasioned by this Disease, being, as it
were, an odd and new kind of Distemper, not reducible to the old Class of
Cholicks. Secondly being not considered in its various Mixtures, Complications
and Disguises, which requires other sorts of Medicines to cure it, than are
commonly prescribed. Thirdly by Practioners being confounded by variety of
Medicines directed by Authors, who seeing one Medicine fail, run to another,
and so from Medicine to Medicine in an endless Circuit, till they have either
destroyed or nauseated their Patients, as well as crammed their Chamber-Windows
and Tables, with Galipots, Glasses, Boxes and Papers, whose Contents, instead
of expelling noxious Humors, had no other effect than draining the Patient's
Purse to enrich an unexperienced, unskilful Physician.

Now these Evils, almost grown a common Nuisance to the Public, as well as a
Reproach to Physicians, are remedied, by those few Men, of which number, I
profess my self to be One, that make Art follow Nature, rather than strain
Nature and her Anomalies to general Rules of Art, and who seeing Nature
degenerated into Extravagancies and complicated Diseases, unknown to the
Ancients, endeavor to find out Experienced ways to deal with her, however
various and disguised, and by red cing a whole Apothecary's Shop into a few
well studied and often Experienced Medicines; such Men though falsely called
Empericks, will be Masters in the Art of Physic since they can truly say with
Ovid Remed. Am. l. 2.

Et quoniam vaniant Morbi, variabimus Arts Mill Mali species, Mill salutis
erunt.

Because Diseases mix and vary, therefore we
Do vary Arts of Cure; and though there be
A Thousand sorts of strange Distempers steal
On us, we have most certain ways to heal.
This being the main and honest design of Practicing, it will be no strange
thing to believe, that I being bred an Apothecary and having seen the
ineffectual Prescription and multiplicity of Medicines used by other Men, and
dedicating my Life to the Service of Mankind, in the Knowledge and Practice of
Physic, that I should by Conversation, much reading of the best Authors,
Foreign and Domestic, and by almost a Twenty Years Practice, be able to
shorten the number of Medicines and contract them into a few; but so
efficacious in their Nature and Effects, as render them effectual in most
Diseases, and such I assure you I have for the Cure of this Contumacious
Disease, the Scorbutic Cholick; of which I could give you numerous Examples of
Persons cured by them, as well as in these few, that follow, who have given me
leave to make use of their Names, and Places of Abode: Of which I see I must be
more sparing for the future, because the Book begins to swell into a larger
Volume than I first intended.

Elizabeth the late Wife of Robert Miles, Tobacconist, in Lamb-Alley, in
Abchurch-Lane, was for some Years troubled with a Complication of Diseases,
viz. the Scorbutic Cholick, Rheumatism, Sciatica, Palsy, Gravil in the
Kidneys, and very troublesome Vapors, living in so miserable a Condition, that
she was left off by several Practioners as Incureable, and thought to be even
at the very Brink of the Grave; but being committed to my Gare, through the
blessing of God upon the use of my Medicines, I cured her of her complicated
Distempers to that Degree, that she comfortably attends her daily Affairs, and
enjoys a better state of Health that she had done for Six Years last past. The
truth whereof she is ready and willing to attest upon Oath before a Magistrate,
as she has done to me in a Certificate under her Hand.

Mr. William Bagley, Cloth-Worker, i^ Miles's- Alley, in Petticoat-Lane, was
afflicte^ with a Rhuematism, complicated with Scorbutic Cholick Pains, for
Four Years successively at Spring and Fall; a lameness in hi^ Hands and Feet,
with large Knobs and Swellings, was cured by the use of my Medicines, and has
continued in firm Health without any Symptoms of a Relaps, or the return of
Pain for a long space of time, as h^ will satisfy any Person that enquires
(...) him.

William West Senior, Waterman, dwellin^ near St. Savior's- Mill-Stairs, in
Southwar^ was violently afflicted with a Scorbutic Cholick, joined with
Nephritick Pains, vulgarl^ called the Stone Cholick, and receiving (...) help
from others, addressed himself to m^^ and I at a small charge, and in little
tim^ cased him of his terrible griping Pains, ar^ brought away Three large
Stones. In gratitude for which Cure, he recommended several of his Neighbors
to me, who were troubled with the like Disease, who all, as well as himself
were cured, to their great satisfaction.

The Iliack Passion.
I his Disease called in Greek (...) in Latin Iliaca Passio, from the Gut Ileon,
which is chiefly affected in this Distemper, is a Cholick in excess, an extreme
Costiveness, pain about the Navel, rising from the inverted Peristaltick motion
of the Guts, disgorging the Excrements upward; for the Fibers of the Guts which
ought to be contracted from ^^e Superior toward the Inferior, are drawn to the
Superior; so whatsoever is contained in the Guts is Vomited up, and Clysters
how sharp so ever become Vomitive: Purges also taken by the Mouth are cast up
by Vomit; and I am of Opinion, that the exquisite and intolerable Pain coming
upon this Disease, is only occasioned by the aforesaid Preposterous motions of
the Guts; for as those Folds which the many Circumvolutions of the Guts make,
are so formed by Nature, that they should most aptly conduce to the carrying,
down of the Feces; when they are forced to give way to a motion contrary to
their Fibers, the aforesaid Pain is occasioned from thence, which is fixed to
one Part, and is like the boaring of an Augur, when either the value, which is
seated at the beginning of the Colon, hinders the going back of the Excrements
to the Ilium, or any other Membrane belonging to the Sinus, sustains alone the
force of this Peristaltick motion.

Symptoms of an Iliack Passion.
The Signs of an approaching Iliack Passion, are, extreme Costiveness,
retraction of the Anus, a Loathing, Vomiting and intolerable Pains in the
small Guts; and if a Hiccough follow it, threatens Death. If the Anus is much
drawn back, so that a Clyster-Pipe cannot enter it, it is a sign that the gross
Intestiness are affected. If otherwise the small Guts are touched. If the
greatest Pain possesses the Epigastrium, the Ilium is most oppressed. A
shooting burning Pain in one particular part of the Body, a Lipyria Fever. If
the Pain ceasing is attended by cold Sweats, difficult Respiration, Swoonings,
and sometimes Convulsions, it is a Sign of a Gangrene, caused by the corrugation
of the Guts, mistaken by some for a twisting of 'em round one another, a thing
inconsistent with their Ligation to the Mesentery. In fine, the common Symptoms
of an Iliack Passion, are hardness of the Belly, suppression of the Urine,
Loathing, Vomiting, first the contents of the Stomach, and next the Excrements,
a stinking habit of Body, frequent Swoonings, insufferable griping Pains in the
Guts, a prodigious Anxiety, and sometimes Vomiting of Clysters.

Prognostic Signs.
In the Prognostics of an Iliack Passion, ^nflamations or Gangreenes are
Mortal. If the upper Gut descend in the lower it is a fatal Symptom. If the
lower ascend into the higher, it is curable. If the Disease proceed from a
Rupture or hardened Excrements, it is not desperate. If Sleep succeeds the
taking of Opiates, it is a hopeful Indication. Deafness or Dotings are
pernicious consequences. If the Sweat, Breath, and Belching stink very much,
Death is about to put an End to the Patient's Misery.

Causes of the Iliack Passion.
The Cause of an Ileos, or Iliaca Passio, is a excrementitious Viscous Matter,
adhering to the Gut Ileo, which in time is coagulated into a very hard
substance, almost in the Form of Bullets, whence all the passage for Excrements
by siege is stopped, and anon their regress and ascent to the Stomach follows,
with a miserable Vomiting of them up.

The Rupture of the Peritoneum may cause this grievous Disease, especially if
it be so great, that not only the small Guts but the great ones also, fall
through the lacerated Orifice, and renders them incapable of being reduced or
put back through the same Hole; so that a hard and unsupportable Tumor follows,
which hinders the Reflux of Blood, and causes an Inflammation, and consequently
a Gangrene in the Guts, attended with a violent Vomiting of the Excrements and
a speedy summons to the Grave.

But we may chiefly assign a twofold Cause of this Inversion, from whence the
Pain arises, and they are Obstruction and Irritation; for whatever violently
obstructs the Intestines, so that nothing can pass downwards, necessarily
occasions this contrary Motion in them, as hardened Excrements, gross Wind
collected in great quantity, etc. Irritation proceeds from sharp and Malignant
Humors cast upon the Stomach and Guts that are next to it, by the excessive
raging of the Blood, by reason of a late Fever begun, whereby the motion of the
Stomach is first Inverted, and violently forced to cast up what is contained in
it; at length the small Guts that are joined to the Stomach being weakened,
yield to the violent Motion of it, and with them at last the greater follow by
consent; the Stomach Vomiting beginning the fatal Tragedy: And this may be
truly called the Iliack Passion.

The cure of this Disease, consists in removing the Irritation, and retrieving
the Natural Motion of the Guts, to that end if the Excrements are hardened they
ought to be softened by the speedy exhibition of Clysters, before they are
hardened beyond Relief. All Purgatives are improper, till the Pain in the Guts
and Stomach are quieted, and restored to their Natural Motion, which you may
know, by a large quantity of Humors being voided downwards by the help of
Nature or Art. Opiates are very hurtful in case of a Gangrene and in that of
Obstructions, till the Belly is well opened; but if the Disease proceed from
violent Irritations, attended by continual vomiting, Opiates may be mixed with
Stomachical Medicines while the Patient is strong: Always remembering, that
whatever you use in the Cure of this Disease, whether outwardly or inwardly,
must be Warm, both in the Fit, and when the Patient is on the mending hand.

If the Small Guts only are inverted, give Emollient Clysters, quickened with
Sal Gem, or the Infusion of Crocus Metallorum, or those of the Carminative
Seeds boiled in Child's Urine and Water: But if the great ones are also
Inverted, that sort of Clysters are noxious, and you must seek help from
temperate, Laxative, lubrical Potions; such as the Decoction of Emollient Herbs
in Broth, mixed with Oil of Sweet Almonds newly drawn.

When all other Medicines want Success, some Men give Leaden Bullets, and boast
of the use of Quicksilver, which I have seldom known to have done much good,
but often prove injurious, especially in an Inflammation, Rupture, Gangrene, or
falling of the upper Gut into the lower; therefore if any Practitioner thinks
himself under a necessity of using Quicksilver, which is prefered before
Bullets, let him be sure to prepare his Patient's Body before he gives it, with
lubric al Medicines, such as Oil of Sweet Almonds new drawn, or Sperma Caeti:
Then exhibit Three, Four, and sometimes Eight Ounces of purified Quicksilver,
together with Oil of Sweet Almonds and Mint Water; and if it does not answer
his Intentions at first, let it be frequently repeated, and the mean while
inject Emollient Clysters, foment the Belly with softning Decoctions; or set
the Sick into a proper Bath. If the Mercury does not force its way out of the
Body, give sharp Clysters, and anoint the Belly with Oil of Coloquintida to
soften the Excrements. If the Quicksilver offend the Mouth, Throat and Gums,
check its virulence with a Gargarism of Honey of Roses, and Syrup of Violets;
and if the Mercury is successful in opening the Body, remember to exhibit the
Lunar Bezoar and Diaphoretick Antimony, to expel the remains of the Mercury;
for though Mercury given by an Intelligent Person is an Excellent Medicine, yet
it always does Mischief, if any of it stays too long in the Body.

These are the usual Methods for discovering the Cause and curing this Disease,
which I publish in this succinct way; First, to assist those that want greater
Light; Secondly to show, that I am thoroughly instructed in the Knowledge of
Physic; and, Thirdly, to silence Malicious Back-biters, who for want of
business, make it part of their employment, to represent me in their ow^ Class
of Ignoramus's which this Treatise, a^^ the rest that are to follow it, will
plainly confute, in the Opinion of all Men of Sense, Generosity and Learning.

In my own Practice for the Cure of this Disease, when it evidently appears by
the Symptoms abovenamed, and by Vomiting up Clysters, that its a true Iliack
Passion, I apply my self to give the Patient some Ease, if it be possible; for
let others say what they please, he that can do that has half conquered the
Disease, for then Nature will assist in removing the Cause, by being enabled to
sustain the Force of Medicines proper to soften the Excrements, and after to
expel them by Siege: And to this end, I give my Elixir in small Doses, repeat
them often, and enlarge the number of Drops every time they are given, and I
never found them unsuccessful; their Virtue being to invigorate the Sick by
giving him a relaxation from his Pain, Mollifying the offending Matter, and by
that means preparing and smoothing the way for my Pills to drive it out by
gentle degrees; for this Disease will endure no rough and violent Treatment.

Here I cannot, according to Custom, give Examples of Persons Cured by the use
of my Two abovenamed Remedies; (one I cured sometime since, but am not
permitted to make use of her Name,) for though, blessed be God, I have never
wanted Success, yet I could not prevail with the Patients I have Cured, to give
me leave to Name them, and so the Credit of my Medicines in this Case, can have
no other Vouchers but my own Word and Reputation, which I value my self more
upon than Ten Thousand Testimonials.

The Caeliack Cholick.
Called in Greek (...), in Latin Caeliaca Passio, the Caeliack Passion, or
Caeliack Cholick, is a Looseness of the Belly, when the Meat comes forth crude
and imperfectly digested; which some say is not to be refered to the Concoction
only being hurt, but to the debility of the Retentive Faculty, the Food being
not long enough retained to be Concocted; by which it appears, say they, that
the Disease proceeds from a fault in the Stomach as well as in the Guts: But
the Learned Etmullerus, says, it is a Flux of the Belly, by which the Chyle is
voided together with Excrements, the Stomach being in no fault, because
Chylification is duly performed there; therefore the blame, says he, must
either be laid on the Bile, that is stopped in its Passage to the Guts, or by
degenerating from its Saline Acrimony, and consequently is unfit to separate
the Chyle: Or else on the Lacteal Vessels through which the Chyle ought to
pass, their Orifices being covered With Slime, or shut by the Contraction, or
Corrosion of the Intestines occasioned by Fluxes.

Symptoms of a Caeliaca.
The Symptoms of this Disease, are, extraor^inary, Pains both in the upper and
lower Region of the Belly, not unattended with Pain in the Back and Limbs; for
all complicated Diseases, generally affect all the Neighboring Parts, as well
as the Place where they are more particularly and chiefly seated; and that you
may have a true notion of this Maladay, observe, that if the Bile is defective,
the Excrements are White, or very Pale; without any sign of separation. If the
obstruction of the Lacteal Veins cause the Disease, the Excrements are
Yellowish, and the Chyle, though voided at the same time with them, is but
loosely mixed with them, as being separated in the Guts, but disappointed in
its Passage.

Causes of a Coaliack Cholick.
The Causes of this Distemper, are generally ranked under Three Heads, which
will comprehend all the differing Opinions about it. The First is a Cold
Distemper of the Stomach and Liver, which generate Phlegmatic and Glutinous
Humors, which cover the Wrincles of the Stomach that it cannot retain the
Food: Though Retention be made by the Astringing Quality, yet it operates by fit
Instruments, viz. the rawness of the Inward Coat of the Stomach; which rawness
being taken away, and the Wrincles filled by the Humors aforesaid, the
Retention is damnified, and the Food Slips away without Concoction.

The Second Cause assigned by others, is, violent sharp Humors, that prick,
twinge, and irritate the Parts, by which the Stomach and Guts are provoked to
send out the Meat too soon.

The Third, and which I take to be the true Cause of the Caeliack Cholick, is,
the Obstruction of the Mesenteraick Veins which hinder the passage of the Chyle
to the Liver, or the Obstruction of the Glandules of the Mesentery, and
therefore must of necessity be ejected by the Belly. If this: Disease is of
long continuance it is very dangerous, because Nature is deprived of her
Nourishment, and the Weak Body is liable to the Insults of all Diseases.

Now, since the Disease called (...), a Lientary, is also a Flux of the Belly,
in which the Food is quickly thrown out of the Body undigested; and differs
only from a Caeliack Cholick in degrees, and that their Cures are the same; I
shall omit treating particularly on that Head, and refer the Reader to what
follows.

Cure of the Caelick Cholick.
The Curatory Indication of the Caeliack Choliack, is, to remove the Morbisick
Cause, and strengthen the Stomach, which kind of Method being seasonably begun,
and duly prosecuted often does the whole Work; for the Cause of the Disease or
the Root of it being cut off, the Effects depending on it, die of their own
accord. Therefore if the Bile is sluggish, or stopped in its Passage, means
must be used to make it more Active, to correct the Acid and Austure Ferment
proceeding from the Stomach and Intestines, to retrieve the Natual Texture and
distribution of the Bile and to promote the Separation of the Heterogenious
Particles. If the Lacteal or Milky Vessels are shut up, endeavor to remove the
Slime that choaks them, by attenuating, opening Ingredients, Astringents are
improper. Let the Peccant humors be purged: After which the Tincture of
Tartar, or of the Dross of Regules of Antimony, or Chalybeate Tinctures, mixed
with the Spirit of Sal Armoniaci, are very convenient to strengthen the Stomach
by procuring an Appetite. Amatus Lusitanus highly commends the following
Prescription. Conserve of Roses six Ounces, Venice Treacle six Drams, and Syrup
of Quinces a sufficient quantity to make an Opiate: Halt an Ounce of which must
be taken in the Morning, fasting an Hour after it.

For the Use and Benefit of my own Patients, I have stated and well experienced
Medicines for the Cure of this Disease, (...) which I could give numerous
Examples, though I only prodnce Two.

Experience guides my Practice; others may do,
What their Inclinations prompt them to.
Mrs. Anne Percival, of Russel Street Bloomsbury, was for several Years grieved
with a Caeliack Cholick at certain Times and Seasons only, but about Three
Months since, she was seized with it in so violent and terrible a manner, that
her Life was despaired of: And having by the Advice of some able Physicians,
taken diverse Medicines, without receiving any Benefit by them; at length
hearing of my great success in curing the Cholick, of what kind soever; she
came to me, who through the Divine Blessing, and the use of my Medicines, was
cured in a short Time. And that others who suffer the like cruel Pains, and
languish under that Disease, might also find Relief, gave me Authority under
her Hand writing, to publish her Name and Cure. And if any Person desires
further Satisfaction in this matter, if they please to enquire at her Brother's
House, Mr. Percival in Benbridge-street, in the Parish of St. Giles's in the
Fields, this Fact will be attested by Word of Mouth.

Samuel Maynard, dwelling in Lydes Court near St. Giles's Church, being sorely
afflicted with the Cholick, and Rheumatism, the Sciatica, and excessive Pains
in his Back and Limbs, insomuch that he was incapable of following his
Employment, was happily cured by my Advice and taking my Remedies, in a very
short time, and now is able to follow his Business as formerly. This Example I
insert, as I could do many others, to show what a concatenation of Diseases and
different sorts of Pains and in many Places do often accompany this Disease, as
will further appear in the next Instance.

A sufficient and reputable Tradesman's Wise, in the City of London, was
unspeakably troubled with Vapors, originally proceeding from this Disease,
which run her into Distraction; and after much Advice and taking many Medicines
from other Physicians, to no purpose, her Husband sent for me, and by Heaven s
Blessing, my particular Care, and the seasonable Use of my Medicines, she was
restored to her Senses, perfectly recovered, freed from her Vapors, and so
continues. So that you see violent Pains of the Head, Giddiness and Frenzies,
are concomitants in a Caeliack Cholick. I will direct any modest Enquirer, how,
and where, they may be satisfied of the truth of this remarkable Instance from
the Gentlewomans own Mouth.

The Choleric Cholick.
This Disease named in Greek (...) and in Latin Cholerica Passio, is a Grier, in
which the Vicious Humors are impetuously thrown out both by Vomit and Stool,
with a violent Pain in the Stomach and Belly, Distension of the Hypocondria,
Heartburnings, Thirst, Perplexity of the Breast, a swift and sometimes Small
Pulse, frequent Swoonings, a coldness in the outward Parts, Prostration of
Strength, and at last Convulsions and Hiccoughs. This Disease, some say, is a
Symptom of the Expulsive Faculty being hurt by uncocted Meats, and if the
Retentive Faculty is also in fault, the Distemper is so much the worse and more
violent.

Immediate Causes of a Choleric Cholick.
Some make two sorts of this Disease, a Wet and a Dry, and from hence came the
vulgar Distinction of Moist and Dry Gripes. A Moist is what I am discoursing.
The Dry is more rarely found, proceeds from a Windy Spirit, produced in the
Stomach, by the fiery Heat of the part corrupting the Meat, or by Meats Rank
and Windy, as Hipocrates himself affirms. Senuertus from the Hermetical
Doctrine, adds another cause, namely, Salt and adust Humors in the
H^pochondria, which grow Hot by the mixture of another Humor, and demonstrates
it, by the mixing Aqua Fortis and Oil of Vitriol with Salt of Tartar, which
produce very flatuous Spirits: So that according to these Authors, the
Immediate Causes of this Disease, are, Choleric, Burnt, Sharp, Salt or Rotten
Humors of the Stomach, Bowels, Spleen and Mesentery; or some Nourishment of a
pernicious Quality, or some strong Medicine or Poison, taken uncorrected.

O^^asional Causes.
The Occasional Causes of a Choleric Cholick, are the same with those of a
Looseness. The Corruption and Acrimony of Food in the Stomach, the assumption
of Sharp, Costick Medicines, such as Antimony, Arsenick, Mercury, etc.

If the Excrements are Livid, Faetid, Black, or Corrosive; if it accompany
Malignant Fevers, especially in the Beginning, and if the Stomach is much
disordered, it generally proves fatal. It Is an Acute Disease, and quickly
finishes its Course. It observes a Tertian Period in its Exasperations, and
frequently relapses after an apparent Cure.

Symptoms.
The Signs preceding this Disease, are, frequent and plentiful Evacuations of
Choleric, sharp and corrupted Humors, upward and downward, swelling with
Wind, Thirst, and gnawing Pains in the Stomach and Guts: A Loathing, which a
little appeased with cold Drink, which is soon after cast up. The Pulse high
and unequal, Sweating, with Convulsion of the extreme Parts and Swooning, are
dangerous Symptoms. It Is easily discovered whether the Disease came by some
violent Medicine, Poison, or offensive Diet.

The Internal Causes are known by the Quality of the Humors that are ejected.
If there be continual Loathing and Gnawing, the Disease is in the Stomach. If a
Malignant Fever is joined, it is in the Veins. If it has its Original from some
ill Diet, there is Hopes, that when the peccant Matter is cast out, the Disease
will end. If its very violent, it is dangerous, for the greater the Convulsions,
Swoonings, and Coldness of the extreme Parts are, the nearer Death is at Hand.

In the Beginning of the Cure, you ought to assist Evacuations with gentle,
cooling, and cleansing Clysters, especially Milk Clysters, with Venice Treacle,
or Diascordium dissolved in them are always useful. It Is proper to breathe a
Vein, to cool the burnt and boiled Blood, but let it be done with Discretion,
Twice or Thrice, if the Strength be not impaired by the First. Endeavor to
qualify the sharpness of the Humors after this manner. Waters of Plantane,
Purslane and Mint of each two Ounces: Syrup of Quinces, and dried Roses, of
each one Ounce; Syrup of Vinegary, half an Ounce, mix them, and dissolve
therein two Scruples of Theriack Andromachi, and six Drops of Oil of Vitriol:
Give now and then a Spoonful. But if the Patient has some Ease, and if the
Symptoms abate or disappear, take great care that they don't suddenly return, to
your Amazement and the Destruction of the Patient, as it sometimes happens
unforeseen in this Case. Therefore Nourish him and Strengthen his Stomach, says
most of our Eminent Physicians, with a Restoring Opiate, compounded in or after
this Method. Gelly of Hartshorn made with Canary Wine, four Ounces, Conserve
of Roses, Burrage, Bugloss and Clove Gilly-Flowers, of each one Ounce:
Confectio Alkermes, half an Ounce, Citron Bark and Nutmegs, Candied, of each
three Drams; Essence of Cloves, Mace, Nutmegs and Cinnamon, of each three Drops,
and with the Syrup of Clove Gilly-Flowers make On Opiate; of which must be
taken the quantity of a Hazle Nut or more, Mornings and Evenings. Of all the
Medicines used against Looseness, says a great Author, Opium is the chief,
being a powerful controler of all tumultuous Motions and accordingly prescribes
Laudanum Opiatum, or Liquid Laudanum in large quanties, for the Cure of this
and most other Diseases.

But for my part, though I will not pretend to censure the Practice of my Superiors,
yet I think my self obliged to say, that I tamper not with Opiates, nor ever
use Laudanum but on extraordinary occasions, being rather a Pallative than a
Curative Medicine; and therefore in my Practice for the Cure of this or any
other Disease I pretend to Cure, I only employ my own Experiencd Medicines,
which by their own native virtue subdue Diseases by their amicable
correspondence with Nature, and by assisting her in all her Operations and
endeavors, to support her self, and exterminate those noxious Invaders, that
disturb her desired Peace and tranquillity. And that I have such efficacious
Remedies for the Cure of this Disease, if timely consulted, will appear by the
following Examples.

An Eminent Trader in the City of London, who had for a long time been
grieviously troubled with intolerable Pains proceeding from a Choleric
Cholick, such as violent Pains in the Stomach and Bowels, distension of the
Hypochondria, Heart burning, Thirst and perplexity of the Breast; insomuch that
he scarce enjoyed one Minutes Health, and having advised with the Learned, and
taken a Multiplicity o^ Medicines both inwardly and by outward applications to
his Breast, to his very great trouble, but without Relief, he was at last
recommended to me, and I perfectly cured him in a few Days, no Symptoms of the
said Disease having appeard, since the time of his Recovery; and though he is
unwilling to have his Name exposed in Print, yet to do me and my Remedies
justice, and that others might reap Benefit by the same means, he has order^d
me to send any Person to receive Satisfaction from his own Relation, which I am
always ready to do.

Mr. John Shadwel, near the Sign of the Three Mariners, in the Parish of St.
Thomas Wapping, Mate of a Merchant Man, having been a long Voyage, and feeding
much upon Meat that had been long salted, at his coming on shore, was
violently taken with frequent vomiting and Purging, attended with great
Weakness of Body, a chilness in the outward Parts and unexpressible Pain. He
consulted two Physicians, took the Medicines they jointly prescribed, but those
Gentlemen being frighted at the appearance of a slight convulsive Motion in the
Patients Face and Eyes, gave him over as Incurable: Whereupon I was sent for,
and by the Blessing of God upon one single Medicine, he had Ease in less than
Ten Minutes time, and continuing the same Medicine but four Days together, was
perfectly Recovered, and so remains to this Day.

The Dysentery or Bloody Flux.
A Dysentery, which the Greeks name (...), properly so called, proceeds from the
Ulceration of the Intestines, but is commonly taken for every Bloody Flux: The
Latins call it Tormina from the excessive Pain the Patient endures. This
Disease which is voiding Blood and purulent Matter with tormenting Pain, is
distinguishd from the Painless Evacuation of Thin, Watery Blood from the
internal Hemerroid Veinsm, called by the Ancients a Flux of the Liver, and
likewise from the Natural discharge of Blood independent of the Guts, causd by
its redundancy in the Body, as after Amputation, suppression of the Menses,
etc. or by its Acrimony opening the Vessels, or the Obstruction of the Bowels
hindering its regular Circulation. Agreeable hereunto, Galen mentions four kind
of Fluxes, all which he calls Dysenteries. The first is when any usual
Evacuation of Blood, as the Hemerroids, or at the Nostrils is impeded.
Secondly, When Watery Blood is voided, occasioned by the Weakness of the Liver.
The Third is, Blood mixed with melancholy and burnt by reason of its being
detaind in the Liver and Spleen is evacuated and shines. The Fourth and last,
and that I am now treating of, is, when Blood and Excrements are mixed
together, and sometimes also purulent Matter accompanies it, to the Patient's
intolerable Pain.

Symptoms of a Dysentery.
The Diagnostick Signs of the Bloody Flux, are, that the Sick Person is seized
with unsufferable griping Pains in the Guts followed by frequent Stools, first
of Whitish Matter, and afterward of Blood and Slime mixed together. Watching,
Thirsting, loathing Food, and sometimes attended by a Malignant Fever and all
its dismal Symptoms. If the Small Guts are affected, the Pain is vehement, like
the pricking of Pins, because they are of exquisite Sense: The Patient goes not
to Stool presently after the Pain, and when he does, is grievously tortured,
and the Guts and Bowels seem to fall down. If the Great Guts are affected, the
Pain is not so sharp, and being seated toward the sides of the Belly, is
quickly followed by Stools; the Blood swims on the top, or is a little mixd
with the Excrements, and you may judge of the Humor causing this Disease, by
the Color of the Excrements, Age and Temperament of the Patient and the Season
of the Year.

There are Three degrees observable in a Dysemery. The Symptoms of the first
are Bloody and Slimy Stools. In the Second, the Slime is a Sign of Excoriation
and in the third of an Exulceration. When the Guts are Excoriated, it is either
the Crust that covers them, or part of their thick Tunicle, or at most the
Caruncles, or inflamed Glandules of the Guts that is voided.

Prognostic Symptoms.
A Dysentery caused by black Choler is a dangerous Sign, if it be not Critical,
because the Ulcer grows Cancerous; be sure therefore you make a right judgment
between melancholy and congealed Blood. If loathing of Meat and a Fever
accompany it, it is dangerous. If Pieces of Flesh be voided in it, it is Deadly.
Much Watching, great Thirst, Black Bloody and Stinking Stool^, without a
mixture of Humors, Hiccough, Choleric Vomitings, Pains in the Liver and
Midriff, are generally deadly Signs. If Choler and sharp Diet is the Cause of
this Disease, its easily cured; Salt Phlegm is worse, because sticks longer in
the Guts. If the because it sticks longer in the Guts. If the Bloody Flux
happens to one troubled with a diseased Spleen, or the Gout, its good, in the
Opinion of Hippocrates, because the Matter is sent forth. But I rather take
this for a Diarrhea than a Dysentery.

Causes of the Bloody Flux.
The Internal Causes of this Disease are sharp and Vlcerating Humors. Yellow
Green, and Black Choler; Salt Phlegm in the Head created by Heat, or in the
Belly by Putrefaction. which being brought to the Guts, and sticking close to
them Ulcerates the Part. The sharp Acid that irritates the Guts, provokes them
to Contraction, assembles the Blood by virtue of its provocation, and corrodes
the Orifices of the Blood Vessels. This may proceed from the corrupted Matter
in the Guts. But the cause of a Malignant, Epidemical, contagious Looseness,
such as the Learned Sydenham discourses of, as happening in the Years, 1669,
70, 71, 72, is a corrupt volatile Acid, not lodged in the Guts, but immediately
reigning in the Blood, perverting its Texture, opening the Vessels inserted
into the Guts and provoking them to Convulsive Contractions; from whence is
derived a Malignant Fever, Griping and Bloody Stools: So though the previous
excoriations may take place in benign Dysenteries, there is no occasion for
them in the contagious Malignant sort; it being a sufficient Cause of bloody
Stools, that the Costick Ferment is a Mortal Enemy to the Intestines, like
Arsenick, that perpetually thwarts and provokes them to Convulsions; upon
which, says that excellent Author, they squeeze out their Blood together with
their Nutritious Juice, that they are not then in a capacity to receive; and
which is taken by some for the Mucus or Snot of the Guts, whereas the large
quantities that are voided, sufficiently evince the contrary.

The External Causes, are all such things as procreate sharp and ill Humors,
as Meats which soon putrify ill the Stomach, Fruits which are soon rotten, and
all things unripe: The Air thus qualified; the Winter co'd and dry, and the
Spring very Wet and full of South Winds, cause Dysenteries in Summer. Or if the
Winter be Wet and full of South Winds, and a dry Spring, and the North Winds
blow much; such a Season generally speaking produces Bloody Fluxes. Sometimes
the Air is infected and produces a Contagious and Epidemical Dysentery, which
is so infectious, that the Excrements of the Sick being cast into a Bog-house,
infect, all that sit over it. To which may be added, the taking of Mercury,
Coloquintida, Antimony, Lead, the course Powder of an Adamant, Worms, etc.
which vellicate the Guts and heap up sharp Humors in them.

To Cure of the Bloody Flux.
From what has been already said, you may rationally infer, that Indications for
Cure of a Dysentery, are, to evacuate sharp Humors, assuage Pain, Cleanse,
Consolidate and Dry the Ulcers, Purify the Blood, separate the preternatural
Ferment and stop the Flux.

To discharge the Body of sharp Humors you must Purge every Second, Third or
Fourth Day, according to the Patient's Age and Strength, and the Season of the
Year. Rhubarb given in Powder a Dram, a Dram and half, and two Drams is very
usual; but because Pouders are apt to stick to the Guts and vex them, I better
approve of it converted into a Potion, made of Liquoras, Raisms of the Sun,
Tamarinds and yellow Myrabolans boiled in Barley-Water, to Three or Four
Ounces; which Liquor being strained, infuse in it a Dram of Rhubarb sliced very
thin; then add an Ounce of Syrup of Roses Solutive, and you have a very good
Medicine to evacuate sharp Humors.

If the Dysentery is accompanied with a Fever and Inflammation of the Bowels,
open a Vein, let the Patient Bleed in proportion to his Strength. Sometimes
vomiting is profitable, to repel the Humors, which fall from the Stomach to
the Intestines, and therefore not to be omitted, especially if the Patient is
inclined to Vomit, for then Nature dictates the right way, and ought to be
immitated, in disburdening a foul Stomach. Afterward you ought to give
asswaging, mild and cleansing Clysters, and succeed them with Astringent
Clysters.

If the Vlcerss stand in need of cleansing, add Centaury and Wormwood to the
former Decoction, and to the strained Liquor add Turpentine dissolv^d in the
Yolk of an Egg, and the Chemical Oil of Wax, of each one Dram. When there is
more need of Binding and Glutinating Medicines, give Emplastick Clysters, to
cover the internal Superfices of the Guts, and preserve those Parts from the
Gnawing of the Matter.

To cleanse, give Goats Milk; to glutinate Cows Milk Chalybeated, which is
proper to consolidate and heal, to which you may add the Juice of Plantan,
Syrup of Comfrey, Sugar of Roses, Troches of Amber, and Rhasis's white Troches.
Let the Sick eat Rice boiled in Chalybiated Milk, or the Mucilage of Gum,
Tragacanth and Arabic, drawn with Rose or Plantan Water, the quantity of half
a Dram in his Broth. To purify the Blood and separate the preternatural
Ferment, Goddards Drops are often successful. And to complete the Cure, the
Body being thoroughly cleansed you may use Astringent Decoctions and Narcoticks
to stop the Flux.

And if this Course and these Medicines are ineffectual, as sometimes to the
Patient's disappointment and extravagant Charge, they have been too often
found; let the Sick try my Medicines, which have never yet failed to cure the
Bloody Flux, in numerous Instances, of which I only give you Two Examples.

Mr. Alexander Carter, Tailor, dwelling in Swan-Yard, over against
Somerset House in the Strand, was sorrowfully afflicted with the Bloody Flux
above two Years together, without any Intermission, insomuch that he had almost
ruined himself in going from one Doctor to another, and yet was still rather
worse than any thing better, till he came to me and made use of my Remedies,
which cured him in a few Days, and now continues in as good Health, as ever he
enjoyed in his Life. To the truth whereof he is ready to make Oath, if desired.

Mr. Thomas Chiffinch, Carpenter, Aged Sixty odd Years, was Seven Years grieved
with the Bloody Flux at certain Times; but the last Three Years had it
constantly, and in so violent a manner as threatened him with inevitable Death,
in the Opinion of all his Friends and Acquaintance; for he could find no Relief
in all the means he used: But applying himself to me, and taking my Medicines,
was cured in a short time, and at a small Charge; the truth of which immediate
Cure, will be attested to any Person, that pleases to enquire either of Mr
Clark, or the Patient himself, at Duglas's- Coffee House in St. Martin's Lane,
Westminster.

Having now, I presume, said enough about the Cure of the Cholick in all its
different kinds, and the other Diseases that generally accompany it, sufficient
for the Instruction of the Industrious and Ingenious, and too much for the
Envious Idle and Ignorant, I should have concluded this Treatise, but because I
resolve to publish several other Discourses on other Diseases, and that many
People who have met with repeated Disappointments in following other Men's
Remedies, before my Books now under Hand can be Published; for their sakes as
well as my own, I shall briefly show, in a few Examples, in what other Diseases
as well as the Cholick, my Medicines have been wonderfully successful, and also
that the over curious or suspicious may receive entire Satisfaction, by
enquiring of the Persons I have taken leave to Name, and the Places where they
dwell, in the following brief Catalogue, which I shall begin with the Headache.

Headache and Vertigo.
William Fletcher, of Engfield, in the Country of Middlesex, White-Smith, being
grievously afflicted with the Megrim, Giddiness and Swimming Pains in the Head,
so that oftentimes he was in danger of falling down as he Worked or Walked,
which continued upon him for the long space of Six Years, and using diverse
Medicines for his Cure, but without Success; he applied to me, and I in letting
him Blood in the inside of one of his Nostrils, and giving him a Medicine, he
found immediate Relief, without any Pain or Trouble for above a Year; but
afterward finding a Pain and Giddiness, on the other side of his Head, and I
letting him Blood in the Nostril of that side, he was perfectly Cured of that
Vexatious and Troublesome Disease.

Head Ach.
Mr. Samual Haines, Broad-Silk-Weaver, dwelling in Fashon-street, in
Spittle-Fields, London; was for the long space of Twelve or Thirteen Years,
violently afflicted with the Headache, and though he industriously sought Relief
from other Hands, could find none, till he made use of my Remedies, and by
them, the Almighty's Blessing interposing, was thoroughly cured.

Edward Harrison, Leather Dresser, living with Sir Isaac Shard, Knight, in
Horse-lye-Down, near Southwark, was sorely afflicted with the Headache at
certain times, which returned very often, and continued to his great Chief in
this manner Six whole Years successively, of which he could find no Cure, though
he used variety of Medicines from no mean Professors of Physic; but at last
applying himself to me, was perfectly cured.

Margaret Thomas, Servant to the late Mrs. Jux, who was her Majesty's Strower,
and did then dwell in Little Scotland-Yard, adjoining to White Hall, was
grievously troubled with the Headache for the space of Two Years, and with
other Female Distempers much longer, with which she will acquaint any of her
own Sex, that think-fit to enquire of her; but after the use of not a few
Medicines prescribed by other Practitioners in Physic, without effect; she was
recovered from all her Diseases by following my Advice, and the use of my
Medicines, and continues in perfect Health to the present time.

William Watson, late Servant to Mr. Welsh, Vertigo.
a Shoemaker, in Chancery Lane, London; was much troubled with a Vertigo, or
Giddiness of the Head, between Five and Six Years, and sometimes so violently,
that some thought it would terminate in a Appoplexy or Epilepsy, of which
Disease he could find no Cure, till he applied himself to me, and by God's
Blessing, and giving him Experienced proper Remedies, he was restored to Health.

Moses Grant, late Servant to Mr. London, Perruke-Maker, in Channel Row,
Westminster, was Fourteen Years troubled with the Headache, and Four Years last
past, was afflicted with it in so grievous a manner and with such intolerable
Pain, without one Days intermission; and making use of diverse Medicines without
Relief, he came to me, and I effectually cured him by giving him my Medicines
in Six or Eight times, and he has continued well for a Year last past, as he
assures me, excepting twice that he was slightly visited with it, by too hard
Drinking, which soon went off again, without the use of any means.

A Child of Mr. John Evans's, Frame-Work-Knitter, in Hand-Alley, in
Bishops-Gate-street, was so grievously afflicted with sore-Eyes, occasioned by
a Defluction of Hot Rheum on those tender Parts which continuing with great
severity above a Quarter of a Year, 'twas the general Opinion she would be
Blind; but her Father addressing himself to me, I perfectly cured his Child's
Sore Eyes, and took away the Cause in Three or Four Days time, and left her as
well as ever she was in her Life.

The Worms
Mr. Robert Guinn, at the Sign of the Two Brewers, in White Lion Yard, near
Norton-Falgate, in the Parish of Stepney; for some Years past was so abundantly
Pestered with Worms, that sometimes they dropped out of his Body as he went
along the Streets, and at other times crept from him when he was in Bed. He was
also afflicted with an Excessive Ravenous Appetite, and yet though he Eat as much
as would have sufficed Six or Eight Persons, he received no Nourishment by his
Food, but fell away, and was so wasted in his Flesh, that he was little else
than Skin and Bones. He had long sought Relief from many, and variety of means,
but all in vain, till he came to me, and through Mercy I cured him of all these
complicated and uncommon Distempers, in about a Fortnights time; and has
continued in a good state of Health ever since.

The Son of Mr. John Carter, in George-Alley, in Coleman-street, London, who
was about Two Years of Age, and terribly afflicted with Worms, and gnawing
griping Pains, by taking my Remedies, voided above a Pint of Worms, was freed
from his Pains, and has continued well ever since.

I could give you may other instances of Persons of both Sexes, Young and Old,
but I reserve them for a particular Treatise of the Worms, that will
immediately follow the publication of this Book.

Rheumatism and Gout.
A Gentleman of considerable Quality, Lame with a Rheumatism and the Gout to
such a degree, that he dreaded the utter loss of the use of his Limbs; but
applying himself to me, I cured him of his Rheumatism, eased his Arthritick
Pains, and so restored the use of his Limbs, that he is capable of attending
his own Affairs: And though he will not allow his Name to be Printed, yet I have
his leave to send any Person to him, who will confirm the Truth of what is here
but privately divulged. To Name more Persons whom I have cured of the
Rheumatism, is wholly needless, since the Weekly Papers have from time to time,
published to many. And though. I don't pretend to m^ke a perfect Cure of the
Gout, yet I hope I may be allowed to speak truth, and say, That my Medicines
never fail to give speedy Ease in the most violent Pains attending that Disease.

The Stone and Gravel.
Mr. William Cordwell, Frame-Work-Knitter, at the Sign of the Black-Boy, in
Wheeler's- street, Spittle-Fields, being violently afflicted with Suppression
of Urine, occasioned by the Stone, Gravel, and a concommitant Cholick, which
had continued at certain Times for Three Years last past, and since Christmas
last in a more severe manner than ever; applied himself to me, and by the use
of my Remedies aforenamed, voided several Stones and obtained a perfect Cure:
And having paid me for my Medicines to my own content, desired also, that his
Cure might be published, that others laboring under the same Distemper, might
receive Benefit by the same Hand and Means.

Francis-Wilks, Fevers.
dwelling near the Sign of the Black-Horse, in Blackman-street, hard by St.
George's-Church, in Southwark, was seize Five Months with a Tertian Ague, and
having taken great quantities of Jesuit's Powder, or Peruvian Bark, and an
incredible number of other Medicines, to no purpose; insomuch that he seemed to
be on the Brink of the Grave, and his Circumstances being but indifferent, I
offered him his Cure Gratis, which I performed with great Expedition, and so
effectually, that after the first Dose of Physic I gave him, his Fit returned
no more, and the Patient enjoys his Health to this Day.

The great number of Patients I have cured of Fevers, under all Denominations,
whether attended or unaccompanied with a Cold shaking Fit, which are vulgarly
called Agues, will excuse me from giving more Examples in this Disease, because
my Medicines, are so well known to give relief in Fevers, that to commend them
by Testimonies in uncessary waste of time, since they recommend themselves by
their Innate Virtue; not because they are Hot, not because they are Cold, not
because they Cut and attenuate; but because they have the peculiar virtue, to
extinguish the hot fermenting Alkali, which is the Occasional, Internal and
Continent cause of Fevers, and that they may effect what they are designed for,
I vary them as I find Occasion; because, vix ulla perpetua Ars Medicinalis
recepit, scarce any of the Precepts of the Art of Physic are perpetual.

Coughs and Consumptions.
Mr. Thomas Adin, Weaver, dwelling in King's- Head-Yard, in Shore-Ditch, was
long afflicted with a Consumptive Cough, attended with all the dismal Symptoms
of approaching Death; but by the blessing of God, the Medicines I directed him
to take, perfectly recovered him.

Spitting Blood.
Mary, Wife of Mr. Richard Darling Barber, formerly dwelt in Burchen-Lane, near
Lumbard street, London, was in Three Years time last past, twice cured by
Medicines of a violent Cholick and Spitting Blood, and the last Spring was
seized with a Hectic Fever, and all the dreadful Symptoms of an approaching
Tabes or Consumption, and was given over for a Dying Woman by all her Friends
and Relations; but by Heaven Blessing the Medicines she took of me, she was
restored to her former Health, as will be attested by more than Twenty
Eyewitnesses of her unexpected Cure, as well as by the Patient her self.

The French Disease.
In the next place I could give many Examples of Persons I have cured of both
Sexes, of Gonorheas and the French Pox; but because to give Examples in such
Cases, would be a horrid breach of good Manners; I shall only recommend my
Medicines as Safe and Certain in the Cure, and my self for perfect Silence.

The Stone.
The last Disease of which I shall give any Examples in this Book is the Stone,
and shall begin in the well known Case of Mr. Richard Hurford, at the Sign of
the New England Arms, near Ratliff-Cross, who was Twelve Years afflicted with
the Stone, but lately in a most violent manner, and having taken abundance of
Medicines in hopes of Ease, but all in vain, I gave him my own Medicines
experimentally adapted to the Cure of that Disease in his Case, which brought
away an incredible number of Stones, and some of them as large as were capable
of passing through the Vreters and can scarce be credited by any, but those
that have seen and handled them.

Mary, the Wife of Mr. Richard Pomfret, dwelling in Little Carter Lane, near
the Swan Ale House, was afflicted with the Stone and Gravel to that degree,
that upon any agitation of the Body she made Bloody Urine, and after she had
had the Advice of several Doctors of Physic, but without success; the first
Remedy I gave her, put a stop to her Bloody Urine, and brought away a
prodigious Quantity of Gravel, by which means she was Cured at a small Charge,
and in a very short time.

Having thus plainly proved to the meanest Capacity, the efficacy of my
Remedies the Sincerity of my Practice, and the Truth of the Examples of Persons
cured, insomuch that they that are not blinded by partiality or biased by
Interest, must be Masters of a great deal of Sophistry, that will pretend to
deny, contradict or oppose them. I should now put an end to this brief
Discourse.

But having a little Paper to spare I shall employ it, in accommodating the
Reader with the Virtues and Use of a bitter Medicament, which I invented, and
call Tinctura Stomachicalis major, or the greater Stomachical Tincture.

Which is a Composition of all the Noblest Bitter Aromatic and Stomachical
Specificks in the whole Materia Medica, and perfectly answers all Intentions
accordingly. It enlivens and sharpens a languid Appetite, expels Viscous
Humors; assists Fermentation and helps Digestion; Fortifies the Stomach and
prevents Nauseating and Loathing. It is Carminative, a great expeller of Wind
out of the Stomach and Bowels; and as all bitter things are Medicinal against
Worms, so this Tincture has an excellent faculty that way. If any Person has
the misfortune to drink bad Wine, or to drink to excess; if he mingles some
Drops of this Tincture in his Wine, it will rectify all Disorders occasioned by
hard Drinking, and prevent next Mornings Head-Achs, loathsome Vomitings, and
menacing Surfeits, the usual Attendants on Nocturnal Debauches. It Is a good
Remedy for Persons newly delivered from a Fever, or any Chronical Distemper,
because it strengthens the Crasis, or convenient mixture of Qualities. It Is
proper for Mariners to carry with them to Sea, and for those that Travel by
Land, because it prevents ill accidents occasioned by Ill or Scanty Diet,
change of Air, and Epidemical Infections. It far excels all other bitter
Medicaments; it never offends the Eyes, or causes breakings out on the Skin, as
generally all other Bitters do. It will keep good many Years, and may be taken
in Wine, Ale, Tea, or Spring Water, from Thirty Drops to a Hundred, in the
Morning, and at Four or Five of the Clock in the Afternoon, when People find
occasion for it, either to cure Diseases, prevent them, or confirm one in a
State of good Health, in which I have found my Tincture successful in many
Years Practice; being as pleasant a Bitter as Art can contrive. One Ounce of
Mine will make Three Ounces of any other Bitter, that is commonly exposed to
Sale. And that the Poor may receive Benefit by it, I will Sell it to such as
really are so, for Two Shillings the Ounce, and Twelve Pence the Half Ounce.

T^^ u^^ of the C^^pta^^^ Sn^^.
For the Cure of the Headache, Deafness, Vertigo or Giddiness, and the Cure of
an Old and Inveterate Cough, I have also a Caephalik Snush, which snuffed up
both Nostrils, Night and Morning, till the Nose runs plentifully, will produce
the desired Effect; but when this and other Remedies fail, as the best
sometimes do; I have another way of curing the Headache, and Vertigo, by
Phlebotomy, in the Part, and by a safe Method scarce known, or practiced by any
other Person.

FINIS.
Errata.
BEsides mispellings, mispointings and Literal Faults, the Reader is desired in
Page 52. Line 4. to read, Diseases act against us, per ignorata seminaria, etc.


