THREE ESSAYS: ON PICTURESQUE BEAUTY; ON PICTURESQUE TRAVEL; AND ON SKETCHING
LANDSCAPE: TO WHICH IS ADDED A POEM, ON LANDSCAPE PAINTING.

BY WILLIAM GILPIN, M. A. PREBENDARY OF SALISBURY; AND VICAR OF BOLDRE IN NEW
FOREST, NEAR LYMINGTON.

London; PRINTED FOR R. BLAMIRE, IN THE STRAND.

M.DCC.XCII.

TO WILLIAM LOCK, ESQUIRE OF NORBURY-PARK, in SURREY.
DEAR SIR,
THE following essays, and poem, I beg leave to inscribe to you. Indeed I do
little more, than return your own: for the best remarks, and observations in
them, are yours. Such as may be cavilled at, I am persuaded, must be mine.

A published work is certainly a fair object of criticism: but I think, my dear
sir, we picturesque people are a little misunderstood with regard to our
general intention. I have several times been surprised at finding us
represented, as supposing, all beauty to consist in picturesque beauty -- and
the face of nature to be examined only by the rules of painting. Whereas, in
fact, we always speak a different language. We speak of the grand scenes of
nature, tho uninteresting in a picturesque light, as having a strong effect on
the imagination -- often a stronger, than when they are properly disposed for
the pencil. We every where make a distinction between scenes, that are
beautiful, and amusing; and scenes that are picturesque. We examine, and admire
both. Even artificial objects we admire, whether in a grand, or in a humble
style, tho unconnected with picturesque beauty -- the palace, and the cottage
-- the improved garden-scene, and the neat homestall. Works of tillage also
afford us equal delight -- the plough, the mower, the reaper, the hay-field,
and the harvest-wane. In a word, we reverence, and admire the works of God; and
look with benevolence, and pleasure, on the works of men.

In what then do we offend? At the expense of no other species of beauty, we
merely endeavor to illustrate, and recommend one species more; which, tho
among the most interesting, has never yet, so far as I know, been made the set
object of investigation. From scenes indeed of the picturesque kind we exclude
the appendages of tillage, and in general the works of men; which too often
introduce preciseness, and formality. But excluding artificial objects from one
species of beauty, is not degrading them from all. We leave then the general
admirer of the beauties of nature to his own pursuits; nay we admire them with
him: all we desire, is, that he would leave us as quietly in the possession of
our amusements.

Under this apology, my dear sir, I have ventured, in the following essays, to
enlarge a little both on our theory, and practice. In the first essay (that we
may be fairly understood) the distinguishing characteristic is marked, of such
beautiful objects, as are suited to the pencil. In the second, the mode of
amusement is pointed out, that may arise from viewing the scenes of nature in a
picturesque light: and in the third, a few rules are given for sketching
landscape after nature. I have practiced drawing as an amusement, and
relaxation, for many years; and here offer the result of my experience. Some
readiness in execution indeed, it is supposed, is necessary, before these rules
can be of much service. They mean to take the young artist up, where the
drawing-master leaves him. -- I have only to add farther, that as several of
the rules, and principles here laid down, have been touched in different
picturesque works, which I have given the public, I have endeavored not to
repeat myself: and where I could not throw new light on a subject, I have
hastened over it: -- only in a work of this kind, it was necessary to bring all
my principles together.

With regard to the poem, annexed to these essays, something more should be
said. As that small part of the public, who personally know me; and that still
smaller part, whom I have the honor to call my friends, may think me guilty of
presumption in attempting a work of this kind, I beg leave to give the
following history of it.

Several years ago, I amused myself with writing a few lines in verse on
landscape-painting; and afterward sent them, as a fragment (for they were not
finished) to amuse a friend. Edward Forster esquire of Walthamstow.
I had no other purpose. My friend told me, he could not say much for my
poetry; but as my rules, he thought, were good, he wished me to finish my
fragment; and if I should not like it as a poem, I might turn it into an essay
in prose. -- As this was only what I expected, I was not disappointed; tho not
encouraged to proceed. So I troubled my head no farther with my verses.

Some time after, another friend, Rev. Mr. Mason.
finding fault with my mode of describing the lakes, and mountains of
Cumberland, and Westmoreland, as too poetical, I told him the fate of my
fragment; lamenting the hardship of my case -- when I wrote verse, one friend
called it prose; and when I wrote prose, another friend called it verse. In his
next letter he desired to see my verses; and being pleased with the subject, he
offered, if I would finish my poem (however carelessly as to metrical
exactness) he would adjust the versification. But he found, he had engaged in a
more arduous affair, than he expected. My rules, and tecnical terms were
stubborn, and would not easily glide into verse; and I was as stubborn, as
they, and would not relinquish the scientific part for the poetry. My friend's
goodnature therefore generally gave way, and suffered many lines to stand, and
many alterations to be made, which his own good taste could not approve.
Extract of a letter from Mr. Mason.

-- I have inserted conscientiously every word, and phrase, you have altered;
except the awkward word clump, which I have uniformly discarded, whenever it
offered itself to me in my English garden, which you may imagine it did
frequently: in it is stead I have always used tuft. I have ventured therefore to
insert it adjectively; and I hope, I shall be forgiven. Except in this single
instance, I know not that I have deviated in the least from the alterations,
you sent. -- I now quit all that relates to the poem, not without some
self-satisfaction in thinking it is over: for, to own the truth, had I thought
you would have expected such almost mathematical exactitude of terms, as I find
you do; and in consequence turned lines tolerably poetical, into prosaic, for
the sake of precision, I should never have ventured to give you my assistance.
I am afraid therefore I must appear to the world, as having spoiled a good
poem; and must shelter myself, and it under those learned reasons, which have
been given for putting Propria quae maribus, and As in praesenti, into verse.
If the rules have injured the poetry; as rules at least, I hope, they will meet
your approbation. I am, dear sir, with the greatest esteem, and regard,

Your sincere, and most obedient, humble servant, WILLIAM GILPIN.
Vicar's-hill, Oct. 12, 1791.
EXPLANATION OF THE PRINTS.
TWO facing page 19. It is the intention of these two prints to illustrate how
very adverse the idea of smoothness is to the composition of landscape. In the
second of them the great lines of the landscape are exactly the same as in the
first; only they are more broken.

Two facing p. 75. The first of these prints is meant to illustrate the idea of
simple illumination. The light falls strongly on various parts; as indeed it
often does in nature. But, as it is the painter's business to take nature in
her most beautiful form, he chooses to throw his light more into a mass, as
represented in the second print, which exhibits the same landscape, only better
enlightened. When we merely take the lines of a landscape from nature; and
inlighten it (as we must often do) from our own taste, and judgment, the
massing of the light must be well attended to, as one of the great sources of
beauty. It must not be scattered in spots; but must be brought more together,
as on the rocky side of the hill in the second print: and yet it must graduate
also in different parts; so as not to appear affected.

One print facing p. 77. The idea of gradation is here farther illustrated;
according to the explanation in p. 76. -- The inscription is that admired one
of Caecilia Metella, the daughter of Metellus, and the wife of Crassus; in
which, with so much elegant, and tender simplicity, her name is divided between
her father, and her husband.

One facing p. 79. This print exemplifies a simple mode of tinting a drawing,
as explained in the text. The coloring of this print (which is done by hand)
has added a little to the expense of the book: but it was thought necessary to
complete the scheme. -- It was colored by a relation of mine; Mr. Gilpin,
drawing-master at Paddington-green; who in all the copies I have seen, has
illustrated my ideas very satisfactorily; and who, as far as the recommendation
of a partial kinsman may go, deserves mine.

One facing p. 85. This print is an explanation of a few rules in perspective;
just sufficient for the use of common landscape.

ESSAY I. ON PICTURESQUE BEAUTY.
ESSAY I.
DISPUTES about beauty might perhaps be involved in less confusion, if a
distinction were established, which certainly exists, between such objects as
are beautiful, and such as are picturesque -- between those, which please the
eye in their natural state; and those, which please from some quality, capable
of being illustrated in painting.

Ideas of beauty vary with the object, and with the eye of the spectator. Those
artificial forms appear generally the most beautiful, with which we have been
the most conversant. Thus the stone-mason sees beauties in a well-jointed wall,
which escape the architect, who surveys the building under a different idea.
And thus the painter, who compares his object with the rules of his art, sees
it in a different light from the man of general taste, who surveys it only as
simply beautiful.

As this difference therefore between the beautiful, and the picturesque
appears really to exist, and must depend on some peculiar construction of the
object; it may be worth while to examine, what that peculiar construction is.
We inquire not into the general sources of beauty, either in nature, or in
representation. This would lead into a nice, and scientific discussion, in
which it is not our purpose to engage. The question simply is, What is that
quality in objects, which particularly marks them as picturesque?

In examining the real object, we shall find, one source of beauty arises from
that species of elegance, which we call smoothness, or neatness; for the terms
are nearly synonymous. The higher the marble is polished, the brighter the
silver is rubbed, and the more the mahogany shines, the more each is considered
as an object of beauty: as if the eye delighted in gliding smoothly over a
surface.

In the class of larger objects the same idea prevails. In a pile of building
we wish to see neatness in every part added to the elegance of the
architecture. And if we examine a piece of improved pleasure-ground, every
thing rough, and slovenly offends.

Mr. Burke, enumerating the properties of beauty, considers smoothness as one
of the most essential. "A very considerable part of the effect of beauty, says
he, is owing to this quality: indeed the most considerable: for take any
beautiful object, and give it a broken, and rugged surface, and however
well-formed it may be in other respects, it pleases no longer. Whereas, let it
want ever so many of the other constituents, if it want not this, it becomes
more pleasing, than almost all the others without it." Upon the sublime and
beautiful, p. 213.
-- How far Mr. Burke may be right in making smoothness the most considerable
source of beauty, I rather doubt Mr. Burke is probably not very accurate in
what he farther says on the connection between beauty, and diminutives. --
Beauty excites love; and a loved object is generally characterized by
diminutives. But it does not follow, that all objects characterized by
diminutives, tho they may be so because they are loved, are therefore
beautiful. We often love them for their moral qualities; their affections;
their gentleness; or their docility. Beauty, no doubt, awakens love; but it
also excites admiration, and respect. This combination forms the sentiment,
which prevails, when we look at the Apollo of Belvidere, and the Niobe. No man
of nice discernment would characterize these statues by diminutives. -- There
is then a beauty, between which and diminutives there is no relation; but
which, on the contrary, excludes them: and in the description of figures,
possessed of that species of beauty, we seek for terms, which recommend them
more to our admiration, than our love.


. A considerable one it certainly is.

Thus then, we suppose, the matter stands with regard to beautiful objects in
general. But in picturesque representation it seems somewhat odd, yet we shall
perhaps find it equally true, that the reverse of this is the case; and that
the ideas of neat and smooth, instead of being picturesque, in fact disqualify
the object, in which they reside, from any pretensions to picturesque beauty.
-- Nay farther, we do not scruple to assert, that roughness forms the most
essential point of difference between the beautiful, and the picturesque; as it
seems to be that particular quality, which makes objects chiefly pleasing in
painting. -- I use the general term roughness; but properly speaking roughness
relates only to the surfaces of bodies: when we speak of their delineation, we
use the word ruggedness. Both ideas however equally enter into the picturesque;
and both are observable in the smaller, as well as in the larger parts of
nature -- in the outline, and bark of a tree, as in the rude summit, and craggy
sides of a mountain.

Let us then examine our theory by an appeal to experience; and try how far
these qualities enter into the idea of picturesque beauty; and how far they
mark that difference among objects, which is the ground of our inquiry.

A piece of Palladian architecture may be elegant in the last degree. The
proportion of it is parts -- the propriety of it is ornaments -- and the symmetry
of the whole, may be highly pleasing. But if we introduce it in a picture, it
immediately becomes a formal object, and ceases to please. Should we wish to
give it picturesque beauty, we must use the mallet, instead of the chissel: we
must beat down one half of it, deface the other, and throw the mutilated
members around in heaps. In short, from a smooth building we must turn it into
a rough ruin. No painter, who had the choice of the two objects, would hesitate
a moment.

Again, why does an elegant piece of garden-ground make no figure on canvas?
The shape is pleasing; the combination of the objects, harmonious; and the
winding of the walk in the very line of beauty. All this is true; but the
smoothness of the whole, tho right, and as it should be in nature, offends in
picture. Turn the lawn into a piece of broken ground: plant rugged oaks instead
of flowering shrubs: break the edges of the walk: give it the rudeness of a
road: mark it with wheel-tracks; and scatter around a few stones, and
brush-wood; in a word, instead of making the whole smooth, make it rough; and
you make it also picturesque. All the other ingredients of beauty it already
possessed.

You sit for your picture. The master, at your desire, paints your head combed
smooth, and powdered from the barber's hand. This may give it a more striking
likeness, as it is more the resemblance of the real object. But is it therefore
a more pleasing picture? I fear not. Leave Reynolds to himself, and he will
make it picturesque: he will throw the hair dishevelled about your shoulders.
Virgil would have done the same. It was his usual practice in all his
portraits. In his figure of Ascanius, we have the fusos crines; and in his
portrait of Venus, which is highly finished in every part, the artist has given
her hair, -- diffundere ventis. The roughness, which Virgil gives the hair of
Venus, and Ascanius, we may suppose to be of a different kind from the squalid
roughness, which he attributes to Charon: Portitor has horrendus aquas, et
flumina servat
Terribili squalore Charon, cui plurima mento
Canities inculta jacet. --
Charon's roughness is, in it is kind, picturesque also; but the roughness here
intended, and which can only be introduced in elegant figures, is of that kind,
which is merely opposed to hair in nice order. In describing Venus, Virgil
probably thought hair, when streaming in the wind, both beautiful, and
picturesque, from it is undulating form, and varied tints; and from a kind of
life, which it assumes in motion; tho perhaps it is chief recommendation to him,
at the moment, was, that it was a feature of the character, which Venus was
then assuming.




That lovely face of youth smiling with all it is sweet, dimpling charms, how
attractive is it in life! how beautiful in representation! It is one of those
objects, that please, as many do, both in nature, and on canvas. But would you
see the human face in it is highest form of picturesque beauty, examine that
patriarchal head. What is it, which gives that dignity of character; that force
of expression; those lines of wisdom, and experience; that energetic meaning,
so far beyond the rosy hue, or even the bewitching smile of youth? What is it,
but the forehead furrowed with wrinkles? the prominent cheek-bone, catching the
light? the muscles of the cheek strongly marked, and losing themselves in the
shaggy beard? and, above all, the austere brow, projecting over the eye -- that
feature which particularly struck Homer in his idea of Jupiter It is much more
probable, that the poet copied forms from the sculptor, who must be supposed to
understand them better, from having studied them more; than that the sculptor
should copy them from the poet. Artists however have taken advantage of the
pre-possession of the world for Homer to secure approbation to their works by
acknowledging them to be reflected images of his conceptions. So Phidias
assured his countrymen, that he had taken his Jupiter from the description of
that god in the first book of Homer. The fact is, none of the features
contained in that image, except the brow, can be rendered by sculpture. But he
knew what advantage such ideas, as his art could express, would receive from
being connected in the mind of the spectator with those furnished by poetry;
and from the just partiality of men for such a poet. He seems therefore to have
been as well acquainted with the mind of man, as with his shape, and face. --
If by (...), we understand, as I think we may, a projecting brow, which casts a
broad, and deep shadow over the eye, Clarke has rendered it ill by nigris
superciliis, which most people would construe into black eyebrows. Nor has
Pope, tho he affected a knowledge of painting, translated it more happily by
sable brows. -- But if Phidias had had nothing to recommend him, except his
having availed himself of the only feature in the poet, which was accommodated
to his art, we should not have heard of inquirers wondering from whence he had
drawn his ideas; nor of the compliment, which it gave him an opportunity of
paying to Homer.


, and which he had probably seen finely represented in some statue? in a word,
what is it, but the rough touches of age?

As an object of the mixed kind, partaking both of the beautiful, and the
picturesque, we admire the human figure also. The lines, and surface of a
beautiful human form are so infinitely varied; the lights and shades, which it
receives, are so exquisitely tender in some parts, and yet so round, and bold
in others; it is proportions are so just; and it is limbs so fitted to receive
all the beauties of grace, and contrast; that even the face, in which the
charms of intelligence, and sensibility reside, is almost lost in the
comparison. But although the human form, in a quiescent state, is thus beautiful;
yet the more it is smooth surface is ruffled, if I may so speak, the more
picturesque it appears. When it is agitated by passion, and it is muscles swollen
by strong exertion, the whole frame is shown to the most advantage. -- But when
we speak of muscles swollen by exertion, we mean only natural exertions, not an
affected display of anatomy, in which the muscles, tho justly placed, may still
be overcharged.

It is true, we are better pleased with the usual representations we meet with
of the human form in a quiescent state, than in an agitated one: but this is
merely owing to our seldom seeing it naturally represented in strong action.
Even among the best masters we see little knowledge of anatomy. One will
inflate the muscles violently to produce some trifling effect: another will
scarce swell them in the production of a labored one. The eye soon learns to
see a defect, tho unable to remedy it. But when the anatomy is perfectly just,
the human body will always be more picturesque in action, than at rest. The
great difficulty indeed of representing strong muscular motion, seems to have
struck the ancient masters of sculpture: for it is certainly much harder to
model from a figure in strong, momentary action, which must, as it were, be
shot flying; than from one, sitting, or standing, which the artist may copy at
leisure. Amidst the variety of statues transmitted from their hands, we have
only three, or four in very spirited action. Tho there are only perhaps two or
three of the first antique statues in very spirited action -- the Laocoon, the
fighting gladiator, and the boxers -- yet there are several others, which are
in action -- the Apollo Belvidere -- Michael Angelo's Torso -- Arria and Paetus
-- the Pietas militaris, sometimes called the Ajax, of which the Pasquin at
Rome is a part, and of which there is a repetition more entire, tho still much
mutilated, at Florence -- the Alexander, and Bucephalus; and perhaps some
others, which occur not to my memory. The paucity however of them, even if a
longer catalogue could be produced, I think, shows that the ancient sculptors
considered the representation of spirited action as an achievement. The
moderns have been less daring in attempting it. But I believe connoisseurs
universally give the preference to those statues, in which the great masters
have so successfully exhibited animated action.


Yet when we see an effect of this kind well executed, our admiration is
greatly increased. Who does not admire the Laocoon more than the Antinous?

Animal life, as well as human, is, in general, beautiful both in nature, and
on canvas. We admire the horse, as a real object; the elegance of his form; the
stateliness of his tread; the spirit of all his motions; and the glossiness of
his coat. We admire him also in representation. But as an object of picturesque
beauty, we admire more the worn-out cart-horse, the cow, the goat, or the ass;
whose harder lines, and rougher coats, exhibit more the graces of the pencil.
For the truth of this we may examine Berghem's pictures: we may examine the
smart touch of Rosa of Tivoli. The lion with his rough mane; the bristly boar;
and the ruffled plumage of the eagle The idea of the ruffled plumage of the
eagle is taken from the celebrated eagle of Pindar, in his first Pythian ode;
which has exercised the pens of several poets; and is equally poetical, and
picturesque. He is introduced as an instance of the power of music. In Gray's
ode on the progress of poesy we have the following picture of him. Perching on
the sceptered hand
Of Jove, thy magic lulls the feathered king
With ruffled plumes, and flagging wing:
Quenched in dark clouds of slumber lie
The terror of his beak, and lightening of his eye.
Akenside's picture of him, in his hymn to the Naiads, is rather a little
stiffly painted. -- With slackened wings,
While now the solemn concert breathes around,
Incumbent on the scepter of his lord
Sleeps the stern eagle; by the numbered notes
Possessed; and satiate with the melting tone;
Sovereign of birds. --
West's picture, especially the two last lines, is a very good one. The bird's
fierce monarch drops his vengeful ire,
Perched on the scepter of the Olympian king,
The thrilling power of harmony he feels
And indolently hangs his flagging wing;
While gentle sleep his closing eyelid seals,
And over his heaving limbs, in loose array,
To every balmy gale the ruffling feathers play.



, are all objects of this kind. Smooth-coated animals could not produce so
picturesque an effect.

But when the painter thus prefers the cart-horse, the cow, or the ass to other
objects more beautiful in themselves, he does not certainly recommend his art
to those, whose love of beauty makes them anxiously seek, by what means it is
fleeting forms may be fixed.

Suggestions of this kind are ungrateful. The art of painting allows you all
you wish. You desire to have a beautiful object painted -- your horse, for
instance, led out of the stable in all his pampered beauty. The art of painting
is ready to accommodate you. You have the beautiful form you admired in nature
exactly transferred to canvas. Be then satisfied. The art of painting has given
you what you wanted. It is no injury to the beauty of your Arabian, if the
painter think he could have given the graces of his art more forcibly to your
cart-horse.

But does it not depreciate his art, if he give up a beautiful form, for one
less beautiful, merely because he could have given it the graces of his art
more forcibly -- because it is sharp lines afford him a greater facility of
execution? Is the smart touch of a pencil the grand desideratum of painting?
Does he discover nothing in picturesque objects, but qualities, which admit of
being rendered with spirit?

I should not vindicate him, if he did. At the same time, a free execution is
so very fascinating a part of painting, that we need not wonder, if the artist
lay a great stress upon it. -- It is not however entirely owing, as some
imagine, to the difficulty of mastering an elegant line, that he prefers a
rough one. In part indeed this may be the case; for if an elegant line be not
delicately hit off, it is the most insipid of all lines: whereas in the
description of a rough object, an error in delineation is not easily seen.
However this is not the whole of the matter. A free, bold touch is in itself
pleasing. A stroke may be called free, when there is no appearance of
constraint. It is bold, when a part is given for the whole, which it cannot
fail of suggesting. This is the laconism of genius. But sometimes it may be
free, and yet suggest only how easily a line, which means nothing, may be
executed. Such a stroke is not bold, but impudent.


In elegant figures indeed there must be a delicate outline -- at least a line
true to nature: yet the surfaces even of such figures may be touched with
freedom; and in the appendages of the composition there must be a mixture of
rougher objects, or there will be a want of contrast. In landscape universally
the rougher objects are admired; which give the freest scope to execution. If
the pencil be timid, or hesitating, little beauty results. The execution then
only is pleasing, when the hand firm, and yet decisive, freely touches the
characteristic parts of each object.

If indeed, either in literary, or in picturesque composition you endeavor to
draw the reader, or the spectator from the subject to the mode of executing it,
your affectation Language, like light, is a medium; and the true philosophic
style, like light from a north-window, exhibits objects clearly, and
distinctly, without soliciting attention to itself. In painting subjects of
amusement indeed, language may gild somewhat more, and color with the dies of
fancy: but where information is of more importance, than entertainment, tho you
cannot throw too strong a light, you should carefully avoid a colored one. The
style of some writers resembles a bright light placed between the eye, and the
thing to be looked at. The light shows itself; and hides the object: and, it
must be allowed, the execution of some painters is as impertinent, as the style
of such writers.


disgusts. At the same time, if some care, and pains be not bestowed on the
execution, your slovenliness disgusts, as much. Tho perhaps the artist has more
to say, than the man of letters, for paying attention to his execution. A truth
is a truth, whether delivered in the language of a philosopher, or a peasant:
and the intellect receives it as such. But the artist, who deals in lines,
surfaces, and colors, which are an immediate address to the eye, conceives the
very truth itself concerned in his mode of representing it. Guido's angel, and
the angel on a sign-post, are very different beings; but the whole of the
difference consists in an artful application of lines, surfaces, and colors.

It is not however merely for the sake of his execution, that the artist values
a rough object. He finds it in many other respects accommodated to his art. In
the first place, his composition requires it. If the history-painter threw all
his draperies smooth over his figures, his groups, and combinations would be
very awkward. And in landscape-painting smooth objects would produce no
composition at all. In a mountain-scene what composition could arise from the
corner of a smooth knoll coming forward on one side, intersected by a smooth
knoll on the other; with a smooth plain perhaps in the middle, and a smooth
mountain in the distance. The very idea is disgusting. Picturesque composition
consists in uniting in one whole a variety of parts; and these parts can only
be obtained from rough objects. If the smooth mountains, and plains were broken
by different objects, the composition might be good, on a supposition the great
lines of it were so before.

Variety too is equally necessary in his composition: so is contrast. Both
these he finds in rough objects; and neither of them in smooth. Variety indeed,
in some degree, he may find in the outline of a smooth object: but by no means
enough to satisfy the eye, without including the surface also.

From rough objects also he seeks the effect of light and shade, which they are
as well disposed to produce, as they are the beauty of composition. One uniform
light, or one uniform shade produces no effect. It is the various surfaces of
objects, sometimes turning to the light in one way, and sometimes in another,
that give the painter his choice of opportunities in massing, and graduating
both his lights, and shades. -- The richness also of the light depends on the
breaks, and little recesses, which it finds on the surfaces of bodies. What the
painter calls richness on a surface, is only a variety of little parts; on
which the light shining, shows all it is small inequalities, and roughnesses;
and in the painter's language, inriches it. -- The beauty also of catching
lights arises from the roughness of objects. What the painter calls a catching
light is a strong touch of light on some prominent part of a surface, while the
rest is in shadow. A smooth surface has no such prominences.

In coloring also, rough objects give the painter another advantage. Smooth
bodies are commonly as uniform in their color, as they are in their surface.
In glossy objects, tho smooth, the coloring may sometimes vary. In general
however it is otherwise; in the objects of landscape, particularly. The smooth
side of a hill is generally of one uniform color; while the fractured rock
presents it is gray surface, adorned with patches of greensward running down
it is guttered sides; and the broken ground is every where varied with an okery
tint, a gray gravel, or a leaden-coloured clay: so that in fact the rich
colors of the ground arise generally from it is broken surface.

From such reasoning then we infer, that it is not merely for the sake of his
execution, that the painter prefers rough objects to smooth. The very essence
of his art requires it.

As picturesque beauty therefore so greatly depends on rough objects, are we to
exclude every idea of smoothness from mixing with it? Are we struck with no
pleasing image, when the lake is spread upon the canvas; the marmoreum aequor,
pure, limpid, smooth, as the polished mirror?

We acknowledge it to be picturesque: but we must at the same time recollect,
that, in fact, the smoothness of the lake is more in reality, than in
appearance. Were it spread upon the canvas in one simple hue, it would
certainly be a dull, fatiguing object. But to the eye it appears broken by
shades of various kinds; by the undulations of the water; or by reflections
from all the rough objects in it is neighborhood.

It is thus too in other glossy bodies. Tho the horse, in a rough state, as we
have just observed, or worn down with labor, is more adapted to the pencil,
than when his sides shine with brushing, and high-feeding; yet in this latter
state also he is certainly a picturesque object. But it is not his smooth, and
shining coat, that makes him so. It is the apparent interruption of that
smoothness by a variety of shades, and colors, which produces the effect. Such
a play of muscles appears, every where, through the fineness of his skin,
gently swelling, and sinking into each other -- he is all over so lubricus
aspici, the reflections of light are so continually shifting upon him, and
playing into each other, that the eye never considers the smoothness of the
surface; but is amused with gliding up, and down, among these endless
transitions, which in some degree, supply the room of roughness.

It is thus too in the plumage of birds. Nothing can be softer, nothing
smoother to the touch; and yet it is certainly picturesque. But it is not the
smoothness of the surface, which produces the effect -- it is not this we
admire: it is the breaking of the colors: it is the bright green, or purple,
changing perhaps into a rich azure, or velvet black; from thence taking a
semitint; and so on through all the varieties of color. Or if the color be
not changeable, it is the harmony we admire in these elegant little touches of
nature's pencil. The smoothness of the surface is only the ground of the
colors. In itself we admire it no more, than we do the smoothness of the
canvas, which receives the colors of the picture. Even the plumage of the
swan, which to the inaccurate observer appears only of one simple hue, is in
fact varied with a thousand soft shadows, and brilliant touches, at once
discoverable to the picturesque eye.

Thus too a piece of polished marble may be picturesque; but it is only, when
the polish brings out beautiful veins, which in appearance break the surface by
a variety of lines, and colors. Let the marble be perfectly white, and the
effect vanishes. Thus also a mirror may have picturesque beauty; but it is only
from it is reflections. In an unreflecting state, it is insipid.

In statuary we sometimes see an inferior artist give his marble a gloss,
thinking to atone for his bad workmanship by his excellent polish. The effect
shows in how small a degree smoothness enters into the idea of the picturesque.
When the light plays on the shining coat of a pampered horse, it plays among
the lines, and muscles of nature; and is therefore founded in truth. But the
polish of marble-flesh is unnatural On all human flesh held between the eye and
the light, there is a degree of polish. I speak not here of such a polish as
this, which wrought marble always, in a degree, possesses, as well as human
flesh; but of the highest polish, which can be given to marble; and which has
always a very bad effect. If I wanted an example, the bust of archbishop
Boulter in Westminster-abbey would afford a very glaring one.


. The lights therefore are false; and smoothness being here one of the chief
qualities to admire, we are disgusted; and say, it makes bad, worse.

After all, we mean not to assert, that even a simple smooth surface is in no
situation picturesque. In contrast it certainly may be: nay in contrast it is
often necessary. The beauty of an old head is greatly improved by the
smoothness of the bald pate; and the rougher parts of the rock must necessarily
be set off with the smoother. But the point lies here: to make an object in a
peculiar manner picturesque, there must be a proportion of roughness; so much
at least, as to make an opposition; which in an object simply beautiful, is
unnecessary.

Some quibbling opponent may throw out, that wherever there is smoothness,
there must also be roughness. The smoothest plain consists of many rougher
parts; and the roughest rock of many smoother; and there is such a variety of
degrees in both, that it is hard to say, where you have the precise ideas of
rough, and smooth.

To this it is enough, that the province of the picturesque eye is to survey
nature; not to anatomize matter. It throws it is glances around in the
broad-cast style. It comprehends an extensive tract at each sweep. It examines
parts, but never descends to particles.

Having thus from a variety of examples endeavored to show, that roughness
either real, or apparent, forms an essential difference between the beautiful,
and the picturesque; it may be expected, that we should point out the reason of
this difference. It is obvious enough, why the painter prefers rough objects to
smooth See page 19, etc.
: but it is not so obvious, why the quality of roughness should make an
essential difference between the objects of nature, and the objects of
artificial representation.

To this question, we might answer, that the picturesque eye abhors art; and
delights solely in nature: and that as art abounds with regularity, which is
only another name for smoothness; and the images of nature with irregularity,
which is only another name for roughness, we have here a solution of our
question.

But is this solution satisfactory? I fear not. Tho art often abounds with
regularity, it does not follow, that all art must necessarily do so. The
picturesque eye, it is true, finds it is chief objects in nature; but it
delights also in the images of art, if they are marked with the
characteristics, which it requires. A painter's nature is whatever he imitates;
whether the object be what is commonly called natural, or artificial. Is there
a greater ornament of landscape, than the ruins of a castle? What painter
rejects it, because it is artificial? -- What beautiful effects does Vandervelt
produce from shipping? In the hands of such a master it furnishes almost as
beautiful forms, as any in the whole circle of picturesque objects? -- And what
could the history-painter do, without his draperies to combine, contrast, and
harmonize his figures? Uncloathed, they could never be grouped. How could he
tell his story, without arms; religious utensils; and the rich furniture of
banquets? Many of these contribute greatly to embellish his pictures with
pleasing shapes.

Shall we then seek the solution of our question in the great foundation of
picturesque beauty? in the happy union of simplicity and variety; to which the
rough ideas essentially contribute. An extended plain is a simple object. It is
the continuation only of one uniform idea. But the mere simplicity of a plain
produces no beauty. Break the surface of it, as you did your pleasure-ground;
add trees, rocks, and declivities; that is, give it roughness, and you give it
also variety. Thus by enriching the parts of a united whole with roughness, you
obtain the combined idea of simplicity, and variety; from whence results the
picturesque. -- Is this a satisfactory answer to our question?

By no means. Simplicity and variety are sources of the beautiful, as well as
of the picturesque. Why does the architect break the front of his pile with
ornaments? Is it not to add variety to smplicity? Even the very blacksmith
acknowledges this principle by forming ringlets, and bulbous circles on his
tongs, and pokers. In nature it is the same; and your plain will just as much
be improved in reality by breaking it, as upon canvas. -- In a garden-scene the
idea is different. There every object is of the neat, and elegant kind. What is
otherwise, is inharmonious, and roughness would be disorder.

Shall we then change our ground; and seek an answer to our question in the
nature of the art of painting? As it is an art strictly imitative, those
objects will of course appear most advantageously to the picturesque eye, which
are the most easily imitated. The stronger the features are, the stronger will
be the effect of imitation; and as rough objects have the strongest features,
they will consequently, when represented, appear to most advantage. -- Is this
answer more satisfactory?

Very little, in truth. Every painter, knows that a smooth object may be as
easily, and as well imitated, as a rough one.

Shall we then take an opposite ground, and say just the reverse (as men
pressed with difficulties will say any thing) that painting is not an art
strictly imitative, but rather deceptive -- that by an assemblage of colors,
and a peculiar art in spreading them, the painter gives a semblance of nature
at a proper distance; which at hand, is quite another thing -- that those
objects, which we call picturesque, are only such as are more adapted to this
art -- and that as this art is most concealed in rough touches, rough objects
are of course the most picturesque. -- Have we now attained a satisfactory
account of the matter?

Just as much so, as before. Many painters of note did not use the rough style
of painting; and yet their pictures are as admirable, as the pictures of those,
who did: nor are rough objects less picturesque on their canvas, than on the
canvas of others: that is, they paint rough objects smoothly.

Thus foiled, shall we in the true spirit of inquiry, persist; or honestly give
up the cause, and own we cannot search out the source of this difference? I am
afraid this is the truth, whatever airs of dogmatizing we may assume. Inquiries
into principles rarely end in satisfaction. Could we even gain satisfaction in
our present question, new doubts would arise. The very first principles of our
art would be questioned. Difficulties would start up vestibulum ante ipsum. We
should be asked, What is beauty? What is taste? -- Let us step aside a moment,
and listen to the debates of the learned on these heads. They will at least
show us, that however we may wish to six principles, our inquiries are seldom
satisfactory.

One philosopher will tell us, that taste is only the improvement of our own
ideas. Every man has naturally his proportion of taste. The seeds of it are
innate. All depends on cultivation.

Another philosopher following the analogy of nature, observes, that as all
men's faces are different, we may well suppose their minds to be so likewise. He
rejects the idea therefore of innate taste; and in the room of this makes
utility the standard both of taste, and beauty.

Another philosopher thinks the idea of utility as absurd, as the last did that
of innate taste. What, cries he, can I not admire the beauty of a resplendent
sunset, till I have investigated the utility of that peculiar radiance in the
atmosphere? He then wishes we had a little less philosophy amongst us, and a
little more common sense. Common sense is despised like other common things:
but, in his opinion, if we made common sense the criterion in matters of art,
as well as science, we should be nearer the truth.

A fourth philosopher apprehends common sense to be our standard only in the
ordinary affairs of life. The bounty of nature has furnished us with various
other senses suited to the objects, among which we converse: and with regard to
matters of taste, it has supplied us with what, he doubts not, we all feel
within ourselves, a sense of beauty.

Pooh! says another learned inquirer, what is a sense of beauty? Sense is a
vague idea, and so is beauty; and it is impossible that any thing determined
can result from terms so inaccurate. But if we lay aside a sense of beauty, and
adopt proportion, we shall all be right. Proportion is the great principle of
taste, and beauty. We admit it both in lines, and colors; and indeed refer all
our ideas of the elegant kind to it is standard.

True, says an admirer of the antique; but this proportion must have a rule, or
we gain nothing: and a rule of proportion there certainly is: but we may
inquire after it in vain. The secret is lost. The ancients had it. They well
knew the principles of beauty; and had that unerring rule, which in all things
adjusted their taste. We see it even in their slightest vases. In their works,
proportion, tho varied through a thousand lines, is still the same; and if we
could only discover their principles of proportion, we should have the arcanum
of this science; and might settle all our disputes about taste with great ease.

Thus, in our inquiries into first principles, we go on, without end, and
without satisfaction. The human understanding is unequal to the search. In
philosophy we inquire for them in vain -- in physics -- in metaphysics -- in
morals. Even in the polite arts, where the subject, one should imagine, is less
recondite, the inquiry, we find, is equally vague. We are puzzled, and
bewildered; but not informed. All is uncertainty; a strife of words; the old
contest, Empedocles, an Stertinii deliret acumen?

In a word, if a cause be sufficiently understood, it may suggest useful
discoveries. But if it be not so (and where is our certainty in these
disquisitions) it will unquestionably mislead.

END OF THE FIRST ESSAY.
AS the subject of the foregoing essay is rather new, and I doubted, whether
sufficiently founded in truth, I was desirous, before I printed it, that it
should receive the imprimatur of sir Joshua Reynolds. I begged him therefore to
look it over, and received the following answer.

London, April 19th, 1791. DEAR SIR,
Tho I read now but little, yet I have read with great attention the essay,
which you was so good to put into my hands, on the difference between the
beautiful, and the picturesque; and I may truly say, I have received from it
much pleasure, and improvement.

Without opposing any of your sentiments, it has suggested an idea, that may be
worth consideration -- whether the epithet picturesque is not applicable to the
excellences of the inferior schools, rather than to the higher. The works of
Michael Angelo, Raphael, etc. appear to me to have nothing of it; whereas
Reubens, and the Venetian painters may almost be said to have nothing else.

Perhaps picturesque is somewhat synonymous to the word taste; which we should
think improperly applied to Homer, or Milton, but very well to Pope, or Prior.
I suspect that the application of these words are to excellences of an inferior
order; and which are incompatible with the grand style.

You are certainly right in saying, that variety of tints and forms is
picturesque; but it must be remembered, on the other hand, that the reverse of
this -- (uniformity of color, and a long continuation of lines,) produces
grandeur.

I had an intention of pointing out the passages, that particularly struck me;
but I was afraid to use my eyes so much.

The essay has lain upon my table; and I think no day has passed without my
looking at it, reading a little at a time. Whatever objections presented
themselves at first view, Sir Joshua Reynolds had seen this essay, several
years ago, through Mr. Mason, who showed it to him. He then made some
objections to it: particularly he thought, that the term picturesque, should be
applied only to the works of nature. His concession here is an instance of that
candor, which is a very remarkable part of his character; and which is
generally one of the distinguishing marks of true genius.


were done away on a closer inspection: and I am not quite sure, but that is
the case in regard to the observation, which I have ventured to make on the
word picturesque.

I am, etc. JOSHUA REYNOLDS.
To the revd. Mr. Gilpin, Vicar's-hill.

THE ANSWER.
May 2d, 1791. DEAR SIR,
I am much obliged to you for looking over my essay at a time, when the
complaint in your eyes must have made an intrusion of this kind troublesome.
But as the subject was rather novel, I wished much for your sanction; and you
have given it me in as flattering a manner, as I could wish.

With regard to the term picturesque, I have always myself used it merely to
denote such objects, as are proper subjects for painting: so that, according to
my definition, one of the cartoons, and a flower-piece are equally picturesque.

I think however I understand your idea of extending the term to what may be
called taste in painting -- or the art of fascinating the eye by splendid
coloring, and artificial combinations; which the inferior schools valued; and
the dignity of the higher perhaps despised. But I have seen so little of the
higher schools, that I should be very ill able to carry the subject farther by
illustrating a disquisition of this kind. Except the cartoons, I never saw a
picture of Raphael's, that answered my idea; and of the original works of
Michael Angelo I have little conception.

But tho I am unable, through ignorance, to appreciate fully the grandeur of
the Roman school, I have at least the pleasure to find I have always held as a
principle your idea of the production of greatness by uniformity of color, and
a long continuation of line: and when I speak of variety, I certainly do not
mean to confound it is effects with those of grandeur.

I am, etc. WILLIAM GILPIN.
To sir Joshua Reynolds, Leicester-square.

ESSAY II. ON PICTURESQUE TRAVEL.
ESSAY II.
ENOUGH has been said to show the difficulty of assigning causes: let us then
take another course, and amuse ourselves with searching after effects. This is
the general intention of picturesque travel. We mean not to bring it into
competition with any of the more useful ends of traveling: but as many travel
without any end at all, amusing themselves without being able to give a reason
why they are amused, we offer an end, which may possibly engage some vacant
minds; and may indeed afford a rational amusement to such as travel for more
important purposes.

In treating of picturesque travel, we may consider first it is object; and
secondly it is sources of amusement.

It Is object is beauty of every kind, which either art, or nature can produce:
but it is chiefly that species of picturesque beauty, which we have endeavored
to characterize in the preceding essay. This great object we pursue through the
scenery of nature; and examine it by the rules of painting. We seek it among
all the ingredients of landscape -- trees -- rocks -- broken-grounds -- woods
-- rivers -- lakes -- plains -- valleys -- mountains -- and distances. These
objects in themselves produce infinite variety. No two rocks, or trees are
exactly the same. They are varied, a second time, by combination; and almost as
much, a third time, by different lights, and shades, and other aerial effects.
Sometimes we find among them the exhibition of a whole; but oftener we find
only beautiful parts. As some of these topics have been occasionally mentioned
in other picturesque works, which the author has given the public, they are
here touched very slightly: only the subject required they should be brought
together.




That we may examine picturesque objects with more ease, it may be useful to
class them into the sublime, and the beautiful; tho, in fact, this distinction
is rather inaccurate. Sublimity alone cannot make an object picturesque.
However grand the mountain, or the rock may be, it has no claim to this
epithet, unless it is form, it is color, or it is accompaniments have some degree
of beauty. Nothing can be more sublime, than the ocean: but wholly
unaccompanied, it has little of the picturesque. When we talk therefore of a
sublime object, we always understand, that it is also beautiful: and we call it
sublime, or beautiful, only as the ideas of sublimity, or of simple beauty
prevail.

The curious, and fantastic forms of nature are by no means the favorite
objects of the lovers of landscape. There may be beauty in a curious object;
and so far it may be picturesque: but we cannot admire it merely for the sake
of it is curiosity. The lusus naturae is the naturalist's province, not the
painter's. The spiry pinnacles of the mountain, and the castle-like arrangement
of the rock, give no peculiar pleasure to the picturesque eye. It is fond of
the simplicity of nature; and sees most beauty in her most usual forms. The
Giant's causeway in Ireland may strike it as a novelty; but the lake of
Killarney attracts it is attention. It would range with supreme delight among
the sweet vales of Switzerland; but would view only with a transient glance,
the Glaciers of Savoy. Scenes of this kind, as unusual, may please once; but
the great works of nature, in her simplest and purest style, open inexhausted
springs of amusement.

But it is not only the form, and the composition of the objects of landscape,
which the picturesque eye examines; it connects them with the atmosphere, and
seeks for all those various effects, which are produced from that vast, and
wonderful storehouse of nature. Nor is there in traveling a greater pleasure,
than when a scene of grandeur bursts unexpectedly upon the eye, accompanied
with some accidental circumstance of the atmosphere, which harmonizes with it,
and gives it double value.

Besides the inanimate face of nature, it is living forms fall under the
picturesque eye, in the course of travel; and are often objects of great
attention. The anatomical study of figures is not attended to: we regard them
merely as the ornament of scenes. In the human figure we contemplate neither
exactness of form; nor expression, any farther than it is shown in action: we
merely consider general shapes, dresses, groups, and occupations; which we
often find casually in greater variety, and beauty, than any selection can
procure.

In the same manner animals are the objects of our attention, whether we find
them in the park, the forest, or the field. Here too we consider little more,
than their general forms, actions, and combinations. Nor is the picturesque eye
so fastidious as to despise even less considerable objects. A flight of birds
has often a pleasing effect. In short, every form of life, and being has it is
use as a picturesque object, till it become too small for attention.

But the picturesque eye is not merely restricted to nature. It ranges through
the limits of art. The picture, the statue, and the garden are all the objects
of it is attention. In the embellished pleasure-ground particularly, tho all is
neat, and elegant -- far too neat and elegant for the use of the pencil; yet,
if it be well laid out, it exhibits the lines, and principles of landscape; and
is well worth the study of the picturesque traveller. Nothing is wanting, but
what his imagination can supply -- a change from smooth to rough. See page 8.


But among all the objects of art, the picturesque eye is perhaps most
inquisitive after the elegant relics of ancient architecture; the ruined tower,
the Gothic arch, the remains of castles, and abbeys. These are the richest
legacies of art. They are consecrated by time; and almost deserve the
veneration we pay to the works of nature itself.

Thus universal are the objects of picturesque travel. We pursue beauty in
every shape; through nature, through art; and all it is various arrangements in
form, and color; admiring it in the grandest objects, and not rejecting it in
the humblest.

From the objects of picturesque travel, we consider it is sources of amusement
-- or in what way the mind is gratified by these objects.

We might begin in moral style; and consider the objects of nature in a higher
light, than merely as amusement. We might observe, that a search after beauty
should naturally lead the mind to the great origin of all beauty; to the --
first good, first perfect, and first fair. But tho in theory this seems a
natural climax, we insist the less upon it, as in fact we have scarce ground to
hope, that every admirer of picturesque beauty, is an admirer also of the
beauty of virtue; and that every lover of nature reflects, that Nature is but a
name for an effect,
Whose cause is God. --
If however the admirer of nature can turn his amusements to a higher purpose;
if it is great scenes can inspire him with religious awe; or it is tranquil
scenes with that complacency of mind, which is so nearly allied to benevolence,
it is certainly the better. Apponat lucro. It is so much into the bargain: for
we dare not promise him more from picturesque travel, than a rational, and
agreeable amusement. Yet even this may be of some use in an age teeming with
licentious pleasure; and may in this light at least be considered as having a
moral tendency.

The first source of amusement to the picturesque traveller, is the pursuit of
his object -- the expectation of new scenes continually opening, and arising to
his view. We suppose the country to have been unexplored. Under this
circumstance the mind is kept constantly in an agreeable suspense. The love of
novelty is the foundation of this pleasure. Every distant horizon promises
something new; and with this pleasing expectation we follow nature through all
her walks. We pursue her from hill to dale; and hunt after those various
beauties, with which she every where abounds.

The pleasures of the chase are universal. A hare started before dogs is enough
to set a whole country in an uproar. The plough, and the spade are deserted.
Care is left behind; and every human faculty is dilated with joy.

And shall we suppose it a greater pleasure to the sportsman to pursue a
trivial animal, than it is to the man of taste to pursue the beauties of
nature? to follow her through all her recesses? to obtain a sudden glance, as
she flits past him in some airy shape? to trace her through the mazes of the
cover? to wind after her along the vale? or along the reaches of the river?

After the pursuit we are gratified with the attainment of the object. Our
amusement, on this head, arises from the employment of the mind in examining
the beautiful scenes we have found. Sometimes we examine them under the idea of
a whole: we admire the composition, the coloring, and the light, in one
comprehensive view. When we are fortunate enough to fall in with scenes of this
kind, we are highly delighted. But as we have less frequent opportunities of
being thus gratified, we are more commonly employed in analyzing the parts of
scenes; which may be exquisitely beautiful, tho unable to produce a whole. We
examine what would amend the composition; how little is wanting to reduce it to
the rules of our art; what a trifling circumstance sometimes forms the limit
between beauty, and deformity. Or we compare the objects before us with other
objects of the same kind: -- or perhaps we compare them with the imitations of
art. From all these operations of the mind results great amusement.

But it is not from this scientifical employment, that we derive our chief
pleasure. We are most delighted, when some grand scene, tho perhaps of
incorrect composition, rising before the eye, strikes us beyond the power of
thought -- when the vox faucibus haeret; and every mental operation is
suspended. In this pause of intellect; this deliquium of the soul, an
enthusiastic sensation of pleasure overspreads it, previous to any examination
by the rules of art. The general idea of the scene makes an impression, before
any appeal is made to the judgment. We rather feel, than survey it.

This high delight is generally indeed produced by the scenes of nature; yet
sometimes by artificial objects. Here and there a capital picture will raise
these emotions: but oftener the rough sketch of a capital master. This has
sometimes an astonishing effect on the mind; giving the imagination an opening
into all those glowing ideas, which inspired the artist; and which the
imagination only can translate. In general however the works of art affect us
coolly; and allow the eye to criticize at leisure.

Having gained by a minute examination of incidents a complete idea of an
object, our next amusement arises from enlarging, and correcting our general
stock of ideas. The variety of nature is such, that new objects, and new
combinations of them, are continually adding something to our fund, and
enlarging our collection: while the same kind of object occurring frequently,
is seen under various shapes; and makes us, if I may so speak, more learned in
nature. We get it more by heart. He who has seen only one oak-tree, has no
complete idea of an oak in general: but he who has examined thousands of
oak-trees, must have seen that beautiful plant in all it is varieties; and
obtains a full, and complete idea of it.

From this correct knowledge of objects arises another amusement; that of
representing, by a few strokes in a sketch, those ideas, which have made the
most impression upon us. A few scratches, like a shorthand scrawl of our own,
legible at least to ourselves, will serve to raise in our minds the remembrance
of the beauties they humbly represent; and recall to our memory even the
splendid coloring, and force of light, which existed in the real scene. Some
naturalists suppose, the act of ruminating, in animals, to be attended with
more pleasure, than the act of grosser mastication. It may be so in traveling
also. There may be more pleasure in recollecting, and recording, from a few
transient lines, the scenes we have admired, than in the present enjoyment of
them. If the scenes indeed have peculiar greatness, this secondary pleasure
cannot be attended with those enthusiastic feelings, which accompanied the real
exhibition. But, in general, tho it may be a calmer species of pleasure, it is
more uniform, and uninterrupted. It flatters us too with the idea of a sort of
creation of our own; and it is unallayed with that fatigue, which is often a
considerable abatement to the pleasures of traversing the wild, and savage
parts of nature. -- After we have amused ourselves with our sketches, if we
can, in any degree, contribute to the amusement of others also, the pleasure is
surely so much inhanced.

There is still another amusement arising from the correct knowledge of
objects; and that is the power of creating, and representing scenes of fancy;
which is still more a work of creation, than copying from nature. The
imagination becomes a camera obscura, only with this difference, that the
camera represents objects as they really are; while the imagination, impressed
with the most beautiful scenes, and chastened by rules of art, forms it is
pictures, not only from the most admirable parts of nature; but in the best
taste.

Some artists, when they give their imagination play, let it loose among
uncommon scenes -- such as perhaps never existed: whereas the nearer they
approach the simple standard of nature, in it is most beautiful forms, the more
admirable their fictions will appear. It is thus in writing romances. The
correct taste cannot bear those unnatural situations, in which heroes, and
heroines are often placed: whereas a story, naturally, and of course
affectingly told, either with a pen, or a pencil, tho known to be a fiction, is
considered as a transcript from nature; and takes possession of the heart. The
mavelous disgusts the sober imagination; which is gratified only with the
pure characters of nature.

-- Beauty best is taught
By those, the favored few, whom heaven has lent
The power to seize, select, and reunite
Her loveliest features; and of these to form
One archetype complete, of sovereign grace.
Here nature sees her fairest forms more fair;
Owns them as hers, yet owns herself excelled
By what herself produced. --
But if we are unable to embody our ideas even in a humble sketch, yet still a
strong impression of nature will enable us to judge of the works of art. Nature
is the archetype. The stronger therefore the impression, the better the
judgment.

We are, in some degree, also amused by the very visions of fancy itself.
Often, when slumber has half-closed the eye, and shut out all the objects of
sense, especially after the enjoyment of some splendid scene; the imagination,
active, and alert, collects it is scattered ideas, transposes, combines, and
shifts them into a thousand forms, producing such exquisite scenes, such
sublime arrangements, such glow, and harmony of coloring, such brilliant
lights, such depth, and clearness of shadow, as equally foil description, and
every attempt of artificial coloring.

It may perhaps be objected to the pleasureable circumstances, which are thus
said to attend picturesque travel, that we meet as many disgusting, as pleasing
objects; and the man of taste therefore will be as often offended, as amused.

But this is not the case. There are few parts of nature, which do not yield a
picturesque eye some amusement.

-- Believe the muse,
She does not know that unauspicious spot,
Where beauty is thus niggard of her store.
Believe the muse, through this terrestrial waste
The seeds of grace are sown, profusely sown,
Even where we least may hope. --
It is true, when some large tract of barren country interrupts our
expectation, wound up in quest of any particular scene of grandeur, or beauty,
we are apt to be a little peevish; and to express our discontent in hasty
exaggerated phrase. But when there is no disappointment in the case, even
scenes the most barren of beauty, will furnish amusement.

Perhaps no part of England comes more under this description, than that tract
of barren country, through which the great military road passes from Newcastle
to Carlisle. It is a waste, with little interruption, through a space of forty
miles. But even here, we have always something to amuse the eye. The
interchangeable patches of heath, and green-sward make an agreeable variety.
Often too on these vast tracts of intersecting grounds we see beautiful lights,
softening off along the sides of hills: and often we see them adorned with
cattle, flocks of sheep, heath-cocks, grous, plover, and flights of other
wild-fowl. A group of cattle, standing in the shade on the edge of a dark hill,
and relieved by a lighter distance beyond them, will often make a complete
picture without any other accompaniment. In many other situations also we find
them wonderfully pleasing; and capable of making pictures amidst all the
deficiences of landscape. Even a winding road itself is an object of beauty;
while the richness of the heath on each side, with the little hillocs, and
crumbling earth give many an excellent lesson for a foreground. When we have no
opportunity of examining the grand scenery of nature, we have every where at
least the means of observing with what a multiplicity of parts, and yet with
what general simplicity, she covers every surface.

But if we let the imagination loose, even scenes like these, administer great
amusement. The imagination can plant hills; can form rivers* and lakes in
valleys; can build castles, and abbeys; and if it find no other amusement, can
dilate itself in vast ideas of space.

But although the picturesque traveller is seldom disappointed with pure nature,
however rude, yet we cannot deny, but he is often offended with the productions
of art. He is disgusted with the formal separations of property -- with houses,
and towns, the haunts of men, which have much oftener a bad effect in
landscape, than a good one. He is frequently disgusted also, when art aims more
at beauty, than she ought. How flat, and insipid is often the garden-scene! how
puerile, and absurd! the banks of the river how smooth, and parrallel! the
lawn, and it is boundaries, how unlike nature! Even in the capital collection of
pictures, how seldom does he find design, composition, expression, character,
or harmony either in light, or coloring! and how often does he drag through
saloons, and rooms of state, only to hear a catalogue of the names of masters!

The more refined our taste grows from the study of nature, the more insipid
are the works of art. Few of it is efforts please. The idea of the great
original is so strong, that the copy must be very pure, if it do not disgust.
But the varieties of nature's charts are such, that, study them as we can, new
varieties will always arise: and let our taste be ever so refined, her works,
on which it is formed (at least when we consider them as objects,) must always
go beyond it; and furnish fresh sources both of pleasure and amusement.

END OF THE SECOND ESSAY.
ESSAY III. ON THE ART OF SKETCHING LANDSCAPE.
ESSAY III.
THE art of sketching is to the picturesque traveller, what the art of writing
is to the scholar. Each is equally necessary to fix, and communicate it is
respective ideas.

Sketches are either taken from the imagination, or from nature. -- When the
imaginary sketch proceeds from the hands of a master, it is very valuable. It
is his first conception; which is commonly the strongest, and the most
brilliant. The imagination of a painter, really great in his profession, is a
magazine abounding with all the elegant forms, and striking effects, which are
to be found in nature. These, like a magician, he calls up at pleasure with a
wave of his hand; bringing before the eye, sometimes a scene from history, or
romance; and sometimes from the inanimate parts of nature. And in these happy
moments, when the enthusiasm of his art is upon him, he often produces from the
glow of his imagination, with a few bold strokes, such wonderful effusions of
genius, as the more sober, and correct productions of his pencil cannot equal.

It will always however be understood, that such sketches must be examined also
by an eye learned in the art, and accustomed to picturesque ideas -- an eye,
that can take up the half-formed images, as the master leaves them; give them a
new creation; and make up all that is not expressed from it is own storehouse.
-- I shall however dwell no longer on imaginary sketching, as it has but
little relation to my present subject. Let me only add, that although this essay
is meant chiefly to assist the picturesque traveller in taking views from
nature, the method recommended, as far as it relates to execution, may equally
be applied to imaginary sketches.

Your intention in taking views from nature, may either be to fix them in your
own memory -- or to convey, in some degree, your ideas to others.

With regard to the former, when you meet a scene you wish to sketch, your
first consideration is to get it in the best point of view. A few paces to the
right, or left, make a great difference. The ground, which folds awkwardly
here, appears to fold more easily there: and that long blank curtain of the
castle, which is so unpleasing a circumstance, as you stand on one side, is
agreeably broken by a buttress on another.

Having thus fixed your point of view, your next consideration, is, how to
reduce it properly within the compass of your paper: for the scale of nature
being so very different from your scale, it is a matter of difficulty, without
some experience, to make them coincide. If the landscape before you is
extensive, take care you do not include too much: it may perhaps be divided
more commodiously into two sketches. -- When you have fixed the portion of it,
you mean to take, fix next on two or three principal points, which you may just
mark on your paper. This will enable you the more easily to ascertain the
relative situation of the several objects.

In sketching, black-lead is the first instrument commonly used. Nothing glides
so volubly over paper, and executes an idea so quickly. -- It has besides,
another advantage; it is gray tint corresponds better with a wash, than black,
or red chalk, or any other pastile. -- It admits also of easy correction.

The virtue of these hasty, black-lead sketches consists in catching readily
the characteristic features of a scene. Light and shade are not attended to. It
is enough if you express general shapes; and the relations, which the several
intersections of a country bear to each other. A few lines drawn on the spot,
will do this. "Half a word, says Mr. Gray, fixed on, or near the spot, is worth
all our recollected ideas. When we trust to the picture, that objects draw of
themselves on the mind, we deceive ourselves. Without accurate, and particular
observation, it is but ill-drawn at first: the outlines are soon blurred: the
colors, every day grow fainter; and at last, when we would produce it to any
body, we are obliged to supply it is defects with a few strokes of our own
imagination." Letter to Mr. Palgrave, p. 272, 4to.
-- What Mr. Gray says, relates chiefly to verbal description: but in lineal
description it is equally true. The leading ideas must be fixed on the spot: if
left to the memory, they soon evaporate.

The lines of black-lead, and indeed of any one instrument, are subject to the
great inconvenience of confounding distances. If there are two, or three
distances in the landscape, as each of them is expressed by the same kind of
line, the eye forgets the distinction, even in half a day's traveling; and all
is confusion. To remedy this, a few written references, made on the spot, are
necessary, if the landscape be at all complicated. The traveller should be
accurate in this point, as the spirit of his view depends much on the proper
observance of distances. -- At his first leisure however he will review his
sketch; add a few strokes with a pen, to mark the near grounds; and by a slight
wash of Indian ink, throw in a few general lights, and shades, to keep all
fixed, and in it is place. -- A sketch need not be carried farther, when it is
intended merely to assist our own memory.

But when a sketch is intended to convey, in some degree, our ideas to others,
it is necessary, that it should be somewhat more adorned. To us the scene,
familiar to our recollection, may be suggested by a few rough strokes: but if
you wish to raise the idea, where none existed before, and to do it agreeably,
there should be some composition in your sketch -- a degree of correctness, and
expression in the out-line -- and some effect of light. A little ornament also
from figures, and other circumstances may be introduced. In short, it should be
so far dressed, as to give some idea of a picture. I call this an adorned
sketch; and should sketch nothing, that was not capable of being thus dressed.
An unpicturesque assemblage of objects; and, in general, all untractable
subjects, if it be necessary to represent them, may be given as plans, rather
than as pictures.

In the first place, I should advise the traveller by no means to work his
adorned sketch upon his original one. His first sketch is the standard, to
which, in the absence of nature, he must at least recur for his general ideas.
By going over it again, the original ideas may be lost, and the whole thrown
into confusion. Great masters therefore always set a high value on their
sketches from nature. On the same principle the picturesque traveller preserves
his original sketch, tho in itself of little value, to keep him within proper
bounds.

This matter being settled, and the adorned sketch begun anew, the first point
is to fix the composition.

But the composition, you say, is already fixed by the original sketch.

It is true: but still it may admit many little alterations, by which the forms
of objects may be assisted; and yet the resemblance not disfigured: as the same
piece of music, performed by different masters, and graced variously by each,
may yet continue still the same. We must ever recollect that nature is most
defective in composition; and must be a little assisted. Her ideas are too vast
for picturesque use, without the restraint of rules. Liberties however with
truth must be taken with caution: tho at the same time a distinction may be
made between an object, and a scene. If I give the striking features of the
castle, or abbey, which is my object, I may be allowed some little liberty in
bringing appendages (which are not essential features) within the rules of my
art. But in a scene, the whole view becomes the portrait; and if I flatter
here, I must flatter with delicacy.

But whether I represent an object, or a scene, I hold myself at perfect
liberty, in the first place, to dispose the foreground as I please; restrained
only by the analogy of the country. I take up a tree here, and plant it there.
I pare a knoll, or make an addition to it. I remove a piece of paling -- a
cottage -- a wall -- or any removeable object, which I dislike. In short, I do
not so much mean to exact a liberty of introducing what does not exist; as of
making a few of those simple variations, of which all ground is easily
susceptible, and which time itself indeed is continually making. All this my
art exacts:

She rules the foreground; she can swell, or sink
It Is surface; here her leafy skreen oppose,
And there withdraw; here part the varying greens,
And crowd them there in one promiscuous gloom,
As best befits the genius of the scene.
The foreground indeed is a mere spot, compared with the extension of the
distance: in itself it is of trivial consequence; and cannot well be called a
feature of the scene. And yet, tho so little essential in giving a likeness, it
is more so than any other part in forming a composition. It resembles those
deep tones in music, which give a value to all the lighter parts; and harmonize
the whole.

As the foreground therefore is of so much consequence, begin your adorned
sketch with fixing this very material part. It is easier to ascertain the
situation of your foreground, as it lies so near the bottom of your paper, than
any other part; and this will tend to regulate every thing else. In your rough
sketch it has probably been inaccurately thrown in. You could not so easily
ascertain it, till you had gotten all your landscape together. You might have
carried it too high on your paper; or have brought it too low. As you have now
the general scheme of your landscape before you, you may adjust it properly;
and give it it is due proportion. -- I shall add only, on the subject of
foregrounds, that you need not be very nice in finishing them, even when you
mean to adorn your sketches. In a finished picture the foreground is a matter
of great nicety: but in a sketch little more is necessary, than to produce the
effect you desire.

Having fixed your foreground, you consider in the same way, tho with more
caution, the other parts of your composition. In a hasty transcript from
nature, it is sufficient to take the lines of the country just as you find
them: but in your adorned sketch you must grace them a little, where they run
false. You must contrive to hide offensive parts with wood; to cover such as
are too bald, with ^ushes; and to remove little objects, which in nature push
themselves too much in sight, and serve only to introduce too many parts into
your composition. In this happy adjustment the grand merit of your sketch
consists. No beauty of light, coloring, or execution can atone for the want of
composition. It is the foundation of all picturesque beauty. No finery of dress
can set off a person, whose figure is awkward, and uncouth.

Having thus digested the composition of your adorned sketch, which is done
with black-lead, you proceed to give a stronger outline to the foreground, and
nearer parts. Some indeed use no outline, but what they freely work with a
brush on their black-lead sketch. This comes nearest the idea of painting; and
as it is the most free, it is perhaps also the most excellent method: but as a
black-lead outline is but a feeble termination, it requires a greater force in
the wash to produce an effect; and of course more the hand of a master. The
hand of a master indeed produces an effect with the rudest materials: but these
precepts aim only at giving a few instructions to the tyroes of the art; and
such will perhaps make their out-line the most effectually with a pen. As the
pen is more determined than black-lead, it leaves less to the brush, which I
think the more difficult instrument. -- Indian ink, (which may be heightened,
or lowered to any degree of strength, or weakness, so as to touch both the
nearer, and more distant grounds,) is the best ink you can use. You may give a
stroke with it so light as to confine even a remote distance; tho such a
distance is perhaps best left in black-lead.

But when we speak of an out-line, we do not mean a simple contour; which,
(however necessary in a correct figure,) would in landscape be formal. It is
enough to mark with a few free touches of the pen, here and there, some of the
breaks, and roughnesses, in which the richness of an object consists. But you
must first determine the situation of your lights, that you may mark these
touches on the shadowy side.

Of these free touches with a pen the chief characteristic is expression; or
the art of giving each object, that peculiar touch, whether smooth, or rough,
which best expresses it is form. The art of painting, in it is highest
perfection, cannot give the richness of nature. When we examine any natural
form, we find the multiplicity of it is parts beyond the highest finishing: and
indeed generally an attempt at the highest finishing would end in stiffness.
The painter is obliged therefore to deceive the eye by some natural tint, or
expressive touch, from which the imagination takes it is cue. How often do we
see in the landscapes of Claude the full effect of distance; which, when
examined closely, consists of a simple dash, tinged with the hue of nature,
intermixed with a few expressive touches? -- If then these expressive touches
are necessary, where the master carries on the deception both in form, and
color; how necessary must they be in mere sketches, in which color, the great
vehicle of deception, is removed? -- The art however of giving those expressive
marks with a pen, which impress ideas, is no common one. The inferior artist
may give them by chance: but the master only gives them with precision. -- Yet
a sketch may have it is use, and even it is merit, without these strokes of
genius.

As the difficulty of using the pen is such, it may perhaps be objected, that
it is an improper instrument for a tyro. It loses it is grace, if it have not a
ready, and off-hand execution.

It is true: but what other instrument shall we put into his hands, that will
do better? His black-lead, his brush, whatever he touches, will be unmasterly.
But my chief reason for putting a pen into his hands, is, that without a pen it
will be difficult for him to preserve his outline, and distances. His touches
with a pen may be unmasterly, we allow: but still they will preserve keeping in
his landscape, without which the whole will be a blot of confusion. -- Nor is
it perhaps so difficult to obtain some little freedom with a pen. I have seen
assiduity, attended with but little genius, make a considerable progress in the
use of this instrument; and produce an effect by no means displeasing. -- If
the drawing be large, I should recommend a reed-pen, which runs more freely
over paper.

When the out-line is thus drawn, it remains to add light, and shade. In this
operation the effect of a wash is much better, than of lines hatched with a
pen. A brush will do more in one stroke, and generally more effectually, than a
pen can do in twenty. I have seldom seen any drawings etched with a pen, that
pleased me. The most masterly sketches in this way I ever saw, were taken in
the early part of the life of a gentleman, now very high in his profession, Mr.
Mitford of Lincoln's inn. They were taken in several parts of Italy, and
England; and tho they are mere memorandum-sketches, the subjects are so happily
chosen -- they are so characteristic of the countries they represent -- and
executed with so free, and expressive a touch, that I examined them with
pleasure, not only as faithful portraits, (which I believe they all are) but as
masterpieces, as far as they go, both in composition, and execution.


For this purpose, we need only Indian ink; and perhaps a little bistre, or
burnt umber. With the former we give that greyish tinge, which belongs to the
sky, and distant objects; and with the latter (mixed more, or less with Indian
ink) those warm touches, which belong to the foreground. Indian ink however
alone makes a good wash both for the foreground, and distance.

But mere light and shade are not sufficient: something of effect also should
be aimed at in the adorned sketch. Mere light and shade propose only the simple
illumination of objects. Effect, by balancing large masses of each, gives the
whole a greater force. -- Now tho in the exhibitions of nature, we commonly
find only the simple illumination of objects; yet as we often do meet with
grand effects also, we have sufficient authority to use them: for under these
circumstances we see nature in her best attire, in which it is our business to
describe her.

As to giving rules for the production of effect, the subject admits only the
most general. There must be a strong opposition of light and shade; in which
the sky, as well as the landscape, must combine. But in what way this
opposition must be varied -- where the full tone of shade must prevail -- where
the full effusion of light -- or where the various degrees of each -- depends
entirely on the circumstance of the composition. All you can do, is to examine
your drawing (yet in it is naked out-line) with care; and endeavor to find out
where the force of the light will have the best effect. But this depends more
on taste, than on rule.

One thing both in light and shade should be observed, especially in the former
-- and that is gradation; which gives a force beyond what a glaring display of
light can give. The effect of light, which falls on the stone, produced as an
illustration of this idea, would not be so great, unless it graduated into
shade. -- In the following stanza Mr. Gray has with great beauty, and
propriety, illustrated the vicissitudes of life by the principles of
picturesque effect.

Still where rosy pleasure leads,
See a kindred grief pursue:
Behind the steps, which misery treads,
Approaching comfort view.
The hues of bliss more brightly glow,
Chastised by sabler tints of woe;
And, blended, form with artful strife,
The strength, and harmony of life.


I may farther add, that the production of an effect is particularly necessary
in drawing. In painting, color in some degree makes up the deficency: but in
simple clair-obscure there is no succedaneum. It Is force depends on effect; the
virtue of which is such, that it will give a value even to a barren subject.
Like striking the chords of a musical instrument, it will produce harmony,
without any richness of composition.

It is farther to be observed, that when objects are in shadow, the light, (as
it is then a reflected one,) falls on the opposite side to that, on which it
falls, when they are enlightened.

In adorning your sketch, a figure, or two may be introduced with propriety. By
figures I mean moving objects, as wagons, and boats, as well as cattle, and
men. But they should be introduced sparingly. In profusion they are affected.
Their chief use is, to mark a road -- to break a piece of foreground -- to
point out the horizon in a sea-view -- or to carry off the distance of retiring
water by the contrast of a dark sail, not quite so distant, placed before it.
But in figures thus designed for the ornament of a sketch, a few slight touches
are sufficient. Attempts at finishing offend. See the preceding essay.


Among trees, little distinction need be made, unless you introduce the pine,
or the cypress, or some other singular form. The oak, the ash, and the elm,
which bear a distant resemblance to each other, may all be characterized alike.
In a sketch, it is enough to mark a tree. One distinction indeed is often
necessary even in sketches; and that is, between full-leaved trees, and those
of straggling ramification. In composition we have often occasion for both, and
therefore the hand should be used readily to execute either. If we have a
general idea of the oak, for instance, as a light tree; and of the beech as a
heavy one, it is sufficient.

It adds, I think, to the beauty of a sketch to stain the paper slightly with a
reddish, or yellowish tinge; the use of which is to give a more pleasing tint
to the ground of the drawing by taking away the glare of the paper. It adds
also, if it be not too strong, a degree of harmony to the rawness of black, and
white. This tinge may be laid on, either before, or after the drawing is made.
In general, I should prefer the latter method; because, while the drawing is
yet on white paper, you may correct it with a sponge, dipped in water; which
will, in a good degree, efface Indian ink. But if you rub out any part, after
the drawing is stained, you cannot easily lay the stain again upon the rubbed
part without the appearance of a patch.

Some choose rather to add a little color to their sketches. My instructions
attempt not the art of mixing a variety of tints; and finishing a drawing from
nature; which is generally executed in colors from the beginning, without any
use of Indian ink; except as a gray tint, uniting with other colors. This
indeed, when chastely executed, (which is not often the case) exceeds in beauty
every other species of drawing. It is however beyond my skill to give any
instruction for this mode of drawing. All I mean, is only to offer a modest way
of tinting a sketch already finished in Indian ink. By the addition of a little
color I mean only to give some distinction to objects; and introduce rather a
gayer style into a landscape.

When you have finished your sketch therefore with Indian ink, as far as you
propose, tinge the whole over with some light horizon hue. It may be the rosy
tint of morning; or the more ruddy one of evening; or it may incline more to a
yellowish, or a greyish cast. As a specimen an evening hue is given. The first
tint you spread over your drawing, is composed of light red, and oker, which
make an orange. It may incline to one, or the other, as you choose. In this
example it inclines rather to the former. By washing this tint over your whole
drawing, you lay a foundation for harmony. When this wash is nearly dry, repeat
it in the horizon; softening it off into the sky, as you ascend. -- Take next a
purple tint, composed of lake, and blue, inclining rather to the former; and
with this, when your first wash is dry, form your clouds; and then spread it,
as you did the first tint, over your whole drawing, except where you leave the
horizon-tint. This still strengthens the idea of harmony. Your sky, and
distance are now finished.

You proceed next to your middle, and foregrounds; in both which you
distinguish between the soil, and the vegetation. Wash the middle grounds with
a little umber. This will be sufficient for the soil. The soil of the
foreground you may go over with a little light red. The vegetation of each may
be washed with a green, composed of blue, and oker; adding a little more oker
as you proceed nearer the eye; and on the nearest grounds a little burnt terra
Sienna. This is sufficient for the middle grounds. The foreground may farther
want a little heightening both in the soil, and vegetation. In the soil it may
be given in the lights with burnt terra Sienna; mixing in the shadows a little
lake: and in the vegetation with gallstone; touched in places, and occasionally
varied, with a little burnt terra Sienna.

Trees on the foreground are considered as a part of it; and their foliage may
be colored like the vegetation in their neighborhood. Their stems may be
touched with burnt terra Sienna. -- Trees, in middle distances are darker than
the lawns, on which they stand. They must therefore be touched twice over with
the tint, which is given only once to the lawn.

If you represent clouds with bright edges, the edges must be left in the first
orange; while the tint over the other part of the horizon is repeated, as was
mentioned before.

A lowering, cloudy sky is represented by, what is called, a gray tint,
composed of lake, blue, and oker. As the shadow deepens, the tint should
incline more to blue.

The several tints mentioned in the above process, may perhaps the most easily
be mixed before you begin; especially if your drawing be large. Rub the raw
colors in little saucers: keep them clean, and distinct; and from them, mix
your tints in other little vessels.

I shall only add, that the strength of the coloring you give your sketch,
must depend on the height, to which you have carried the Indian ink finishing.
If it be only a slight sketch, it will bear only a light wash of color.

This mode however of tinting a drawing, even when you tint it as high as these
instructions reach, is by no means calculated to produce any great effect of
coloring: but it is at least sufficient to preserve harmony. This you may
preserve: an effect of coloring you cannot easily attain. It is something
however to avoid a disagreeable excess; and there is nothing surely so
disagreeable to a correct eye as a tinted drawing (such as we often see) in
which greens, and blues, and reds, and yellows are daubed without any attention
to harmony. It is to the picturesque eye, what a discord of harsh notes is to a
musical ear.

But the advocate for these glaring tints may perhaps say, he does not make his
sky more blue than nature; nor his grass, and trees more green.

Perhaps so: but unless he could work up his drawing with the finishing of
nature, he will find the effect very unequal. Nature mixes a variety of
semitints with her brightest colors: and tho the eye cannot readily separate
them, they have a general chastizing effect; and keep the several tints of
landscape within proper bounds, which a glare of deep colors cannot do.
Besides, this chastizing hue is produced in nature by numberless little
shadows, beyond the attention of art, which she throws on leaves, and piles of
grass, and every other minute object; all which, tho not easily distinguished
in particulars, tells in the whole, and is continually chastening the hues of
nature.

Before I conclude these remarks on sketching, it may be useful to add a few
words, and but a few, on perspective. The nicer parts of it contain many
difficulties; and are of little use in common landscape: but as a building, now
and then, occurs, which requires some little knowledge of perspective, the
subject should not be left wholly untouched.

If a building stand exactly in front, none of it is lines can go off in
perspective: but if it stand with a corner to the eye, as picturesque buildings
commonly do, it is lines will appear to recede. In what manner they recede, the
following mechanical method may explain.

Hold horizontally between your eye, and the building you draw, a flat ruler,
till you see only the edge of it. Where it cuts the nearest perpendicular of
the building, which you have already just traced on your paper, make a mark;
and draw a slight line through that part, parallel with the bottom of your
paper. This is called the horizontal line, and regulates the whole perspective.
Observe next the angle, which the uppermost of these receding lines makes with
the nearest perpendicular of the building; and continue that receding line till
it meet the horizontal line. From the point, where it intersects, draw another
line to the bottom of the nearest perpendicular. This gives you the perspective
of the base. In the same manner all the lines, which recede, on both sides, of
the building; as well above, as below the horizontal line -- windows, doors,
and projections of every kind, (on the same plane) -- are regulated. The points
on the horizontal line, in which these receding lines unite, are called points
of sight.

After all, however, from the mode of sketching here recommended (which is as
far as I should wish to recommend drawing landscape to those, who draw only for
amusement) no great degree of accuracy can be expected. General ideas only must
be looked for; not the peculiarities of portrait. It admits the winding river
-- the shooting promontory -- the castle -- the abbey -- the flat distance --
and the mountain melting into the horizon. It admits too the relation, which
all these parts bear to each other. But it descends not to the minutiae of
objects. The fringed bank of the river -- the Gothic ornaments of the abbey --
the chasms, and fractures of the rock, and castle -- and every little object
along the vale, it pretends not to delineate with exactness. All this is the
province of the finished drawing, and the picture; in which the artist conveys
an idea of each minute feature of the country he delineates, or imagines. But
high finishing, as I have before observed, belongs only to a master, who can
give expressive touches. The disciple, whom I am instructing, and whom I
instruct only from my own experience, must have humbler views; and can hardly
expect to please, if he go farther than a sketch, adorned as has been here
described.

Many gentlemen, who draw for amusement, employ their leisure on human figures,
animal life, portrait, perhaps history. Here and there a man of genius makes
some proficiency in these difficult branches of the art: but I have rarely seen
any, who do. Distorted faces, and dislocated limbs, I have seen in abundance:
and no wonder; for the science of anatomy, even as it regards painting, is with
difficulty attained; and few who have studied it their whole lives, have
acquired perfection.

Others again, who draw for amusement, go so far as to handle the pallet. But
in this the success of the ill-judging artist seldom answers his hopes; unless
utterly void of taste, he happen to be such an artist as may be addressed in
the sarcasm of the critic, -- Sine rivali teque, et tua solus amares. Painting
is both a science, and an art; and if so very few attain perfection, who spend
a lifetime on it, what can be expected from those, who spend only their
leisure? The very few gentlemen-artists, who excel in painting, scarce afford
encouragement for common practice.

But the art of sketching landscape is attainable by a man of business; and it
is certainly more useful; and, I should imagine, more amusing, to attain some
degree of excellence in an inferior branch, than to be a mere bungler in a
superior. Even if you should not excel in execution (which indeed you can
hardly expect) you may at least by bringing home the delineation of a fine
country, dignify an indifferent s;ketch. You may please yourself by
administering strongly to recollection: and you may please others by conveying
your ideas more distinctly in an ordinary sketch, than in the best language.

THE END.
CONTENTS OF THE FOLLOWING POEM.
Line 1 INTRODUCTION, and address. Line 26 A close attention to the various
scenes of nature recommended; and to the several circumstances, under which
they appear. Line 78 A facility also in copying the different parts of nature
should be attained, before the young artist attempts a whole. Line 90 This
process will also be a kind of test. No one can make any progress, whose
imagination is not fired with the scenes of nature. Line 107 On a supposition,
that the artist is enamoured with his subject; and is well versed in copying
the parts of nature, he begins to combine, and form those parts into the
subjects of landscape. He pays his first attention to design, or to the
bringing together of such objects, as are suited to his subject; not mixing
trivial objects with grand scenes; but preserving the character of his subject,
whatever it may be. Line 133 The different parts of his landscape must next be
studiously arranged, and put together in a picturesque manner. This is the work
of disposition; or, as it is sometimes called, composition. No rules can be
given for this arrangement, but the experience of a nice eye: for tho nature
seldom presents a complete composition, yet we every where see in her works
beautiful arrangements of parts; which we ought to study with great attention.
Line 149 In general, a landscape is composed of three parts -- a foreground --
a middle ground -- and a distance. Line 153 Yet this is not a universal rule. A
balance of parts however there should always be; tho sometimes those parts may
be few. Line 166 It is a great error in landscape-painters, to lose the
simplicity of a whole, under the idea of giving variety. Line 172 Some
particular scene, therefore, or leading subject should always be chosen; to
which the parts should be subservient. Line 195 In balancing a landscape, a
spacious foreground will admit a small thread of distance: but the reverse is a
bad proportion. In every landscape there must be a considerable foreground.
Line 206 This theory is illustrated by the view of a disproportioned distance.
Line 233 An objection answered, why vast distances, tho unsupported by
foregrounds, may please in nature, and yet offend in representation. Line 256
But tho the several parts of landscape may be well balanced, and adjusted; yet
still without contrast in the parts, there will be a great deficiency. At the
same time this contrast must be easy, and natural. Line 276 Such pictures, as
are painted from fancy, are the most pleasing efforts of genius. But if an
untoward subject be given, the artist, must endeavor to conceal, and vary the
unaccommodating parts. The foreground he must claim as his own. Line 298 But if
nature be the source of all beauty, it may be objected, that imaginary views
can have little merit. The objection has weight, if the imaginary view be not
formed from the selected parts of nature; but if it be, it is nature still.
Line 312 The artist having thus adjusted his forms, and disposition; conceives
next the best effect of light; and when he has thus laid the foundation of his
picture, proceeds to coloring. Line 325 The author avoids giving rules for
coloring, which are learned chiefly by practice. Line 331 He just touches on
the theory of colors. Line 352 Artists, with equally good effect, sometimes
blend them on their pallet; and sometimes spread them raw on their canvas. Line
362 In coloring, the sky gives the ruling tint to the landscape: and the hue
of the whole, whether rich, or sober, must be harmonious. Line 406 A
predominancy of shade has the best effect. Line 439 But light, tho it should
not be scattered, should not be collected, as it were, into a focus. Line 444
The effect of gradation illustrated by the coloring of cattle. Line 463 Of the
disposition of light. Line 488 Of the general harmony of the whole. Line 499 A
method proposed of examining a picture with regard to it is general harmony.
Line 511 The scientific part being closed, all that can be said with regard to
execution, is, that, as there are various modes of it, every artist ought to
adopt his own, or else he becomes a servile imitator. On the whole, the bold
free method recommended; which aims at giving the character of objects, rather
than the minute detail. Line 545 Rules given with regard to figures. History in
miniature, introduced in landscape, condemned. Figures should be suited to the
scene. Line 600 Rules to be observed, in the introduction of birds. Line 625 An
exhibition is the truest test of excellence; where the picture receives it is
stamp, and value not from the airs of coxcombs; but from the judgment of men of
taste, and science.
ON LANDSCAPE PAINTING, A POEM.
ON LANDSCAPE PAINTING. A POEM.
THAT Art, which gives the practiced pencil power
To rival Nature's graces; to combine
In one harmonious whole her scattered charms,
And over them fling appropriate force of light,
I sing, unskilled in numbers; yet a Muse,
Led by the hand of Friendship, deigns to lend
Her aid, and give that free colloquial flow,
Which best befits the plain preceptive song.
To thee, thus aided, let me dare to sing,
Judicious LOCK; who from great Nature's realms
Have culled her loveliest features, and arrang'd
In thy rich mem'ry's storehouse: Thou, whose glance,
Practiced in truth and symmetry, can trace
In every latent touch, each Master's hand,
Whether the marble by his art subdued
Be softened into life, or canvas smooth
Be swelled to animation: Thou, to whom
Each mode of landscape, beauteous or sublime,
With every various color, tint, and light,
Its nice gradations, and its bold effects,
Are all familiar, patient hear my song,
That to thy taste and science nothing new
Presents, yet humbly hopes from thee to gain
The plaudit, which, if Nature first approve,
Then, and then only, thou will deign to yield.
First to the youthful artist I address
This leading precept: Let not inborn pride,
Presuming on thy own inventive powers,
Mislead thine eye from Nature. She must reign
Great architype in all: Trace then with care
Her varied walks; observe how she upheaves
The mountain's towering brow; on its rough sides
How broad the shadow falls, what different hues
Invest its glimmering surface. Next survey
The distant lake; so seen, a shining spot:
But when approaching nearer, how it flings
Its sweeping curves around the shooting cliffs.
Mark every shade its Proteus shape assumes
From motion and from rest; and how the forms
Of tufted woods, and beetling rocks, and towers
Of ruined castles, from the smooth expanse,
Shade answ'ring shade, inverted meet the eye.
From mountains hie thee to the forest-scene.
Remark the form, the foliage of each tree,
And what its leading feature: View the oak;
Its massy limbs, its majesty of shade;
The pendent birch; the beech of many a stem;
The lighter ash; and all their changeful hues
In spring or autumn, russet, green, or gray.
Next wander by the river's mazy bank:
See where it dimpling glides; or briskly where
Its whirling eddies sparkle round the rock;
Or where, with headlong rage, it dashes down
Some fractur'd chasm, till all its fury spent,
It sinks to sleep, a silent stagnant pool,
Dark, though translucent, from the mantling shade.
Now give thy view more ample range: explore
The vast expanse of ocean; see, when calm,
What Iris-hues of purple, green, and gold,
Play on its glassy surface; and when vexed
With storms, what depth of billowy shade, with light
Of curling foam contrasted. View the cliffs;
The lonely beacon, and the distant coast,
In mists arrayed, just heaving into sight
Above the dim horizon; where the sail
Appears conspicuous in the lengthened gleam.
With studious eye examine next the arch
Etherial; mark each sloating cloud; its form,
Its varied color; and what mass of shade
It gives the scene below, pregnant with change
Perpetual, from the morning's purple dawn,
Till the last glimmering ray of russet eve.
Mark how the sunbeam, steeped in morning-dew,
Beneath each jutting promontory flings
A darker shade; while brightened with the ray
Of sultry noon, not yet entirely quenched,
The evening-shadow less opaquely falls.
Thus stored with fair ideas, call them forth
By practice, till thy ready pencil trace
Each form familiar: but attempt not thou
A whole, till every part be well conceived.
The tongue that awes a senate with its force,
Once lisp'd in syllables, or ever it poured
Its glowing periods, warm with patriot-fire.
At length matur'd, stand forth for honest Fame
A candidate. Some noble theme select
From Nature's choicest scenes; and sketch that theme
With firm, but easy line; then if my song
Assist thy power, it asks no nobler meed.
Yet if, when Nature's sovereign glories meet
Thy sudden glance, no corresponding spark
Of vivid flame be kindled in thy breast;
If calmly thou can view them; know for thee
My numbers flow not: seek some fitter guide
To lead thee, where the low mechanic toils
With patient labor for his daily hire.
But if true Genius fire thee, if thy heart
Glow, palpitate with transport, at the fight;
If emulation seize thee, to transfuse
These splendid visions on thy vivid chart;
If the big thought seem more than Art can paint,
Haste, snatch thy pencil, bounteous Nature yields
To thee her choicest stores; and the glad Muse
Sits by assistant, aiming but to fan
The Promethean flame, conscious her rules
Can only guide, not give, the warmth divine.
First learn with objects suited to each scene
Thy landscape to adorn. If some rude view
Thy pencil culls, of lake, or mountain range,
Where Nature walks with proud majestic step,
Give not her robe the formal folds of art,
But bid it flow with ample dignity.
Mix not the mean and trivial: Is the whole
Sublime, let each accordant part be grand.
Yet if through dire necessity (for that
Alone should force the deed) some polished scene
Employ thy pallet, dressed by human art,
The lawn so level, and the bank so trim,
Yet still preserve thy subject. Let the oak
Be elegant of form, that mantles over
Thy shaven fore-ground: The rough forester
Whose peeled and withered boughs, and knarled trunk,
Have stood the rage of many a winter's blast,
Might ill such cultured scenes adorn. Not less
Would an old Briton, rough with martial scars,
And bearing stern defiance on his brow,
Seem fitly stationed at a Gallic feast.
This choice of objects suited to the scene,
We name DESIGN: A choice not more required
From RAFFAEL, than from thee; whether his hand
Give all but motion to some group divine,
Or thine inglorious picture woods and streams.
With equal rigor DISPOSITION claims
Thy close attention. Would thou learn its laws,
Examine Nature, when combined with art,
Or simple; mark how various are her forms,
Mountains enormous, rugged rocks, clear lakes,
Castles, and bridges, aqueducts and fanes.
Of these observe, how some, united please;
While others, ill-combin'd, disgust the eye.
That principle, which rules these various parts,
And harmonizing all, produces one,
Is Disposition. By its plastic power
Those rough materials, which Design selects,
Are nicely balanced. Thus with friendly aid
These principles unite: Design presents
The general subject; disposition culls,
And recombines, the various forms anew.
Yet here true Taste to three distinguished parts
Confines her aim: Brought nearest to the eye
She forms her foregrounds; then the midway space;
Ever the blue distance melt in liquid air.
But though full often these parts with blending tints
Are softened so, as wakes a frequent doubt
Where each begins, where ends; yet still she keeps
A general balance. So when Europe's sons
Sound the alarm of war; some potent hand
(Now thine again my Albion) poises true
The scale of empire; curbs each rival power;
And checks each lawless tyrant's wild career.
Not but there are of fewer parts who plan
A pleasing picture. These a forest-glade
Suffices often; behind which, just removed,
One tuft of foliage, WATERLO, like thine,
Gives all we wish of dear variety.
For even variety itself may pall,
If to the eye, when pausing with delight
On one fair object, it presents a mass
Of many, which disturb that eye's repose.
All hail Simplicity! To thy chaste shrine,
Beyond all other, let the artist bow.
Often have I seen arrang'd, by hands that well
Could pencil Nature's parts, landscapes, that knew
No leading subject: Here a forest rose;
A river there ran dimpling; and beyond,
The portion of a lake: while rocks, and towers,
And castles intermixed, spread over the whole
In multiform confusion. Ancient dames
Thus often compose of various silken shreds,
Some gaudy, patched, unmeaning, tawdry thing;
Where bucks and cherries, ships and flowers, unite
In one rich compound of absurdity.
Choose then some principal commanding theme,
Be it lake, valley, winding stream, cascade,
Castle, or seaport, and on that exhaust
Thy powers, and make to that all else conform.
Who paints a landscape, is confined by rules,
As fixed and rigid as the tragic bard,
To unity of subject. Is the scene
A forest, nothing there, save woods and lawns
Must rise conspicuous. Episodes of hills
And lakes be far removed; all that obtrudes
On the chief theme, how beautiful soever
Seen as a part, disgusts us in the whole.
Thus in the realms of landscape, to preserve
Proportion just is Disposition's task.
And though a glance of distance it allows,
Even when the foreground swells upon the sight:
Yet if the distant scen'ry wide extend,
The foreground must be ample: Take free scope:
Art must have space to stand on, like the Sage,
Who boasted power to shake the solid globe.
This thou must claim; and, if thy distance spread
Profuse, must claim it amply: Uncombin'd
With foreground, distance loses power to please.
Where rising from the solid rock, appear
Those ancient battlements, there lived a knight,
That often surveying from his castle wall
The wide expanse before him; distance vast;
Interminable wilds; savannahs deep;
Dark woods; and village spires, and glittering streams,
Just twinkling in the sunbeam, wished the view
Transferrd' to canvass, and for that sage end,
Led some obedient son of Art to where
His own unerring taste had previous fixed
The point of amplest prospect. "Take thy stand
"Just here," he cried, "and paint me all thou see,
"Omit no single object." It was done;
And soon the live-long landscape clothes his hall,
And spreads from base to ceiling. All was there;
As to his guests, while dinner cooled, the knight
Full often would prove; and with uplifted cane
Point to the distant spire, where slept entombed
His ancestry; beyond, where lay the town,
Skirted with wood, that gave him place and voice
In Britain's senate; nor untrac'd the stream
That fed the goodly trout they soon should taste;
Nor every scattered seat of friend, or foe,
He calls his neighbors. Heedless he, meanwhile,
That what he deems the triumph of his taste,
Is but a painted survey, a mere map;
Which light and shade and perspective misplaced
But serve to spoil.
Yet why (methinks I hear
Some Critic say) do ample scenes like this
In picture fail to please; when every eye
Confesses they transport on Nature's chart?
Why, but because, where she displays the scene,
The roving sight can pause, and swift select,
From all she offers, parts, whereon to six,
And form distinct perceptions; each of these
Producing separate pictures; and as bees
Condense within their hives the varying sweets;
So does the eye a lovely whole collect
From parts disjointed; nay, perhaps, deformed.
Then deem not Art defective, which divides,
Rejects, or recombines: but rather say,
It Is her chief excellence. There is, we know;
A charm unspeakable in converse free
Of lover, or of friend, when soul with soul
Mixes in social intercourse; when choice
Of phrase, and rules of rhet'ric are disdained;
Yet say, adopted by the tragic bard,
If Jaffier thus with Belvidera talked,
So vague, so rudely, would not want of skill,
Selection, and arrangement, damn the scene?
Thy forms, though balanced, still perchance may want
The charm of Contrast: Sing we then its power.
It Is Beauty's surest source; it regulates
Shape, color, light, and shade; forms every line
By opposition just; whatever is rough
With skill delusive counteracts by smooth;
Sinuous, or concave, by its opposite;
Yet ever covertly: should Art appear,
That art were Affectation. Then alone
We own the power of Contrast, when the lines
Unite with Nature's freedom: then alone,
When from its careless touch each part receives
A pleasing form. The lake's contracted bounds
By contrast varied, elegantly flow;
The unwieldy mountain sinks; here, to remove
Offensive parallels, the hill deprest
Is lifted; there the heavy beech expunged
Gives place to airy pines; if two bare knolls
Rise to the right and left, a castle here,
And there a wood, diversify their form.
Thrice happy he, who always can indulge
This pleasing feast of fancy; who, replete
With rich ideas, can arrange their charms
As his own genius prompts, and plan and paint
A novel whole. But tasteless wealth often claims
The faithful portrait, and will fix the scene
Where Nature's lines run falsely, or refuse
To harmonize. Artist, if thus employed,
I pity thy mischance. Yet there are means
Even here to hide defects: The human form,
Portrayed by Reynolds, often abounds with grace
He saw not in his model; which nor hurts
Resemblance, nor fictitious skill betrays.
Why then, if over the limb uncouth he flings
The flowing vest, may not thy honest art
Veil with the foliage of some spreading tree,
Unpleasing objects, or remote, or near?
An ample license for such needful change,
The foregrounds give thee: There both mend and make*
Whoever opposes, tell them, it is the spot
Where fancy needs must sport; where, if restrained
To close resemblance, thy best art expires.
What if they plead, that from thy general rule,
That rests on Nature as the only source
Of beauty, thou revolt'st; tell them that rule
Thou hold'st still sacred: Nature is its source;
Yet Nature's parts fail to receive alike
The fair impression. View her varied range:
Each form that charms is there; yet her best forms
Must be selected: As the sculptured charms
Of the famed Venus grew, so must thou cull
From various scenes such parts as best create
One perfect whole. If Nature never arrayed
Her most accomplished work with grace complete,
Think, will she waste on desert rocks, and dells,
What she denies to Woman's charming form?
And now, if on review thy chalked design,
Brought into form by Disposition's aid,
Displease not, trace thy lines with pencil free;
Add lightly too that general mass of shade,
Which suits the form and fashion of its parts.
There are who, studious of the best effects,
First sketch a slight cartoon: Such previous care
Is needful, where the Artist's fancy fails
Precisely to foresee the future whole.
This done, prepare thy pallet, mix thy tints,
And call on chaste Simplicity again
To save her votary from whate'ever of hue,
Discordant or abrupt, may flaunt or glare.
Yet here to bring materials from the mine,
From animal, or vegetable dies,
And sing their various properties and powers,
The Muse descends not. To mechanic rules,
To prose, and practice, which can only teach
The use of pigments, she resigns the toil.
One truth she gives, that Nature's simple loom
Weaves but with three distinct, or mingled, hues,
The vest that clothes Creation: These are red,
Azure, and yellow. Pure and unstained white
(If color deemed) rejects her general law,
And is by her rejected. Do thou deem
The glossy surface of yon heifer's coat
A perfect white? Or yon vast heaving cloud
That climbs the distant hill? With ceruse bright
Attempt to catch its tint, and thou will fail.
Some tinge of purple, or some yellowish brown,
Must first be blended, ever thy toil succeed.
Pure white, great Nature wishes to expunge
From all her works; and only then admits,
When with her mantle broad of fleecy snow
She wraps them, to secure from chilling frost;
Conscious, mean while, that what she gives to guard,
Conceals their every charm; the stole of night
Not more eclipses: yet that sable stole
May, by the skilful mixture of these hues,
Be shadowed even to dark Cimmerian gloom.
Draw then from these, as from three plenteous springs,
Thy brown, thy purple, crimson, orange, green,
Nor load thy pallet with a useless tribe
Of pigments, when commix'd with needful white,
As suits thy end, these native three suffice.
But if thou do, still cautious keep in view
That harmony which these alone can give.
Yet still there are, who scorning all the rules
Of dull mechanic art, with random hand
Fling their unblended colors, and produce
Bolder effects by opposition's aid.
The Sky, whatever its hue, to landscape gives
A correspondent tinge. The morning ray
Spreads it with purple light, in dew-drops steeped;
The evening fires it with a crimson glow.
Blows the bleak North? It sheds a cold, blue tint
On all it touches. Do light mists prevail?
A soft gray hue o'erspreads the general scene,
And makes that scene, like beauty viewed through gauze,
More delicately lovely. Choose thy sky;
But let that sky, whatever the tint it takes,
O'er-rule thy pallet. Frequent have I seen,
In landscapes well composed, aerial hues
So ill-preserv'd, that whether cold or heat,
Tempest or calm, prevailed, was dubious all.
Not so thy pencil, CLAUDE, the season marks:
Thou make us pant beneath thy summer noon;
And shiver in thy cool autumnal eve.
Such are the powers of sky; and therefore Art
Selects what best is suited to the scenes
It means to form: to this adapts a morn,
To that an evening ray. Light mists full often
Give mountain-views an added dignity,
While tame impoverished scenery claims the force
Of splendid lights and shades; nor claims in vain.
Thy sky adjusted, all that is remote
First color faintly: leaving to the last
Thy foreground. Easier it is, thou know, to spread
Thy floating foliage over the sky; than mix
That sky amid the branches. Venture still
On warmer tints, as distances approach
Nearer the eye: nor fear the richest hues,
If to those hues thou giv'st the meet support
Of strong opposing shade. A canvas once
I saw, on which the Artist dared to paint
A scene in Indostan; where gold, and pearl
Barbaric, flamed on many a broider'd vest
Profusely splendid: yet chaste Art was there,
Opposing hue to hue; each shadow deep
So spread, that all with sweet accord produced
A bright, yet modest whole. Thus blend thy tints,
Be they of scarlet, orange, green, or gold,
Harmonious, till one general glow prevail
Unbroken by abrupt and hostile glare.
Let shade predominate, it makes each light
More lucid, yet destroys offensive glare.
Mark when in fleecy showers of snow, the clouds
Seem to descend, and whiten over the land,
What unsubstantial unity of tinge
Involves each prospect: Vision is absorbed;
Or, wandering through the void, finds not a point
To rest on: All is mockery to the eye.
Thus light diffused, debases that effect
Which shade improves. Behold what glorious scenes
Arise through Nature's works from shade. Yon lake
With all its circumambient woods, far less
Would charm the eye, did not the dusky mist
Creeping along its eastern shores, ascend
Those towering cliffs, mix with the ruddy beam
Of opening day, just damp its fires, and spread
Over all the scene a sweet obscurity.
But would thou see the full effect of shade
Well mass'd, at eve mark that upheaving cloud,
Which charged with all the artillery of Jove,
In awful darkness, marching from the east,
Ascends; see how it blots the sky, and spreads,
Darker, and darker still, its dusky veil,
Till from the east to west, the cope of heaven
It curtains closely round. Happily thou stand'st
Expectant of the loud convulsive burst,
When lo! the sun, just sinking in the west,
Pours from the horizon's verge a splendid ray,
Which tenfold grandeur to the darkness adds.
Far to the east the radiance shoots, just tips
Those tufted groves; but all its splendor pours
On yonder castled cliff, which chiefly owes
Its glory, and supreme effect, to shade.
Thus light, enforced by shadow, spreads a ray
Still brighter. Yet forbid that light to shine
A glittering speck; for this were to illume
Thy picture, as the unequal glass collects,
All to one dazzling point, the solar rays.
Whatever the force of opposition, still
In soft gradation equal beauty lies.
When the mild luster glides from light to dark,
The eye well-pleased pursues it. 'Mid the herds
Of variegated hue, that graze our lawns,
Often may the Artist trace examples just
Of this sedate effect, and often remark
Its opposite. Behold yon lordly Bull,
His sable head, his lighter shoulders tinged
With flakes of brown; at length still lighter tints
Prevailing, graduate over his flank and loins
In tawny orange. What, if on his front
A star of white appear? The general mass
Of color spreads unbroken; and the mark
Gives his stern front peculiar character.
Ah! how degenerate from her well-cloath'd sire
That heifer. See her sides with white and black
So studded, so distinct, each justling each,
The groundwork-colour hardly can be known.
Of lights, if more than two thy landscape boast,
It boasts too much: But if two lights be there,
Give one pre-eminence: with that be sure
Illume thy foreground, or thy midway space;
But rarely spread it on the distant scene.
Yet there, if level plains, or fens appear,
And meet the sky, a lengthened gleam of light
Discreetly thrown, will vary the flat scene.
But if that distance be abruptly closed
By mountains, cast them into total shade:
Ill suit gay robes their hoary majesty.
Sober be all their hues; except, perchance,
Approaching nearer in the midway space,
One of the giant-brethren tower sublime.
To him thy art may aptly give a gleam
Of radiance: 'twill befit his awful head,
Alike, when rising through the morning-dews
In misty dignity, the pale, wan ray,
Invests him; or when, beaming from the west,
A fiercer splendor opens to our view
All his terrific features, rugged cliffs,
And yawning chasms, which vapors through the day
Had veiled; dens where the Lynx or Pard might dwell
In noontide safety, meditating there
His next nocturnal ravage through the land.
Are now thy lights and shades adjusted all?
Yet pause: perhaps the perspective is just;
Perhaps each local hue is duly placed;
Perhaps the light offends not; harmony
May still be wanting, that which forms a whole
From color, shade, gradation, is not yet
Obtained. Avails it ought, in civil life,
If here and there a family unite
In bonds of peace, while discord rends the land,
And pale-ey'd Faction, with her garment dipped
In blood, excites her guilty sons to war?
To aid thine eye, distrustful if this end
Be fully gained, wait for the twilight hour:
When the gray owl, sailing on lazy wing,
Her circuit takes; when lengthening shades dissolve;
Then in some corner place thy finished piece,
Free from each garish ray: Thine eye will there
Be undisturbed by parts; there will the whole
Be viewed collectively; the distance there
Will from its foreground pleasingly retire,
As distance ought, with true decreasing tone.
If not, if shade or light be out of place,
Thou see the error, and may yet amend.
Here science ceases, though to close the theme,
One labor still, and of Herculean cast,
Remains unsung, the art to execute,
And what its happiest mode. In this, alas!
What numbers fail; though paths, as various, lead
To that fair end, as to thy ample walls
Imperial London. Every Artist takes
His own peculiar manner; save the hand
Coward, and cold, that dare not leave the track
Its master taught. Thou who would boldy seize
Superior excellence, observe, with care,
The style of every Artist; yet disdain
To mimic even the best: Enough for thee
To gain a knowledge from what various modes
The same effect results. Artists there are,
Who, with exactness painful to behold,
Labor each leaf, and each minuter moss,
Till with enameled surface all appears
Completely smooth. Others with bolder hand,
By Genius guided, mark the general form,
The leading features, which the eye of Taste,
Practiced in Nature, readily translates.
Here lies the point of excellence. A piece,
Thus finished, though perhaps the playful toil
Of three short mornings, more enchants the eye,
Than what was labored through as many moons.
Why then such toil misspent? We do not mean,
With close and microscopic eye, to pore
On every studied part: The practiced judge
Looks chiefly on the whole; and if thy hand
Be guided by true Science, it is sure
To guide thy pencil freely. Scorn thou then
On parts minute to dwell: The character
Of objects aim at, not the nice detail.
Now is the scene complete: with Nature's ease,
Thy woods, and lawns, and rocks, and splendid lakes,
And distant hills unite; it but remains
To people these fair regions. Some for this
Consult the sacred page; and in a nook
Obscure, present the Patriarch's test of faith,
The little altar, and the victim son:
Or happily, to adorn some vacant sky,
Load it with forms, that fabling Bard supplies
Who sang of bodies changed; the headlong steeds,
The car upheav'd, of Phaeton, while he,
Rash boy! spreads on the plain his pallid corse,
His sisters weeping round him. Groups like these
B^^it not landscape: Say, does Abraham there
Ought that some idle peasant might not do?
Is there expression, passion, character,
To mark the Patriarch's fortitude and faith?
The scanty space which perspective allows,
Forbids. Why then degrade his dignity
By paltry miniature? Why make the seer
A mere appendage? Rather deck thy scene
With figures simply suited to its style.
The landscape is thy object; and to that,
Be these the under-parts. Yet still observe
Propriety in all. The speckled Pard,
Or tawny Lion, ill would glare beneath
The British oak; and British flocks and herds
Would graze as ill on Afric's burning sands.
If rocky, wild, and awful, be thy views,
Low arts of husbandry exclude: The spade,
The plough, the patient angler with his rod,
Be banished thence; far other guests invite,
Wild as those scenes themselves, banditti fierce,
And gipsey-tribes, not merely to adorn,
But to impress that sentiment more strong,
Awaked already by the savage-scene.
Often winding slowly up the forest glade,
The ox-team lab-ring, drags the future keel
Of some high admiral: no ornament
Assists the woodland scene like this; while far
Removed, seen by a gleam among the trees,
The forest-herd in various groups repose.
Yet, if thy skill should fail to people well
Thy landscape, leave it desert. Think how CLAUDE
Often crowded scenes, which Nature's self might own,
With forms ill-drawn, ill-chosen, ill-arrang'd,
Of man and beast, over loading with false taste
His sylvan glories. Seize them, Pestilence,
And sweep them far from our disgusted sight.
If, over thy canvas Ocean pours his tide,
The full sized vessel, with its swelling sail,
Be cautious to admit; unless thy art
Can give it cordage, pennants, masts, and form
Appropriate; rather with a careless touch
Of light, or shade, just mark the distant skiff.
Nor thou refuse that ornamental aid,
The feathered race afford. When fluttering near
The eye, we own absurdity results,
They seem both fixed and moving: but beheld
At proper distance, they will fill thy sky
With animation: Give them there free scope
Their pinions in the blue serene to ply.
Far up yon river, opening to the sea,
Just where the distant coast extends a curve,
A lengthened train of sea-fowl urge their flight.
Observe their files! In what exact array
The dark battalion floats, distinctly seen
Before yon silver cliff! Now, now, they reach
That lonely beacon; now are lost again
In yon dark cloud. How pleasing is the sight!
The forest-glade from its wild, timorous herd,
Receives not richer ornament, than here
From birds this lonely sea-view. Ruins too
Are graced by such additions: not the force
Of strong and catching lights adorn them more,
Than do the dusky tribes of rooks, and daws,
Fluttering their broken battlements among.
Place but these feathered groups at distance due,
The eye, by fancy aided, sees them move;
Flit past the cliff, or circle round the tower.
Thy landscape finished, though it meet thy own
Approving judgment, still requires a test,
More general, more decisive. Thine's an eye
Too partial to be trusted. Let it hang
On the rich wall, which emulation fills;
Where rival masters court the world's applause
There traveled virtuosi, stalking round,
With strut important, peering through the hand,
Hollowed in telescopic form, survey
Each luckless piece, and uniformly damn;
Assuming for their own the taste they steal.
"This has not Guido's air:" "This poorly apes
"Titian's rich coloring:" "Rembrant's forms are here,
"But not his light and shadow." Skilful they
In every hand, save Nature's. What if these
With Gaspar or with Claude thy work compare,
And therefore scorn it; let the pedants prate
Unheeded. But if taste, correct and pure,
Grounded on practice; or, what more avails
Than practice, observation justly formed
On Nature's best examples and effects,
Approve thy landscape; if judicious LOCK
See not an error he would wish removed,
Then boldly deem thyself the heir of Fame.
NOTES ON THE FOREGOING POEM.
Line 34 SOME perhaps may object to the word glimmering: but whoever has
observed the playing lights, and colors, which often invest the summits of
mountains, will not think the epithet improper. Line 45 What it is leading
feature; that is, the particular character of the tree. The different shape of
the leaves, and the different mode of spreading it is branches, give every tree,
a distinct form, or character. At a little distance you easily distinguish the
oak from the ash; and the ash from the beech. It is this general form, not any
particular detail, which the artist is instructed to get by heart. The same
remark holds with regard to other parts of nature. These general forms may be
called the painter's alphabet. By these he learns to read her works; and also
to make them intelligible to others. Line 61 With light of curling foam
contrasted. The progress of each wave is this. Beneath the frothy curl, when it
rises between the eye, and the light, the color is pale green, which brightens
from the base toward the summit. When a wave subsides, the summit falling into
the base, extends, and raises it; and the sides running off from the center,
that part of the water which meets the succeeding wave, springs upward from the
shock; the top forms into foam, and rolling over falls down the side, which has
been shocked; presenting if the water be much agitated, the idea of a cascade.
Line 77 The evening-shadow less opaquely falls. It is not often observed by
landscape-painters, tho it certainly deserves observation, that the
morning-shadows are darker than those of the evening. Line 101 If the big
thought seem more than art can paint. It is always a sign of genius to be
dissatisfied with our own efforts; and to conceive more than we can express.
Line 146 Design presents the general subject, disposition, etc. Some writers on
the art of painting have varied this division. But it seems most proper, I
think, to give the selection of the elements of landscape -- the assembling of
rocks, mountains, cataracts, and other objects to design: while disposition is
properly employed in the local arrangement of them. Line 149 The general
composition of a landscape consists of three parts -- the foreground -- the
second ground -- and the distance. No rule can be given for proportioning these
parts to each other. There are ten thousand beautiful proportions; from which
the eye of taste must select a good one. The foreground must always be
considerable -- in some cases, ample. It is the very basis, and foundation of
the whole. -- Nor is it a bad rule, I think, that some part of the foreground
should be the highest part of the picture. In rocky, and mountainous views this
is easy, and has generally a good effect. And sometimes even when a country is
more level, a tree on the foreground, carried higher than the rest of the
landscape, answers the end. At the same time in many species of landscape this
rule cannot easily be adapted: nor is it by any means essential. Line 164
Waterlo, like thine. The subjects of this master seldom went beyond some little
forest-view. He has etched a great number of prints in this style of landscape;
which for the beauty of the trees in particular, are much admired. Line 173
Landscapes, that knew no leading subject. There is not a rule in
landscape-painting more neglected; or that ought more to be observed, than what
relates to a leading-subject. By the leading subject, we mean, what
characterizes the scene. We often see a landscape, which comes under no
denomination. Is it the scenery about a ruin? Is it a lake-scene? Is it a
river-scene? No: but it is a jumble of all together. Some leading subject
therefore is required in every landscape, which forms it is character; and to
which the painter -- is confined by rules,
As fixed, and rigid as the tragic bard.
when the landscape takes it is character from a ruin, or other object on the
foreground, the distance introduced, is merely an appendage; and must plainly
appear to be an under-part; not interfering with the subject of the piece. But
most commonly the scene, or leading-subject of the picture, occupies the middle
distance. In this case, the foreground becomes the appendage; and without any
striking object to attract the eye, must plainly show, that it is intended only
to introduce the leading-subject with more advantage. Line 190 Thus, in a
forest-scene, the woods and lawns are the leading-subject. If the piece will
admit it, a hill, or a lake, may be admitted in remote distance: but they must
be introduced, only as the episodes in a poem, to set off the main subject.
They must not interfere with it; but be far removed. Line 197 And tho a glance.
It is certain, in fact, that a considerable foreground, with a glance of
distance, will make a better picture, than a wide distance, set off only with a
meagre foreground: and yet I doubt whether an adequate reason can be given;
unless it be founded on what has already been advanced, that we consider the
foreground as the basis, and foundation of the whole picture. So that if it is
not considerable in all circumstances, and extensive in some, there seems a
defect. Line 280 A novel whole. The imaginary-view, formed on a judicious
selection, and arrangement of the parts of nature, has a better chance of
making a good picture, than a view taken in the whole from any natural scene.
Not only the lines, and objects of the natural scene rarely admit a happy
composition; but the character of it is seldom throughout preserved. Whether it
be sublime, or beautiful, there is generally something mixed with it of a
nature unsuitable to it. All this the exhibition of fancy rectifies, when in
the hands of a master. Nor does he claim any thing, but what the poet, and he
are equally allowed. Where is the story in real life, on which the poet can
form either an epic, or a drama, unless heightened by his imagination? At the
same time he must take care, that all his imaginary additions are founded in
nature, or his work will disgust. Such also must be the painter's care. But
under this restriction, he certainly may bring together a more consistent
whole, culled from the various parts of nature, than nature herself exhibits in
any one scene. Line 314 Trace thy lines with pencil free. The master is
discovered even in his chalk, or black-lead lines -- so free, firm, and
intelligent. We often admire these first, rude touches. The story of the two
old masters will be remembered, who left cards of compliments to each other, on
which only the simple outline of a figure was drawn by one, and corrected by
the other; but with such a superior elegance in each, that the signature of
names could not have marked them more decisively. Line 318 First sketch a
slight cartoon. It is the practice indeed of the generality of painters, when
they have any great design to execute, to make a slight sketch, sometimes on
paper, and sometimes on canvas. And these sketches are often greatly superior
to the principal picture, which has been labored, and finished with the
exactest care. King William on horseback at Hampton court, by sir Godfrey
Kneller, is a striking example of this remark. The picture is highly finished;
but is a tame, and unmasterly performance. At Houghton-hall I have seen the
original sketch of this picture; which I should have valued, not only greatly
beyond the picture itself, but beyond any thing I ever saw from the pencil of
sir Godfrey. Line 331 One truth she gives, etc. From these three virgin
colors, red, blue, and yellow, all the tints of nature are composed. Greens of
various hues, are composed of blue, and yellow: orange, of red, and yellow:
purple and violet, of red, and blue. The tints of the rainbow seem to be
composed also of these colors. They lie in order thus: violet -- red -- orange
-- yellow -- green -- blue -- violet -- red: in which assortment we observe
that orange comes between red, and yellow; that is, it is composed of those
colors melting into each other. Green is in the same way composed of yellow
and blue; and violet, or purple of blue, and red. -- Nay even browns of all
kinds may, in a degree, be effected by a mixture of these original colors: so
may gray; and even a kind of black, tho not a perfect one. -- As all pigments
however are deficient, and cannot approach the rainbow colors, which are the
purest we know, the painter must often, even in his splendid tints, call in
different reds, blues, and yellows. Thus as vermilion, tho an excellent red on
many occasions, cannot give the rosy, crimson hue, he must often call in lake.
Nor will he find any yellow, or blue, that will answer every purpose. In the
tribe of browns he will be still more at a loss; and must have recourse to
different earths. -- In oil-painting one of the finest earths is known, at the
colour-shops, by the name of castle-earth, or Vandyke's-brown; as it is
supposed to have been used by that master. Line 336 And is by her rejected.
Scarce any natural object, but snow, is purely white. The chalk-cliff is
generally in a degree discolored. The petals of the snow-drop indeed, and of
some other flowers, are purely white: but seldom any of the larger parts of
nature. Line 358 Keep in view that harmony, etc. Tho it will be necessary to
use other colors, besides yellow, red, and blue, this union should however
still be kept in view, as the leading principle of harmony. A mixture indeed of
these three will produce nearly the color you want: but the more colors are
mixed, the muddier they grow. It will give more clearness therefore, and
brightness to your coloring, to use simple pigments, of which there are great
abundance in the painter's dispensatory. Line 361 This mode of coloring is the
most difficult to attain, as it is the most scientific. It includes a perfect
knowledge of the effects of colors in all their various agreements, and
oppositions. When attained, it is the most easy in practice. The artist, who
blends his colors on his pallet, depends more on his eye, than on his
knowledge. He works out his effect by a more labored process; and yet he may
produce a good picture in the end. Line 380 Nobody was better acquainted with
the effects of sky, nor studied them with more attention, than the younger
Vanderveldt. Not many years ago, an old Thames-waterman was alive, who
remembered him well; and had often carried him out in his boat, both up and down
the river, to study the appearances of the sky. The old man used to say, they
went out in all kinds of weather, fair, and foul; and Mr. Vanderveldt took with
him large sheets of blue paper, which he would mark all over with black, and
white. The artist easily sees the intention of this process. These expeditions
Vanderveldt called, in his Dutch manner of speaking, going a skoying. Line 401
The most remarkable instance of ingenious coloring I ever heard of, is in
Guido's St. Michael. The whole picture is composed of blue, red, and black; by
means of which colors the ideas of heaven and hell are blended together in a
very extraordinary manner; and the effect exceedingly sublime; while both
harmony, and chasteness are preserved in the highest degree. Line 406 Let shade
predominate. As a general rule, the half-tints should have more extent than the
lights; and the shadows should equal both put together. -- Yet why a
predominancy of shade should please the eye more than a predominancy of light,
would perhaps be difficult to explain. I can easily conceive, that a balance of
light and shade may be founded in some kind of reason; but am at a loss to give
a reason for a predominancy of either. The fact however is undoubted; and we
must skreen our ignorance of the principle, as well as we can. Line 440 This
rule respects an affected display of light. If it be introduced as a focus, so
as not to fall naturally on the several objects it touches, it disgusts.
Rembrandt, I doubt, is sometimes chargeable with this fault. He is commonly
supposed to be a master of this part of painting; and we often see very
beautiful lights in his pictures, and prints: but as in many of them we see the
reverse, he appears to have had no fixed principle. Indeed, few parts of
painting are so much neglected, so easily transgressed, and so little
understood, as the distribution of light. Line 444 Opposition, and gradation
are the two grand means of producing effect by light. In the picture just given
(l. 424. etc.) of the evening-ray, the effect is produced by opposition.
Beautiful effects too of the same kind arise often from catching lights. -- The
power of producing effect by gradation, is not less forcible. Indeed, without a
degree of gradation, opposition itself would be mute. In the picture just given
of the evening-ray, the grand part of the effect, no doubt, arises from the
opposition between the gloom, and the light: but in part it arises also from
the gradation of the light, till it reach it is point. It just tips The tufted
groves; but all it is splendour pours
On yonder castled cliff. --
Line 447 The colors of animals often strongly illustrate the idea of
gradation. When they soften into each other, from light to dark, or from one
color into another, the mixture is very picturesque. It is as much the
reverse, when white and black, or white, and red, are patched over the animal
in blotches, without any intermediate tints. Domestic cattle, cows, dogs,
swine, goats, and cats, are often disagreeably patched: tho we sometimes see
them pleasingly colored with a graduating tint. Wild animals, in general, are
more uniformly colored, than tame. Except the zebra, and two or three of the
spotted race, I recollect none which are not, more or less, tinted in this
graduating manner. The tiger, the panther, and other variegated animals have
their beauty: but the zebra, I think, is rather a curious, than a picturesque
animal. It Is streaked sides injure it both in point of color, and in the
delineation of it is form. Line 467 But rarely spread it on the distant scene.
In general perhaps a landscape is best enlightened, when the light falls on the
middle parts of the picture; and the foreground is in shadow. This throws a
kind of natural retiring hue throughout the landscape: and tho the distance be
in shadow, yet that shadow is so faint, that the retiring hue is still
preserved. This however is only a general rule. In history-painting the light
is properly thrown upon the figures on the foreground; which are the capital
part of the picture. In landscape the middle grounds commonly form the scene,
or the capital part; and the foreground is litttle more, than an appendage.
Sometimes however it happens, that a ruin, or some other capital object on the
foreground, makes the principal part of the scene. When that is the case, it
should be distinguished by light; unless it be so situated as to receive more
distinction from shade. Line 482 A fiercer splendour opens to our view all his
terrific features. It is very amusing, in mountainous countries, to observe the
appearance, which the same mountain often makes under different circumstances.
When it is invested with light mists; or even when it is not illumined, we see
it is whole summit perhaps under one gray tint. But as it receives the sun,
especially an evening-sun, we see a variety of fractures, and chasms gradually
opening, of which we discovered not the least appearance before. Line 488 Tho
the objects may lessen in due proportion, which is called keeping; tho the
graduating hue of retiring objects, or the aerial perspective, may be just; and
tho the light may be distributed according to the rules of art; yet still there
may not be that general result of harmony, which denotes the picture one
object: and as the eye may be misled, when it has the several parts before it,
the best way of examining it as a perfect whole, is to examine it in such a
light, as will not admit the investigation of parts. Line 529 Others, etc. Some
painters copy exactly what they see. In this there is more mechanical
precision, than genius. Others take a general, comprehensive view of their
object; and marking just the characteristic points, lead the spectator, if he
be a man of taste, and genius likewise, into a truer knowledge of it, than the
copier can do, with all his painful exactness. Line 563 Why then degrade, etc.
If by bringing the figures forward on the foreground, you give room for
character, and expression, you put them out of place as appendages, for which
they were intended. Line 581 Often slowly winding, etc. The machine itself here
described is picturesque: and when it is seen in winding motion, or (in other
words) when half of it is seen in perspective, it receives additional beauty
from contrast. In the same manner a cavalcade, or an army on it is march, may be
considered as one object; and derive beauty from the same source. Mr. Gray has
given us a very picturesque view of this kind, in describing the march of
Edward I; As down the steep of Snowdon's shaggy side
He wound with toilsome march his long array.
Stout Gloucester stood aghast in speechless trance:
To arms! cried Mortimer; and couched his quivering lance.
Through a passage in the mountain we see the troops winding round at a great
distance. Among those nearer the eye, we distinguish the horse and foot; and on
the foreground, the action, and expression of the principal commanders. The
ancients seem to have known very little of that source of the picturesque,
which arises from perspective: every thing is introduced in front before the
eye: and among the early painters we see very little more attention paid to it.
Raphael is far from making a full use of the knowledge of it; and I believe
Julio Romano makes still less. I do not remember meeting any where with a more
picturesque description of a line of march, than in Vaillant's travels into the
interior parts of Africa. He was passing with a numerous caravan, along the
borders of Caffraria. I first, says he, made the people of the hord, which
accompanied me, set out with their cattle: and a little after my cattle
followed; cows, sheep, and goats; with all the women of the hord, mounted on
oxen with their children. My wagons, with the rest of my people, closed the
rear. I myself, mounted on horseback, rode backwards, and forewards. This
caravan on it is march, exhibited often a singular, and amusing spectacle. The
turns it was obliged to make in following the windings of the woods, and rocks,
continually gave it new forms. Sometimes it entirely disappeared: then
suddenly, at a distance, from the summit of a hill, I again discovered my
vanguard slowly advancing perhaps toward a distant mountain: while the main
body, following the track, were just below me. Line 595 This rule indeed
applies to all other objects: but as the ship is so large a machine, and at the
same time so complicated a one, it is character is less obvious, than that of
most other objects. It is much better therefore, where a vessel is necessary,
to put in a few touches for a skiff; than to insert some disagreeable form for
a ship, to which it has no Resemblance. At the same time, it is not at all
necessary to make your ship so accurate, that a seaman could find no fault with
it. It is the same in figures: as appendages of landscape there is no necessity
to have them exactly accurate; but if they have not the general form, and
character of what they represent, the landscape is better without them. Line
603 They seem, etc. Rapid motion alone, and that near the eye, is here
censured. We should be careful not to narrow too much the circumscribed sphere
of art. There is an art of seeing, as well as of painting. The eye must in part
enter into the deception. The art of painting must, in some degree, be
considered as an act of convention. General forms only are imitated, and much
is to be supplied by the imagination of the spectator. -- It is thus in drama.
How absurdly would the spectator act, if instead of assisting the illusion of
the stage, he should insist on being deceived, without being a party in the
deception? -- if he refused to believe, that the light he saw, was the sun; or
the scene before him, the Roman capital, because he knew the one was a
candlelight, and the other, a painted cloth? The painter therefore must in
many things suppose deception; and only avoid it, where it is too palpably
gross for the eye to suffer. Line 636 Guido's air, no doubt, is often very
pleasing. He is thought to have excelled in imagining the angelic character;
and, as if aware of this superiority, was fond of painting angels. After all,
however, they, whose taste is formed on the simplicity of the antique, think
Guido's air, in general somewhat theatrical. Line 638 Skilful they, etc. The
greatest obstruction to the progress of art arises from the prejudices of
conceited judges; who, in fact, know less about the matter, than they, who know
nothing: inasmuch as truth is less obvious to error, than it is to ignorance.
Till they can be prevailed on to return upon their steps, and look for that
criterion in nature, which they seek in the half-perished works of great names;
the painter will be discouraged from pursuing knowledge in those paths, where
Raphael, and Titian found it. Line 639 What if these compare, etc. Bruyere
observes, that the inferior critic judges only by comparison. In one sense all
judgment must be formed on comparison. But Bruyere, who is speaking of poetry
means, that the inferior critic has no scale of judging of a work of art, but
by comparing it with some other work of the same kind. He judges of Virgil by a
comparison with Homer; and of Spencer by comparing him with Tasso. By such
criticism he may indeed arrive at certain truths; but he will never form that
masterly judgment, which he might do by comparing the work before him with the
great archetypes of nature, and the solid rules of his art. -- What Bruyere
says of the critic in poetry, is very applicable to the critic in painting. The
inferior critic, who has traveled, and seen the works of many great masters,
supposes he has treasured up from them the ideas of perfection; and instead of
judging of a picture by the rules of painting, and it is agreement with nature,
he judges of it by the arbitrary ideas he has conceived; and these too very
probably much injured in the conception. From this comparative mode of
criticizing, the art receives no advancement. All we gain, is, that one artist
paints better than another.
END OF THE NOTES.

