OBSERVATIONS ON THE RIVER WYE, AND SEVERAL PARTS OF SOUTH WALES, etc. RELATIVE
CHIEFLY TO PICTURESQUE BEAUTY; MADE In the Summer of the Year 1770, SECOND
EDITION,

By WILLIAM GILPIN, M. A. PREBENDARY OF SALISBURY; AND VICAR OF BOLDRE IN NEW
FOREST, NEAR LYMINGTON.

LONDON; PRINTED FOR R. BLAMIRE, IN THE STRAND.

M.DCC.LXXXIX.

TO THE Rev. WILLIAM MASON.
Vicar's Hill, November 20, 1782. DEAR SIR,
THE very favorable manner, in which you spoke See Gray's memoirs, p. 377.
of some observations I showed you in MS. several years ago, On the lakes, and
mountains of the northern parts of England, induced many of my friends, at
different times, to desire the publication of them. But as they are illustrated
by a great variety of plans, and drawings, the hazard and expense had rather a
formidable appearance.

Your advice against a subscription, I have considered; and am convinced, on
weighing the matter, that without ascertaining a little better the difficulties
of printing so complicated a work, I should find myself embarrassed by an
engagement with the public; and should infallibly injure either my subscribers
on one hand; or myself on the other.

I have followed your advice, you see, also in another point; and have made an
essay in a smaller work of the same kind; which may enable me the better to
ascertain the expenses of a larger.

I have chosen the following little piece for that purpose; which was the first
of the kind I ever amused myself with; and as it is very unimportant in itself,
you will excuse my endeavoring to give it some little credit by the following
anecdote.

In the same year, in which this journey was made, your late valuable friend
Mr. Gray Mr. Gray's own account of this tour is contained in a letter, dated
the 24th of May, 1771. My last summer's tour was through Worcestershire,
Glocestershire, Monmouthshire, Herefordshire, and Shropshire, five of the most
beautiful counties in the kingdom. The very principal light, and capital
feature of my journey, was the river Wye, which I descended in a boat for near
40 miles from Ross to Chepstow. It Is banks are a succession of nameless
beauties. One, out of many, you may see not ill-described by Mr. Whately, in
his observations on gardening, under the name of the New-Weir. He has also
touched on two others, Tintern-abbey, and Persfield; both of them famous
scenes; and both on the Wye. Monmouth, a town I never heard mentioned, lies on
the same river; in a vale, that is the delight of my eyes, and the very seat of
pleasure. The vale of Abergavenny, Ragland, and Chepstow-castles, Ludlow,
Malvern-hills, etc. were the rest of my acquisitions; and no bad harvest in my
opinion: but I made no journal myself; else you should have had it. I have
indeed a short one, written by the companion of my travels, Mr. Nicholls, that
serves to recall, and fix the fleeting images of these things.
made it likewise; and hearing that I had put on paper a few remarks on the
scenes, which he had so lately visited, he desired a sight of them. They were
then only in a rude state; but the handsome things he said of them to a friend
William Fraser Esquire under-secretary of state.
of his, who obligingly repeated them to me, gave them, I own, some little
degree of credit in my own opinion; and make me somewhat less apprehensive in
risking them before the public.

If this little work afforded any amusement to Mr. Gray, it was the amusement
of a very late period of his life. He saw it in London, about the beginning of
June 1771; and he died, you know, at the end of the July following.

Had he lived, it is possible, he might have been induced to have assisted me
with a few of his own remarks on scenes, which he had so accurately examined.
The slightest touches of such a master would have had their effect. No man was
a greater admirer of nature, than Mr. Gray; nor admired it with better taste.

I can only however offer this little work to the public, as a hasty sketch. To
criticize the face of a country correctly, you should see it oftener than once;
and in various seasons. Different circumstances make such changes in the same
landscape, as give it wholly a new aspect. But these scenes are marked just as
they struck the eye at first. I had not an opportunity to repeat the view.

For the drawings I must apologize in the same manner. They were hastily
sketched; and under many disadvantages; and pretend at best to give only a
general idea of a place, or scene, without entering into the details of portrait.

Such as the work is, I print it by your advice; and it is chiefly from my
deference to your opinion, and that of my other friends, that my expectation of
any favor from the public is derived. I am, dear sir, with great regard, and
esteem,

Your most obedient, and very sincere humble servant, WILLIAM GILPIN.

POSTSCIPT to the second edition.
In the first edition of this work, the drawings were executed in a style
between etching with a needle, and aquatinta. In this edition, the latter mode
only is employed. They are all executed by one hand, a very ingenious artist
Mr. Jukes, in Howland Street.
, who has done them I think, full justice. Many of the drawings he has much
improved.

I do not myself thoroughly understand the process of working in aquatinta; but
the great inconvenience of it seems to arise from it is not being sufficiently
under the artist's command. It is not always able to give that just gradation
of light and shade, which he desires. Harsh edges will sometimes appear. It is
however a very beautiful mode of multiplying drawings; and certainly comes the
nearest of any mode we know, to the softness of the pencil. It may indeed
literally be called drawing; as it washes in the shades. The only difference
is, that it is a more unmanageable process to wash the shades upon copper with
aquafortis, than upon paper with a brush. If however the aquatinta mode of
multiplying drawings has some inconveniences, it is no more than every other
mode of working on copper is subject to. Engraving particularly is always
accompanied with a degree of stiffness.

For myself, I am fond of the free, rough style of etching landscape with a
needle, after the manner of Rembrandt; in which much is left to the imagination
to make out. But this would not satisfy the public; nor indeed any one, whose
imagination is not so conversant with the scenes of nature, as to make out a
landscape from a hint. -- This rough mode has at least the advantage of biting
the copper more strongly; and giving a greater number of good impressions.

To the fifteen drawings of the first edition I was advised to add two, as
explanatory of the folding of the side-screens of a circumscribed river See
page 21.
. The first of these drawings is meant to illustrate these screens in their
simplest form, when each consists only of one part. The second illustrates the
variation of them, when each consists of two parts, or more.

To the observations also of the first edition, a few are added; particularly
the entire sixth section; and a fuller description of the vale of Severn in the
first.

CONTENTS.
SECTION I. page 1. GENERAL PURPOSES of traveling -- end proposed in this tour
-- Lord Cadogan's -- Wallingford-road -- Shillingford -- Witney -- Burford --
picture of the More family -- view at Barrington -- North-leach -- vale of
Severn -- Gloucester -- Ross. SECT. II. p. 17. The Wye -- sources of it is beauty
-- and general ornaments. SECT. III. p. 27. Remarks on weather as it affects
landscape -- first part of the river from Ross -- Goodrich-castle -- remarks on
natural composition -- Rure-dean church -- Stone-quarries, and Bishop's wood --
remarks on Mannerists -- Lidbroke -- Welsh-Bicknor -- Cold-well -- White-church
-- New-Weir -- coricle -- Monmouth. SECT. IV. p. 43. St. Breval's -- how
pasturage affects landscape -- Tintern-abbey -- iron-works. SECT. V. p. 55.
Persfield -- Chepstow -- country between Chepstow, and Monmouth. SECT. VI. p.
65. Journey to the sources of the Wye, and through the midland counties of
Wales. SECT. VII. p. 87. Ragland-castle -- Brecknoc-hills -- Abergavenny --
vale of Usk -- Tretower-castle -- Brecknoc -- it is castle and abbey -- country
between Brecknoc and Trecastle -- remarks on white objects -- Llandovery. SECT.
VIII. p. 99. Llandilo -- vale of Towy -- poem of Grongar-hill criticized --
Dinevawr-castle -- observations on varied surfaces -- Merlin's cave -- distant
view of the vale of Towy. SECT. IX. p. 109. Country, after we leave Llandilo --
Black-mountain -- effects of a storm -- scenery beyond the Black-mountain --
view of Neath. SECT. X. p. 117. Vista of mountains -- copper-works --
Margam-sand-bank -- river Abravon -- Lord Mansell's woods -- Pyle -- remarks on
painting a crowd. SECT. XI. p. 125. Bridgend -- Cowbridge -- distant view of
the Bristol channel -- heights of Clanditham -- remarks on distant views --
Cardiff -- Newport -- approach to the ferry -- passage -- distant view of the
Welsh-coast. SECT. XII. p. 139. Road to Bristol -- remarks on strong tinting --
Bristol -- hot-wells -- country between Bristol and Bath -- Bath -- Chippenham
-- Marlborough -- Marlborough-downs -- road to Newberry -- Donnington-castle --
remarks on painting imaginary objects.
TRANSLATION OF LATIN QUOTATIONS.
Page 38. ON the left of the river stood a lofty rock, as if hewn from the
quarry, hanging over the precipice, haunted by birds of prey. -- 59. Perhaps
you may introduce some trifling plant: but does this compensate for want of
unity, and simplicity in a whole? -- 77. Every man is at liberty to fill his
glass to the height, he chooses. -- 78. Glasses unequally filled. -- 100.
Countries, which have never known the plough, are my delight -- wild woods, and
rivers wandering through artless vales. Page 131. At first, when the vessel
pushing from the shore, appeared surrounded by water, all was terror. The
trembling animals urging each other on both sides from it, occasioned at first
some confusion: but their fears subsiding gradually, from the familiarity of
the object, tranquillity took place. -- 149. A scene of wild brushwood. -- 149.
Even then the awful genius of the place held the trembling rustic in awe. Even
then he entered those gloomy woods with superstitious fear. Some God, no doubt
(tho what God, is uncertain) inhabits those sacred groves. The Arcadians often
think they see Jove himself, flashing his lightning from the clouds, when the
louring storm comes forward over the lofty woods.
ERRATA.
Page 37. For three times as far, read three. -- 77. For at the close of a
beautiful approach, read at the close of a well-conducted approach. -- 133. For
desengaging their hinder ledgs, read disengaging their hinder legs.
OBSERVATIONS ON THE RIVER WYE, etc.
SECTION I.
WE travel for various purposes -- to explore the culture of soils -- to view
the curiosities of art -- to survey the beauties of nature -- and to learn the
manners of men; their different polities, and modes of life.

The following little work proposes a new object of pursuit; that of examining
the face of a country by the rules of picturesque beauty: opening the sources
of those pleasures, which are derived from the comparison.

Observations of this kind, through the vehicle of description, have the better
chance of being founded in truth; as they are not the offspring of theory; but
are taken immediately from the scenes of nature, as they arise.

Crossing Hounslow-heath, from Kingston, in Surry, we struck into the
Reading-road and turned a little aside, to see the approach to Caversham-house,
which winds about a mile, along a valley, through the park. This was the work
of Brown; whose great merit lay in pursuing the path, which nature had marked
out. Nothing can be easier, than the sweep; nor better united than the ground;
nor more ornamental, than several of the clumps: but many of the single trees,
which are beeches, are heavy, and offend the eye. Almost any ordinary tree may
contribute to form a group. It Is deformities are lost in a crowd: nay, even the
deformities of one tree may be corrected by the deformities of another. But few
trees have those characters of beauty, which will enable them to appear with
advantage as individuals This approach to Caversham-house, I have been
informed, is now much injured.
.

From lord Cadogan's we took the Wallingford-road to Oxford. It affords some
variety, running along the declivity of a range of hills; and overlooking one
of the valleys of the Thames. But there is nothing very interesting in these
scenes. The Thames appears; but only in short reaches. It rarely exceeds the
dimensions of a pool; and does not once, as I remember, exhibit those ample
sweeps, in which the beauty of a river so much consists. The woods too are
frequent but they are formal copses: and white spots, bursting every where from
a chalky soil, disturb the eye.

From Wallingford to Oxford, we did not observe one good view, except at
Shillingford; where the bridge, the river, and it is woody banks exhibit some
scenery.

From Oxford we proposed to take the nearest road to Ross. As far as Witney,
the country appears flat, tho in fact it rises. About the eleventh stone the
high grounds command a noble semicircular distance on the left; and near
Burford there are views of the same kind, on the right; but not so extensive.
None of these landscapes however are perfect, as they want the accompaniments
of fore-grounds.

At Mr. Lenthal's, in Burford, we admired a capital picture of the family of
the Mores, which is said to be Holbein's; and appeared to us entirely in that
master's style. But Mr. Walpole thinks it is not an original; and says he found
a date upon it, subsequent to the death of that master. It is however a good
picture of it is kind. It contains eleven figures -- Sir Thomas More, and his
father; two young ladies, and other branches of the family. The heads are as
expressive, as the composition is formal. The judge is marked with the
character of a dry, facetious, sensible, old man. The chancellor is handed down
to us in history, both as a cheerful philosopher; and as a severe inquisitor.
His countenance here has much of that eagerness, and stern attention, which
remind us of the latter. The subject of this piece seems to be a dispute
between the two young ladies; and alludes probably to some well-known family
story.

Indeed every family-picture should be founded on some little story, or
domestic incident, which, in a degree, should engage the attention of all the
figures. It would be invidious perhaps to tax Vandyck on this head: but if the
truth might be spoken, I could mention some of his family pictures, which, if
the sweetness of his coloring, and the elegant simplicity of his airs, and
attitudes, did not make us forget all faults, would appear only like so many
distinct portraits, stuck together on the same canvas. It would be equally
invidious to omit mentioning a modern master, now at the head of his profession
Sir Joshua Reynolds.
, whose great fertility of invention in employing the figures of his
family-pictures, is not among the least of his many excellences.

The country from Burford is high, and downy. A valley, on the right, kept pace
with us; through which flows the Windrush; not indeed an object of sight; but
easily traced along the meadows by pollard-willows, and a more luxuriant
vegetation.

At Barrington we had a pleasing view, through an opening on the foreground.

About North-leach the road grows very disagreeable. Nothing appears, but downs
on each side; and these often divided by stone walls, the most offensive
separation of property.

From the neighborhood of London, we had now pursued our journey through a
tract of country, almost uniformly rising, tho by imperceptible degrees, into
the heart of Glocestershire; till at length we found ourselves on the ridge of
Coteswold.

The county of Gloucester is divided into three capital parts -- the Wolds, or
high downy grounds toward the east -- the vale of Severn in the middle -- and
the forest of Dean, toward the west. The first of these tracts of country we
had been traversing from our entrance into Glocestershire: and the ridge we now
stood on, made the extremity of it. Here the heights which we had been
ascending by such imperceptible degrees, that we hardly ever perceived the
ascent, at length broke down abruptly into the lower grounds; and a vast
stretch of distant country appeared at once before the eye.

I know not that I was ever more struck with the singularity, and grandeur of
any landscape. Nature generally brings different countries together in some
easy mode of connection. If she raise the grounds on one side by a long ascent,
she commonly unites them with the country on the other, in the same easy
manner. Such scenes we view without wonder, or emotion. We glide without
observation, from the near grounds into the more distant. All is gradual, and
easy. But when nature works in the bold, and singular style of composition, in
which she works here -- when she raises a country through a progress of a
hundred miles; and then breaks it down at once by an abrupt precipice into an
expansive vale, we are immediately struck with the novelty, and grandeur of the
scene.

It was the vale of Severn, which was spread before us. Perhaps no where in
England a distance so rich, and at the same time so extensive, can be found. We
had a view of it almost from one end to the other; winding through the space of
many leagues in a direction nearly from west to north. The eye was lost in the
profusion of objects, which were thrown at once before it; and ran wild, as it
were, over the vast expanse, with rapture, and astonishment, before it could
compose itself enough to make any coherent observations. -- At length we begin
to examine the detail; and to separate the vast immensity before us into parts.

To the north, we looked up the vale, along the course of the Severn. The town
of Cheltenham lay below our feet, at the distance of two or three miles. The
vale appeared afterward confined between the limits of Bredon hills, on the
right; and those of Malvern on the left. Right between these in the middle of
the vale lies Tewksbury, bosomed in wood; the great church even at this
distance makes a respectable appearance. A little to the right, but in distance
very remote, we may see the towers of Worcester, if the day be clear;
especially if some accidental gleam of light relieve them from the hills of
Shropshire, which close the scene.

To the west, we look toward Gloucester. And here it is remarkable, that as the
objects in the northern part of the vale are confined by the hills of Malvern,
and Bredon, so in this view the vale is confined by two other hills; which tho
inconsiderable in themselves, give a character to the scene; and the more so as
they are both insulated. One of these hills is known by the name of
Robin's-wood; the other by that of Church-down, from the singularity of a
church seated on it is eminence. Between these hills the great object of the
vale, is the city of Gloucester; which appears rising over rich woody scenes.
Beyond Gloucester the eye still pursues the vale into remote distance, till it
unite with a range of mountains.

Still more to the west arises a distant forest-view, composed of the woods of
the country uniting with the forest of Dean. Of this view the principal feature
is the mouth of the Severn, where it first begins to assume a character of
grandeur by mixing with the ocean. A small portion only of it is seen
stretching in an acute angle over the wood. But the eye, used to perspective,
seeing such a body of water, small as it appears, wearing any determined form
at such distance, gives it credit for it is full magnitude. The Welsh mountains
also, which rise beyond the Severn, contribute to raise the idea: for by
forming an even horizontal line along the edge of the water, they give it the
appearance of what it really is, an arm of the sea.

Having thus taken a view of the vast expanse of the vale of Severn from the
extremity of the descent of Coteswold; we had leisure next to examine the
grandeur of the descent itself; which forms a foreground not less admirable
than the distance. The lofty ridge, on which we stood, is of great extent;
stretching beyond the bounds of Glocestershire, both toward the north, and
toward the south. It is not every where, we may suppose, of equal beauty,
height, and abruptness: but fine passages of landscape, I have been told,
abound in every part of it. The spot where we took this view, over the vale of
Severn, is the high ground on Crickly-hill; which is a promontory standing out
in the vale, between the villages of Leckhampton, and Birdlip. Here the descent
consists of various rocky knolls, prominences, and abruptnesses; among which a
variety of roads wind down the steep toward different parts of the vale; and
each of these roads, through it is whole varying progress, exhibits some
beautiful view; discovering the vale either in whole, or in part, with every
advantage of a picturesque foreground.

Many of these precipices also are finely wooded. Some of the largest trees in
the kingdom perhaps are to be seen in these parts. The Cheltenham oak, and an
elm, not far from it, are trees, which curious travelers always inquire after.

Many of these hills, which enclose the vale of Severn, on this side, furnish
landscapes themselves, without borrowing assistance from the vale. The woody
valleys, which run winding among them, present many pleasing pastoral scenes.
The clothing country about Stroud, is particularly diversified in this way:
tho many of these valleys are greatly injured in a picturesque light, by
becoming scenes of habitation, and industry. A cottage, a mill, or a hamlet
among trees, may often add beauty to a rural scene: but when houses are
scattered through every part, the moral sense can never make a convert of the
picturesque eye. Stroud-water valley especially, which is one of the most
beautiful of these scenes, has been deformed lately not only by a number of
buildings, but by a canal, cut through the middle of it.

Among the curiosities of these high grounds, is the seven-well-head of the
Thames. In a glen near the road, a few limpid springs, gushing from a rock,
give origin to this noblest of English rivers; tho I suppose several little
streams, in that district, might claim the honor with equal justice, if they
could bring over opinion.

Nothing can give a stronger idea of the nature of the country I have been
describing, than this circumstance of it is giving rise to the Thames. On one
side, within half a dozen miles below the precipice, the Severn has arrived at
so much consequence, as to take it is level from the tides of the ocean: on the
other, the Thames arising at our feet, does not arrive at that dignity, till it
have performed a course of two hundred and fifty miles.

Having descended the heights of Crickley, the road, through the vale continues
so level to Gloucester, that we scarce saw the town, till we entered it.

The cathedral is of elegant Gothic on the outside, but of heavy Saxon within:
that is, these different modes of architecture prevail most in these different
parts of the building. But in fact, the cathedral of Gloucester is a compound of
all the several modes, which have prevailed from the days of Henry the second
to those of Henry the seventh, and may be said to include, in one part or
other, the whole history of sacred architecture during that period. Many parts
of it have been built in the times of the purest Gothic: and others, which have
been originally Saxon, appear plainly to have been altered into the Gothic;
which was no uncommon practice. A Grecian screen is injudiciously introduced to
separate the choir. The cloisters are light and airy.

As we leave the gates of Gloucester, the view is pleasing. A long stretch of
meadow, filled with cattle, spreads into a foreground. Beyond, is a screen of
wood, terminated by distant mountains; among which Malvern-hills make a
respectable appearance. The road to Ross, leads through a country, woody,
rough, hilly, and picturesque.

Ross stands high, and commands many distant views; but that from the
churchyard is the most admired; and is indeed very amusing. It consists of an
easy sweep of the Wye; and of an extensive country beyond it. But it is not
picturesque. It is marked by no characteristic objects: it is broken into too
many parts; and it is seen from too high a point. The spire of the church,
which is the man of Ross's heaven-directed spire, tapers beautifully. The inn,
which was the house he lived in, is known by the name of the man of Ross's
house.

At Ross, we planned our voyage down the Wye to Monmouth; and provided a
covered-boat, navigated by three men. Less strength would have carried us down;
but the labor is in rowing back.

SECT. II.
THE WYE takes it is rise near the summit of Plinlimmon; and dividing the
counties of Radnor, and Brecknoc, passes through the middle of Herefordshire.
From thence becoming a second boundary between Monmouth, and Glocestershire, it
falls into the Severn, a little below Chepstow. To this place from Ross, which
is a course of near forty miles, it flows in a gentle, uninterrupted stream;
and adorns, through it is various reaches, a succession of the most picturesque
scenes.

The beauty of these scenes arises chiefly from two circumstances -- the lofty
banks of the river, and it is mazy course; both which are accurately observed by
the poet, when he describes the Wye, as ecchoing through it is winding bounds
Pleased Vaga echoes through it is winding bounds,
And rapid Severn hoarse applause resounds.
Pope's Eth. Ep.


. It could not well echo, unless it is banks were both lofty and winding.

From these two circumstances the views it exhibits, are of the most beautiful
kind of perspective; free from the formality of lines.

Every view on a river, thus circumstanced, is composed of four grand parts;
the area, which is the river itself; the two side-screens, which are the
opposite banks, and mark the perspective; and the front-screen, which points
out the winding of the river.

If the Wye ran, like a Dutch canal, between parallel banks there could be no
front-screen: the two side-screens, in that situation, would lengthen to a
point.

If a road were under the circumstance of a river winding like the Wye, the
effect would be the same. But this is rarely the case. The road pursues the
irregularity of the country. It climbs the hill; and sinks into the valley: and
this irregularity gives the view it exhibits, a different character.

The views on the Wye, tho composed only of these simple parts, are yet
infinitely varied.

They are varied, first, by the contrast of the screens. Sometimes one of the
side-screens is elevated; sometimes the other; and sometimes the front. Or both
the side-screens may be lofty; and the front either high, or low.

Again, they are varied by the folding of the side-screens over each other; and
hiding more or less of the front. When none of the front is discovered, the
folding-side either winds round, like an amphitheatre The word amphitheatre,
strictly speaking, is a complete enclosure: but, I believe, it is commonly
accepted, as here, for any circular piece of architecture, tho it do not wind
entirely round.
; or it becomes a long reach of perspective.

These simple variations admit still farther variety from becoming complex. One
of the sides may be compounded of various parts; while the other remains
simple: or both may be compounded; and the front simple: or the front alone may
be compounded.

Besides these sources of variety, there are other circumstances, which, under
the name of ornaments, still farther increase them. Plain banks will admit all
the variations we have yet mentioned: but when this plainness is adorned, a
thousand other varieties arise.

The ornaments of the Wye may be ranged under four heads -- ground -- wood --
rocks -- and buildings.

The ground, of which the banks of the Wye consist, (and which has thus far
been considered only in it is general effect,) affords every variety, which
ground is capable of receiving; from the steepest precipice, to the flattest
meadow. This variety appears in the line formed by the summits of the banks; in
the swellings, and excavations of their declivities; and in the unequal
surfaces of the lower grounds.

In many places also the ground is broken; which adds new sources of variety.
By broken ground, we mean only such ground, as has lost it is turf, and
dicovers the naked soil. Often you see a gravelly earth shivering from the
hills, in the form of water-falls: or perhaps you see dry, stony channels,
guttering down precipices; the rough beds of temporary torrents: and sometimes
so trifling a cause, as the rubbing of sheep against the sides of little banks,
or hillocs, will often occasion very beautiful breaks.

The color too of the broken soil is a great source of variety, the yellow, or
the red oker; the ashy gray; the black earth; or the marley blue. And the
intermixtures of these with each other, and with patches of verdure, blooming
heath, and other vegetable tints, still increase that variety.

Nor let the fastidious reader think, these remarks descend too much into
detail. Were an extensive distance described, a forest-scene, a sea coast view,
a vast semicircular range of mountains, or some other grand display of nature,
it would be trifling to mark these minute circumstances. But here the hills
around exhibit little, except foregrounds; and it is necessary, where we have
no distances, to be more exact in finishing objects at hand.

The next great ornament on the banks of the Wye, are it is woods. In this
country there are many works carried on by fire; and the woods being maintained
for their use, are periodically cut down. As the larger trees are generally
left, a kind of alternacy takes place: what is, this year, a thicket; may, the
next, be an open grove. The woods themselves possess little beauty, and less
grandeur; yet, when we consider them as the ornamental, not as the essential
parts, of a scene; the eye must not examine them with exactness; but compound
for a general effect.

One circumstance, attending this alternacy, is pleasing. Many of the furnaces,
on the banks of the river, consume charcoal, which is manufactured on the spot;
and the smoke, which is frequently seen issuing from the sides of the hills;
and spreading it is thin veil over a part of them, beautifully breaks their
lines, and unites them with the sky.

The chief deficiency, in point of wood, is of large trees on the edge of the
water; which, clumped here and there, would diversify the hills, as the eye
passes them; and remove that heaviness, which always, in some degree, (tho here
as little as any where) arises from the continuity of ground. They would also
give a degree of distance to the more removed parts; which in a scene like
this, would be attended with peculiar advantage: for as we have here so little
distance, we wish to make the most of what we have. -- But trees immediately on
the foreground cannot be suffered in these scenes; as they would obstruct the
navigation of the river.

The rocks, which are continually starting through the woods, produce another
ornament on the banks of the Wye. The rock, as all other objects, tho more than
all, receives it is chief beauty from contrast. Some objects, are beautiful in
themselves. The eye is pleased with the tuftings of a tree: it is amused with
pursuing the eddying stream; or it rests with delight on the shattered arches
of a Gothic ruin. Such objects, independent of composition, are beautiful in
themselves. But the rock, bleak, naked, and unadorned, seems scarcely to
deserve a place among them. Tint it with mosses, and lychens of various hues,
and you give it a degree of beauty. Adorn it with shrubs and hanging herbage,
and you still make it more picturesque. Connect it with wood, and water, and
broken ground; and you make it in the highest degree interesting. It Is color,
and it is form are so accommodating, that it generally blends into one of the
most beautiful appendages of landscape.

Different kinds of rocks have different degrees of beauty. Those on the Wye,
which are of a greyish color, are in general, simple, and grand; rarely
formal, or fantastic. Sometimes they project in those beautiful square masses,
yet broken and shattered in every line, which is characteristic of the most
majestic species of rock. Sometimes they slant obliquely from the eye in
shelving diagonal strata: and sometimes they appear in large masses of smooth
stone, detached from each other, and half buried in the soil. Rocks of this
last kind are the most lumpish, and the least picturesque.

The various buildings, which arise every where on the banks of the Wye, form
the last of it is ornaments; abbeys, castles, villages, spires, forges, mills,
and bridges. One or other of these venerable vestiges of past, or cheerful
habitations of present times, characterize almost every scene.

These works of art are however of much greater use in artificial, than in
natural landscape. In pursuing the beauties of nature, we range at large among
forests, lakes, rocks, and mountains. The various scenes we meet with, furnish
an inexhausted source of pleasure. And tho the works of art may often give
animation and contrast to these scenes; yet still they are not necessary. We
can be amused without them. But when we introduce a scene on canvas -- when the
eye is to be confined within the frame of a picture, and can no longer range
among the varieties of nature; the aids of art become more necessary; and we
want the castle, or the abbey, to give consequence to the scene. Indeed the
landscape-painter seldom thinks his view perfect, without characterizing it by
some object of this kind.

SECT. III.
HAVING thus analyzed the Wye, and considered separately it is constituent parts
-- the steepness of it is banks -- it is mazy course -- the ground, woods, and
rocks, which are it is native ornaments -- and the buildings, which still
farther adorn it is natural beauties; we shall now take a view of some of those
delightful scenes, which result from the combination of all these picturesque
materials.

I must however premise, how ill-qualified I am to do justice to the banks of
the Wye, were it only from having seen them under the circumstance of a
continued rain; which began early in the day, before one third of our voyage
was performed.

It is true, scenery at hand suffers less under such a circumstance, than
scenery at a distance; which it totally obscures.

The picturesque eye also, in quest of beauty, finds it almost in every
incident, and under every appearance of nature. Her works, and all her works,
must ever, in some degree, be beautiful. Even the rain gave a gloomy grandeur
to many of the scenes; and by throwing a veil of obscurity over the removed
banks of the river, introduced, now and then, something like a pleasing
distance. Yet still it hid greater beauties; and we could not help regretting
the loss of those broad lights, and deep shadows, which would have given so
much luster to the whole; and which, ground like this, is, in a peculiar
manner, adapted to receive.

The first part of the river from Ross, is tame. The banks are low; and there
is scarce an object worth attention, except the ruins of Wilton-castle, which
appear on the left, shrouded with a few trees. But the scene wants
accompaniments to give it grandeur.



The bank however soon began to swell on the right, and was richly adorned with
wood. We admired it much; and also the vivid images reflected from the water;
which were continually disturbed, as we sailed past them; and thrown into
tremulous confusion, by the dashing of our oars. A disturbed surface of water
endeavoring to collect it is scattered images; and restore them to order, is
among the pretty appearances of nature.

We met with nothing, for some time, during our voyage, but these grand woody
banks, one rising behind another; appearing, and vanishing, by turns, as we
doubled the several capes. But tho no particular objects marked and
characterized these different scenes; yet they afforded great variety of
beautiful perspective views, as we wound round them; or stretched through the
reaches, which they marked along the river.

The channel of no river can be more decisively marked, than that of the Wye.
Who has divided a watercourse for the flowing of rivers? says the Almighty
in that grand apostrophe to Job on the works of creation. The idea is happily
illustrated here. A nobler watercourse was never divided for any river, than
this of the Wye. Rivers, in general, pursue a devious course along the
countries, through which they flow; and form channels for themselves by
constant fluxion. But sometimes, as in these scenes, we see a channel marked
with such precision; that it appears as if originally intended only for the bed
of a river.

After sailing four miles from Ross, we came to Goodrich-castle; where a grand
view presented itself; and we rested on our oars to examine it. A reach of the
river, forming a noble bay, is spread before the eye. The bank, on the right,
is steep, and covered with wood; beyond which a bold promontory shoots out,
crowned with a castle, rising among trees.

This view, which is one of the grandest on the river, I should not scruple to
call correctly picturesque; which is seldom the character of a purely natural
scene.

Nature is always great in design. She is an admirable colourist also; and
harmonizes tints with infinite variety, and beauty. But she is seldom so
correct in composition, as to produce an harmonious whole. Either the
foreground, or the background, is disproportioned: or some awkward line runs
across the piece: or a tree is ill-placed: or a bank is formal: or something or
other is not exactly what it should be. The case is, the immensity of nature is
beyond human comprehension. She works on a vast scale; and, no doubt,
harmoniously, if her schemes could be comprehended. The artist, in the mean
time, is confined to a span; and lays down his little rules, which he calls the
principles of picturesque beauty, merely to adapt such diminutive parts of
nature's surfaces to his own eye, as come within it is scope.

Hence therefore, the painter, who adheres strictly to the composition of
nature, will rarely make a good picture. His picture must contain a whole: his
archetype is but a part.

In general however he may obtain views of such parts of nature, as with the
addition of a few trees; or a little alteration in the foreground, (which is a
liberty, that must always be allowed) may be adapted to his rules; though he is
rarely so fortunate as to find a landscape completely satisfactory to him. In
the scenery indeed at Goodrich-castle the parts are few; and the whole is a
very simple exhibition. The complex scenes of nature are generally those, which
the artist finds most refractory to his rules of composition.

In following the course of the Wye, which makes here one of it is boldest
sweeps, we were carried almost round the castle, surveying it in a variety of
forms. Many of these retrospects are good; but, in general, the castle loses,
on this side, both it is own dignity, and the dignity of it is situation.

The views from the castle, were mentioned to us, as worth examining: but the
rain was now set in, and would not permit us to land.

As we leave Goodrich-castle, the banks, on the left, which had hitherto
contributed less to entertain us, began now principally to attract our
attention; rearing themselves gradually into grand steeps; sometimes covered
with thick woods; and sometimes forming vast concave slopes of mere verdure;
unadorned, except here and there, by a straggling tree: while the flocks, which
hung browzing upon them, seen from the bottom, were diminished into white
specks.

The view at Rure-dean-church unfolds itself next; which is a scene of great
grandeur. Here, both sides of the river are steep, and both woody; but in one
the woods are intermixed with rocks. The deep umbrage of the forest of Dean
occupies the front; and the spire of the church rises among the trees. The
reach of the river, which exhibits this scene, is long; and, of course, the
view, which is a noble piece of natural perspective, continues some time before
the eye: but when the spire comes directly in front, the grandeur of the
landscape is gone.

The stone-quarries, on the right, from which the bridge of Bristol was built;
and, on the left, the furnaces of Bishop's-wood, vary the scene, tho they are
objects of no great importance in themselves.

For some time, both sides of the river continue steep and beautiful. No
particular object indeed characterizes either: but here nature characterizes
her own scenes. We admire the infinite variety, with which she shapes, and
adorns, these vast concave, and unequal forms. We admire also that varied touch,
with which she expresses every object.

Here we see one great distinction between her painting, and that of all her
copyists. Artists universally are mannerists in a certain degree. Each has his
particular mode of forming particular objects. His rocks, his trees, his
figures are cast in one mould: at least they possess only a varied sameness.
Ruben's figures are all full-fed: Salvator's, spare, and long-legged.

The artist also discovers as little variety in filling up the surfaces of
bodies, as he does in delineating their forms. You see the same touch, or
something like it, universally prevail; tho applied to different subjects.

In every part of painting except execution, an artist may be assisted by the
labors of those, who have gone before him. He may improve his skill in
composition -- in light and shade -- in perspective -- in grace and elegance;
that is, in all the scientific parts of his art: but with regard to execution,
he must set up on his own stock. A mannerist, I fear, he must be. If he get a
manner of his own, he may be an agreeable mannerist: but if he copy another's,
he will certainly be a formal one. The more closely he copies nature, the
better chance he has of being free from this general defect.

At Lidbroke is a large wharf, where coals are shipped for Hereford, and other
places. Here the scene is new, and pleasing. All has thus far been grandeur,
and tranquillity. It is now life, and bustle. A road runs diagonally along the
bank; and horses, and carts appear passing to the small vessels, which lie
against the wharf, to receive their burdens. Close behind, a rich, woody hill
hangs sloping over the wharf, and forms a grand background to the whole. The
contrast of all this business, the engines used in lading, and unlading,
together with the solemnity of the scene, produce all together a picturesque
assemblage. The sloping hill is the front-screen; the two side-screens are low.

The front soon becomes a lofty side-screen on the left; and sweeping round the
eye at Welsh-Bicknor, forms a noble amphitheatre.

At Cold-well, the front-screen first appears as a woody hill, swelling to a
point. In a few minutes, it changes it is shape, and the woody hill becomes a
lofty side-screen, on the right; while the front unfolds itself into a majestic
piece of rock-scenery.

Here we should have gone on shore, and walked to the New-Weir, which by land
is only a mile; though by water, I believe, it is three times as far. This walk
would have afforded us, we were informed, some very noble river-views: Nor
should we have lost any thing by relinquishing the water; which in this part
was uninteresting.

The whole of this information we should probably have found true; if the
weather had permitted us to have profitted by it. The latter part of it was
certainly well-founded: for the water-views, in this part, were very tame. We
left the rocks, and precipices behind; exchanging them for low-banks, and
sedges.

But the grand scenery soon returned. We approached it however gradually. The
views at White-church were an introduction to it. Here we sailed through a long
reach of hills; whose sloping sides were covered with large, lumpish, detached
stcones; which seemed, in a course of years, to have rolled from a girdle of
rocks, that surrounds the upper regions of these high grounds on both sides of
the river; but particularly on the left.

From these rocks we soon approached the New-Weir; which may be called the
second grand scene on the Wye.

The river is wider, than usual, in this part; and takes a sweep round a
towering promontory of rock; which forms the side-screen on the left; and is
the grand feature of the view. It is not a broad, fractured face of rock; but
rather a woody hill, from which large projections, in two or three places,
burst out; rudely hung with twisting branches, and shaggy furniture; which,
like mane round the lion's head, give a more savage air to these wild
exhibitions of nature. Near the top a pointed fragment of solitary rock, rising
above the rest, has rather a fantastic appearance: but it is not without it is
effect in marking the scene.

A great matter in landscape has adorned an imaginary view with a circumstance
exactly similar: Stabat acuta silex, praecisis undique saxis,
-- dorso insurgens, altissima visu,
Dirarum nidis domus opportuna volucrum,
-- prona jugo, laevum incumbebat ad amnem AEn. VIII. 233.
.




On the right side of the river, the bank forms a woody amphitheatre, following
the course of the stream round the promontory. It Is lower skirts are adorned
with a hamlet; in the midst of which, volumes of thick smoke, thrown up at
intervals, from an iron-forge, as it is fires receive fresh fuel, add double
grandeur to the scene.

But what peculiarly marks this view, is a circumstance on the water. The whole
river, at this place, makes a precipitate fall; of no great height indeed; but
enough to merit the title of a cascade: tho to the eye above the stream, it is
an object of no consequence. In all the scenes we had yet passed, the water
moving with a slow, and solemn pace, the objects around kept time, as it were,
with it; and every steep, and every rock, which hung over the river, was
solemn, tranquil, and majestic. But here, the violence of the stream, and the
roaring of the waters, impressed a new character on the scene: all was
agitation, and uproar; and every steep, and every rock stared with wildness,
and terror.

A fishing-boat is used in this part of the river, which is curious. It is
constructed of waxed canvas, stretched over a few slight ribs; and holds only a
single man. It is called a coricle; and is derived probably, as it is name
imports, from the ancient boat, which was formed of leather.

An adventrous fellow, for a wager, once navigated a coricle as far as the isle
of Lundy, at the mouth of the Bristol-channel. A full fortnight, or more, he
spent in this dangerous voyage; and it was happy for him, that it was a
fortnight of serene weather. Many a current, and many an eddy; many a flowing
tide, and many an ebbing one, afforded him occasion to exert all his skill, and
dexterity. Sometimes his little bark was carried far to leeward; and sometimes
as far to windward: but still he recovered his course; persevered in his
undertaking; and at length happily achieved it. When he returned to the
New-Weir, report says, the account of his expedition was received like a voyage
round the world.

Below the New-Weir are other rocky views of the same kind, though less
beautiful. But description flags in running over such a monotony of terms.
High, low, steep, woody, rocky, and a few others, are all the colors of
language we have, to describe scenes; in which there are infinite gradations;
and, amidst some general sameness, infinite peculiarities.

After we had passed a few of these scenes, the hills gradually descend into
Monmouth; which lies too low to make any appearance from the water: but on
landing, we found it a pleasant town, and neatly built. The townhouse, and
church, are both handsome.

The transmutations of time are often ludicrous. Monmouth-castle was formerly
the palace of a king; and birthplace of a mighty prince: it is now converted
into a yard for fatting ducks.

The sun had set before we arrived at Monmouth. Here we met our chaise: but, on
enquiry, finding a voyage more likely to produce amusement, than a journey, we
made a new agreement with our bargemen; and embarked again, the next morning.



SECT. IV.
AS we left Monmouth, the banks, on the left, were, at first, low; but on both
sides they soon grew steep, and woody; varying their shapes, as they had done
the day before. The most beautiful of these scenes is in the neighborhood of
St. Breval's castle; where the vast, woody declivities, on each hand, are
uncommonly magnificent. The castle is at too great a distance to make any
object in the view.

The weather was now serene: the sun shone; and we saw enough of the effect of
light, in the exhibitions of this day, to regret the want of it the day before.

During the whole course of our voyage from Ross, we had scarce seen one
corn-field. The banks of the Wye consist, almost entirely either of wood, or of
pasturage; which I mention as a circumstance of peculiar value in landscape.
Furrowed-lands, and waving-corn, however charming in pastoral poetry, are
ill-accommodated to painting. The painter never desires the hand of art to
touch his grounds. -- But if art must stray among them -- if it must mark out
the limits of property, and turn them to the uses of agriculture; he wishes,
that these limits may, as much as possible, be concealed; and that the lands
they circumscribe, may approach, as nearly as may be, to nature -- that is,
that they may be pasturage. Pasturage not only presents an agreeable surface:
but the cattle, which graze it, add great variety, and animation to the scene.

The meadows, below Monmouth, which ran shelving from the hills to the
waterside, were particularly beautiful, and well-inhabited. Flocks of sheep
were every where hanging on their green steeps; and herds of cattle occupying
the lower grounds. We often failed past groups of them laving their sides in
the water: or retiring from the heat under sheltered banks.

In this part of the river also, which now begins to widen, we were often
entertained with light vessels gliding past us. Their white sails passing along
the sides of woodland hills were very picturesque.

In many places also the views were varied by the prospect of bays, and
harbors in miniature; where little barks lay moored, taking in ore, and other
commodities from the mountains. These vessels, designed plainly for rougher
water, than they at present incountred, showed us, without any geographical
knowledge, that we approached the sea.

From Monmouth we reached, by a late breakfast-hour, the noble ruin of
Tinternabbey; which belongs to the Duke of Beaufort; and is esteemed, with its
appendages, the most beautiful and picturesque view on the river.

Castles, and abbeys have different situations, agreeable to their respective
uses. The castle, meant for defense, stands boldly on the hill; the abbey,
intended for meditation, is hid in the sequestered vale.

Ah! happy thou, if one superior rock
Bear on it is brow, the shivered fragment huge
Of some old Norman fortress: happier far,
Ah then most happy, if thy vale below
Wash, with the crystal coolness of it is rills,
Some mouldering abbey's ivy-vested wall.
Such is the situation of Tintern-abbey. It occupies a gentle eminence in the
middle of a circular valley, beautifully screened on all sides by woody hills;
through which the river winds it is course; and the hills, closing on it is
entrance, and on it is exit, leave no room for inclement blasts to enter. A more
pleasing retreat could not easily be found. The woods, and glades intermixed;
the winding of the river; the variety of the ground; the splendid ruin,
contrasted with the objects of nature; and the elegant line formed by the
summits of the hills, which include the whole; make all together a very
enchanting piece of scenery. Every thing around breathes an air so calm, and
tranquil; so sequestered from the commerce of life; that it is easy to
conceive, a man of warm imagination, in monkish times, might have been allured
by such a scene to become an inhabitant of it.

No part of the ruins of Tintern is seen from the river, except the
abbey-church. It has been an elegant Gothic pile; but it does not make that
appearance as a distant object, which we expected. Tho the parts are beautiful,
the whole is ill-shaped. No ruins of the tower are left, which might give form,
and contrast to the buttresses, and walls. Instead of this, a number of
gabel-ends hurt the eye with their regularity; and disgust it by the vulgarity
of their shape. A mallet judiciously used (but who durst use it?) might be of
service in fracturing some of them; particularly those of the cross isles,
which are not only disagreeable in themselves, but confound the perspective.

But were the building ever so beautiful, encompassed as it is with shabby
houses, it could make no appearance from the river. From a stand near the road,
it is seen to more advantage.

But if Tintern-abbey be less striking as a distant object, it exhibits, on a
nearer view, (when the whole together cannot be seen, but the eye settles on
some of it is nobler parts,) a very enchanting piece of ruin. Nature has now
made it her own. Time has worn off all traces of the rule: it has blunted the
sharp edges of the chissel; and broken the regularity of opposing parts. The
figured ornaments of the east-window are gone; those of the west-window are
left. Most of the other windows, with their principal ornaments, remain.

To these were superadded the ornaments of time. Ivy, in masses uncommonly
large, had taken possession of many parts of the wall; and given a happy
contrast to the grey-coloured stone, of which the building is composed. Nor was
this undecorated. Mosses of various hues, with lychens, maidenhair,
penny-leaf, and other humble plants, had overspread the surface; or hung from
every joint, and crevice. Some of them were in flower, others only in leaf; but
all together gave those full-blown tints, which add the richest finishing to a
ruin.

Such is the beautiful appearance, which Tintern-abbey exhibits on the outside
in thosse parts, where we can obtain a near view of it. But when we enter it,
we see it in most perfection: at least, if we consider it as an independent
object, unconnected with landscape. The roof is gone: but the walls, and
pillars, and abutments, which supported it, are entire. A few of the pillars
indeed have given way; and here and there, a piece of the facing of he wall:
but in correspondent parts, one always remains to tell the story. The pavement
is obliterated: the elevation of the choir is no longer visible: the whole area
is reduced to one level; cleared of rubbish; and covered with neat turf,
closely shorn; and interrupted with nothing, but the noble columns, which
formed the isles, and supported the tower.

When we stood at one end of this awful piece of ruin; and surveyed the whole
in one view -- the elements of air, and earth, it is only covering, and
pavement; and the grand, and venerable remains, which terminated both --
perfect enough to form the perspective; yet broken enough to destroy the
regularity; the eye was above measure delighted with the beauty, the greatness,
and the novelty of the scene. More picturesque it certainly would have been, if
the area, unadorned, had been left with all it is rough fragments of ruin
scattered round; and bold was the hand that removed them: yet as the outside of
the ruin, which is the chief object of picturesque curiosity, is still left in
all it is wild, and native rudeness; we excuse -- perhaps we approve -- the
neatness, that is introduced within. It may add to the beauty of the scene --
to it is novelty it undoubtedly does.

Among other things in this scene of desolation, the poverty and wretchedness
of the inhabitants were remarkable. They occupy little huts, raised among the
ruins of the monastery; and seem to have no employment, but begging: as if a
place, once devoted to indolence, could never again become the seat of
industry. As we left the abbey, we found the whole hamlet at the gate, either
openly soliciting alms; or covertly, under the pretense of carrying us to some
part of the ruins, which each could show; and which was far superior to any
thing, which could be shown by any one else. The most lucrative occasion could
not have excited more jealousy, and contention.

One poor woman we followed, who had engaged to show us the monk's library. She
could scarce crawl; shuffling along her palsied limbs, and meager, contracted
body, by the help of two sticks. She led us, through an old gate, into a place
overspread with nettles, and briars; and pointing to the remnant of a shattered
cloister, told us, that was the place. It was her own mansion. All indeed she
meant to tell us, was the story of her own wretchedness; and all she had to
show us, was her own miserable habitation. We did not expect to be interested:
but we found we were. I never saw so loathsome a human dwelling. It was a
cavity, loftily vaulted, between two ruined walls; which streamed with
various-coloured stains of unwholesome dews. The floor was earth; yielding,
through moisture, to the tread. Not the merest utensil, or furniture of any
kind appeared, but a wretched bedstead, spread with a few rags, and drawn into
the middle of the cell, to prevent it is receiving the damp, which trickled down
the walls. At one end was an aperture; which served just to let in light enough
to discover the wretchedness within. -- When we stood in the midst of this cell
of misery; and felt the chilling damps, which struck us in every direction, we
were rather surprised, that the wretched inhabitant was still alive; than that
she had only lost the use of her limbs.

The country about Tintern-abbey has been described as a solitary, tranquil
scene: but it is immediate environs only are meant. Within half a mile of it are
carried on great ironworks; which introduce noise and bustle into these regions
of tranquillity.

The ground, about these works, appears from the river to consist of grand
woody hills, sweeping, and intersecting each other, in elegant lines. They are
a continuation of the same kind of landscape, as that about Tintern-abbey; and
are fully equal to it.

As we still descend the river, the same scenery continues. The banks are
equally steep, winding, and woody; and in some parts diversified by prominent
rocks, and ground finely broken, and adorned.

But one great disadvantage began here to invade us. Hitherto the river had
been clear, and splendid; reflecting the several objects on it is banks. But
it is waters now became ouzy, and discolored. Sludgy shores too appeared, on
each side; and other symptoms, which discovered the influence of a tide.

SECT. V.
MR. Morris's improvements at Persfield, which we soon approached, are
generally thought as much worth a traveller's notice, as any thing on the banks
of the Wye. We pushed on shore close under his rocks; and the tide being at
ebb, we landed with some difficulty on an ouzy beach. One of our bargemen, who
knew the place, served as a guide; and under his conduct we climbed the steep
by an easy, regular zig-zag; and gained the top.

The eminence, on which we stood, (one of those grand eminences, which
overlooks the Wye,) is an intermixture of rock, and wood; and forms, in this
place, a concave semicircle; sweeping round in a segment of two miles. The
river winds under it; and the scenery, of course, is shown in various
directions. The river itself indeed, as we just observed, is charged with the
impurities of the soil it washes; and when it ebbs, it is verdant banks become
slopes of mud: but if we except these disadvantages, the situation of Persfield
is noble.

Little indeed was left for improvement, but to open walks, and views, through
the woods, to the various objects around them. All this the ingenious
proprietor has done with great judgment; and has shown his rocks, his woods,
and his precipices, under various forms; and to great advantage. Sometimes a
broad face of rock is presented, stretching along a vast space, like the walls
of a citadel. Sometimes it is broken by intervening trees. In other parts, the
rocks rise above the woods; a little farther, they sink below them: sometimes,
they are seen through them; and sometimes one series of rocks appears rising
above another: and tho many of these objects are repeatedly seen, yet seen from
different stations, and with new accompaniments, they appear new. The winding
of the precipice is the magical secret, by which all these enchanting scenes
are produced.

We cannot however call these views picturesque. They are either presented from
too high a point; or they have little to mark them as characteristic; or they
do not fall into such composition, as would appear to advantage on canvas. But
they are extremely romantic; and give a loose to the most pleasing riot of
imagination.

These views are chiefly shown from different stands in a close walk, carried
along the brow of the precipice. It would be invidious perhaps to remark a
degree of tediousness in this walk; and too much sameness in many of the views;
notwithstanding the general variety, which inlivens them: but the intention
probably is not yet complete; and many things are meant to be hid, which are
now too profusely shown As it is many years, since these remarks were made,
everal alterations have probably, since that time, taken place.
.

Having seen every thing on this side of the hill, the walks we pursued, led us
over the ridge of it to the opposite side. Here the ground, depositing it is
wild appearance, assumes a more civilized form. It consists of a great variety
of lawns, intermixed with wood, and rock; and, tho it often rises, and falls,
yet it descends without any violence into the country beyond it.

The views, on this side, are not the romantic steeps of the Wye: but tho of
another species, they are equally grand. They are chiefly distances, consisting
of the vast waters of the Severn, here an arm of the sea; bounded by a remote
country -- of the mouth of the Wye entering the Severn -- and of the town of
Chepstow, and it is castle, and abbey. Of all these distant objects an admirable
use is made; and they are shown, (as the rocks of the Wye were on the other
side) sometimes in parts; and sometimes all together. In one station we had the
scenery of both sides of the hill at once.

It is a pity, the ingenious embellisher of these scenes could not have been
satisfied with the grand beauties of nature, which he commanded. The
shrubberies he has introduced in this part of his improvements, I fear, will
rather be esteemed paltry. As the embellishments of a house; or as the ornament
of little scenes, which have nothing better to recommend them, a few flowering
shrubs artfully composed may have their elegance and beauty: but in scenes,
like this, they are only splendid patches, which injure the grandeur, and
simplicity of the whole.

-- Fortasse cupressum
Scis simulare: quid hoc? --
-- Sit quidvis simplex duntaxat et unum.
It is not the shrub, which offends: it is the formal introduction of it. Wild
underwood may be an appendage of the grandest scene. It is a beautiful
appendage. A bed of violets, or lillies may enamel the ground, with propriety,
at the root of an oak: but if you introduce them artificially in a border, you
introduce a trifling formality; and disgrace the noble object, you wish to
adorn.

From the scenes of Persfield we walked to Chepstow; our barge drawing too much
water to pass the shallows, till the return of the tide. In this walk we wished
for more time, than we could command, to examine the romantic scenes which
surrounded us: but we were obliged to return, that evening, to Monmouth.

The road, at first, affords beautiful distant views of those woody hills,
which had entertained us on the banks of the Wye; and which appeared to as much
advantage, when connected with the country, as they had already done in union
with the river. But the country soon loses it is picturesque form; and assumes a
bleak unpleasant wildness.

About seven miles from Chepstow, we had an extensive view into Wales, bounded
by mountains very remote. But this view, tho much celebrated, has little,
except the grandeur of extension, to recommend it. And yet, it is possible,
that in some lights it may be very picturesque; and that we might only have had
the misfortune to see it in an unfavourable one. Different lights make so great
a change even in the composition of landscape -- at least in the apparent
composition of it, that they create a scene perfectly new. In distance
especially this is the cafe. Hills and valleys may be deranged; awkward
abruptnesses, and hollows introduced; and the effect of woods, and castles, and
all the ornamental detail of a country, lost. On the other hand, these
ingredients of landscape may in reality be awkwardly introduced; yet through
the magical influence of light, they may be altered, softened, and rendered
pleasing.

In a mountainous country particularly, I have often seen, during the morning
hours, a range of hills, rearing their summits, in ill-disposed, fantastic
shapes. In the afternoon, all this incorrect rudeness has been removed; and
each misshapen summit has softened beautifully into some pleasing form.

The different seasons of the year also produce the same effect. When the sun
rides high in summer; and when, in the same meridian, he just skirts the
horizon in winter, he forms the mountain-tops, and indeed the whole face of a
country, into very different appearances.

Fogs also vary a distant country as much as light, softening the harsh
features of landscape; and spreading over them a beautiful, gray, harmonizing
tint.

We remark further, on this subject, that scarce any landscape will stand the
test of different lights. Some searching ray, as the sun veers round, will
expose it is defects. And hence it is, that almost every landscape is seen best
under some peculiar illlumination -- either of an evening, or of a morning, or,
it may be, of a meridian, sun.

During many miles we kept upon the heights; and, through a long, and gentle
descent, approached Monmouth. Before we reached it we were benighted: but as
far as we could judge of a country through the gray obscurity of a
summer-evening, this seemed to abound with many beautiful, woody valleys among
the hills, which we descended. A light of this kind, tho not so favorable to
landscape, is very favorable to the imagination. This active power embodies
half-sormed images; and gives existence to the most illusive scenes. These it
rapidly combines; and often composes landscapes, perhaps more beautiful, than
any, that exist in nature. They are formed indeed from nature -- from the most
beautiful of her scenes; and having been treasured up in the memory, are called
into these imaginary creations by some distant resemblances, which strike the
eye in the multiplicity of dubious surfaces, that float before it.

SECT. VI.
HAVING thus navigated the Wye between Ross, and Chepstow, we had such pleasing
accounts of it is beautiful scenery above Ross, that if our time had permitted,
we could have wished to have explored it.

A journal however fell into my hands, (since the first edition of this book
was printed) of a tour to the source of the Wye; and from thence through the
midland counties of Wales; which I shall put into a little form; and making a
few remarks on different parts of it, shall insert here for the benefit of
those, who may have more time than we had.

From Ross to Hereford the great road leaves the river, which is hardly once
seen. But it is not probable, that much is lost; for the whole country here has
a tame appearance.

The cathedral of Hereford consists, in many parts, of rich Gothic. The
west-front is falling fast to decay, and is every year receiving more the form
of a fine ruin A subscription I hear, is now opened to repair it.
.

At Hereford we again meet the Wye; of which we have several beautiful views
from the higher grounds. The road now follows the course of the river to the
Hay; winding along it is northern banks.

About six miles from Hereford, and very little out of the road, stands Foxley.
The form of the grounds about it, and the beautiful woods that surround it, are
said to be worth seeing. My journalist says it contains a choice collection of
pictures; and some good drawings of landscape by the late Mr. Price.

The ruins of Bradwardine-castle appear soon in view; tho but little of them
remains. At a bridge near them you cross the Wye, and now traverse the
south side of the river. The country, which had been greatly varied before,
begins now to form bolder swells. Among these Mirebich-hill, which rises full
in front, continues some time before the eye, as a considerable object.

Leaving Witney-bridge on the right, you still continue your course along the
southern bank of the river; and come soon in view of the ruins of
Clyfford-castle; where tradition informs us, the celebrated Rosamond spent her
early life.

Soon after, you arrive at the Hay; a town pleasantly situated on the Wye. It
was formerly a Roman station; and was long afterward considered as a place of
great strength; being defended by a castle, and lofty walls, till Owen
Glendouer laid it in ashes in one of those expeditions, in which he drove Harry
Bullin-broke

-- thrice from the banks of Wye,
And sandy-bottomed Severn --
If you have time to make a little excursion, you will find about half way
between the Hay, and Abergavenny, the ruins of Llantony-priory. Dugdale
describes it, in his Monasticon, as a scene richly adorned with wood. But
Dugdale lived a century ago; which is a term that will produce, or destroy, the
finest scenery. It has had the latter effect here; for the woods about
Llantony-priory are now totally destroyed; and the ruin is wholly naked, and
desolate.

After this excursion, you return again to the Hay; and continue your rout to
Bualt, still on the south side of the river.

On the north side, about four miles beyond the Hay, stands Maeslough, the
ancient seat of the Howarths. The house shows the neglect of it is possessor:
but the situation is in it is kind perhaps one of the finest in Wales. The view
from the hall-door is spoken of as wonderfully amusing. A lawn extends to the
river; which incircles it with a curve, at the distance of half a mile. The
banks are enriched with various objects; among which two bridges, with winding
roads, and the tower of Glasbury-church, surrounded by wood, are conspicuous. A
distant country equally enriched, fills the remote parts of the landscape,
which is terminated by mountains. One of the bridges in this view, that at
Glasbury, is remarkably light, and elegant, consisting of several arches. --
How these various objects are brought together, I know not. I should fear there
were too many of them.

As you continue your rout to Bualt, the country grows grander, and more
picturesque. The valley of the Wye becomes contracted, and the road runs at the
bottom; along the edge of the water.

It is possible, I think, the Wye may in this place be more beautiful, than in
any other part of it is course. Between Ross, and Chepstow, the grandeur, and
beauty of it is banks are it is chief praise. The river itself has no other
merit, than that of a winding surface of smooth water. But here, added to the
same decoration from it is banks, the Wye itself assumes a more beautiful
character; pouring over shelving rocks; and forming itself into eddies, and
cascades, which a solemn parading stream through a flat channel, cannot exhibit.

An additional merit also accrues to such a river from the different forms it
assumes, according to the fullness, or emptiness of the stream. There are rocks
of all shapes, and sizes; which always vary the appearance of the water, as it
rushes over, or plays among them: so that such a river, to a picturesque eye,
is a continued fund of new entertainment.

The Wye also, in this part of it is course, still receives farther beauty from
the woods, which adorn it is banks; and which the navigation of the river, in
it is lower reaches, cannot allow. Here the whole is perfectly rural, and
unincumbered. Even a boat, I believe, is never seen beyond the Hay. The boat
itself might be an ornament: but we would not give up for it such a river, as
would not suffer a boat.

Some beauties however the smooth river possesses above the rapid one. In the
latter you cannot have those reflections, which are so ornamental to the
former. -- Nor can you have in the rapid river, the opportunity of
contemplating the grandeur of it is banks from the surface of the water --
unless indeed the road winds close with the river at the bottom, when perhaps
you may see them with additional advantage.

The foundation of these criticisms on smooth and agitated water, is this. When
water is exhibited in small quantities, it wants the agitation of a torrent, a
cascade, or some other adventitious circumstance, to give it consequence. But
when it is spread out in the reach of some capital river -- in a lake -- or an
arm of the sea -- it is then able to support it is own dignity. In the former
case it aims at beauty: in the latter at grandeur. Now the Wye has in no part
of it is course, a quantity of water sufficient to give it any great degree of
grandeur; so that of consequence the smooth part must, on the whole, yield to
the more agitated, which possesses more beauty.

In this wild enchanting country stands Llangoed, the house of sir Edward
Williams. It is adorned, like the house at Foxley, with woods, and playing
grounds: but is a scene totally different. Here however are finer trees, than
those at Foxley; which, when examined as individuals, appear to great
advantage: tho my journalist has heard, that some of the finest of them have
lately been cut down.

The road still continues through the same beautiful country, along the banks
of the Wye; and in a few miles farther brings you to Bualt. This town is seated
in a pleasant vale, surrounded with woods.

A little beyond Bualt, where the river Irvon falls into the Wye, is a field,
still marked by tradition, in which Llewellin, the last prince of Wales, was
put to death. Some historians say, he was killed in battle; but the traditional
account of his being killed near Bualt seems more probable; and that he fell by
the hands of an assassin. When Edward invaded Wales, we are informed, that
Llewellin had entrenched himself in the fastnesses of Snowdon. Here he might
probably have foiled his adversary: but some of his troops having been
successful against the earl of Surrey, one of Edward's generals, Llewellin came
down from his strong holds, with the hope of improving his advantage, and
offered Edward battle. Llewellin was totally routed; and tradition says that in
his flight into Glamorganshire, he slept the night before he was murdered, at
Llechryd, which is now a farmhouse. Here the farrier, who shod his horse, knew
him under his disguise; and betrayed him to the people of Bualt, who put him to
death; and are to this day stigmatized with the name of Brad wyr y Bualht, or
the traitors of Bualt.

At Bualt you cross the Wye again, and now pursue your rout along the north
side of the river. The same grand scenery continues -- lofty banks -- woody
vales -- a rocky channel, and a rapid stream winding through it.

Soon after you come to the sulphurous springs of Llanydrindod, which you
leave on the right; and crossing the river Ithon, you reach Rhaader; a town
about thirteen miles beyond Bualt. -- To a Welshman the appearance of the Wye
at Rhaader, need not to be described. The word signifies a waterfall. There is
no cascade indeed of consequence near the place; but the river being pent up
within close rocky banks, and the channel being steep, the whole is a
succession of water-falls.

As you leave Rhaader, you begin to approach the sources of the Wye. But the
river having now lost it is chief supplies, becomes more and more insignificant;
and as the country becomes wilder, and more mountainous; the scenery of the
river is now disproportioned. There is not a sufficiency of water in the
landscape to balance the land.

Llangerig, which is about twelve miles from Rhaader, is the last village you
find on the banks of the Wye. Soon after all signs of inhabitancy cease. You
begin to ascend the skirts of Plinlimmon; and after rising gradually about ten
miles from Llangerig, you arrive at the sources of a river, which through a
course of so many leagues has afforded you so much entertainment.

It is a singular circumstance, that within a quarter of a mile of the
wellhead of the Wye, arises the Severn. The two springs are nearly alike: but
the fortunes of rivers, like those of men, are owing to various little
circumstances, of which they take the advantage in the early part of their
course. The Severn meeting with a track of ground, rising on the right, soon
after it leaves Plinlimmon, receives a push toward the north-east. In this
direction it continues it is course to Shrewsbury. There it meets another
obstruction, which turns it as far to the south-east. Afterward still meeting
with favorable opportunities, it successfully improves them; enlarging it is
circle; sweeping from one country to another; receiving large accessions every
where of wealth and grandeur; till at length with a full tide, it enters the
ocean as an arm of the sea. -- In the mean time the Wye, meeting with no
particular opportunities of any consequence to improve it is fortunes, never
makes any figure as a capital river; and at length becomes subservient to that
very Severn, whose birth, and early setting out in life, were exactly similar
to it is own. -- Between these two rivers is comprehended a district, consisting
of great part of the counties of Montgomery, Radnor, Salop, Worcester,
Hereford, and Gloucester. Of the last county merely that beautiful portion is
enclosed, which forms the forest of Dean.

The country about Plinlimmon, vast, wild, and unfurnished, is neither adorned
with accompaniments, to be a scene of beauty: nor should I suppose from the
accounts I have received, that it is dreary wastes could afford such materials,
as could form a scene of grandeur. -- Tho grandeur consist in simplicity, it
must take some form of landscape; otherwise it is a shapeless waste --
monstrous without proportions. -- As there is nothing therefore in these
inhospitable regions to detain you long; and no refreshment to be had, except a
draught of pure water from the fountains of the Wye, you will soon be inclined
to return to Rhaader.

From Rhaader my journal leads into Cardiganshire. Crossing the Wye you ascend
a very steep mountain, about seven miles over. Then skirting the banks of a
sweet little river, the Elan, which falls into the Wye, you pass through a
corner of Montgomeryshire; which brings you to the verge of Cardiganshire.

The passage into this county is rather tremendous. You stand on very high
ground; and see extending far below, a long, narrow, contracted valley. The
perspective, from the top gives it rather the appearance of a chasm. Down one
of the precipitous sides of this valley, I understand, the road hurries you;
while the river Istwith at the bottom is ready to receive you, if your foot
should slip, or your horse stumble.

Having descended safely to the bottom of the valley; and having now passed
through it, you cross the river, at it is close, over a handsome bridge; and
arrive at the village of Pentre. Near this place is Havod, the seat of Mr.
Johnes, member for Radnorshire; which affords so much beautiful scenery, that
you should by no means pass by it. It will open suddenly upon you, at the close
of a beautiful approach. The house is new; built in a style I learn, between
Gothic, and Moorish. It is a style of building I am not acquainted with; but I
am informed it has a good effect. It is a large commodious mansion, richly
furnished. One thing is worth observing. Over the chimney of the dining room is
placed, or to be placed, (for I believe the house is not finished,) a neat
tablet of white marble with this inscription: -- Prout cuique libido eft,
Siccat inequales cyathos --


The Welsh gentry are very remarkable for their hospitality; which sometimes, I
have heard, will not allow the inequales cyathos; but brings all to a brimming
level. The spirit of this inscription, I hope, is diffusing itself more and
more over the country.

But elegant houses, and rich furniture are every where to be found. The
scenery at Havod is the object; and such scenery is rarely met with. -- The
walks are divided into what is called the lady's-walk, a circuit of about three
miles -- and the gentleman's-walk, about six. To these is added a more
extensive round, which might properly come under the denomination of a riding,
if in all parts it was accessible to horse men.

The general ground-plot of these walks, and the scenery through which they
convey you, is this.

The river Istwith runs at the distance of about a quarter of a mile from the
house, which stands upon a lawn, consisting of varied grounds descending to the
river. It is a rapid stream, and it is channel is filled with rocks, like many
other Welsh streams, which form cataracts, and cascades in various parts --
more broken, and convulsed, than the Wye about Bualt. It Is banks consist of
great variety of wooded recesses -- hills -- sides of mountains -- and
contracted valleys -- thwarting, and opposing each other in various forms: and
adorned with little cascades running every where among them, in guttered
chasms. Of the grandeur and beauty of these scenes I can speak as an
eye-witriess: for tho I was never on the spot, I have seen a large collection
of drawings, and sketches (not fewer than between twenty and thirty) which were
taken from them.

Through this variety of grand scenery the several walks are conducted. The
views shift rapidly from one to another; each being characterized by some
circumstance peculiar to itself.

The artificial ornaments are such chiefly, as are necessary. Many bridges are
wanted, both in crossing the Istwith; and the several streams, which run into
it from the surrounding hills. They are varied as much as that species of
architecture will admit, from the stone arch to the Alpine plank -- In one
place you see a cottage, pleasantly seated among the thickets of a woody hill,
which Mr. Johnes intends to fit up for the accommodation of a band of
musicians; for so a pack of hounds may be called among the hills, and dales,
and ecchoing rocks of these grand scenes.

Among the natural curiosities of the place, is a noble cascade sixty feet
high, which is seen through a cavern, partly natural, and partly artificial.
You enter it by a passage, cut through a rock four feet broad, and seven high;
which continues about twenty yards; and brings you into a very lofty,
perforated cavern, through which you see the cascade to great advantage.

From the scenes of Havod, you continue your excursions, among some other
grand, and beautiful scenery in that country.

You are carried first to the Devil's bridge, about four miles from Havod. I do
not clearly understand the nature of the scenery here from the account given in
my journal; but I should suppose it is only one grand piece of foreground,
without any distance, or accompaniments; and probably one of those scenes,
which is itself sufficient to form a picture. The plan of it is, a rocky chasm;
over which is thrown an arch. Between these cheeks, and just beneath the
bridge, the river Funnach falls abruptly down the space of several yards; and
afterward meeting with other steeps, makes it is way, after a few of these
interruptions, into the Rhydol, a little below. The bridge, I should suppose,
is an interesting object. It consists I understand of two arches, one thrown
over the other: the under one, which is that said to be built by the devil, was
not thought sufficiently strong. The common people suppose, when he built it,
he had some mischief in his head.

From the Devil's bridge, you visit another, called Monk's bridge; where the
same kind of scenery is exhibited under a different modification.

From thence you descend into the vale of Rhydol, called so from the river of
that name, which passes through it.

If the Welsh counties, distinguished for so much beauty of scenery of various
kinds, are remarkable for pre-eminence in any mode, I think it is in their
vales. Their lakes are infinitely exceeded, both in grandeur, and beauty, by
those of Cumberland, Westmoreland, and Scotland. Nor are their mountains, as
far as I have observed, of such picturesque form, as many as I have seen in
those countries. They are often of a heavy, lumpish kind: for there are orders
of architecture in mountains, as well as in palaces. Their rivers I allow are
often very picturesque; and so are their seacoast views. But their vales and
valleys, I think, exceed those of any country I ever saw.

The vale of Rhydol is described as a very grand, and extensive scene,
continuing not less than ten miles, among rocks, hanging woods, and varied
ground, which in some parts, becomes mountainous; while the river is every
where a beautiful object; and twice, or three times, in it is passage through
the vale, is interrupted in it is course, and formed into a cascade. This is a
circumstance in a vale, I think, rather uncommon. In a contracted valley it is
frequent: but an extended vale, as I apprehend this to be, is seldom so
interrupted, as not to give way to the river, on one side, or the other. I can
easily however imagine, that when the whole vale is interrupted, as I conceive
it to be here, it will occasion a very beautiful scene, if the eye from so good
a foreground has such an elevated station, as will enable it to trace the
winding of the vale, as a distance, beyond the cascade. But this is perhaps
reasoning (as we often do on higher subjects,) without sufficient grounds. On
the spot, I should probably find, that all these conceptions are wrong -- that
the obstrudtions of the river in the vale of Rhydol are no advantage to the
scene -- or perhaps, after all, that the vale of Rhydol does not deserve that
name; but is only a contracted valley of considerable length.

At the end of this vale or valley, by whichsoever of these names it ought to
be distinguished, stand the ruins of Abyrysthwick-castle. Of this fortress
little now remains, but a solitary tower, over-looking the sea. Once it was the
residence of the great Cadwallader; and in all the Welsh-wars was considered as
a fortress of the first consequence. Even so late as the civil wars of the last
century it was esteemed a place of great strength.

But the rich lead-mines, in it is neighborhood were the basis of it is glory.
These mines are said to have yielded near a hundred ounces of silver from a ton
of lead; and to have produced a profit of two thousand pounds a month. Here Sir
Hugh Middleton made that vast fortune, which he expended afterward on the new
river. But a gentleman of the name of Bushel, raised these mines to their
greatest height. He was allowed by Charles the first the privilege of setting
up a mint in this castle, for the benefit of paying his workmen. Here therefore
all the business of the mines was transacted, which made Abyrysthwick-castle a
place of more consequence, and resort than any other place in Wales. King
Charles also appointed Mr. Bushel governor of the isle of Lundy; where he made
a harbor for the security of his vessels, which carried the produce of his
mines up the Severn. When the civil wars broke out, he had an opportunity of
showing his gratitude; which he did with the magnificence of a prince. He
clothed the king's whole army; and offered his majesty a loan, which was
considered as a gift, of forty thousand pounds. Afterward, when Charles was
pressed by the parliament, Mr. Bushel raised him a regiment, among his miners,
at his own expense.

From the vale of Rhydol, you seek again the banks of the Istwitb; and enter a
vale, which takes it name from the river.

This scene is another proof of what I have just observed of the Welsh vales.
From the accounts I have heard of it, I should suppose it a scene of
extraordinary beauty -- less romantic than the vale of Rhydol; but more sylvan.
Nature has introduced the rock more sparingly; but she has made great amends by
wood: tho there is one part of it mentioned, in which an immense rock forms a
very grand feature. -- It is much easier however to conceive the variety of
these scenes, than to describe them. Nature's alphabet consists only of four
letters; wood -- water -- rock -- and ground: and yet with these four letters
she forms such varied compositions; such infinite combinations, as no language
with an alphabet of twenty-four can describe.

From the vale of Istwith, you may visit the ruins of the abbey of Strata
Florida. But as far as I find there is little among those ruins worth notice,
except a Saxon gateway; and that I should think, can hardly be an object of
much beauty.

The painter therefore, who can make little use of this old abbey, consigns it
over to the antiquarian; who tells you, that it was formerly the sacred
repository of the bones of several of the Welsh princes; and that here the
records, and acts of the principality were preserved for many generations.

From the ruins of Strata Florida you return to Hereford, through Rhosfair,
Rhaader, Pinabout, and new Radnor; in which rout I find nothing in my journal
mentioned, as worth notice; tho it is hardly possible, that in so large a tract
of rough country, there should not be many picturesque passages.



SECT. VII.
FROM Monmouth to Abergavenny, by Ragland-castle, the road is a good stone
causeway, (as the roads, in these parts, commonly are,) and leads through a
pleasant, enclosed country; discovering, on each side, extensive views of rich
cultivation.

Ragland-castle seemed to stand, (as we saw it from the heights) in a vale: but
as we descended, it took an elevated station. It is a large, and very noble
ruin: more perfect than ruins of this kind commonly are. It contains two areas
within the ditch; into each of which you enter by a lofty, and deep gateway.

The buildings, which circumscribe the first area, consisit of the kitchen, and
offices. It is amusing to hear stories of ancient hospitality. Here are the
remains of an oven, said our conductor, which was large enough to bake a whole
ox; and of a fire-range, wide enough to roast him.

The grand hall, or banquetting-room, a large and lofty apartment, forms the
screen between the two areas; and is perfect, except the roof. The
music-gallery may be distinctly traced; and the butteries, which divide the
hall from a parlour. Near the hall is shown a narrow chapel.

On viewing the comparative size of halls and chapels in old castles, one can
hardly, at first, avoid observing, that the founders of these ancient
structures supposed, a much greater number of people would meet together to
feast, than to pray. But yet we may perhaps account for the thing, without
calling in question the piety of our ancestors. The hall was meant to regale a
whole country; while the chapel was intended only for the private use of the
inhabitants of the castle.

The whole area of the first enclosure, is vaulted, and contains cellars,
dungeons, and other subterraneous apartments. -- The buildings of the second
area are confined merely to chambers.

Near the castle stands the citadel, a large octagonal tower; two or three
sides of which are still remaining. This tower is incircled by a separate moat;
and was formerly joined to the castle by a drawbridge.

Ragland-castle owes it is present picturesque form to Cromwell; who laid his
iron hands upon it; and shattered it into ruin. A window is shown, through
which a girl in the garrison, by waving a handkerchief, introduced his troops.

From Ragland-castle the views are still extensive, the roads enclosed, and the
country rich. The distances are skirted by the Brecknoc-hills; among which the
Sugar Loaf makes a remarkable appearance.

The Brecknoc-hills are little more, than gentle swellings, cultivated to the
top. For many miles they kept their station in a distant range on each side.
But, by degrees, they began to close in; approximating more and more; and
leaving in front, a narrow pass between them; through which an extensive
country appeared. Through this pass, we hoped, the progress of our road would
lead us; as it seemed to open into a fair, and beautiful country.

It led us first to Abergavenny, a small town, which has formerly been
fortified, lying under the hills. We approached it by the castle; of which
nothing remains, but a few staring ruins.

From hence we were carried, as we expected, through the pass, which we had
long observed at a distance. It opened into the vale of Usk.

The vale of Usk, is a delightful scene. The river, from whence it borrows it is
name, winds through the middle of it; and the hills, on both sides, are
diversified with woods, and lawns. In many places, they are partially
cultivated. We could distinguish little cottages, and farms, faintly traced
along their shadowy sides; which, at such a distance, rather varied, and
enriched the scene; than impressed it with any regular, and unpleasing shapes.



Through this kind of road we passed many miles. The Usk continued, every
where, our amusing companion: and if, at any time, it made a more devious
curve, than usual, we were sure to meet it again, at the next turn. Our passage
through the vale was still more inlivened by many little foaming rills, which
crossed the road (some of them so large, as to make bridges necessary,) and two
ruined castles; with which, at proper intervals, the country is adorned.

After leaving the latter of them, called Tretower-castle, we mounted some high
grounds; which gave a variety to the scene, tho not so picturesque an
exhibition of it. Here the road brought us in view of Langor's-pool; which is
no very inconsiderable lake. As we descended these heights, the Usk met us once
more at the bottom, and conducted us into Brecknoc.

Brecknoc is a very romantic place, abounding with broken grounds, torrents,
dismantled towers, and ruins of every kind. I have seen few places, where a
landscape-painter might get a collection of better ideas. The castle has once
been large; and is still a ruin of dignity. It is easy to trace the main body,
the citadel, and all the parts of ancient fortification.

In many places indeed these works are too much ruined, even for picturesque
use. Yet, ruined as they are, as far as they go, they are very amusing. The
arts of modern fortification are ill calculated for the purposes of landscape.
The angular, and formal works of Vauban, and Cohorn, when it comes to their
turn to be superseded by works of superior invention, will make a poor figure
in the annals of picturesque beauty. No eye will ever be delighted with their
ruins: while not the least fragment of a British or a Norman castle exists,
that is not surveyed with delight.

But the most beautiful scenery we saw at Brecknoc, is about the abbey. We had
a view of it, tho but a transient view, from a little bridge in the
neighborhood. There we saw a sweet limpid stream, glistening over a bed of
pebbles; and forming two or three cascades, as it hurried to the bridge. It
issued from a wood, with which it is banks were beautifully hung. Amidst the
gloom arose the ruins of the abbey, tinged with a bright ray, which discovered
a profusion of rich Gothic workmanship; and exhibited in pleasing contrast the
gray stone, of which the ruins are composed, with the feathering foliage, that
floated round them: but we had not time to examine, how all these beauteous
parts were formed into a whole. -- The imagination formed it, after the vision
vanished. But tho it might possibly create a whole, more agreeable to the rules
of painting; yet it could scarce do justice to the beauty of the parts.

From Brecknoc, in our road to Trecastle, we enter a country very different
from the vale of Usk. This too is a vale: but nature always marks even kindred
scenes with some peculiar character. The vale of Usk is almost one continued
winding sweep. The road now played among a variety of hills. The whole seemed
to consist of one great vale divided into a multiplicity of parts. All
together, they wanted unity; but separately, afforded a number of those
pleasing passages, which, treasured up in the memory, become the ingredients of
future landscapes.

Sometimes the road, instead of winding round the hills, took the shortest way
over them. In general, they are cultivated, like those of the vale of Usk: but
as the cultivation in many of them is brought too near the eye, it becomes
rather offensive. Our best ideas were obtained from such, as were adorned with
wood; and fell, in various forms, into the valleys below.

In these scenes we lost the Usk, our sweet, playful companion in the vale: but
other rivers of the same kind frequently met us, tho they seldom continued
long; disappearing in haste, and hiding themselves among the little, tufted
recesses, at the bottom of the hills.

In general, the Welsh gentlemen, in these parts, seem fond of whitening their
houses, which gives them a disagreeable glare. A speck of white is often
beautiful; but white, in profusion, is, of all tints, the most inharmonious. A
white feat, at the corner of a wood, or a few white cattle grazing in a meadow,
inliven a scene perhaps more, than if the seat, or the cattle, had been of any
other color. They have meaning, and effect. But a front, and two staring
wings; an extent of rails; a huge, Chinese bridge; the tower of a church; and a
variety of other large objects, which we often see daubed over with white, make
a disagreeable appearance; and unite ill with the general simplicity of
nature's coloring.

Nature never colors in this offensive way. Her surfaces are never white. The
chalky cliff is the only permanent object of the kind, which she allows to be
here is; and this seems rather a force upon her from the boisterous action of a
furious element. But even here it is her constant endeavor to correct the
offensive tint. She hangs her cliffs with sarmphire, and other marine plants;
or she stains them with various hues; so as to remove, in part at least, the
disgusting glare. The western end of the isle of Wight, called the
Needle-cliffs, is a remarkable instance of this. These rocks are of a substance
nearly resembling chalk: but nature has so reduced their unpleasant luster by a
variety of chastising tints, that in most lights they have even a beautiful
effect. She is continually at work also, in the same manner, on the white
cliffs of Dover; tho her endeavors here are more counteracted by a greater
exposure. But here, and in all other places, were it not for the intervention
of foreign causes, she would in time throw her green mantle over every naked
and exposed part of her surface.

In these remarks I mean only to insinuate -- that white is a hue, which nature
seems studious to expunge from all her works, except in the touch of a flower,
an animal, a cloud, a wave, or some other diminutive, or transient object --
and that her mode of coloring should always be the model of cur's.

In animadverting however on white objects, I would only censure the mere raw
tint. It may easily be corrected, and turned into stone-colours of various
hues; which tho light, if not too light, may often have a good effect.

Mr. Lock, who did me the favor to overlook these papers, made some remarks on
this part of my subject, which are so new, and so excellent, that I cannot
without impropriety, take the credit of them myself.

White offers a more extended scale of light, and shadow, than any other
color, when near; and is more susceptible of the predominant tint of the air,
when distant. The transparency of it is shadows, (which in near objects partake
so little of darkness, that they are rather second lights) discover, without
injuring the principal light, all the details of surfaces.

I partake however of your general dislike to the color; and though I have
seen a very splendid effect from an accidental light on a white object; yet I
think it a hue, which oftener injures, than it improves the scene. It
particularly disturbs the air in it is office of graduating distances; shows
objects nearer, than they really are; and by pressing them on the eye, often
gives them an importance, which from their form, and situation, they are not
entitled to.

The white of snow is so active, and refractory, as to resist the discipline of
every harmonizing principle. I think I never saw Mont Blanc, and the range of
snows, which run through Savoy, in union with the rest of the landscape, except
when they were tinged by the rays of the rising, and setting sun; or
participated of some other tint of the surrounding sky. In the clear, and
colorless days so frequent in that country, the Glaciers are always out of
tune.

SECT. VIII.
FROM Trecastle we ascended a steep of three miles; which the country people
call a pitch. It raised us to a level with the neighboring hills; whose rugged
summits formed all the landscape we had. No sweet views into the valleys below
presented themselves. All around was wild, and barren.

From these heights we descended gently, through a space of seven miles. As we
approached the bottom, we saw, at a distance, the town of Llandovery, seated in
the meadows below, at the conflux of several rivulets. Unadorned with wood, it
made only a naked appearance: but light wreaths of smoke, rising from it in
several parts, showed that it was inhabited: while a ray of the setting sun
singled it out among the objects of the vale; and gave it some little
consequence in the landscape. As we descended into it, it is importance
increased. We were met by an old castle, which had formerly defended it, tho
nothing remains, except the ruins of the citadel.

Llandovery stands at the entrance of the vale of Towy; which, like other
vales, receives it is name from the river, that winds through it. This
delightful scene opened before us, as we left Llandovery, in our way to
Llandilo; which stands about twelve miles lower in the vale.

The vale of Towy is still less a scene of cultivation than that of Usk. The
woodland views are more frequent; and the whole more wild, and simple. The
scenery seems precisely of that kind, with which a great master in landscape
was formerly enamoured.

-- Juvat arva videre
Non rastris hominum, non ulli obnoxia curae:
Rura mihi, and rigui placeant in vallibus amnes:
Flumina amem, sylvasque --
In this vale, the river Towy, tho it frequently met us, and always kept near
us; yet did not so constantly appear, and bear us such close company, as the
Usk had done before. Some heights too we ascended; but such heights as were
only proper stands, from whence we viewed in greater perfection the beauties of
the vale.

This is the scene, which Dyer celebrated, in his poem of Grongar-hill. Dyer
was bred a painter; and had here a picturesque subject: but he does not give us
so good a landscape, as might have been expected. We have no where a complete,
formed distance; tho it is the great idea suggested by such a vale as this: no
where any touches of that beautiful obscurity, which melts a variety of objects
into one rich whole. Here and there, we have a few accidental strokes, which
belong to distance; tho seldom masterly As where he describes the beautiful
form which removed cultivation takes: How close and small the hedges lie!
What streaks of meadow cross the eye!
Or a distant spire seen by sunset: Rising from the woods the spire
Seems from far, ascending fire.


Or the aerial view of a distant hill: -- yon summits soft and fair
Clad in colors of the air;
Which to those, who journey near,
Barren, brown, and rough appear.



: I call them accidental; because they are not employed in producing a
landscape; nor do they in fact unite in any such idea; but are rather
introductory to some moral sentiment; which, however good in itself, is here
forced, and mistimed.

Dinevawr-castle, which stands about a mile from Llandilo, and the scenery
around it, were the next objects of our curiosity. This castle is seated on one
of the sides of the vale of Towy; where it occupies a bold eminence, richly
adorned with wood. It was used, not long ago, as a mansion: but Mr. Rice, the
proprietor of it, has built a handsome house in his park, about a mile from the
castle; which, however, he still preserves, as one of the greatest ornaments of
his place.

This castle also is taken notice of by Dyer in his Grongar-hill; and seems
intended as an object in a distance. But his distances, I observed, are all in
confusion; and indeed it is not easy to sepavate them from his foregrounds.

The landscape he gives us, in which the castle of Dinevawr makes a part, is
seen from the brow of a distant hill. The first object, that meets his eye, is
a wood. It is just beneath him; and he easily distinguishes the several trees,
of which it is composed; The gloomy pine, the poplar blue,
The yellow beech, the sable yew,
The slender fir, that taper grows,
The sturdy oak, with broad-spread boughs.


This is perfectly right: objects so near the eye should be distinctly marked.
What next strikes him, is a purple-grove; that is, I presume, a grove, which
has gained it is purple-hue from distance. This is, no doubt, very just
coloring; tho it is here, I think, introduced rather too early in the
landscape. The blue, and purple tints belong chiefly to the most removed
objects; which seem not here to be intended. Thus far however I should not
greatly cavil.

The next object he surveys, is a level lawn, from which a hill, crowned with a
castle, which is meant, I am informed, for that of Dinevawr, arises. Here his
great want of keeping appears. His castle, instead of being marked with still
fainter colors, than the purple-grove, is touched with all the strength of a
foreground. You see the very ivy creeping upon it is walls. Transgressions of
this kind are common in descriptive poetry. Innumerable instances might be
collected from much better poems, than Grongar-hill. But I mention only the
inaccuracies of an author, who, as a painter, should at least have observed the
most obvious principles of his art. -- With how much more picturesque beauty
does Milton introduce a distant castle: Towers, and battlements he sees,
Bosomed high in tufted trees.


Here we have all the indistinct: coloring, which obscures a distant object.
We do not see the iron-grated window, the portcullis, the ditch, or the
rampart. We can just distinguish a castle from a tree; and a tower from a
battlement.

The scenery around Dinevawr-castle is very beautiful; consisting of a rich
profusion of wood, and lawn. But what particularly recommends it, is the great
variety of the ground. I know few places, where a painter might study the
inequalities of a surface with more advantage.

Nothing gives so just an idea of the beautiful swellings of ground, as those
of water; where it has sufficient room to undulate, and expand. In ground,
which is composed of refractory materials, you are presented often with harsh
lines, angular insertions, and disagreeable abruptnesses. In water, whether in
gentle, or in agitated motion, all is easy; all is softened into itself; and
the hills and the valleys play into each other in a variety of beautiful forms.
In agitated water abruptnesses indeed there are; but yet they are such as, in
some part or other, unite properly with the surface around them; and are, on
the whole, perfectly harmonious. Now if the ocean, in any of these swellings,
and agitations, could be arrested, and fixed, it would produce that pleasing
variety, which we admire in ground. Hence it is common to fetch our images from
water, and apply them to land. We talk of an undulating line, a playing lawn,
and a billowy surface; and give a much stronger, and more adequate idea, by
such imagery, than plain language can possibly present.

The woods, which adorn these beautiful scenes about Dinevawr-castle, and which
are clumped with great beauty, consist chiefly of the finest oak; some of them
of large Spanish chestnuts. There are a few, and but a few, young plantations.

The picturesque scenes, which this place affords, are numerous. Wherever the
castle appears, and it appears almost every where, a landscape purely
picturesque is generally presented. The ground is so beautifully disposed, that
it is almost impossible to have bad composition. And the opposite side of the
vale often appears as a back-ground; and makes a pleasing distance.

Some where, among the woody scenes of Dinevawr, Spenser has conceived, with
that splendour of imagination, which brightens all his descriptions, the cave of
Merlin to be seated. Whether there is any opening in the ground, which favors
the fiction, I find no account; the stanzas however are too much in place to be
omitted.

To Maridunum, that is now, by change
Of name, Cayr-Merdin called, they took their way.
There the wise Merlin whilom wont, they say,
To make his won low underneath the ground,
In a deep delve, far from the view of day,
That of no living wight he mote be found,
When so he counseled, with his sprights incompast round.
And if thou ever happen that same way
To travel, go to see that dreadful place:
It is a hideous, hollow, cave-like bay
Under a rock, that lies a little space
From the swift Barry, tumbling down apace,
Emongst the woody hills of Dinevawr.
But dare thou not, I charge, in any case
To enter into that same baleful bower,
For fear the cruel fiends should thee unwares devour.
But standing high aloft, low lay thine ear;
And there such ghastly noise of iron chains,
And brazen caudrons thou shall rombling hear,
Which thousand sprights with long enduring pains
Do toss, that it will stun thy feeble brains.
And oftentimes great groans, and grievous stounds,
When too huge toil, and labor them constrains.
And oftentimes loud strokes, and ringing sounds
From under that deep rock molt horribly rebounds Book III. Cant. 3.
.
As we returned from Dinevawr-castle, into the road, a noble scene opened
before us. It is a distant view of a grand, circular part of the vale of Towy,
(circular at least in appearance) surrounded by hills, one behind anoanother;
and forming a vast amphitheatre. Through this expanse, (which is rich to
profusion with all the objects of cultivation, melted together into one mass by
distance) the Towy winds in various meanders. The eye cannot trace the whole
serpentine course of the river; but sees it, here and there, in glittering
spots, which gives the imagination a pleasing employment in making out the
whole. The nearest hills partake of the richness of the vale: the distant
hills, which rise gently above the others, seem barren.



SECT. IX.
FROM Dinevawr-castle we set out, across the country, for Neath. A good
turnpike-road, we were assured, would lead us thither: but we were told much of
the difficulty of passing the mountain, as they emphatically call a ridge of
very high ground, which lay before us.

Though we had left the vale of Towy, the country continued to wear the same
face of hill, and dale, which it had so long worn. On the right, we had still a
distant view of the scenery of Dinevawr-castle; which appeared like a grand,
woody bank. The woods also of Golden-grove varied the scene. Soon after, other
castles, seated loftily on rising grounds, adorned other vales; Truslan-castle
on the right, and Kirkennel on the left.

But all these beautiful scenes, by degrees, were closed. Castles, and winding
rivers, and woody banks were left behind, one after another; and we approached,
nearer and nearer, the bleak mountain; which spread it is dark mantle athwart
the view.

It did not however approach precipitately. Tho it had long blotted out all
distance; yet it is environs afforded a present scene; and partook of the
beautiful country we had passed. The ground about it is foot was agreeably
disposed; swelling into a variety of little knolls, covered with oak; which a
foaming rivulet, winding along, shaped into tufted islands, and peninsulas of
different forms; wearing away the soil in some parts from the roots of the
trees; and in others delving deep channels: while the mountain afforded a dark,
solemn background to the whole.

At length we began to ascend it is steeps; but before we had risen too high, we
turned round to take a retrospect of all the rich scenes together, which we had
left behind. It was a noble view; distance melting into distance; till the
whole was closed by a semicircle of azure mountains, scarce distinguishable
from the azure sky, which absorbed them.

Still ascending the spiral road round the shaggy side of the mountain, we
arrived at, what is called it is gate. Here all idea of cultivation ceased. That
was not deplorable: but with it our turnpike-road ceased also; which was
finished, on this side, no farther than the mountain-gate. We had gotten a
guide however to conduct us over the pathless desert. But it being too steep,
and rugged to ascend on wheels, we were obliged to lighten our carriage, and
ascend on foot.

In the midst of our labor, our guide called out, that he saw a storm coming
on, along the tops of the mountains; a circumstance indeed, which in these
hilly countries, cannot often be avoided. We asked him, How far it was off? He
answered, Ten minutes. In less time, sky, mountains, valleys were all wrapped in
one cloud of driving rain and obscurity.

Our recompense consisted in following with our eye the rear of the storm;
observing through it is broken skirts, a thousand beautiful effects, and
half-formed images, which were continually opening, lost, and varying; till the
sun breaking out, the whole resplendent landscape appeared again, with double
radiance, under the leaden gloom of the retiring tempest.

When we arrived at the top of the mountain, we found a level plain; which
continued at least two miles. It was a noble terrace; but was too widely
spread, to give us a display of much distant scenery.

At length, we began to descend the mountain; and soon met an excellent
turnpike-road, down which we slid swiftly, in an elegant spiral; and found,
when we came to the bottom, that we had spent near four hours in surmounting
this great obstruction.

Having thus passed the mount Cenis of this country, we fell into the same kind
of beautiful scenery on this side of it, which we had left on the other: only
here the scene was continually shifting, as if by magical interposition.

We were first presented with a view of a deep, woody glen, lying below us;
which the eye could not penetrate, resting only on the tops, and tuftings of
the trees.

This suddenly vanished; and a grand, rocky bank arose in front; richly adorned
with wood.

It was instantly gone; and we were shut up in a close, woody lane.

In a moment, the lane opened on the right, and we had a view of an enchanting
vale.

We caught it is beauties as a vision only. In an instant, they fled; and in
their room arose two bold woody promontories. We could just discover between
them, as they floated past, a creek, or the mouth of a river, or a channel of
the sea; we knew not what it was: but it seemed divided by a stretch of land of
dingy hue; which appeared like a sand-bank.

This scene shifting, immediately arose, on our left, a vast hill, covered with
wood; through which, here and there, projected huge masses of rock.

In a few moments it vanished, and a grove of trees suddenly shot up in it is
room.

But before we could even discover of what species they were, the rocky hill,
which had just appeared on the left, winding rapidly round, presented itself
full in front. It had now acquired a more tremendous form. The wood, which had
before hid it is terrors, was now gone; and the rocks were all left, in their
native wildness, every where bursting from the soil.

Many of the objects, which had floated so rapidly past us, if we had had time
to examine them, would have given us sublime, and beautiful hints in landscape:
some of them seemed even well combined, and ready prepared for the pencil: but,
in so quick a succession, one blotted out another. -- The country at length
giving way on both fides, a view opened, which suffered the eye to rest upon it.

The river Neath, covered with shipping, was spread before us. It Is banks were
enriched with wood; amidst which arose the ruins of Neath-abbey, with it is
double tower. Beyond the river, the country arose in hills; which were happily
adorned, when we saw them, in a clear, serene evening, with one or two of those
distant forges, or charcoal-pits, which we admired on the banks of the Wye;
wreathing a light veil of smoke along their summits, and blending them with the
sky. -- Through this landscape we entered the town of Neath; which, with it is
old castle, and bridges, excited many picturesque ideas.

SECT. X.
AS we left Neath, a grand vista of woody mountains, pursuing each other along
the river, and forming, no doubt, some enchanting vale, if we had had time to
examine it, stretched into remote distance.

The vistas of art are tame, and formal. They consist of streets, with the
unvarying repetition of doors, and windows -- or they consist of trees planted
nicely in rows; a succession of mere vegetable columns -- or they consist of
some other species of regularity. But nature's vistas are of a different cast.
She forms them sometimes of mountains, sometimes of rocks, and sometimes of
woods. But all her works even of this formal kind, are the works of a master.
If the idea of regularity be impressed on the general form, the parts are
broken with a thousand varieties. Her vistas are models to paint from. -- In
this before us, both the mountains themselves were beautiful; and the
perspective combination of them.

The broken ground about a copper-work, a little beyond the town, would afford
hints for a noble landscape. Two contiguous hills appear as if riven asunder;
and lay open a very picturesque scene of rocky fragments, interspersed with
wood; through which a torrent, forcing it is way, forms two or three cascades,
before it reaches the bottom.

A little beyond this, the views, which had entertained us, as we entered
Neath, entertained us a second time, as we left it. The river, covered with
shipping, presented itself again. The woody scenery arose on it is banks: and
the abbey appeared among the woods; tho in different perspective, and in a more
removed situation.

Here too we were again presented with those two woody promontories, which we
had seen before, with a creek, or channel between them, divided by what seemed
a sand-bank. We had now approached much nearer, and found we had been right in
our conjecture. The extensive object we had seen, was the bank of Margam;
which, when the sea retires, is a vast, sandy flat.

From hence we had, for a considerable time, continued views, on the left, of
grand, woody promontories, pursuing each other, all rich to profusion; with
sea-views on the right. Such an intermixture of highlands, and sea, where the
objects are beautiful, and well disposed, makes, in general, a very pleasing
mode of composition. The roughness of the mountains above, and the smooth
expanse of the waters below, wonderfully aid each other by the force of
contrast.

From these views we were hurried, at once, upon a black seacoast; which gave
a kind of relief to the eye, surfeited with rich landscape to satiety.
Margam-sand-bank, which, seen partially, afforded a sweet, chastising tint to
the verdure of the woody promontories, through which we had twice seen it;
became now (when unsupported, and spread abroad in all it is extension) a cold,
disgusting object. -- But relief was every where at hand; and we seldom saw it
long, without some intervention of woody scenery.

As we approached the river Abravon, our views degenerated still more.
Margamsand-bank, which was now only the boundary of marshes, became offensive
to the eye: and tho, on the left, the woody hills continued still shooting
after us, yet they had lost their pleasing shapes. No variety of breaks, like
the members of architecture, gave a lightness, and elegance to their forms. No
mantling furniture invested their sides; nor tufted fringe adorned their
promontories; nor clumps of scattered oak discovered the sky, through
interstices, along their towering summits. Instead of this, they had
degenerated into mere uniform lumps of matter; and were every where overspread
with one heavy, uninterrupted bush.

Of this kind were Lord Mansell's woods, which covered a promontory. Time, with
it is lenient hand, may hereafter hang new beauties upon these hills; when it
has corrected their heaviness, by improving the luxuriance of youthful foliage
into the lighter forms of aged trees.

From Lord Mansell's to Pyle, which stands on a bleak coast, the spirit of the
country is totally lost.

Here we found the people employed in sending provisions to the shore, where a
Dutch West India ship had just been wrecked. Fifteen lives were lost; and among
them the whole family of a Zealand merchant, who was bringing his children for
education to Amsterdam. The populace came down in large bodies to pillage the
wreck; which the officers of the customs, and gentlemen of the country,
assembled to protect. -- It was a busy scene, composed of multitudes of men,
carts, horses, and horsemen.

The bustle of a crowd is not ill-adapted to the pencil: but the management of
it requires great artifice. The whole must be massed together, and considered
as one body.

I mean not to have the whole body so agglomerated, as to consist of no
detached groups: but to have these groups (of which there should not be more
than two or three) appear to belong to one whole, by the artifice of
composition, and the effect of light.

This great whole must be varied also in it is parts. It is not enough to stick
bodies and heads together. Figures must be contrasted with figures; and life,
spirit, and action must pervade the whole.

Thus in managing a crowd, and in managing a landscape, the same general rules
are to be observed. Tho the parts must be contrasted, the whole must be
combined. But the difficulty is the greater in a crowd; as it is parts,
consisting of animated bodies, require a nicer observation of form: being all
similar likewise, they require more art in the combination of them.

Composition indeed has never a more difficult work, than when it is engaged in
combining a crowd. When a number of people, all colored alike, are to be drawn
up in rank and file; it is not in the art of man to combine them in a
picturesque manner. We can introduce a rencounter of horse, where all
regularity is broken -- or we can exhibit a few general officers, with their
aids de camp, on the foreground, and cover a fighting army with smoke at a
distance; but the files of war, the regiment, or squadron in military array,
admit no picturesque composition. Modern heroes therefore must not look to have
their achievements recorded on canvas, till they abrogate their formal arts. --
But even when we take all the advantages of shape, and color, with which the
human form can be varied, or clothed, we find it still a matter of difficulty
enough.

I do not immediately recollect having seen a crowd better managed, than
Hogarth has managed one in the last print of his idle prentice. In combining
the multifarious company, which attends the spectacle of an execution, he has
exemplified all the observations I have made. I have not the print before me;
but I have often admired it in this light: nor do I recollect observing any
thing offensive in it; which is rare in the management of such a multitude of
figures.

The subject before us is as well adapted, as any species of crowd can be, to
exhibit the beauties of composition. Horses, carts, and men, make a good
assemblage: and this variety in the parts would appear to great advantage in
contrast with the simplicity of a winding shore; and of a stranded ship, (a
large, dark object,) heeling on one side, in a corner of the piece.

SECT. XI.
FROM Pyle the country grows still worse, till at last it degenerates into a
vile heath; and continues a long time totally unadorned, or at best with a few
transient beauties.

At Bridgend, where we meet the river Ogmore, a beautiful landscape bursts
again upon us. Woody banks arise on both sides; on the right especially, which
continue a considerable way, marking the course of the liver. On the left is a
rich distance.

From hence we pass in view of cultivated valleys, into which the rich
distance, we had just seen, began to form itself: while the road winds over a
kind of terrace above them. An old castle, also inriches the scene; till at
length the terrace giving way, we sink into the vale; and enter Cowbridge.

The heights beyond Cowbridge give us the first view of the Bristol channel on
the right. The country between the eye and the water has a marshy appearance;
but being well blended, and the lines broken, it makes a tolerable distance.
The road passes through pleasant enclosed lanes.

At the fifth stone, before we reached Cardiff, we had a most grand, and
extensive view, from the heights of Clanditham. It contained an immense stretch
of country, melting gradually into a faint blue semicircle of mountains, which
edged the horizon. -- This scene indeed, painted in syllables, words, and
sentences, appears very like some of the scenes we had met with before: but in
nature it was very different from any of them.

In distant views of cultivated countries, seen from lofty stands; the parts,
which lie nearest the eye, are commonly disgusting. The divisions of property
into squares, rhomboids, and other mathematical forms, are unpleasant. A view
of this kind therefore does not assume it is beauty, till you descend a little
into the vale; till the hedgrows begin to lengthen; and form those agreeable
discriminations, of which Virgil -- et late discriminat agros. AEn. II. 144.
takes notice; where fields, and meadows become extended streaks; and yet are
broken in various parts by rising grounds, castles, and other objects, with
which distances abound: melting away from the eye, in one general azure tint;
just, here and there, diversified with a few lines of light and shade; and
dotted with a few indistinct objects. Then, if we are so happy as to find a
ruin, a spreading tree, a bold rock, or some other object, large enough, with
it is appendages to become a foreground, and balance the distance, (such as we
found among the abrupt heights of Coteswold See page 10.
;) we have the chance of being presented with a noble picture, which distance
alone cannot give.

Hence appears the absurdity of carrying a painter to the top of a high hill,
to take a view. He cannot do it. Extension alone, tho amusing in nature, will
never make a picture. It must be supported.

Cardiff lies low; tho it is not unpleasantly seated, on the land-side, among
woody hills. As we approached, it appeared with more of the furniture of
antiquity about it, than any town we had seen in Wales: but on the spot the
picturesque eye finds it too entire to be in full perfection. The castle, which
was formerly the prison of the unfortunate Robert, son of William the first,
who languished here the last twenty years of his life, is still, I believe, a
prison, and in good repair.

From the town and parts adjacent, the windings and approach of the river Tave
from the sea, with a full tide, make a grand appearance. This is, on the whole,
the finest estuary, we had seen in Wales.

From the heights beyond Cardiff, the views of the channel, on the right,
continue; and of the Welsh mountains on the left. The Sugar Loaf, near
Abergavenny, appears still distinctly. The road leads through enclosed lanes.

Newport lies pleasantly on a declivity. A good view might be taken from the
retrospect of the river, the bridge, and the castle. A few slight alterations
would make it picturesque.

Beyond Newport some of the views of the channel were finer than any we had
seen. The coast, tho it continues flat, becomes more woody, and the parts are
larger.

About seven miles from Newport, the road winds among woody hills; which, here
and there, form beautiful dips at their intersections. On one of these knolls
stand the ruins of a castle; which has once made a grand appearance; but it is
now degraded into a modern dwelling.

As we approached the passage over the Bristol channel, the views of it became
still more interesting. On the right, we left the magnificent ruins of
Caldicot-castle; and arrived at the ferry-house, about three in the afternoon,
where we were so fortunate as to find the boat preparing to set sail. It had
attempted to cross at high water, in the morning: but after toiling three hours
against the wind, it was obliged to put back. This afforded another
opportunity, when the water was at ebb: for the boat can pass only at the two
extremes of the tide; and seldom oftener than once in a day.

We had scarce alighted at the ferry-house, when we heard the boatman winding
his horn from the beach, about a quarter of a mile below, as a signal to bring
down the horses. When they were all embarked, the horn sounded again for the
passengers. A very multifarious company assembled; and a miserable walk we had
to the boat through sludge; and over shelving, and slippery rocks. When we got
to it, we found eleven horses on board, and above thirty people; and our chaise
(which we had intended to convert into a cabin during the voyage) slung into
the shrouds.

The boat, after some struggling with the shelves, at length gained the
channel. The wind was unfavourable, which obliged us to make several tacks, as
the seamen phrase them. These tacks occasioned a fluttering in the sail: and
this produced a fermentation among the horses; till their fears reduced them
again to order.

Livy gives us a beautiful picture of the terror of cattle, in a scene of this
kind. -- Primus erat pavor, quum, soluta rati, in alturn raperentur. Ibi
urgentes inter se, cedentibus extremis ab aqua, trepidationem aliquantam
edebant; donec quietem ipse timor circumspicientibus aquam fecisset Lib. XXI.
cap. xxviii.
.

The scenery of this short voyage was of little value. We had not here the
steep, folding banks of the Wye to produce a succession of new landscapes. Our
picture now was motionless. From the beginning: to the end of the voyage, it
continued the same. It was only a display of water; varied by that little
change introduced by distance, on a coast, which seen from so low a point, as
the surface of the water, became a mere thread. The screens bore no proportion
to the area.

After beating near two hours against the wind our voyage concluded, as it
began, with an uncomfortable walk through the sludge, to the high water mark.

The worst part of the affair, is, the usage of horses. If they are unruly, or
any accident occurs, there is hardly a possibility, at least if the vessel be
crowded, of affording them relief. Early in our voyage, as the boat heeled, one
of the poor animals fell down. Many an ineffectual struggle it made to rise;
but nothing could be done, till we arrived at the other side.

The operation too of landing horses, is equally disagreeable. They are forced
out of the boat, through an aperture in the side of it; which is so
inconvenient a mode of egress, that in leaping, many have been hurt from the
difficulty of desengaging their hinder ledgs.

This passage, as well as the other over the Severn (for there is one also a
little above) are often esteemed dangerous. The tides are uncommonly rapid in
this channel; and when a brisk wind happens to blow in a contrary direction,
the waters are very rough. The boats too are often ill-managed; for what is
done repeatedly, is often done carelessly. A British admiral, I have heard, who
had lived much at sea, riding up to one of these ferries, with an intention to
pass over, and observing the boat, as she was working across the channel from
the other side, he declared he durst not trust himself to the seamanship of
such fellows as managed her; and turning his horse, went round by Gloucester.

Several melancholy accidents indeed within the course of a dozen years, have
thrown discredit on these ferries. One I had from a gentleman, who himself
providentially escaped being lost. He went to the beach, just as the vessel was
unmooring. His horse had been embarked before, together with sixty head of
cattle. A passage with such company appeared so disagreeable, that he, and
about six or seven passengers more, whom he found on the beach, among whom was
a young lady, agreed to get into an open boat, and be towed over by the large
one.

The passage was rough, and they observed the cattle on board the larger
vessel, rather troublesome. About half way over, an ox, which stood near the
aperture in the side of the vessel, mentioned above for the entrance, and
egress of cattle, entangled his horn in a wooden slider, which closes it, and
which happened, according to the careless custom of boatmen, to be unpinned.
The beast finding his head fixed, and endeavoring to disengage himself, drew
up the slider. The vessel heeled; the tide rushed in; and all was instant
confusion. The danger, and the impossibility of opposing it, in such a crowd,
struck every one at once.

In the mean time, the passengers in the open boat, who were equally conscious
of the ruin, had nothing left, but to cut the rope, which tied them to the
sinking vessel. But not a knife could be found in the whole company. After much
confusion, a little, neat, tortoise-shell penknife was produced; with which
unequal instrument they just got the rope severed, when the large vessel, and
all it is contents, went down. All on board perished, except two or three oxen,
which were seen floating on the surface; and it was believed got to shore.

The joy of the passengers in the boat was however short-lived. It soon
appeared they had escaped only one mode of death. They were left to themselves
in a wide expanse of water; at the mercy of a tide, ebbing with a violent
current to the sea; without oars, or sail; and without one person on board, who
had ever handled either. A gentleman among them had just authority enough to
keep them all quiet; without which their safety could not have been insured a
moment. He then took up a paddle, the only instrument on board, with an
intention, if possible, to get the boat on shore. But the young lady, who was
his niece, throwing her arms around him, in an agony of distress not knowing
what she did, would not let him proceed. He was obliged to quiet her by
threatening in a furious tone to strike her down instantly with the oar, if she
did not desist. Notwithstanding all his efforts, they were hurried away by the
ebbing waters, as far as Kingroad; where the violence of the tide slackening,
he prevented the boat from going out to sea; and got her by degrees to shore.

The gentleman, who told me this story, I observed, was one of the persons, who
were saved. From him I had the account of the loss of an open boat, in the same
passage, from the obstinacy of a passenger.

The wind was rough, and a person on board lost his hat; which floated away in
a contrary direction. He begged the waterman to turn round to recover it: but
the waterman told him, it was as much as their lives were worth to attempt it.
On which the passenger, who seemed to be a tradesman, started up, seized the
helm, and swore the fellow should return. In the struggle, the helm got a wrong
twist, and the boat instantly filled, and went to the bottom. It appeared
afterward that the hat was a hat of value; for the owner had secreted several
bills in the lining of it.

For ourselves however we found the passage only a disagreeable one; and if
there was any danger, we saw it not. The danger chiefly, I suppose, arises from
carelessness, and overloading the boat.

As our chaise could not be landed, till the tide flowed up the beach, we were
obliged to wait at the ferry-house. Our windows overlooked the channel, and the
Welsh-coast, which seen from a higher stand, became now a woody, and beautiful
distance. The wind was brisk, and the sun clear; except that, at intervals, it
was intercepted by a few floating clouds. The playing lights, which arose from
this circumstance, on the opposite coast, were very picturesque. Pursuing each
other, they sometimes just caught the tufted tops of trees; then gleaming
behind shadowy woods, they spread along the vales, till they faded insensibly
away.

Often these partial lights are more stationary; when the clouds, which fling
their lengthened shadows on distant grounds, hang, some time, balanced in the
air. But whenever found, or from whatever source derived, the painter observes
them with the greatest accuracy: he marks their different appearances; and lays
them up in his memory among the choice ingredients of distant landscape. Almost
alone they are sufficient to vary distance. A multiplicity of objects, melted
harmoniously together, contribute to enrich it; but without throwing in those
gleaming lights, the artist can hardly avoid heaviness When the shadows of
floating clouds fall upon the sides of mountains, they have a bad effect. --
See Picturesque Observat. on Scotch landscape, vol. II. p. 152.
.

SECT. XII
FROM the ferry-house to Bristol, the views are amusing. The first scene
presented to us, was a spacious lawn, about a mile in diameter, the area of
which was flat; and the boundary, a grand, woody bank; adorned with towers and
villas, standing either boldly near the top; or seated in woody recesses near
the bottom. The horizon line is well varied, and broken.

The whole of this landscape is too large; and not characterized enough to make
a picture; but the contrast between the plain, and the wood, both of which are
objects of equal grandeur, is pleasing: and many of the parts, taken
separately, would form into good composition.

When we left the plain, the road carried us into shady lanes, winding round
woody eminences; one of which was crowned with an artificial castle. The castle
indeed, which consisted of one tower, might have been better imagined: the
effect however was good, tho the object was paltry.

About three miles on this side of Bristol, we had a grand view of rising
country. It consisted of a pleasing mixture of wood, and lawn: the parts were
large: and the houses, and villages scattered in good proportion. The whole,
when we saw it, was overspread with a purplish tint, which, as the objects were
so near, we could not account for; but it united all the parts together in very
pleasing harmony.

Nature's landscapes are generally harmonized. Whether the sky is enlightened,
or whether it lowers; whether it is tinted, or whether it is untinted, it gives
it is yellow luster, or it is gray obscurity, to the surface of the earth. It is
but seldom however, that we meet with those strong harmonizing tints, which the
landscape before us presented.

As the air is the vehicle of these tints, distant objects will of course
participate of them in the greatest degree; the foregrounds will be little
affected, as they are seen only through a very thin veil of air. But when the
painter thinks it proper to introduce these strong tints into his distances, he
will give his foregrounds likewise in some degree, a participating hue; more
perhaps than in reality belongs to them; or, at least, he will work them up
with such colors, mute, or vivid, as accord best with the general tone of his
landscape. -- How far it is proper for him to attempt these uncommon
appearances of nature, is not a decided question. If the landscape before us
should be painted with that full purple glow, with which we saw it overspread;
the connoisseur would probably take offense, and call it affected.

The approach to Bristol is grand; and the environs every where show the
neighborhood of an opulent city; tho the city itself lay concealed, till we
entered it. For a considerable way, the road led between stonewalls, which
bounded the fields on each side. This boundary, tho, of all others, the most
unpleasing, is yet proper as you approach a great town: it is a kind of
connecting thread.

The narrowness of the port of Bristol, which is formed by the banks of the
river, is very striking. It may be called a dry harbor, notwithstanding the
river: for the vessels, when the tide ebbs, lie on an ouzy bed, in a deep
channel. The returning tide lifts them to the height of the wharfs. It exhibits
of course none of those beautiful winding shores, which often adorn an estuary.
The port of Bristol was probably first formed, when vessels, afraid of being
cut from their harbors by corsairs, ran up high into the country for security.

The great church is a remnant only of the ancient fabric. It has been a noble
pile, when the nave was complete, and the stunted tower crowned with a spire,
as I suppose, it once was. We were sorry we did not look into Ratcliff-church,
which is said to be an elegant piece of Gothic architecture.

The country around Bristol is beautiful; tho we had not time to examine it.
The scenery about the Hot-wells is in a great degree picturesque. The river is
cooped between two high hills; both of which are adorned with a rich profusion
of rock, wood, and verdure. Here is no offskip indeed; but as far as
foregrounds alone make a picture, (and they will do much better alone, than
distances) we are presented with a very beautiful one. -- Between these hills
stands the pump-room, close to the river; and every ship, that sails into
Bristol, fails under it is windows.

The road between Bristol and Bath contains very little worth notice. We had
been informed of some grand retrospect: views; but we did not find them. We
were told afterward, that there are two roads between Bath and Bristol; of
which the Glocestershire road is the more picturesque. If so, we unfortunately
took the wrong one.

At Bath the buildings are strikingly splendid: but the picturesque eye finds
little amusement among such objects. The circus, from a corner of one of the
streets, that run into it, is thrown into perspective; and if it be happily
enlightened, is seen with advantage. The crescent is built in a simpler, and
greater style of architecture.

I have heard an ingenious friend, Col. Mitford, who is well-versed in the
theory of the picturesque, speak of a very beautiful, and grand effect of
light, and shade, which he had sometimes observed from an afternoon-fun, in a
bright winter-day, on this structure. No such effect could happen in summer; as
the sun, in the same meridian, would be then too high. A grand mass of light,
falling on one side of the Crescent, melted imperceptibly into as grand a body
of shade on the other; and the effect rose from the opposition, and graduation
of these extremes. It was still increased by the pillars, and other members of
architecture, which beautifully varied, and broke both the light and the shade;
and gave a wonderful richness to each. The whole, he said, seemed like an
effort of nature to set off art; and the eye roved about in astonishment to see
a mere mass of regularity become the ground of so enchanting a display of
harmony, and picturesque effect. The elliptical form of the building was the
magical source of this exhibition.

As objects of curiosity, the parades, the baths, the rooms, and the abbey, are
all worth feeing. The rising grounds about Bath, as they appear from the town,
are a great ornament to it: tho they have nothing pleasing in themselves. There
is no variety in the out-line; no breaks; no masses of woody scenery.

From Bath to Chippenham the road is pleasant; but I know not, that it deserves
any higher epithet.

From Chippenham to Marlborough, we passed over a wild plain, which conveys no
idea, but that of vastness, unadorned with beauty.

Nature, in scenes like these, seems only to have chalked out her designs. The
ground is laid in; but left unfinished. The ornamental part is wanting -- the
river, or the lake winding through the bottom, which lies in form to receive it
-- the hanging rocks, to adorn some shooting promontory -- and the woody
screens to incompass, and give richness to the whole.

Marlborough-down is one of those vast, dreary scenes, which our ancestors, in
the dignity of a state of nature, chose as a repository of their dead. Every
where we fee the tumuli, which were raised over their ashes; among which the
largest is Silbury-hill. These structures have no date in the history of time;
and will be, in all probability, among it is most lasting monuments. Our
ancestors had no ingenious arts to gratify their ambition; and as they could
not aim at immortality by a bust, a statue, or a piece of bas-relief, they
endeavored to obtain it by works of enormous labor. It was thus in other
barbarous countries. Before the introduction of arts in Egypt, kings
endeavored to immortalize themselves by lying under pyramids.

As we passed, what are called, the ruins of Abury, we could not but admire the
industry, and sagacity of those antiquarians, who can trace a regular plan in
such a mass of confusion See an acccount of Abury by Dr. Stukely.
.

At the great inn at Marlborough, formerly a mansion of the Somerset-family,
one of these tumuli stands in the garden, and is whimsically cut into a spiral
walk; which, ascending imperceptibly, is lengthened into half a mile. The
conceit at least gives an idea of the bulk of these massy fabrics.

From Marlborough the road takes a more agreeable appearance. Savernake-forest,
through which it passes, is a pleasant, woody scene: and great part of the way
afterward is adorned with little groves, and opening glades, which form a
variety of second distances on the right. But we seldom found a foreground to
set them off to advantage.

The country soon degenerates into open corn-lands: but near Hungerford, which
is not an unpleasant town, it recovers a little spirit; and the road passes
through close lanes; with breaks here and there, into the country between the
boles of the trees.

As we approach Newberry, we had a view of Donnington-castle; one of those
scenes, where the unfortunate Charles reaped some glory. Nothing now remains of
this gallant fortress, but a gate-way and two towers. The hill, on which it
stands, is so overgrown with brush-wood, that we could scarce discern any
vestiges either of the walls of the castle; or of the works, which had been
thrown up against it.

This whole woody hill, and the ruins upon it, are now tenanted, as we were
informed by our guide, only by ghosts; which however add much to the dignity of
these forsaken habitations; and are for that reason, of great use in
description.

In Virgil's days, when the Tarpeian rock was graced by the grandeur of the
capitol, it was sufficiently enobled. But in it is early state, when it was
sylvestribus horrida dumis, it wanted something to give it splendour. The poet
therefore has judiciously added a few ideas of the awful kind; and has
contrived by this machinery to impress it with more dignity in it is rude state,
than it possessed in it is adorned one: Jam turn religio pavidos terrebat
agrestes
Dira loci: jam tum sylvam, saxumque timebant.
"Hoc nemus, hunc, inquit, frondoso vertice collem,
(Quis Deus, iucertum est) habitat Deus, Arcades ipsum
Credunt se vidisse Jovem, cum saepe nigrantem
AEgida concuteret dextracirc, nimbosque cieret."


Of these imaginary beings the painter, in the mean time, makes little use. The
introduction, of them, instead of raising, would depreciate his subject. The
characters indeed of Jupiter, Juno, and all that progeny, are rendered as
familiar to us, through the antique, as those of Alexander, and Caesar. But the
judicious artist will be cautious how he goes farther. The poet will introduce
a phantom of any kind without scruple. He knows his advantage. He speaks to the
imagination; and if he deal only in general ideas, as all good poets on such
subjects will do, every reader will form the phantom according to his own
conception. But the painter, who speaks to the eye, has a more difficult work.
He cannot deal in general terms: he is obliged to particularize: and it is not
likely, that the spectator will have the same idea of a phantom, which he has.
-- The painter therefore acts prudently in abstaining, as much as possible,
from the representation of fictitious beings.

The country about Newberry furnished little amusement. But if it is not
picturesque, it is very historical.

In every historical country there are a set of ideas, which peculiarly belong
to it. Hastings, and Tewksbury; Runnemede, and Clarendon, have all their
associate ideas. The ruins of abbeys, and castles have another set: and it is a
soothing amusement in traveling to assimilate the mind to the ideas of the
country. The ground we now trod, has many historical ideas associated with it;
two great battles, a long siege, and the death of the gallant Lord Falkland.

The road from Newberry to Reading leads through lanes, from which a flat and
woody country is exhibited on the right; and rising grounds on the left. Some
unpleasant common fields intervene.

In the new road from Reading to Henly, the high grounds overlook a very
picturesque distance on the right. The country indeed is flat; but this is a
circumstance we do not dislike in a distance, when it contains a variety of
wood and plain; and when the parts are large, and well-combined.

Henley lies pleasantly among woody hills: but the chalk, bursting every where
from the soil, strikes the eye in spots; and injures the landscape.

From hence we struck again into the road across Hounslow-heath; having crowded
much more within the space of a fortnight (to which our time was limited) than
we ought to have done.

THE END.

