A VIEW of NORTHUMBERLAND with an EXCURSION to The ABBEY of MAILROSS in
SCOTLAND.

By W. HUTCHINSON Anno. 1776.

HEXHAM ABBEY
depiction of Hexham Abbey

NEWCASTLE Printed by T. SAINT, for W. CHARNLEY, and Messrs VESEY and WHITFIELD

MDCCLXXVIII.

PREFACE.
A Desire of collecting into one view, the observations and opinions of former
writers, on the History and Antiquities of Northumberland, first induced me to
make this compilation; for such with the utmost deference, I must call it.

The utility of a work of this kind, to the generality of readers, is obvious;
as a competent knowledge of the county may be attained, without the labor and
expense of turning over many volumes, from whence my authorities were deduced.

I have added descriptions of remarkable objects, in their present state, with
drawings of some of the principal ones; and have endeavored to preserve a
strict impartiality through the whole.

There are interspersed through the work many original papers, found among the
manuscripts of the late Antiquary, Roger Gale, Esquire communicated to me by a
particular friend; in which the reader will find several observations, made by
him and his learned correspondents, Mr John Horsley, Mr John Warburton, Sir
John Clerk, Mr Robert Cay, Mr Maurice Johnson, Dr Stukeley, the Rev. Mr Robert
Patten, Dr Hunter, the Rev. Mr Robert Place, and others.
on the antiquities of this county, never before published.

The AUTHOR.

A Genealogical Table of the Kings of Bernicia and Deira, and of those united
Provinces under the Title of Kings of Northumberland.
(...) Ida 1st King of Bernicia. (...) These are said to be the Issue of Ida's
Brother. Ad ^^^ Glappa 3d King of Bern^cia. (...) AD, 1^^. Theodwald his
brother, 4th King of Bernicia. (...) AD. ^^^. Frethulf 2d brother to Glappa 5th
King of Bernicia. (...) Issue by his Queen. (...) Adda 2d King of Bernicia.
(...) AD ^^^ Ethelric 2d King of Northumberland AD ^^^ (...) Ethelfrith 3d King
of Northumberland Issue by his Queen. AD ^^^ Eanfrid 7th King of Bernicia. O.
^34 AD 634 Oswald 5th King of Northumb. O 642 Oswald married Kineburg, Daughter
of Cynegils King of the West Saxons, by whom he had AD 653. Ethelwald 4th King
of Deira. where he died not known. Oswine. Ossac Oswid. Ossa. Oss^a. Oswitha
and Ebba both Nuns. Issue by a Concubine. AD 641. Oswco 8th King of Bernicia.
O. ^^^ He added Deira to his Crown and subjugated Mercia. He married Eanfled
daughter of Edwine, By whom he had Issue. AD. 6^0. Egfrid 6th King of
Northumber. Ob 6^^. Elfwine slain in Battle. Elfleda a Nun. Ostrid married
Chelred King of Mercia. By a Concubine. AD. ^^6. Alcfrid 7th King of
Northumber. Ob ^05. He married Kenburg, the Daughter of Penda King of Mercia,
and had Issue, AD. 705. Osred 8th King of Northumber. Ob 716. AD 759 Ethelwald
14th King of Northumber. Assassinated. AD 759 Ethelred 16th King of Northumber.
Dethroned and again restored. Tedbald slain by the Scots. AD ^^^ Theoderic 6th
King of Bernicia. (...) Edric. Osmer. Theo^^dum Issue by Concubines. Alric.
Bla^mo^. Bo^sa. Blen^am Eanwin. AD. ^^^. Alured 15th King of Northumber.
Dethroned. Alcmund slain by Eardulf. AD. ^91. Osred 18th King of Northumber.
Fied. AD. 182. Alfwold 17th King of Northumber. Ob. 791. Ogga. Ead^^h^ E^gwald
Eata. AD. 788. Egbert 12th King of Northumber. Became a Monk. AD. 758. Oswulf
13th King of Northumber. (...). Cuthwine. AD. 716. Cenred 9th King of
Northumber. Ob 7^^. AD. 718. Osric the Son of Alfrid 10th King of Northumber.
Ob. 7^^. Cutha. AD. 731. Ceolwlf 11th King of Northumber. Became a Monk. (...).
Off^^^. ^egota. Segothae. AD ^^^. Aelle 1st King of Deira. (...) He united the
Provinces of Deira and Bernicia, and was 1st King of Northumberland, 587. AD
61^. Edwine 4th King of Northumber. Ob. 633. 1st Wife. Cwenburga, Daughter of
Ceorl King of Mercia. Osfrid both slain in the King of Egfrid Battle with Penda
Mercia. 2d Wife. Ethelburga Daughter of Ethelbert King of Kent Ethelm died in
his Youth. Uskfrea died at the Court of France. Enfleda married Oswy King of
Northumber. Ethelrida died in Infancy. AD ^^^. Osric the Son of Elfric. 2d King
of Deira. Ob 6^^. AD. 642. Oswine 2d King of Deira. Ob. ^^^.


genealogy

INTRODUCTION.
BEFORE I enter upon the following descriptive View of the county of
Northumberland, it appears necessary to take notice of the Roman possession of
this territory; and to collect into a separate chronological class, the state
of regal authority therein, under the Saxon heptarchy.

The kingdom of Northumberland, as established in the reign of Aelle,
comprehended the two British provinces of Bernicia and Deira; and extended from
the rivers Mersey and Humber on the south, to Liddisdale, Cheviot Hills, and
the river Tweed on the north; and from east to west, from the German Ocean to
the Irish Channel.

The etymologies given by Camden of the name of Northumberland, are from the
Saxon Noranhumbra ric, the kingdom of Northumberland, and Noranhumber-lond,
lands north of Humber. Et regiones omnes quae trans Humbrum aestuarium ad
septentriones jacent, Saxonico nomine Noran Humbra ric, i. e. Nordanhumbrorum
regnum vocari caeperunt.

Camden Brit. p. 6^^.
The provincial name of Bernicia the same author derives from the British
appellation given to the inhabitants of Guir Brinaich Mountaineers. Inde cum
regnum Berniciorum, quas Brittanni Guir-a-Brinaich ed est quasi Montanos dicunt.

Camden Brit. p. 623.


The scene of my attention in this work, is that part only of this extensive
territory, which retains the name Northumberland; bounded toward the east by
the German Ocean, toward the west by the county of Cumberland, toward the
north by the river Tweed and the shire of Roxborough, and toward the south by
the county palatine of Durham.

This district, at the time the Romans first entered it, was inhabited by the
Otadini toward the east, and the Gadeni on the western and maintainous parts.
It is presumed these invaders had not advanced so far northward as
Northumberland, before the third year of Agricola's command in Britain.
According to Tacitus's account, he came over in the character of Legate, in the
year 78, when the summer was far advanced; that this dignity was conferred upon
him immediately after his Consulship, which by the Fasti Consulares appears to
have been in the year 77: so that the reduction of Northumberland by the Roman
ar^s, happened in the year 80. The Romans did not totally desert this island
till the middle of the fifth century, and they possessed several stations is
Northumberland to the last; consequently their continuance there was for a
series of near 370 years. Horsley Brit. Romans lib. I. cha. 3.


Agricola, it is well known, in his recession from the business of warfare,
studied to introduce the Roman habit and luxury among the Britons: as a good
Politician, conceiving that whilst these pleasures fascinated, they also
enervated and relaxed, rendering the natives less ferocious, and easier to be
conciliated or subdued; and would also promote the future wealth of a province,
of which he had the honor to complete the conquest, by urging the inhabitants
to extend their trade: pleasures and luxuries introduce artificial wants, which
arts, manufactures, commerce, and navigation must supply.

These new enjoyments were of a short existence, for in the course of the
fourth century after Agricola's command, the natives were left exposed to the
ravages of barbarous nations, no longer kept in awe by the Roman arms.

The unhappy estate of the northern inhabitants, after they were totally
deserted by the Romans, is easily conceived; the perils and miseries to which
they were frequently exposed, by the incursions of tribes of Picts and Sco^s,
naturally induces a belief, that the principal part of those who were possessed
of riches, merchandise, flocks, and herds, would immediately retire, and seek
for safer and more peaceful habitations, in the southern parts of the land. The
ravagers still advanced, and the wretchedness of the Britons was so greatly
increased, that they were driven to seek refuge in the mountains, and conceal
themselves in their forests and caverns. Such was the deplorable situation of
the natives in the year 449, when they implored the assistance of the Saxons, a
brave and warlike people inured to arms.

Our Historians, with a disgraceful partiality, have stigmatized the Saxons
with the epithets of cruelty and injustice, in order to extenuate the errors of
the Britons, or to palliate their despicable impotence.

It manifestly appears, that under the protection of the Romans, the Britons
had sunk into supineness and depravity; public virtues were extinguished, and
an abjectness of spirit universally prevailed. They sent Ambassadors to the
Saxons, thus commissioned:

Most noble Saxons. We the wretched and distressed Britons, worn our by the
constant incursions of our cruel and merciless enemies, and because we have
heard of the fame of those glorious victories which by your valor you have
obtained; therefore have we sent our humble suppliants to you, to implore your
kind assistance. We have large and plentiful possessions, abounding with every
necessary; these with ourselves, we submit to your disposal, if you will
generously lend us your succor against our inveterate foes. Long have we
enjoyed the sweets of peace, under the powerful protection of the Roman arms,
and now we know none second in glory to them, but yourselves: therefore to you
we lift up our hands for assistance, and in return are willing to abide
whatever service you shall impose upon us. Witichindus Gest. Sax. lib. I.

Some authors say the Saxons were not invited over by the Britons, but being
exiled from their own country, landed here. But Mannius, in particular, does
not show any proof for this assertion, from the situation of the German states
in that era.

Verstigan, from the authority of Pomarius, says 9000 Saxons came over. Hector
Boethius says they were 10,000 in number, and were transported in 30 ships.




Why should we discredit this Historian, when the former petitions made to the
Roman state were equally as abject. To Aetius thrice Consul. The groans of the
Britains. The Barbarians drive us to the sea, the sea forces us back again upon
the Barbarians; in these dreadful extremities, death awaits us equally on both
sides, either we must fall by the hands of our enemies, or else be drowned in
the swelling waves.

The Isle of Thanet was allotted to these new allies, and it was not long
before they rendered signal services to the Britons. The northern ravagers,
with a mighty band, were advanced into Lincolnshire; the Saxons with alacrity
took the field; Historians agree, the victory obtained over the invaders near
Stamford, was only to be attributed to the military prowess and skilful
dispositions of the Saxons.

A people recovering from a state of despair, are apt to advance to excess in
their love and gratitude toward their redeemers. After the ravagers were thus
discomfited, and had retired into the north, the Saxons were looked upon with
the highest veneration: and in order effectually to repress the northern
nations, an additional band of Saxons were petitioned for, and a greater extent
of territory granted for their residence The Scotch writers say this
reinforcement consisted of 5000 men.
So happy were the Britons in their new alliance, that Vortergern their Prince
espoused Rowena, the daughter of Hengist the Saxon General.

The circumstances evidently prove, the Saxons were invited hither to partake
the land and become settlers, as it does not appear from any admissible
authority, that any other gratuity Bid and Ethelwerd are silent, as to any
promises of submission made by the natives. Gildas says their first pretense of
quarrelling was for a greater allowance. The expression in Gildas is epimenia,
a Roman team for the pay of a soldier. In Bid it is a^ionae, which is
construed the produce of lands, provisions of corn, etc. From thence the editor
of Camden determines they were merely mercenaries.
was stipulated for their services. The Saxons were not applied to, till the
country was almost totally lost or become d^sert; so that providing them
settlements, was giving even what the fugitive Britons could not hold. The
county of Kent was the second establishment granted to these allies.

So peculiarly frail and instable by nature, were the dispositions of mind
possessed by the natives, that no sooner were they relieved from the most
abject state, and deplorable calamities and distresses, than, in the moment of
ease, they began to regard those who had rescued them with jealousy, to be
discontented with their former resolutions, to imagine future evils, and to
devise projects of the grossest ingratitude. The heroic Saxons received the
intelligence with contempt, and looked upon the ingratitude with abhorrence.
The most abject mind the soonest conceives ingratitude: there is a baseness and
illiberality in grovelling souls, which detests a sense of obligations; the
meanest peasant has the most ungenerous sentiments; distrust and jealousy are
the issue of vicious hearts; selfishness is brutal, and characteristic of
ignorance. On the other hand, hero^c minds are fired with virtues, for courage
and fortitude are the result of principle. The angry Saxons no sooner beheld
the instability of British faith and affection, than they began to devise the
means of taking the reigns of government out of the hands of impotence. The
name of King was yet unknown among the Saxons, who in emergencies of state
chose an Heretogen, or General, who^e power and dignity subsided with the
occasion of his election. They knew no obligation to Sovereigns, their liberty
was uncontaminated with the appendages of supremacy. The royal dignity of
Vortergein was by them esteemed of little importance, and of much less utility.

The abjectness of the Britons was despicable, and the Saxons contemplated it
with contempt. The land before their arrival was ravaged by barbarous tribes,
even the southern provinces were desolated, and the natives driven to the
forests and mountains: they were no longer able to retain, or worthy to rule so
fertile a country. Such were the causes which induced the Saxons to devise
means of g^^ing the government.

Authors who impeach the Saxons of breach of public faith, overlook the terms
on which they were invited hither, and the indignities and injuries they
sustained before they turned their arms against the natives. Had they from the
first intended to make themselves masters of the country, it was foolishly
impol^ to strengthen the Britons, by the repulsion of the Picts and Scots. The
c^mm^^ incidents of war are shocking to humanity, and horrid in their detail;
the (...) were barbarous, and the dispositions of men savage: the miserable
scenes, in the re^procation of such warfare, looks terrible indeed in the
narrative of the Historian: but men were not more peculiarly brutal and inhuman
in these conflicts, than in other countries in the same era, or among equally
barbarous (...) in later centuries. Authors, in the warmth of accusation,
neglect the consideration of the advantages we finally derived from the Saxons;
no less than THE MAXIMS OF OUR COMMON LAW, AND THE ORIGINAL PRINCIPLES OF OUR
INESTIMABLE CONSTITUTION. If we inherit any thing from the Britons, it consists
of their ferocity, instability, and ingratitude. Without the Saxon arms, this
island, like the regions of the east, would have been overrun and desolated by
a banditti, worse than Tartars; and become a den of thieves, pirates, and
robbers.

The British Prince still lived in a state of confidence and esteem with his
new ally; every one but Vortergern could discern the countenance of amity which
Hengist now assumed, was a superficial mask which covered his resentment,
through which insincerity was easily discovered; and that protection was at
length become his most distant object. The Britons conceived, that from the
time of Rowena's espousal, the Saxons put on an insolent and contemptuous
carriage, which increased their natural jealousy against them.

On the other hand, the Saxons observed the government was involved in anarchy
and confusion, the British states were distracted by factions and cabals, and
each individual overwhelmed in despondency, and relaxed from all warlike
disposition. Hengist foresaw, that if he should withdraw his troops, this fine
fertile land must become a desert, under the ravages of those barbarians, who
were irresistible by British force: the depopulation of the northern
territories, favored an intention he had formed, as he conceived the
possession of Northumberland would facilitate his subjugation of the Britons.
In order to effect this purpose, as he possessed the ear of the Prince, he
expatiated on the ravages constantly made by the northern nations, who, though
lately repressed, were again advancing to the interior parts of the country; he
proposed, that a reinforcement of his countrymen should be invited to settle in
those desolated districts, at once to subdue the ferocious bands of robbers,
and form a safeguard for the southern provinces. The plausibility of the
project, the imbecility of Vortergern's political judgment, the abjectness of
spirit which possessed the British councils, and the wretchedness of the
people, groaning under distress and the miseries consequent to war, together
with the implicit confidence with which the Prince listened to the admonitions
of his confident, promising a safe and indolent reign under such protection,
all concurred to promote the plan.

Octa, the brother of Hengist, and Ebussa his son, after receiving the summons,
with the utmost alacrity prepared to collect their adherents, and soon passed
over from Germany with a chosen band of warlike Saxons, taking possession of
Northumberland in the year of our Lord 454.

The new colony had not settled long in this district, before Hengist, no
longer able to endure the indignities put upon him and his people, and the
infringements repeatedly made on the lands granted them on their arrival in
Britain, brought his troops into the field, and began hostilities.

Be very in the people is seldom observed under an impotent commander; --
courage is intimately connected with confidence, and where the leader does not
possess the good opinion of his troops, they act with timidity and reluctance.
It was the case with the Britons, when Hengist showed his hostile intentions,
and threw off disguise; the subjects of Vortergern regarded him with shame,
their councils were full of confusion, and they were seized with a panic almost
bordering upon despair: the resistance they made was weak and fruitless, and at
length they fled before the Saxon veterans, to their former places of
concealment in the wildernesses and mountains.

The northern band, regarding Hengiss's proceedings as a signal for them to
take the field, immediately rose in arms.

I should advance into too large a field, should I follow the Saxon arms
through all the conflicts: I am confined to their northern colony, and
restrained within the limits of Northumberland, must forsake a general, for a
partial view of their actions.

Some modern authors have accused the Northumbrian Saxons of a confederacy with
the Picts and Scots; a charge I do not find supported by any valuable
authority. The struggles during the course of fifty years and upwards, were
many, and various the events; the Britons remained unsubdued, and the Saxons
unexpelled. At length, in the year 547, Ida, with twelve sons and a large
reinforcement, landed at Flamborough, Chron. Sax. -- Ethelward, Malms. etc.
where they were received by their countrymen with acclamations of joy. In a
short time they drove the Britons totally from the province of Bernicia, Inde
cum regnum Berniciorum, constutum esset, quod a tesi ad Scoticum fretum
pertigit; pars ejus optima fuit paruitque Nordanhumbrorum regib^s, quidum fuam
periodum confecissent, quicquid ultra Tuedam erat in Scoticum nomen cessit, etc.

Camden Brit.
the natives on every hand flying from their superior power.

From the authority of the Scala Chronica, Scha. Caron lib. 2.
it appears, that after Hengist had settled in Kent, Octa and his successors
assumed the title of Dukes, until the Northumbrian Saxons, following the
example of those of Kent, elected a Sovereign, who yet remained subject to the
supreme authority of the Kentish King. They are named in the following order:
Hiring that begat Wodnam, that begat Witeglas, of whom came H^rs the King, that
begat Uppa, that begat Heppa, that begat Hermeger, that begat Bernack; all
which were before the noble King Ida, and the gestes of them before Ida be
little known by chroniques.

The above account stands alone and unsupported, our best authorities all
concurring that Ida was the first who assumed the name of King over the
Northrumbrian colony.

The success and safety of the colony being chiefly derived from Ida, no doubt
influenced the people to give him the name of King; and from the power of the
Hererogen, to advance him to that of Sovereignty. What induced the Saxons to
forsake their old constitutional maxims, and give Ida this new authority,
ancient authors, by their silence, leave us only conjectures. It is probable
they were desirous of imitating the British customs, in order to conciliate the
natives to their government.

IDA having ascended the throne of Bernicia, made Beddanborough Now called
Bambrough.
the place of his residence. By some he is supposed to be the original founder
of the castle; by others, that he repaired and enlarged the outworks, and
having removed the palisadoes, enclosed the whole with a wall: Chron. Sax.
Ethelwerd, Malms. Huntington, etc.
all authors agree that it was his chief fortress. He held his crown
independent of Kent, or any other Potentate of the heptarchy. His reign was
full of warfare, for the Britons were continually harrassing his frontiers,
issuing from their places of concealment when an opportunity offered to
distress the Saxons. Ida reigned twelve years, during which time the Britons
never gained any considerable advantage against his people.

He had issue by his Queen six sons; Adda, Ethelric, Theodoric, Edric, Osmer,
and Theofredum: and by his Concubines six; Alric, Ogga, Ecca, Osbald, Segora,
Duodecem namque filios habuit Ida, ex quibus Reges Northanhimbrorum exorti
sunt; Addas, Ethelricum, Theodericum, Edricum, Theunedheri, Osmer, Alricum,
Decam, Osbaldum, Scor, Sceotheri, Ocga.

Symeon Dunelm.
and Segothae; all of whom came with him from Germany. These Saxons with their
adherants came over in 12 ships. -- Math. West.


On the demise of Ida, he was succeeded in his kingdom by his eldest son ADDA,
who ascended the throne of Bernicia in the year of our Lord 560, and reigned
seven years; during which period Aelle, one of the Chieftains who came over
with Ida, by some said to be his nephew, conducted the Saxons against the
province of Deira, from whence having expelled the Britons, he assumed the
sovereignty thereof, and settled there with his adherents.

GLAPPA, a kinsman of Ida, succeeded to the scepter of Bernicia in the year
567: he lived to reign only five years, and of his actions Historians are
silent. In his advancement to the throne, we see an example of the ancient
elective power of the Saxons, who regarded not any pretensions to hereditary
right, as there were living at that time many of the sons of Ida.

THEODWALD, brother to Glappa, ascended the throne in the year 572, and reigned
but one year: of his transactions Historians are silent. He was succeeded by
FRETHULF, a second brother to Glappa, who assumed the scepter in the year 573,
and reigned seven years. Of the transactions of the northern Saxons in this
period Historians are silent. Math. Westminster.
On his demise, THEODORIC, the third son of Ida, ascended the throne, and
reigned seven years. Here we have a second example of the elective power being
retained, and one more striking than the former, as therein was a preference of
Theodoric to his elder brother Ethelric, who was then living. Of the
transactions of this reign Historians are silent.

AELLE, who had reigned in the province of Deira with great reputation for
twenty-seven years, on the death of Theodoric was elected to the sovereignty of
Bernicia: the two provinces under him thus becoming united, obtained the name
of the kingdom of Northumberland. As by his valor and sage conduct he had
secured his territories whilst King of Deira, so the united provinces under his
government enjoyed an uninterrupted peace. His reign as King of Northumberland
commenced in the year 587, and continued only three years. He had issue,
Edwine, who rose to the throne of Northumberland, and Acca, who was the Queen
of Ethelfrith. Ibid.
After the death of Aelle, ETHELRIC, the second son of Ida, succeeded to the
sovereignty of the united provinces in the year 589: he had spent the greatest
part of his life in retirement, and was not called forth to rule before he was
far advanced in years. He reigned five years in uninterrupted peace, and left
issue two sons, Ethelfrith, who succeeded to the scepter, and Tedbald, who in
his brother's reign was slain in a battle against the Scots at a place called
Daegstane. Chron. Sax. Malms. Hunt. etc.


ETHELFRITH, who from his disposition was surnamed the fierce, Qui vocatus
ferus. H. Hunt. lib. II.
succeeded his father in the kingdom of Northumberland in the year 593. The
better to conciliate Edwine, the son of Aelle, to his possessing the united
crowns of Bernicia and Deira, he espoused Acca his sister, and his reign
commenced with great joy and magnificence. He was engaged in a ten years war
with the Britons, in which he enlarged his territories and acquired much
honor; his arms were deemed irresistible, and many of the natives submitted
themselves to his government. He is said to have extended his conquests
further, and reaped more laurels than any of his predecessors. Bid, lib. I. H.
Hunt. lib. II.


As his fame increased and his dominions were enlarged, his neighbors the
Scots began to look on him with a jealous eye, and regard his power as
advancing to too great eminence for their security: they seized the first
plausible pretext for drawing their forces into the field, and led on by
Aegthan their King, approached the frontiers, and prepared to give the Saxons
battle. Ethelfrith with all his powers met them at a place called Daegstane,
where after a bloody conflict, victory declared for the Saxons. The Scots
sustained so great a loss, that they were rendered incapable of renewing the
war for a considerable time. The joy of victory was greatly damped by the death
of the King's brother Tedbald, a heroic youth, who commanded a large body of
Saxons in the engagement.

Perceiving the Scots for four years after this signal victory showed no
hostile intentions, in the year 607 he carried his arms against the Britons,
who were again harrassing the borders of his dominions; a battle was fought
near Caerleon, where he overthrew his adversaries with a mighty slaughter. As
the armies prepared to engage, the Saxon King perceiving a great assembly of
religious putting up their fervent prayers for the Britons, and esteeming them
as essential enemies as those who bore arms against him, gave orders for their
destruction, and stained his arms with the infamous slaughter of twelve hundred
naked and defenseless men, Monks of the monastery of Bangor; fifty only of the
whole religious assembly surviving, who saved themselves by flight Bid, Chron.
Sax.


His important conquests made him so much the terror of the adjoining states,
that he remained for some time undisturbed. During the interval of peace, he
regarded with a jealous eye the growing virtues of Edwine, the brother of his
Queen, and observed his increasing popularity with so much anxiety, that at
length he meditated his death; presuming that was the only means to secure the
province of Deira to his crown, as Edwine had a natural claim thereto. The
young Prince, either from a change in the King's conduct toward him, or by
some intimations of the danger he was in, thought it expedient to fly from the
dominions of Ethelfrith, and seek refuge in the court of Redwald King of the
East Angles.

Ethelfrith, disappointed in his project, burnt with resentment against
Redwald, and immediately sent messengers to demand the fugitive to be delivered
up as a traitor, or on refusal to denounce war against the state. Redwald
considering the power of the Northumbrian King, would have resigned the Prince,
but through the entreaties of his Queen, who represented in the most forcible
language the disgrace such an action would bring upon him, and prevailed with
him not only to continue the protection he had heretofore granted, but also to
levy an army, and instantly march against Northumberland, to reprehend the
imperious Prince for his insolence.

These measures were pursued with such expedition, that Redwald with his army
was on the frontiers, before the Northumbrian Monarch received the returning
Ambassadors. Alarmed at the sudden danger, he raised such forces as the
emergency allowed means to collect, and hastily advanced to stop the rapid
progress of his enemies. The armies joined battle on the banks of the river
Idle, near to Nottingham, where Ethelfrith was slain, and his forces were
routed. This victory, though eminently fortunate for Edwine, as it opened his
accession to the throne, was unhappy to Redwald, whose glory was purchased by
the death of his son Regenhere.

The sons of Ethelfrith hearing of this great overthrow, and the death of their
father, fled the kingdom in terror of the wrath of Edwine, leaving him no
competitor for the crown.

Ethelfrith reigned twenty-four years. He left issue by his Queen seven sons,
Eanfred, Oswald, Oswine, Oslac, Oswid, Ossa, and Offa; also two daughters,
Oswitha and Ebba, who were canonized. Ma^^^. W^^^m.
By a concubine he had one son named Oswe^. Speed.


EDWINE, supported by the arms of Redwald, entered the capital of
Northumberland, and in the year 617 assumed the Diadem, having just attained
his age of twenty-three years; he possessed a noble and intrepid spirit and
conducted his military operations with that skill and fortitude, that in a
short time he not only relieved the frontiers of his kingdom from the
intrusions of the adjoining nations, but extended his dominions by conquest
even as far as the Orchades and Mevaman Islands, now called the Hebrides.
Bede's Eccles. Hist. lib. II. Malms. lib. I.


His wife Cwenburga, the daughter of Ceorl King of Mercia, did not live to see
him mount the throne. He had not been settled thereon above eight years, when
he thought of a second espousal: the eminent virtues and beauty of Ethelburga,
daughter of the King of Kent, had reached his ear, and he sent Embassador^ to
require her in marriage. She had embraced the Christian faith, but he still
retained his national principles; so that conditions were stipulated for the
free exercise of her religion, and that she should retain the necessary
ministers to officiate therein. These preliminaries being settled, the marriage
was celebrated (...) the year 625.

At this time Cwichelm, in conjunction with his father Cynegils, ruled over the
kingdom of Wessex, a Prince of a dark and jealous mind, who had regarded the
growing power and exalted glory of Edwine with envy; and conceiving his
intrepid spirit might induce him to disturb the lesser kingdoms of the
heptarchy, of which Wessex was then one of the weakest, he determined to take
Edwine off by treachery, and by assassination to remove the object of his
terror and envy: for this purpose he employed one Eumer, of whom Historians
have retained nothing previous to this plot. Edwine's court being then held on
the banks of Derwent, the assassin approached him in the character of an
Ambassador, and being admitted to audience, as he was delivering a feigned
address, the specious purport of which claimed the King's particular attention,
the villain suddenly drew a poisoned dagger from under his cloak, and attempted
to plunge it in Edwine's bosom; but Lilla, a faithful servant of the King,
seeing his danger, instantly rushed forward, and in his loyal breast received
the fatal blow designed upon his Sovereign. With such resolution the pass was
made, that the poinard pierced through the body of Lilla and wounded the King.
The desperate assassin, surrounded by the King's guards, was cut to pieces, but
not before he had slain another of the attendants in his resolute defense. Bid.


The wound the King received was of little consequence in the end, though at
the instant, from the poison of the weapon, alarming. This was a proper
occasion for Paulinus, who was one of the Queen's ministers, to exhort the King
to renounce the errors of his religion: the pious example and love of
Ethelburga contributed to move his mind, and render him more susceptible of the
arguments which were used for his conversion; at length, with the solemnity of
a vow, he declared, That if the Deity which the Christians served, and whom
they called the God of Justice, would enable him to punish this violator of the
laws of nature, nations, and kings, who had sent forth unprovoked the murderer
against him, he would from thenceforth confess his divinity, and worship none
other Gods but him. As a pledge of his vow, he delivered into the hands of
Paulinus his infant daughter Eanfled, who was brought into the world the
evening of the day on which the horrid attempt was made against his life, to be
baptized. Bid, lib. I. -- She was the first Christian baptized in
Northumberland.


As soon as his health permitted, he arrayed his troops, and went forth against
the West Saxons, whom he overthrew in his first battle, and put to the sword
all those who had devised his death by Eumer the assassin.

Historians do not mention, whether he made any political advantages to his
kingdom by this war, or sat down satisfied with the issue of his revenge.

In the succeeding year, A. D. 627, with great solemnity and pomp, during the
festival of Easter, he embraced the christian faith, and was baptized by the
hands of Paulinus, multitudes of his subjects following his pious example.
Bid, Chron. Sax.


Such was the excellence of his government, that acts of injustice were seldom
heard of among his subjects: national enemies forbore to provoke his arms, and
an uninterrupted peace blessed his people for several years. During this
interval the internal policy was his chief object, the roads were rendered safe
and commodious, and even so minutely, that every spring by the way side was
preserved, and provided with a dish for the refreshment of travelers. He
frequently perambulated the provinces of his kingdom, putting salutary laws in
execution, and dispensing justice; so that no injured person lingered long
without redress. Bid.


Penda the King of the Mercians, The Kingdom of Mercia comprehended
Gloucestershire, Herefordshire, Cheshire, Staffordshire, Worcestershire,
Oxfordsh^re, Shropshire, Warwickshire, Derbyshire, Leicestershire,
Buckinghamshire, Northamptonshi^e, Nothinghamshire, Lincolnshire, Bedfordshire,
Rutlandshire, Huntingtonshire, and pa^^ of Herfordshire.
ambitious to extend his dominions, entered into a league with Cedwell, or, as
Camden has his name, Caswallon King of Cumberland, a tributary British Prince,
who ruled over one of the districts subdued by Edwine, and under promise of
joining him with all his forces, induced Cedwell to shake off his allegiance.
The restless Britons were easily provoked to insurrection against their
conquerors, and the infatuating name of Liberty fired them with enthusiasm,
though its possession was impossible, and the shaking off subjection to Edwine
could only give commencement to a subjugation by some less worthy ruler, and a
vassalage more severe. Cedwell calling to arms all those whom the name of
Freedom could animate or delude, took the field, and began with cruelty and
devastation to make his progress in the frontier districts. Edwine prepared to
oppose the rebels, whilst Penda, in consequence of his compact, joined his
forces with the Britons, and at a place called Hethfield waited the approach of
the Northumbrians, to give them battle.

The conflict was dreadful; Edwine and his eldest son Osfrid, with many chiefs,
were slain; the loss of their leaders struck the army with a panic, and they
turned their backs upon the invaders: Victory dipped her wings in blood, the
pursuit was prosecuted with the utmost cruelty; In Case Edwine's first wife was
the granddaughter of Crida, as Malms. Hunt. and others allege, (...) P^nda
was ma^^^g ^^r against his brother-in-law.
Egfrid, another of Edwine's sons, was taken prisoner, and butchered in cold
blood, to gratify the burning wrath of the savage Britons. The (...) g^ven by
Caesar and Tacitus, represent the customs of the Britons as barbarous as (...)
of the Americans and Car^t bees: they had no settled internal policy; they
lived in hovels in the (...); they do not appear to have known tillage, save
only on the coasts, which possibly was made by some settlers from Gaul: they
had not even approached so near civilization, as to correct the custom of
(...), the common inter^^rse of sexes, not so much as to avoid incest.


Ethelburga, her son Ulkfren, with Paulinus, under the care of Bassus, a
faithful chief, fled by sea to the kingdom of Kent, then governed by Eadbald,
the brother of Ethelburga. She founded a Monastery at a place called Lymming,
on the happy shore where she found refuge, and therein spent the remainder of
her life in acts of piety.

Edwine was slain in the month of October, A. D. 633, in the 48th year of his
age, having reigned sixteen years. By Cwenburga his first wife, he had issue
two sons, Osfrid and Egfrid, who both fell in the fatal battle of Hethfield. By
Ethelburga he had issue two sons and two daughters; Ethelm the eldest died in
his youth; Ulkfren was sent by his mother to the court of France, where he
died; Enfleda the firstborn, whose nativity was singularly marked by the day
of Edwine's assassination, became the Queen of Oswy King of Northumberland;
Ethelrida the youngest daughter died in her infancy.

The calamities of the Northumbrians did not cease till the inhuman ravagers
withdrew their forces covered with blood, and overloaden with spoils. On their
retreat, Eanfrid the eldest son of Ethelfrith, and Osric the son of Elfric, and
uncle of Edwine, came from their retreat in Scotland, and EANFRID assumed the
reigns of government in the year 633, in the province of Bernicia, and OSRIC in
the province of Deira.

During the time Eanfrid and Osric resided among the Scots, they had become
Christians; but no sooner were they settled on their respective thrones, than
they renounced their new religion, persecuted the Christians, and consecrated
altars and high places to the old idolatry of the Saxons.

Cedwell, though not able to retain the great territories he had subdued, or
rather ravaged, assisted by the Mercian arms, was yet jealous of the recovery
of those states; and holding an inviolable inveteracy against the Saxon name,
levied a great army, and entered the province of Deira. Some authors would
cover the infamous actions of the Briton with the delusive countenance of
religious zeal, and insinuate that his wrath against these Princes was kindled
by their apostasy; but his actions prove the principles by which he was
agitated. Osric not able to oppose the torrent was slain, his city The
corruption of the name Durham from Deira-ham is so easily conceived, that it
renders the conjecture probable this was the capital of Deira. In the
neighborhood of that city is a place called Old Durham; the reason of which
name I cannot more plausibly attribute, than to the Deira-ham of the Saxons.
was sacked, and his subjects were plundered. The victorious tyrant overran
Deira, not like a generous warrior, who amidst his conquests would remember
mercy, but like a ruthless savage, whose sole delight was blood and carnage.
Strutt's Chron. p. 1^6.
Such is the character drawn by a modern writer of this British hero, in the
midst of his glory; contrary indeed to the general bias of his pen.

Eanfrid terrified at the horrid massacre committed in the adjoining province,
and unable, in the feeble state of his new empire, to raise forces to oppose
the progress of the tyrant, who came upon him like the whirlwind with
destruction in its wings, he determined to approach Cedwell with submission;
and taking only twelve soldiers with him as a guard, he entered the Britons
camp unarmed, and bent himself at the tyrant's feet: but unmoved with the
humiliation of a King, uninfluenced by justice, clemency, and mercy, and
against the common faith of nations (even among savages) he rejoiced himself in
the slaughter of those who kneeled for his protection. Bid Eccl. Hist.
I would instantly turn from the name of this detested savage, did not the
accession of the glorious Oswald render it necessary to be retained, to
distinguish the following reign.

The inhabitants would have continued to fly before Cedwell, and in the end
have totally deserted the country, had not OSWALD, the son of Ethelfrith, and
brother of Eanfrid, stepped forth from the place of his retirement, to head the
disconcerted Northumbrians. The attempt was arduous, and few could be brought
to enlist under a banner which was displayed even by the very hands of despair;
for so powerful was the British tyrant, and so tremendous in his cruelties,
that few could be found who had courage to withstand him.

Oswald possessed an excellent knowledge of the art of war, which he had made
his study as a science; he had gathered together a select band, and in a
fortified situation waited the approach of Cedwell, who fell in the conflict,
and his army was totally routed. A more particular account of this battle, see
title St Oswald's, p. 175.


The Northumbrians thus relieved from a savage enemy, raised Oswald to the
throne in the year 684, with joyful acclamations: a jealousy which reigned
between the provinces of Deira and Bernicia he conciliated, and made them
equally happy under his wise government. When peace was restored, he employed
himself in reforming the manners of his subjects, and most especially he
labored in their conversion to Christianity. He sent for a teacher from the
religious seminary of Mailross, to preach to his people, and founded the
Episcopacy of Lindi^farn, as is treated of at large in the course of the
following work.

The glory of his arms was not more eminent than the fame of his wisdom; his
lenity and benevolence were in that age proverbial; the neighboring nations
regarded him with reverence, and his people obeyed him with love.

These excellencies, together with the fate of Cedwell, irritated the wicked
heart of Penda the Mercian, and he levied an army to make war upon
Northumberland. Oswald being informed of these military preparations, with
alacrity collected his troops, and met his adversary at Maserfield, in
Shropshire, on the 5th day of August 642, where after a long and bloody
conflict, victory declared for Penda, Oswald being among the slain. The inhuman
conqueror caused the limbs of the deceased King, after being horridly mangled,
to be suspended on a pole, like a common traitor or infamous malefactor; which
caused the name of Maserfield to be changed to that of Oswald's Tree. After the
departure of Penda, the remains of Oswald (at the command of Osfrida, Penda's
Queen and daughter of Oswine) were carefully taken away from the field of
battle, and interred in the monastery of Bradney, in Lincolnshire, but were
afterward removed to Gloucester, and interred on the north side of the choir
of the cathedral church there.

Bid, lib. III. "Cujus vitam cum multa laud venerabilis Beda prosecutus
esset, "ut multa, inquit, breviter compraehendam, quantem ab eis qui illum
novere didicimus, nichil ex omnibus quae in Evangelicis sive Apostolicis, live
Propheticis litteris facienda cognoverat praetermittere, sed cuncta pro suis
viribus operibus explere curabat." Hujus praesulatus anno 8, regni autem sui
IX, sanctissimus ac piissimus Rex Oswaldus primus in tota Berniciorum gente
signifer fidei Christianae and fundator ecclesiae Lindisfernensis, ex qua
omnium ejusdem provinciae ecclesiarum manarunt primordia, a Paganis in bello
prostratus occubuit. Cujus caput in Cimiterio ecclesiae praefatae, manus vero
cum brachiis quas Rex interfector a corpore praecidi jusserat, in urbe regia
conditae sunt; dextra cum brachio votum benedictionus Aidani Episcopi per
incorruptionem praeferente, quae etiam ad nostram usque aetatem utriusque
meritum, Regis scilicet and Pontificis, gratia suae incorruptionis ostendit;
sicut nostrae, hoc est Dunhelmensis ecclesiae Monachus venerandae caniciei and
multae simplicitatis vocabulo Swartebrandus, qui nuper, Willielmo Episcopatum
administrante, defunctus est, saepius se vidisse attestatus est. Nam ut Beda
narrat, diae sancto Paschae sedente ad mensam Rege, cum discus illi argenteus
esset appositus epulis regalibus refertus, subito nuntiatur multitudinem
pauperum in platea federe and eleemosinae aliquid a Rege expectare; nec mora,
dapes sibimet appositas pa^peribus deferri and cundem discum inter eos
praecepit minutatim dividi: quo facto pietatis Pontifex qui affidebat
delectatus, apprehendens dexteram ejus, ait, nunquam inceterascat haec manus,
Porro assa illius in monasterium, quod in provincia Lindissi situm est,
translata sunt.

Symeon Dunel. lib. I. cha. 2.


Oswald reigned nine years, and died in the 38th year of his age. By his wife
Kineburg, the daughter of Cynegils the first Christian King of the West Saxons,
whom he married in the third year of his reign, he had an only child, a son
named Ethelwald.

OSWEO, the son of Ethelfrith by his concubine, surnamed the Fierce, mounted
the throne of Bernicia in the year 642, whilst Oswin the son of Osric, the last
King of Deira, seized the scepter of that province.

OSWINE, of a mild disposition, governed his subjects with lenity; and
contenting himself with his own dominions, sought only to preserve peace to his
subjects. Osweo, of a turbulent and ambitious temper, eager for extent of
dominion, and impatient of a rivalship in empire, sought frequent occasions to
disturb Oswin, and at length an open rupture took place. Both Kings took the
field, but Osweo's military disposition and passion for arms had occasioned him
to train and discipline his troops, even in times of peace; whilst Oswin,
supinely negligent of all such measures, only cultivated those arts among his
people which flourished under the auspices of peace. Osweo's army was
abundantly more numerous, and better arrayed than the forces of Oswin: when
this was made known to him, willing to spare the effusion of blood, he declined
coming to an engagement; and when his people urged him to try the event of
battle, he retired from the army, and concealed himself in the house of one
Humwald his friend, where he conceived he might abide in safety, and clude the
search of his subjects.

The army of Deira, forsaken of their leader, disbanded themselves and retired,
leaving the country open to be possessed by Osweo. Humwald, with whom Oswin was
in concealment, in hope of reward from Osweo, betrayed his trust, and delivered
up the fugitive King, who was immediately put to death. This tragical event
happened on the 3d day of September, A. D. 651, in the ninth year of Oswin's
reign.

When Osweo had thus removed the obstacle which prevented his uniting the two
provinces, he took possession of Deira: but his government had not been
established above two years, before Ethelwald the son of Oswald appeared,
having attained the age of 16 years, and taking possession of the malcontents
in Deira, declared himself a competitor for that crown against his uncle. The
people of the province were glad to embrace an opportunity of shaking off the
detestable yoke Osweo had subjected them to, as they regarded the man with
inveteracy who had polluted his hands in the innocent blood of Oswin, whose
memory they revered. Osweo with all his power was not able to dispossess him,
though repeated struggles were made, which constantly concluded in Ethelwald's
favor.

But these matters were scarce ended, or Osweo had reconciled himself to sit
down contented with the loss of the province of Deira, before Penda renewed
hostilities against the Northrumbrians in Bernicia; and Osweo, by the invader's
success, was soon reduced to extremities. The offers of peace which he made
were rejected, for nothing but destruction and extent of empire could satisfy
the Mercian. Ethelwald also brought his forces into the field, professing
himself Penda's ally. The desperate circumstances which attended Osweo, urged
him in the moments of despair, to try the event of battle, for in submission,
he saw certain destruction awaited him. He collected a few faithful troops, in
whom he could place his confidence, and together with his son Al^fred, led
forth the little army, trusting only for success in Him, in whose hand alone is
the event of war. The month of December was already advanced, when near to
Loidis, (according to Camden, now Leeds) on the banks of the river then called
Winwed, the armies engaged: during the heat of the battle a sudden inundation
happened, the river overflowed its banks, and swept away mulitudes of the
Mercian troops. The circumstance struck the armies with dismay, the Mercians
were thrown into confusion, Penda was slain, and the Bernicians triumphed
against an host of foes, who were said to exceed them thirty times in number:
Ethelwald escaped, and returned to his capital with disgrace. Bid, lib. III.


Osweo pursued his success, and subjugated the kingdom of Mercia. He
entertained Peada the son of Penda with great friendship, and discovering in
him singular virtues, on his consenting to become a Christian, gave him his
daughter Alofleda (whom he had by his concubine) in marriage; resigning to him
the government of the southern parts of Mercia.

The blood of Oswin continually hung upon his conscience, to expiate which, he
vowed to make a pilgrimage to Rome; but falling sick, Death frustrated his
project. He reigned 28 years, and departed this life on the 15th day of
February, in the year 670, aged 58 years.

Historians are silent as to the fate of Ethelwald; it is probable that he was
deposed by Osweo after the battle of Loidis, and Deira again united with
Bernicia: for such union appears upon the opening of the succeeding reign.

Osweo had by Eanfled his Queen, two sons and one daughter: Egfrid his eldest
son succeeded to his crown; Elswin the youngest only lived to the age of 18,
being slain in battle; Elfleda his daughter, in consequence of her father's vow
before the battle with Penda, took on her the veil, and was accordingly
committed to the care of the Abbess Hilda, in the monastery of Stainslatch, now
Whitby, where she succeeded to be Abbess.

Eanfled after Osweo's decease, retired to the same monastery, where she spent
the remainder of her life, and where were interred her remains, with those of
Osweo and Elfleda.

Osweo had by his concubines two children, Alcfrid who succeeded his brother
Egfrid on the throne, and Alkfleda who was married to Peada, Penda's son.

EGFRID being released from his confinement in Mercia, where he was held as an
hostage, returned with his father's victorious army to Northumberland, and on
the decease of Osweo ascended the throne in the year 670, and in the 25th year
of his age, ruling over the united provinces.

From his turbulent disposition, a war broke out between the Northumbrians and
Mercians, which was so far fruitless, that by the interposition of Theodore the
Bishop, peace was made, without either party making any acquisitions, through
the bloodshed they had occasioned; for on the borders of Trent the armies came
to an engagement, in which Elfwin, the Northumbrian King's brother, with many
other valiant chiefs and vast hosts were slain. Elfwin was equally lamented by
both nations, as well for his excellent qualities, as his alliance with both
Princes, he having married Osfrida the sister of the King of Mercia.

Egfrid not satisfied to reign in peace, in the year 684 sent his forces
against the Irish, who were represented by Bid as a mild and inoffensive
people, constantly desirous of maintaining peace with Britain In this
expedition much slaughter ensued, from whence the character of Egfrid became
odious.

Restless and disposed to mischief, he turned his arms against the Picts, who
bordered on Northumberland, contrary to the earnest solicitations of Cuthbert
then Bishop of Lindisfern, and marching into their country in the month of
June, 685, he fell into a defile among the mountains, where the enemy lay in
ambush, and was slain. Bid, lib. IV.

At Rex E^gfridus anno quo fecerat hunc venerabilem patrem ordinari Episcopum,
cum maxima part cop^arum quas ad devastandam terram pictorum secum duxerat,
secundum prophetiam ejusdem patris Cuthberti, extinctus est apud Nechtanesmere,
quod est stagnum Nechta^, die tertio decimo Kalendarum Juniarum, anno regni sa^
XV. cujus corpus in Hi^ insula Columbae sepultum est.

Symeon Dunel. lib. I. chapter 9.


Egfrid died in the 40th year of his age, having reigned near 15 years: he had
no issue. He married Etheldreda, a widow, the daughter of Anna King of the East
Angles, who had to her first husband, Tonbert, a nobleman of great power in
Huntingdonshire and the adjoining counties. She was a most enthusiastic zealot,
and during both marriages preserved her virginity, esteeming such religious
severities the most acceptable service. She lived with Egfrid 12 years, and
then took the veil in the abbey of Coldingham, under Ebba. Afterward she
removed, and founded the monastery of Ely, where she governed as Abbess till
her death. For her pious donations and exemplary austerities she was canonized.

ALCFRED, the natural son of Oswes, succeeded to the throne in the year 686. He
had spent his youth in Ireland, and according to the humor of those times, had
made religion his chief study.

The Picts in the preceding reign had obtained part of the northern territories
of his predecessors; the most of which he regained, and maintained his kingdom
from further depredations. Though no singular event in warfare distinguished
his reign, yet it was famous for his wise government and salutary laws.

He reigned 19 years, and died in the year 705. He married in his youth Kenburg
the daughter of Penda the Mercian, and had by her issue one son, OSRED, who
succeeded him on the throne, though only eight years of age at the time of his
father's death.

The Northumbrians were at war with the Picts, and in the seventh year of this
reign, under the conduct of Berthfrid, an able General, obtained a signal
victory, with a mighty slaughter.

No sooner had Osred arrived to manhood, than he showed the most vicious
disposition in the gratification of his lust: he despised all restraint, and
every crime marked the progress of his brutal passion; the defilement of his
marriage bed, the pollution of places most sacred, and the violation of women
of all ranks, even of Nuns.

He married Cuthburga the sister of Ina King of the West Saxons, who detesting
his repeated adulteries and enormous vices, obtained a divorce, and retired to
a nunnery she had founded at Winburn in Dorsetshire. Chron. Sax.


After reigning 11 years, despised and abhorred by his subjects, he was
assassinated by two of his kinsmen, Cenred and Osric, who perceiving the
universal hatred which prevailed against him, presumed, by his death, as he had
no issue, they should obtain the diadem. Chron. Winton.
Accordingly CENRED, who was descended from Ida, supported by his party,
usurped the throne in the year 716, but departed this life after reigning only
two years; of the events of which period Historians are silent.

OSRIC, who was the son of Alfrid, on the demise of Cenred, seized the scepter
in the year 718; but whether he sat undisturbed on the throne which he had
ascended by so heinous a crime, together with the events of nine years reign,
remain unnoticed by Historians. All that is recorded of him after his
usurpation, is, that he suffered a violent death. Chron. Sax. Chron. Winton.
etc.


CEOLWULF was elected by the people in the year 731; he was a lineal descendant
of Ida, by Occa his eldest illegitimate son. Chron. Sax.

Qui videlicet Ceolwlfus de stirpe quidem Idae primi Regis Northanhymbrorum
fuerat, sed non de filio ejus Ethelrico Rege, de quo gloriosissimi Reges
Oswaldus and Oswiu descenderant, genealogiam duxit; sed de tratre ipius
Ethelrici nomine Ocga originem traxisse invenitur. Fuerat quippe Ceolwlfus
filius Cut^ae, cujus pater Cuthwine, cujus pater Liodwald, cujus pa^er Ecgwald,
cujus pater Aldhelm, cujus pater Ocga, cujus pater Ida Rex.

Symeon Dunel. lib. I. chapter 13.
He was a pious man, and spent his days in devout exercises: letting the reins
of government relax, a religious enthusiasm possessed his people, and that
abstracted indolence took place, in which neither arts or sciences, cultivation
or manufactories advanced. The commonwealth will always suffer under an
overheated zeal and enthusiastic religion. The first acceptable service of man,
is rectitude of manners; that he do his duty to himself, his family, his
neighbor, and the state: a wretch who neglects all these, to be incessantly on
his knees, lifting up the hands of idleness to heaven, purchases a heavy
condemnation. The King was for ever at his devotions, his Nobles catched the
infatuation, and conceiving that self-denial, mortification, and neglect of
worldly concerns best pleased the Omnipotent, they founded religious houses,
raised churches, and took on them the monastic orders. Those who should have
appeared in the several departments of government, were sunk into cells, and
the state lost its necessary supports: the influenza extended to the lowest
classes of men, and those who should have been found fit for arms and manuel
employs, were lifting up long visages and languid looks to heaven, as if the
benevolent Being could only be pleased with ugly faces, distortions, and
misery. Ethelbald the King of Mercia observing the unhappy condition of the
neighboring empire, determined to make his advantage of it, and with a
powerful army entered Northumberland. He ravaged the borders, sacked and laid
waste their cities, and laden with spoils, returned in triumph: whilst the
Northumbrians, as idle spectators, received their afflictions as the discipline
and scourge of heaven, esteeming them salutary mortifications, wherein they
should find salvation. Anarchy and confusion took place, and the state was
hastening into dissolution, when the King, in a phrensy of zeal, after having
reigned eight years, abdicated the throne, and offered his crown at the high
altar in the cathedral church of Lindisfarn, where he assumed the Cowl. Bid,
lib. V. Malms. Symeon Dunel. etc.


Not having any issue, he is said to have bequeathed his scepter to his
cousin-german, Egbert the son of Eata, who succeeded him. The entering into a
spiritual character may at that time have been esteemed an extinction of
temporal rights, but by what right a Saxon King could dispose of his kingdom to
another, I confess myself ignorant.

EGBERT ascended the throne when the realm was in the most relaxed and impotent
state; all the adjoining powers were committing continual depredations on his
subjects, who, like men of disturbed reason, bowed their simple heads to every
affliction, and put their hands in their bosoms void of self-defence: even the
tributary states began to declare for freedom and independence; and to perfect
the misery of the realm, the Mercians were renewing the war.

How difficult a task it was to rouse the lethargic zealots from their
fascination, to take up arms, may easily be conceived: at length Egbert
disciplined and led forth a powerful army, and with great military prowess,
brought the the malcontents to their duty, subdued the Picts and Britons who
were in arms, and beat back the Mercians.

No sooner was he relieved from these troubles, and peace smiled upon his
reign, than catching the infatuation of the age, after reigning 21 years, he
resigned his sovereignty, and assumed the character of a Monk. Malms. lib. I.
Symeon Dunel. p. 83. lib. II. cha. 3.


He had one son, OSWULF, who in the year 759, on his father's abdication,
ascended the throne. In his reign he did not accomplish one year, being slain
by his servant, at a place called Micklewoughton. The cause of this unhappy
exit is not mentioned by Historians. Hen. Hunt. J. Redbourne.

Osulf, cum post patrem uno anno regnasset, impia nece a sua familia peremptus,
Aethelwoldum Mol successorem habuit.

Symeon Dunel. lib. II. chapter 3.


ETHELWALD, surnamed Mollo, a Northumbrian of noble blood, obtained the
government: he was opposed by a dangerous faction, headed by Oswin, also of
noble descent, who possessing the affections of some partisans, took the field:
the insurrection caused Ethelwald to levy an army without delay, and a decisive
battle was soon after fought at a place called Edwins-clive, in which Oswin was
slain, and his army routed. After this event he reigned for some time in peace,
till he fell by assassination; Alured, a nobleman of great power, highly
dissatisfied with Ethelwald's being raised to the throne in preference of the
royal line of Ida, from whom he was a lineal descendant by Alric, had
determined upon his death, as the means of opening his passage to royalty, to
which he aspired in right of his ancestors. In a note to page 147 in Strut's
Chronicle, he says, "Simon Dunelm seems to say, that he was not slain, but
resigned the government; but whether by force or his own free will does not
appear." All that Symeon says, is, "Qui ubi sex annis regnaverat, Alchred de
stirpe Ethrici filii Idae Regis in imperium successit."

Symeon Dunel. p. 84. lib. II. chapter 3.


Ethelwalda died in the year 770, leaving one son, Ethelred, but he was
succeeded by the traitor ALURED, who usurped the throne. He ruled over a
dissatisfied people for ten years, after which he was ignominiously dethroned.
Malms. lib. I.

Nono autem anno regni fraud suorum Primatum exilio imperium mutavit, pro quo
Aethelred filius Aethelwold^ mox in regnum substitutus est. Quo imperi^ quarto
anno in exilium fugato, Aelfwold filius Ofulfi regnum adeptus Northanhymbrorum
X annis tenuit.

Symeon Dunel. lib. II. chapter 4.


ETHELRED the son of Ethelwald, was chosen to succeed him; but his reign began
with factions, either from the interests of those of royal descent, or from the
morose disposition which Ethelred displayed in his first maxims of government;
perhaps both those causes operated to stir up the succeeding rebellions. His
Generals were unfortunate, and his arms unsuccessful against the malcontents;
at a place called Kings-cliff his troops were routed by the rebels, and Alduff
his General was slain: and in a second battle, at a place called Holy-thorn,
the rebels again prevailed.

Ethelred soon saw himself deserted, and the state in the utmost confusion: in
consequence of which he thought it prudent to withdraw himself privily, and
save his life, which he perceived was in imminent danger.

Edelbald and Herebert, two noblemen of great influence, had headed these
factions, and now perceiving there was no obstacle remaining, proceeded to
place Alfwold, the brother of Alured, on the throne. Malms. lib. I. Symeon
Dunel. Hen. Hunt. Hoveden.


ALFWOLD thus supported, assumed the scepter, no one presuming, in the
turbulent estate of the kingdom, to oppose those violent measures. Alfwold was
of an excellent disposition, and so far from presuming to act oppressively, in
consequence of the power by which he was supported, that he tempered his
government with mercy and justice. So unhappy was the removal of the diadem
from the royal line, and its disposition on the nobility, that factions soon
were kindling in every district, and dissatisfactions breathing from every
quarter: all the Nobles regarded themselves as being publicly affronted, and
that the election of Alfwold was to be considered as their disparagement. The
excellencies and virtues of the King were totally disregarded; they rather
aggravated than served to conciliate: at length the people rose up in open
rebellion, and a conspiracy was formed against his life. Alfwold had reigned
about ten years, when he was treacherously slain by Sigga, a chief of the
conspirators, and one whom he retained about his person. This crime was
perpetrated at a place called Sythle-cester or Cilchester, in the month of
September, 788; and the royal remains were interred at Hexham. Chron. Hen.
Hunt. Hoveden, etc.

Anno praesulatus ejus sexto, praefatus Rex Aelfwoldus a duce suo Sicga
miseranda morte peremptus, in loco qui dicitur Scytlescester juxta murum,
sepultus est in Hagustaldensi ecclesia: fuerat quippe pietatis eximiae ac
justitiae, unde in loco occisionis ejus lux coelitus emissa saepe a plurimis
visa est. Cui suus nepos Osred Alchredi quondam Regis filius successit, sed
post annum pulsus regno in Eufoniam insulam, quae Man vocatur, aufugit, and
Aethelred de exilio revocatus regnum quod dudum amiserat recepit.

Symeon Dunel. lib. II. chapter 4.


He left two sons, Celf and Celfwin, who were both slain by Ethelred, after his
restoration. It does not appear that any one mounted the throne of
Northumberland until the year 791, when the prevailing party placed the crown
on the head of OSRED, son of Alured, but his reign was very short; the same
giddy multitude to whom he owed his diadem, deprived him of it in less than a
year, and he fled to conceal his disgrace, and seek security in some foreign
country. J. Redbourne. Chron. Sax. Hoveden, etc.


ETHELRED conceiving the distraction in the state favored his return,
supported by a few desperate partisans, again ascended the throne. His
malevolent disposition retained the darkest principles of revenge, and when he
thought himself secured in the government, he began to exercise the utmost
severity on those who had appeared against him, whilst he formerly held the
scepter; and the chiefs of those factions he put to death. The sons of Alfwold
having gained the asylum of York, were regarded with an eye of jealousy, lest
in some future day they should lay claim to their father's diadem: by an artful
address, and promises of great employments in the state, he seduced them from
their place of security, and soon after had them assassinated near
Wan-waldermere. His hands were stained with blood, and his heart was hardened
with crimes: he had policy enough to ensnare the unfortunate Osred, who fell a
sacrifice to his wiles, and was put to death at a place called Cunburge.
Trusting that every object was removed which could disturb his government, he
thought it would strengthen his authority to make an alliance with Offa King of
Mercia: to this end, without any real cause of offense, he divorced his Queen,
and married Elfled, Offa's daughter. His tyranny and vices were odious, and all
his subjects groaned under their oppressions. At length the enormity of his
crimes roused the people, who no longer could support their afflictions; cabals
and insurrections were discovered in every quarter of the kingdom, which at
length broke out into a general rebellion; and in the tumult Ethelred was slain
on the 18th of April, 795, at Corbre, having reigned near four years after his
restoration.

From this period the kingdom of Northumberland was rent by innumerable
factions, and an universal anarchy prevailed. Kings were placed upon the throne
by parties, as they gained the superiority, and were deposed as other parties
rose. Among those Monarchs, Oswald and Eardulf are named by Historians, who
possessed a short and turbulent reign. In this distraction the kingdom was
involved, when Egbert King of the West Saxons, in the year 826, having
conquered the Mercians, entered Northumberland, and soon reduced it to
subjection.

A Chronological Table of the Kings of Northumberland.
Begun to reign. Died or Expel. No. AD. 547 AD. 559 1 IDA 1st King of
Bernicia. 560 589 2 Aelle 1st King of Deira, and afterward, in the year 597,
first King of Northumberland: the provinces of Bernicia and Deira being united
by him. 560 567 3 Adda 2d King of Bernicia. 567 572 4 Glappa 3d King of
Bernicia. 572 573 5 Theodwald 4th King of Bernicia. 573 580 6 F^ethulf 5th King
of Bernicia. 58^ 587 7 Theodoric 6th King of Bernicia. After whom Aelle united
the provinces in the kingdom of Northumberland. 589 593 8 Ethelric 2d King of
Northumberland. 593 617 9 Ethe^it^ 3d King of -- 617 633 10 Edwine 4th King of
-- After whom the provinces were again divided. 633 634 11 Eanfrid 7th King of
Bernicia. 12 Osric 2d King of Deira. 634 64^ 13 Oswald who again united the
provinces, and was 5th King of Northumberland, but after him they were again
divided. 642 670 14 Osweo 8th King of Bernicia. 642 651 15 Oswine 3d King of
Deira. 653 16 Ethelwald 4th King of Deira. 670 685 17 Egfrad united the
provinces, and was the 6th King of Northumberland 686 705 18 Alefrid 7th King
of Northumberland. 705 716 19 Osred 8th King of -- 716 718 20 Cenred 9th King
of -- 718 731 21 Osric 10th King of -- 731 22 Ceolwulf 11th King of -- 738 23
Egbert 12th King of -- 759 ^59 24 Oswulf 13th King of -- 759 7^0 25 Ethelwald
14th King of -- ^^0 26 Alured 15th King of -- ^^9 27 Et^elred 16th King of --
782 791 28 Alfwold 17th King of -- 791 29 Osred 18th King of -- 792 Ethelred
was restored.

A TABLE of COINS.


EXPLANATION.
No. 1. This is of gold, and presumed to be a coin of Boadicia, Queen of the
Brigantes, whose dominion extended northward to the Tweed; the provinces of the
Otadini and Gadeni, by some authors being said to be Tributaries. It is the
opinion of the learned, that after the Roman Tributes were appointed in
Britain-coins were struck with impressions suitable to the imposts: those
payable for corn lands were marked with an ear of corn, for forests with a
tree, for the larger cattle a horse, and the smaller cattle a hog; the
poll-money was impressed with a head. Boadicia complaining of those taxes to
her subjects, is said to have used these words: Ye graze and ye plow for the
Romans; nay ye pay an annual tribute for your very bodies. The Mintmaster has
placed the word Tascia on many of the British coins, which signifies
Tribute-money. It is remarked, that these several impressions could not be used
to denote any distinct nation, province, or tribe, for the same prince and
people used them all; as is observed in the coins of Cunobeline, who stamped
upon his coins, severally, the figure of a horse, a hog, an car of corn, etc.
No. 2. A silver coin of Eadbert. There is some doubt whether this is the coin
of a Northumbrian Prince, as there were two Kings of Kent of the same name. Sir
Andrew Fountain, contrary to the opinion of Speed, attributes it to the
Northumbrian. No. 3. A coin of Egbert. There were four Kings of this name, one
of Northumberland, one of Kent, one of Mercia, and one of the West Saxons. Mr
Thoresby places this among the coins of the Northumbrian Monarchs. On the
reverse is the name of the Mintmaster, which was usual in those times. No. 4. A
silver coin of Alured King of Northumberland, No. 26 in the Chronological
Table. No. 5. A coin of Eandred, by some authors said to be the brother of
Edmund, and to be a tributary Prince about the year 968. No. 6. This is a brass
coin: it is doubted by the learned, whether it belonged to Eandred or Eanfrid.
No. 11 in the Chronological Table. Eanfrid built St Peter's church at York, and
made Pa^nus Bishop. No. 7. A silver coin of Aelfred. Th^s Prince was a very
learned person, to show which, it is presumed he used the Al^gram on the
reverse of his coin. This Monogram has been construed to imply Civitas
N^rt^cam, which would fix the coin upon Alfred the Great: Norwich being a place
of little note in the time of Aelfred of Northumberland. No. 8. A silver coin
of Ceolwulf. By the letter M in the legend, it is doubtful this coin belonged
to the Mercian King Ceonulf. No. 9. A coin of Egbert, under whom the Saxon
principalities were united into one kingdom. He was a Prince of extraordinary
wisdom and valor. No. 10. A coin of Ethelred, No. 27 in the Chronological
Table. There was another Ethelred, son of Eandred, a tributary King of
Northumberland, but no coin of his is extant. On this coin the name is spelled
Edilred. No. 11. A silver coin of Oswulf, No. 24 in the Table, by some called
Ethelwulf: he was the son of Egbert. No. 12. A silver coin of Alfred the Great;
by the reverse it appears to have been struck in honor of St Cuthbert. No. 13.
A silver coin of Ed^a^d, brother of Athelstan. No. 14. A silver coin of Eadred.
He died about the year 955. after completing the reduction of Northumberland,
and settling Osulf the first Earl. No. 15. A silver coin of St Edwinus. No. 16.
A silver coin of Canute the Dane. No. 17. A silver coin of Si^tri^, a Danish
King of Northumberland, odious for his tyranny and pride. No 18. A silver coin
of Edwene, No. 10 in the Chronological Table. No. 19. A silver coin of King
Athelstan.
A VIEW OF NORTHUMBERLAND.
EGBERT King of the West Saxons, having conquered Northumberland, became
Sovereign of the united States of the Heptarchy.

The modes of government being settled, and each province reconciled to his
authority, he disbanded his army, and during seven years peace, promoted the
cultivation of those arts and sciences, which should increase the general
happiness and wealth of his people.

In the thirty-second year of this reign, the Danes made their first descent
upon this island. To trace all the ravages those Barbarians committed, would
lead to descriptions tedious and painful: many parts of Northumberland retain
memorials of their hostilities; and such in the course of this work will
necessarily be attended to.

It appears, that under Alfred, the Danes held the sole possession of
Northumberland; but whether as tributaries or conquerors, is not clearly
ascertained: Alfredus postea Danis permisit, quos Athelstanus pauculos post
annos exturbavit.

Camden Brit.
Athelstan obtained many signal victories over them, and at length effected
their expulsion from this territory.

From this period we find the government of Northumberland reposed in nominees
of the Crown, who assumed the titles of Earls of Northumberland; many of whom
are named by our Historians, and their peculiar actions, so far as they are
relative to the immediate objects of my attention in this work, are recounted.
Amongst whom these are reckoned up in order in our histories: -- Osulfe,
Oslake, Edulph, Waldeof the Elder, Uchtred, Adulph, Alred, Siward, Tostie,
Edwin, Morcar, Osculph, and that right valiant Siward, as he lived in arms, so
would he die armed. -- Then this earldom and these parts were given unto
Tostie, the brother of Earl Harold: but the earldoms of Northampton and
Huntingdon, with other lands of his, were assigned to the noble Earl Waldeof
his son and heir. I will add what I have read in an old manuscript, in the
library of John Stowe, an Antiquary of the city of London: -- Copso being made
Earl of Northumberland by William the Conqueror, expelled Osculph, who soon
after flew him: Osculph did not long survive this revenge, he being killed by a
javelin, from the hands of a robber After this Gospatrick purchased this
earldom of the Conqueror, but was soon after deposed. Waldeof the son of Siward
succeeded him, and he in a short time lost his head. Then Walcher Bishop of
Durham had the earldom, and was slain at a riotous assembly of the people.
Robert Mowbray attained these honors, which he forfeited by treasonable
attempts to depose King William Rufus, in favor of Stephen Earl of Albemarle.
King Stephen gave this earldom to Henry, son of David the Scotch King; and
William his son, afterward King of Scotland, assumed the title, claiming it
from his mother of the family of Earls Warren, as appears by the book of
Brinkburn Abbey. After some time elapsed, Richard the First sold this earldom
to Hugh Pudsey Bishop of Durham for life, ceriding him in his title, as having
transmigrated an old Bishop into a young Earl. But when the King was a prisoner
to the Emperor, in his return from the Holy Land, Hugh having contributed for
his ransom only 2000 pounds of silver, which the King resenting, esteeming it
but a trifling sum for one who had amassed immense riches, he divested him of
this dignity: after which time the title of Earldom of Northumberland lay
dormant about 180 years. At length it was revived in the family of Piercys.

Camden. Brit.


In this county innumerable monuments of antiquity and natural beauties exist,
to excite a traveller's curiosity. The possession of the Romans, and in after
times the conflicts with the Saxons, Danes, and Scots, render it truly
historical ground. -- Many of the present inhabitants are derived from a race
of heroes, who purchased immortal honors in the annals of their country.

On this tour I visited ALDSTON, in the county of Cumberland, to have access to
Northumberland at the south-west point.

ALDSTON
is a small market town, meanly built, hanging on the declivity of a steep
hill, inhabited by miners. The fatigue of passing bad roads, in a mountainous,
barren, and inhospitable country, was in no wise alleviated by the scene which
presented itself here. Pent in a narrow valley, over which mountains frowned
with a melancholy sterility and nakedness; the wind tempestuous, impending
clouds stretching forth a dark and disconsolate curtain over the face of
morning; rain beating vehemently against the windows, which were not able to
resist the storm; a few trees standing near the Inn tossed by the heavy blasts
which howled down the valley; whilst the accommodations within doors were even
comfortless, rendered such a frontispiece to a pursuit of pleasure, as would
have given a check to any thing but insatiable curiosity.

We were under the influence of the highest lands in this part of the island,
and could not avail ourselves of the name of summer against such a climate; for
I presume two fair days together are seldom known in this country.

We passed over the south branch of the river Tyne, by a stone bridge, and
entered the county of Northumberland on the Maiden Way, a Roman military road,
near

WHITLEY,
which bears at present the name of WHITLEY CASTLE, though only the remains of
the Roman station called in Dean Gales Antoninus, Alione: H^^er p. 111.
situate on the brook of Gilderdale, the southern boundary of this part of
Northumberland.

Whitley lays on an irregular descent, inclining to the east, is an oblong
square with obtuse angles, 140 paces from east to west, and 110 from north to
south: the ground falls swiftly from the eastern side of this station, but to
the west the hills over look it, from whence it was easily assailed. -- In
order to fortify it on this weak quarter, it is slanked on the north-west and
south-west angles, with several trenches and breastworks of earth; and on the
west with seven several trenches and breastworks, running out to a kind of
semicircle: the entrance is on the south. As a sketch of Whitley will give the
reader a general idea of those stations I visited in this county, I have
subjoined an Etching. It is (...) Mr H^rsley should represent this station so
all in his plates: -- it is delineated as being (...) to the no^ ^nded by three
trenches and v^lums or rampires, and on all the (...) by four, with an e^^^ance
on each side.




The Maiden Way before spoken of, extends from a small fort, called Maiden
Castle, on Stainmore, by Kirby Thore, in Westmoreland, and Whitley to Caer
Voran, in this county; guarded by a chain of stations. This military road was
repaired by part of the twentieth legion, as is denoted by a centurial stone
discovered thereon, inscribed, VEXILLATIO LEGIONIS VICESIMAE V. V. REFICIT. CXI.

Vexillatio legionis vicesimae valentis victricis refecit.

This and the three following belong to the Roman station which has been at
Whitley Castle, near Kirkhaugh, in the south-west corner of the county of
Northumberland. It is only the old Roman station that goes by the name of the
Castle. This station is upon the military way usually called the maiden way:
and this inscription is in the custody of Mr Henry Wallace of Whitley, the
proprietor of the ground in which the station has been. The stone is manifestly
of that sort that are usually inserted in the face of the walls or other works
built or rebuilt by the soldiers: and nothing more can be inferred from this
inscription, but that a vexillation of the 20th legion had rebuilt this
station, or somewhat about it.

Horsley, p. 250.
The Notitia places at Alione the third cohort of the Nervii. In Mr Horsley's
B. Romana CXII.

Maximo Germanico pontifici maximo tribunitiae potestatis decimum nonum consuli
quartum patri patriae -- milites cohortis tertiae nerviorum

This inscription is in a house that stands just at the south entry of the
station, and is called Castle Nook. It is a great pity it should be so
imperfect and broken, since probably it has been much of the same nature with
that of which Camden has given us the original, and which I shall next
describe. I have set the reading under this inscription, which I take to be
right. I know not whether the character like a Greek PH, in the third line, be
only an ornamental stop, or designed for Pio, or that the P has been effaced,
and this put only for 10^, according to the like contraction in the inscription
now in the library at Edinburgh. Nor am I able to determine, whether the first
letters in the 4th line can have been P. R. for Proconsul, a title that
Caracalla also assumed, or for Praefectus, the name of the commander having
been at the end of the preceding line.

Horsley, p. 250.
we find two altars inscribed to the Emperor Caracalla, which prove this
matter. It is contended by some, that Alione was held up and garrisoned by the
Romans to the latest date of their abode in this country. This was a wretched
place for the subsistence of a cohort; cultivation (even in this age) has only
crept down the skirts of the valleys, and hung upon the margins of the rivers;
even where her steps have imprinted the narrow shores, corn has not hitherto
blessed the labor of the husbandman.

Mr Camden says, that Whitley Castle retained the marks of a great and ancient
town, enclosed toward the north with a fourfold rampire. This description
convinces me Camden never visited the place, it is so inconsistent with the
true state of it. He gives us one of the inscriptions discovered there in the
following form, being one of those in Mr. Horsley's B. Romana: IMP. CAES. Lucii
Septimi Severi Ara
BICI, ADIABENICI, PARTHICI
MAX. FILL. DIVI ANTONINI Pii Germanici
SARMA. NEP. DIVI ANTONINI PII PRON.
DIVI HADRIANI ABN. DIVI TRAIANI
PARTH. ET DIVI NERVAE ADNEPOTI
M. AVRELIO ANTONINO PIO
FELL. AVG. GERMANICO. PONT. MAX.
TR. POT -- X -- IMP -- COS. IIII. P. p --
PRO PIETATE AEDE -- VOTO --
COMMVNI CVRANTE --
-- LEGATO AVG.
PR -- COH. III. NERVIO --
RVM -- G. R. POS.
which Camden says shows that a temple was erected there to Antoninus the
Emperor. CXIII.

Imper^tor's Caesaris Lucii Severi Arabici Adiabenici Parthici maximi filio
divi Antonini Pii Sa^mat^^ nepoti divi Antonini Pii pro nepoti divi Hadriani ab
nepoti divi Trajani Parthici, et d^vi Nervae adnepoti Marco Aurelio Antonino
Pio Felici Augusto Germanico pontifici Maximo tribuntiae potestatis decimum --
imperatori -- consuli quartum patri patriae pro pietate Aedem ex V^^o communi
curante Legato Augu^tali cohors tertia Nerviorum Genio Romae posuit.

Sir Robert Cotton would doubtless have procured and removed this stone, if
possible, whatever (...) now become of it, for it is not to be seen at
Conington. There is yet remaining at App^eby, in Westmoreland, what I at first
supposed had been the original. There is at this place another copy or two cut
out as this on stone, the originals of which I know are at Con^ngton, which
increases my jealousy about this, as does likewise a memorandum at the bottom
of the stone on which this inscription is cut, namely, de Astonmore. signifying
the p^ace from whence it came, which is undoubtedly modern, though this might
be added when the stone was removed to Appleby, and so the Roman inscription,
notwithstanding, be gen^^ne. However, from this and Camden^s copy diligently
compared, I have given such a reading to it, as appeared to me the most
probable. Camden tells us, "that the inscription was imperfect, and
compendiously written, with the letters linked one in another," yet he has
given it only in plain Roman capitals; but by the help of the stone at Appleby.
I have brought it nearer to the true form. The inscription is manifestly to
Caracalla, and the titles given to his predecessors are agreeable to the Roman
history. All that Camden says in relation to it, by way of explication, is,
"that the third cohort of the Nervii built a temple here to Antoninus the
Emperor, the son of Severus." -- But in order to make some se^e of the latter
part of the inscription, we must consider it more nicely. In the ninth line
there have been most probably some numeral letters after IMP. and more after
TR. POT, and these may be determined by consulting history and the inscriptions
on coins, in order to know how often he en^oyed the tribunitial power, and been
saluted Imperator, when he was the fourth time Consul, which was the second
year after his father's death, and his leaving Britain I find one Roman coin,
which seems to determine the whole; in which we have TR. P. XVI. IMP. II. COS.
IIII; so that the ninth line has probably been the like, as above. It Is true he
had often, during the same consulate, the tribunitial power, and was oftener
saluted Imperator, but the vacant spaces seem not to admit any larger numbers.
The P. P. at the end of the line is Patri Patriae. In the next line I apprehend
there is only an X wanting before Voto, thus, AED EX VOTO, adem ex Voto, etc.
PR. PR. for Propraetor, seems also to be effaced in the last line but one. But
I am apt to think there has been nothing more in the last line, and that no
letters are wanting between the M and G (though so represented in Camden as if
there were) and that we are to read Genio Romae Posuit. So that if this temple
has been erected to Caracalla, it has been dedicated to him as the Genius of
Rome, or of the Roman people, a flattering compliment too often paid by the
Roman people to their Emperors. Perhaps the name of the Propraetor has been
designedly struck out; but who he was cannot be known from any other
inscriptions: and as for the Roman historians, they are entirely silent with
respect to any affairs in Britain at this time, and for a great while after. To
remove the difficulty that may seem to arise from Caracalla's being called the
grandson of M. Aurelius Antoninus, to whom his father Severus was no ways
related, nor ever adopted by him, it may not be amiss to repeat what I observed
before from X^philine, "that after the death of Albinus, Severus called himself
the son of Marcus, and brother of Commodus: hence his son Caracalla is called
the grandson of Marcus Antoninus. But there is another difficulty in the words
of the inscription, and that is, how Caracalla could be adnepos or atnepos both
to Trajan and Nerva: for if he was so to the former, as the regular series of
the preceding Emperors requires, he must have been trinepos to Nerva. Perhaps
therefore the word et in the sixth line should be fill. and we ought to read
Divi Trajani Parthici filii divi Nervae, adnepoti. This will make the genealogy
consistent; and the manner of expression is not improper, and in effect the
same as Trajani adnepoti, Nervae trinepoti." This inscription was erected in
the year 213, when Caracalla was the fourth time Consul. I have described and
explained it next to number CXII, because I think these two are somewhat of a
like nature.

Horsley, p. 251. IMP. CAES LV --
BIG ADIA --
M^. FILL ^V. ANTONINI --
SARM. ^P. ^V. ^TONI. P. ^ON
DIVI HA^. AB NEP ^V. TRAIAN.
PARTH. ET ^V N^ ^DNEP --
MAVR. A^O^NO PIO --
FELL. AVG --
TR. POTX -- IMP. COS. IIII. PP
^O PIETATE AEDE VOTO
COMMVNI CVRANTE
LEG. AVG
COH. III NERVIO
RVM GR POS.

There are not the least traces to be found at this day of any such edifice.

On the opposite side of the Tyne, as we passed down the valley, we had a view
of KIRKHAUGH. When Mr Horsley visited the place, he found in the churchyard, a
Roman altar, inscribed DEAE MINERVAE ET HERCVLI VICTORI; CXIV.

D^ Minervae et Herculi victori.

This altar is now in the churchyard of Kirkhaugh. It Is erected to Minerva and
Hercules Victor, but by whom or on what occasion does not appear. The Greek
writers call those de^es who were worshipped together at the same altar (...);
and these two, Minerva and Hercules, might perhaps be joined on this altar, to
intimate that the Roman arms were conducted with equal skill and fortitude.
Horsley, p. 252.


but on enquiry, we were informed it was lately removed.

We passed down the vale, a wild and uncultivated scene, till we approached

KNARESDALE,
where some narrow enclosures, by the brink of the river, cheered the eye,
which for some miles had labored over a sameness of unpleasing objects with
languor. Here the meads, and some little woods which hang upon the declivities,
were contrasted by the brown heath and gray rocks of the mountains, and made
the landscape picturesque.

As I now leave the Maiden Way, or Roman military road, and found in this
uncultivated country the most perfect remains I ever saw; to give the reader a
general idea, it may not be improper to introduce a description of this; as it
is to be presumed all the Roman roads bore a similarity thereto in their
construction, though not in their breadth. The Maiden Way In the Gentleman's
Magazine of the year 1755, the origin of the name Maiden Way is learnedly
defined by the great antiquary Mr Pegg^ under his feigned signiture of P
Gemsege, particularly he says, to ^que a conjecture upon a p^^ so obscure,
perhaps it may come from the British word ^a^ p^er, or beautiful; hence
possibly may come the Anglo Saxon word Mai^o and Ma^en virgo, which in that
case answers exactly to our present expressions, a fair one, and (...) a sense
undoubtedly very well accommodated to all the three places, ^h to the road and
the two fortifications, Maiden Castle, Maiden Way, and Maiden Hold.
is near six yards wide, the sides are formed by lines of very large pebbles,
from whence in an easy bow the interior pavement rises to a crown. Where the
road lays down steep descents, the pavement is formed of flat thin stones,
placed on their edges, and laid transversely. It passes many brooks, and I
examined whether any bridges of mason work had been thrown over them, but could
find no remains of such; which leads me to determine, that these places were
passed by means of platforms formed of timber or trunks of trees. The rocks to
which the pavement adjoined, would certainly have retained some testimony of
mason work, if any had been used.

KNARESDALE HALL
is ruinous and neglected. It was the seat of one of the Prats in the reign of
Edward I. who forfeited the same; after which it was granted to Sir Robert de
Swinburn: it came to Wallace of Copeland Castle, by marriage of Eleanor second
daughter of John Swinburn of Edlingham; and Ralph Wallace his descendant, sold
it to Mr Alderman Stephenson of Newcastle upon Tyne.

We passed by a stone bridge over the river Tyne, below Knaresdale, and from
the opposite heights had a view of

LAMBLEY,
now consisting of a small chapel, with a few scattered cottages. Here was
formerly a house founded for Benedictine Nuns, dedicated to God, St Mary, and
St Patrick. Authors differ touching the foundation; Speed and Camden attribute
it to the Lucys, Tanner to Adam de Tynedale, and others to King John. By deed
of confirmation of the second year of King John, Johannes Dei gratia, etc Dat
per Manum S Wellensis Archidiaconi apud Hextoldesham XIV die Februarii, regni
nostri anno Secundo.
certain endowments made by Adam de Tynedale, and others of that family, were
confirmed to this religious house. At the suppression it consisted of six Nuns,
and was valued at 5l. 15s. 8d. The site of the convent is not now to be
discovered: in Camden's day, it was for the most part undermined by the
floodings of the Tyne, and fallen down. John Duke of Northumberland had
Lambley, by the grant of Edward VI. it was afterward in the Featherstonhaughs
of Featherston Castle, and now is the estate of Sir Lancelot Allgood. This
place suffered in an incursion of the Scots in the reign of Edward I. AD. 1296,
when passing down Redesdale and Tindale, burning and laying waste the country,
and committing horrid cruelties on the inhabitants, they destroyed Corbridge,
burnt the town, monastry, and church of Hexham, and also this small nunnery.
The wretched nuns suffering the common fate of captives in those savage
invasions, torture and ravishment.

The river being rough, and the fords not known to us, we left the vale, and
traversing the heights, approached

FEATHERSTON CASTLE,
which lays in a little sequestered valley, concealed by the surrounding hills.
From the eminence over which we traveled, we could command a view for several
miles on every hand; but almost the whole scene was one vast expanse of waste
and barrenness, hill arising beyond hill in dreary succession of broken crags
or brown heath: at the feet of the mountains here and there, a little verdure
was perceived, a narrow valley, and a solitary cottage. The inhabitants are
shepherds, and languish out a life of indigence, and laziness. As we descended
into the vale where the castle stands, some pretty plains of meadow ground on
the margin of Tyne were revealed to us, which, whilst we remained on the
heights, lay concealed from our view.

The castle is little more than a square tower, calculated for defense against
those tribes of robbers the Moss Troopers. Every chief mansion in the county of
Northumberland, in former times was obliged to be thus defended; so that the
number of those small castles is very great. Featherston tower has two
exploratory turrets: it is vaulted underneath for the purpose of securing
flocks and herds in the time of assault.

The family of Featherstonhaugh possessed this place for several ages: the
first upon record is Thomas de Featherstonhaugh, in the first year of Edward I.
who held it as a member of the barony of Tynedale; Excheat, 1 Edward I.
after whom it remained in that family till the latter end of the reign of
Queen Elizabeth: it afterward was sold to Lord Carlisle, and is now the
possession of Sir Matthew Featherstonhaugh. Mr Wallis who wrote the Antiquities
of Northumberland, with infinite industry acquired genealogical tables of
almost all the Northumbrian families. -- From his publication I will make
extracts, as the best authority extant, from whence I can lay before the
reader, an account of those ancient houses this county boasts.

Thomas de Featherston Haugh 1 King Edward I. 2 King Edward II. Alexander -- 39
King Edward III. Thomas -- 42 same. Sir Albany --, High Sheriff of Northumb. 2
Queen Elizabeth. Alexander --, High Sheriff of Northumb. 32 same.



The prospects from the tower are narrow, composed of some cultivated lands on
the skirts of the hills, little groves hanging over the brink of the river,
grassy plains forming the depth of the vale, through which the Tyne rushes, and
a few scattered cottages; over which solemn and gloomy mountains on every hand
impend.

We pursued our way to Bellister Castle by a winding road, on the banks of
Tyne, the vale widening as we proceeded, and the progress of cultivation
increasing upon us -- a most happy change to a traveller.

The situation of

BELLISTER CASTLE
is beautiful, a rich vale intervenes between it and the river; at the time of
our passage covered with an abundant crop of wheat. The Tyne here, a formidable
stream, shows many broad canals as it winds down the valley: the banks are
wooded, and the rising grounds on every side are rich and well cultivated. --
The town of Haltwezell is a great ornament to the landscape, as it is seen
hanging on the opposite eminence.

This castle is a rude structure, of an irregular form as it now lays in ruins,
placed on an artificial mount, defended by a moat; the whole a ragged and
confused pile of mouldering walls, without any ornament or beauty; and rendered
more gloomy by the branches of large oaks, which have surmounted the building,
and shade great part of its remains.

This was the seat of the Blenkinsops Them (...) ^erkinsop, ^ner of ^e^stor 6
King Edward VI. George -- 10 Queen Elizabeth.
Wallis.
-- (Wallis says) a younger branch of the family of Blenkinsop Castle. It is
now the property of John Blenkinsop Coulson, Esquire of Jesmond; but the manor
appertains to the Ellisons of Park-house.

We proceeded toward Haltwezell, in hopes to pass the river by the ferry-boat;
but the boatman, who thinks himself a competent judge of the necessity there is
for his attendance, was not to be found; and we were obliged to pass the ford,
which is broad and deep, with a bottom of very large stones, over which a
horse, breast deep in the water, unaccustomed to the passage, incessantly
faulters or stumbles. Those circumstances would have been greatly aggravated by
our ignorance of the place, had we not met with a person to conduct us. --
Instances of well applied charity characterize this age: it would not be one of
the least, to give a stipend to an attendant at such fords as these, by which
many valuable lives would be saved. -- Is it not shocking, that a traveller
should be exposed to infinite perils, by the stupidity or folly of a boatman,
who presumes to determine on a matter of such moment, as the fate of his fellow
creature! a wretch whose character, perhaps, is one of those humiliating
subjects, which serve to reduce self-estimation and human vanity, by showing
how near, man in the lowest class, is to the brute creation.

HALTWEZELL
is a pleasant village, holding a market on Thursdays; the situation is lofty;
the churchyard, on the south side of the town, commands a fine prospect over
the vale, where Tyne flowing in meanders, shows itself variously upon the
Landscape, which is bounded by Bellister Castle and the adjoining woods on the
one hand, and extends to Haydon bridge on the other; at the instant of our
view, varied with all the rich temts of summer, and the happy effects of
cultivation.

The church contains little that is remarkable: within the altar rails is the
tombstone of an ecclesiastic, sculptured with a crosier of excellent work, and
highly ornamented, a pilgrim's scrip and staff, with a coat armor, party per
fesse, and three garbs: the personage interred not known.

The following rude epitaph marks one of the Riddle family: John -- Redel
That -- sum
tim did be
then Lord of the Walton
Gone is he out of this val of Mesre
His bons lies under this stons
1562
A mutilated effigy of a knight templar, who had made the crusade, lays here;
his legs across, and hands elevated; said to be one of the Blenkinsops of
Blenkinsop Castle.

The Scots plundered this place, in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, but being
pursued by the then Lord Warden of the Middle Marches, they suffered severely
for their temerity. -- Here is an infant manufactory of coarse baize, to which
the situation promises prosperity. -- A small endowment was made by Lady Capel,
for a master to teach reading and writing.

At the east end of the town is an eminence, called Castle Banks, of an oval
figure; in the center of which is a fine spring. On the east and west end, four
distinct terraces, bankings, or gradations are cut; arising one above another.
The crown of the hill, is defended by a breastwork of earth, toward the town;
and on the south by an inaccessible precipice, at whose foot the river runs. To
what people this fortification belonged is not known, no memorable action
having made it remarkable in history. Mr Wallis's opinion appears to be a very
just one, that these eminences thus terraced, were occupied by the militia when
an enemy had penetrated the country; where they not only had a powerful
appearance in such arrangement, but also could fight with great advantage when
an attack was made upon them.

This county bears innumerable memorials of warfare, several of which are not
now to be ascribed to any particular people, either from their form, materials,
or construction. It was the mode of all contending parties, in ancient times to
entrench, and throw up breastworks, which were frequently formed to suit the
situation, without regard to any singular model common to themselves: This was
the practice, only in times of immediate emergency; the permanent camps or
stations, were fortified in a mode peculiar to each people: Such as are
remarkable will be particularly noticed in the following pages.

From Haltwezell we proceeded to

CARR-VORAN,
a Roman station, situate on a declivity, which descends swiftly toward the
south-west, about a hundred yards distant from the Picts Wall, of a square
figure with obtuse angles, each side being 120 paces. The Pretorium is very
distinguishable, about seven paces from the southern side, commanding a very
extensive prospect. Mr Carrick, who farms the ground, is raising the
foundations of the Pretorium, and will no doubt discover some valuable
antiquities. I procured here a fine silver coin of Antoninus Pius, well
preserved, which was found on this station.

In Warburton's Vallum Romanum, this station is numbered eleven, his treatise
beginning at Segedunum. With Mr Horsley, he presumes there is no doubt but this
was the ancient Magna, where the Cohors Secunda Dalmatarum was quartered,
according to the Notitia. Whether the ancient name Magna was British or purely
Roman, is difficult to determine. Horsley's Br. To. p. 107.


Mr Horsley's description is chiefly, that Carr-Voran is placed about 12 or 13
chains to the south of both the walls (which are here very near to each other)
and has a peat moss before it. This may both be the reason of the modern name,
and why the walls approach no nearer to it. The ramparts round this fort are
very conspicuous, and the whole ditch remains distinguishable: the buildings
without the fort, have been on the south and west sides, on the descent toward
the river Tippal. This is one of the forts entirely within Hadrian's Vallum.
The military way called Maiden Way, passes through this place, and, as is said,
goes to Beau Castle, which is about six miles from it: and the other military
way, which comes from Walwick Chesters, passes a little to the south of this
fort, or enters and terminates in the Roman town here. It is very visible upon
the moor south-east of, and not far from Carr-Voran.

A small altar was formerly found here, dedicated to Vitirinaeus, a tutelar
God. Camden.


DEO
VITI
RINE --
-- LIMEO
In consequence of a vow.
-- ROV --
Posuit libens merito.
P. L. M.
A small brass image of one of the Lares -- a ring engraven with the figure of
Victory on a rough cornelian -- a curious effigy in relief of a Roman soldier,
on a white rag stone, were found here in the year 1760. Wallis.
The figure is about 14 inches in height, is helmetted, clothed in a pallium
or light robe, flowing to his feet, clasped on the breast with a fibula; in his
right hand he is armed with the hasta, and rests his left on a parma or shield,
supported on a pedestal: above his shoulder are the figures of a stag seized by
a lion. Abundance of stags' horns have been dug up here, the bones and ashes of
animals, and many millstones. Mr Horsley has the following inscriptions in his
Brit. Romans

LXVI. Solvit libentissime merito.

This I found lying in the court before the house: it is an altar, and has a
praesericulum on one side, and a patera with a crocked handle on the other; but
I could discern no letters at all on the face of the altar, though the four on
the base were visible.

LXVII. Deo Vitiri Menius Dada votum solvit libens merito.

Abundance of antiquities of various sorts have been dug up in this Roman
station and town. When I was last there, I purchased a Roman ring with a
Victory on a cornelian, but coarse; as also a small altar lately found, with
the above very plain inscription upon it, dedicated by one Menius Dada to the
God Vitires.

LXVIII. DIS Manibus Aurelia Pubeo Voma vixit annos.... Aurelius Pubeo Naso
Pientissimae filiae dicat.

These stones are used for two steps in the stairs of a house; the letters are
very visible, but part of them, especially on one of the stones, is covered by
the next step above, which rests upon this. I soon perceived that both of them
must have originally belonged to one and the same stone. The whole stone
appears plainly to have been a funeral monument, erected by Aurelius Pubeo Naso
for his daughter Aurelia Pubeo Voma. Neither this nor the preceding stones have
been published before, unless a small altar, in Mr Warburton's Map of
Northumberland, with the same letters SLLM on the base of No. LXVI, though
there is little resemblance between the two draughts.

LXIX. Dirus Vitirious Deccius votum solvit libens merito.

This is a small altar found here by Mr Gordon, and presented by him to Baron
Clerk, in whose collection it now is. Mr Gordon supposes it to be the same with
that which was discovered by Mr Camden, dedicated to the tutelar God Vitorinus;
but according to his own representation it must be Dirus Vitirieus Deccius,
though what this gentleman took for an E. is a B in the original; so that the
name is Vitiribus, and so it was read to me by the learned Baron himself:
besides, it is quite different from that in Camden. It seems plain from other
inscriptions, that Vitires, and not Vitirinus, was the name of the tutelar God;
for we meet with Vitir^ in the dative Dirus Vitiribus Deccius is evidently the
name of the person who erected this altar: it founds more like the name of a
foreigner than a Roman, and therefore this person was probably among the
auxiliaries, by whom these stations upon the wall were garrisoned.

(N. B. On one side of this altar a Dolphin is delineated.)

The learned Baron has observes, with relation to the Dolphin, that this was a
figure much in use about the time that the Roman walls were made in Britain,
and even before: the ancients denoted by it dispatch of business; and
Vespasian, who was very fond of the proverb used by Augustus Caesar, Fe^ina
lent, ordered on some of his coins, a Dolphin to be represented twisting about
an anchor, importing both Tarditas and Festinatio: the Dolphin was likewise
accounted (...) by Plutarch and others: it is probable that some such thing was
understood by the erector of this altar. There is a Boar on the other side of
th^s altar, which is frequently to be met with on ancient sculptures in Britain.

S^^^h from this station, at less than a mile distance, stands Blenkinsop
Castle, near the side of the river T^ppal; at which place was formerly the
following inscription.

LXX. De^hus Nymphis Vetia mansueta, et Claudia Turbivella filia votum
solverunt libentes.

The late Dr Ca^ of Newcastle sent a copy of this inscription to the late Mr
Thoresby of Leeds, who published it in the Transactions. It is also in Camden's
Britannia. No doubt it had been found some way hereabouts, and probably near
the river: it is now at Dryburn Haugh, near the Spittle, fixed at the stable
door. Who these nymphs were, may be difficult to determine, because they were
of various sorts, and supposed to reside almost in all places both by land and
water. There is a fine address to the water nymphs in Virgil: "Nymphae,
Laurentes Nymphae, genus amnibus unde est,
"Tuque, O Tybri, tuo genitor cum flumine sancto
"Acc^pite Aeneam, et tandem arcete periclis."


Mr Warburton has published, in his Map of Northumberland, two small altars. On
the face of one is Veteres, and on the base of the other DM, for Dis Manibus on
the base of an altar. These, Mr Warburton says, were at Thirlwell Castle, or
near it; but I could not find the originals.

LXXI Imperatori Caesari Flavio Valerio Constantino Pio Nobilissimo Caesari.

This was also found here, and carried from hence by Mr Warburton, but has come
since into my possession. Mr Warburton takes some notice of it in his Map of
Northumberland, the only place I know of wherein it has ever been published
before. The inscription is cu^icus, and needs no explanation. It has been
erected to the honor of Constantine the Great. The letters in the name
Constantino, are crowded for want of room on the stone. The repetition of the
word Caesari at the beginning and end renders it very curious, and perhaps
singular in its kind. Spanheim takes notice of the like on two coins; one of
Carinus, and the other of Numerinus; but represents them as peculiar, and
contrary to the usual custom. In the letters IMR at the beginning, the R which
is very plain on the stone, is either a mistake for P, or else a designed
contraction of IMPER. for Imperatori: so we have NBL for Nobilis, and CS for
Caesar; as likewise CT for Caput or Civitas, as Manutius reads them; with
several others of the like nature, which if attended to, may in some cases
remove the suspicion of an error in the Workmen This monument must have been
erected to Constantine, after the death of his father Constantius, who died in
Britain: for the title of Imperator was not given him till then. As to the
title Nobilis or Nobilissimus Caesar, it was sometimes assumed by the Emperors
themselves, and usually given to their sons.

LXXII. -- Du -- Stireu -- Betro --

At Wall End just by Thirlwell Castle, I discovered this inscription; it is
upon a fragment of a stone, and so imperfect that it is very difficult to make
any thing of it. The stone is coarse, but the letters that remain, fair and
well enough cut. By the shape and ornament of the stone, I incline to think it
has been sepulchral. DVI put me in mind of the God Dui in a Yorkshire
inscription. If this should be so (sepulchral) I know not but the last word may
have been Bretonum; that is, Cohors quarta Bretonum; and then the word in the
second line, Stireus, may be the name of a soldier or commander of this cohort;
but this is only conjecture.

LXXIII. Jovi Optimo Maximo.

This is now a trough in a stable at Thirlwell. It seems plainly to have been
the body of an altar (the capital and base being struck off) erected to Jupiter
Optimus Maximus, but by whom cannot now be discovered.

LXXIIII. Centurio Munax solvit Votum.

At Glenwhelt, which is about a quarter of a mile south of Carr-Voran, I saw a
centurial inscription which reads Centurio Munax solvit Votum. The V that was
joined to the M was turned somewhat round at the bottom. The stone is very
long, and tapering almost pyramidal, and only square in that face which bears
the inscription. An old man here remembered it was brought from the face of the
wall near Thirlwall Castle, which very well agrees with the figure of it.

LXXV. Cohortis Primae Centurio Libonius Posuit.

This is now in the fore wall of a barn at Greenfoot, which is just on the
other side of the water, over against Glenwhelt: it is centurial too, and needs
no explicat^on.

LXXV. Centuria Munatii Maximi.

Under this number are comprehended two of the common centurial inscriptions,
the former of which was found near Walton, cast from Carr-Voran, and the latter
near Foultown, about a mile west from it.

From the Manuscripts of the late R. Gale, Esquire Extract of a Letter from Mr John
Horsley to Roger Gale, Esquire 21st July, 1729.
SIR.
Since my last to you I have received some inscriptions lately discovered in
one or two of the stations on the wall, viz Great Chesters and Carr-Voran: two
of them are of the common sepulchral kind, the other would, I believe, have
been curious, had it not been imperfect* The inscription is on the face of an
altar, under a human figure sacrificing; but the arms of the figure are broken
off, and there remains no more of the inscription than MATRI, which must have
been Matribus; the rest is lost with part of the altar, which has been ^ct^red

I find the altar with the Greek inscription still remaining at C^r^ridge.
exposed to the in^ (...) the (...) and the (...); through a gentleman that has
a considerable interest there promised me it should be taken more care of. If I
am not mistaken, that town and (...) considerable dependence upon the Duke of
Somerset; perhaps my Lord Hert^ (...) find (...) some way or other to get it
into his possession, which every body should w^ (...), that wishes well to
antiquity.

SIR, etc. JOHN HORSLEY."





On the walls about the farm-house, stand innumerable Roman remains, fragments
of Inscriptions, broken Effigies, Millstones, and other things: a bench is
raised at the door of the house, and covered with a large flat stone, on which
a small altar is cut in relief, with the inscription shown in the plate. In the
yard lays another fragment, which I conceive is inscribed to Numerianus; and in
the aperture (left to admit the light into a hay-loft) are two fragments of
inscriptions; one reversed, and rendered not legible; the other represented in
the plate, together with some small inscriptions built up in the walls of the
outhouses, and which have never before been published.



Camden says, he could not discover the ancient name of this station, no lights
being given thereto either by inscriptions or otherwise.

We passed down by Glenwelt to

BLENKINSOP CASTLE,
situate on the southern banks of the brook Tippal. By the remains, it appears
this Castle has consisted of a square tower, built on an artificial mount,
surrounded by an outward wall, at the distance only of four paces, of equal
height with the interior building; defended toward the north by a very deep
ditch and outward mound. The out wall toward the west has been removed of late
years, and lays the tower open on that side. Three vaults support the building,
one of which is 18 feet wide. This Castle is the property of J. Blenkinsop
Coulson, Esquire has been in the family of Blenkinsops for many centuries, Ralph de
Blenkinsop 1 K. Edward I. Thomas -- 39. 42. K. Edward III. William -- 10 Queen
Elizabeth.
Wallis.
and held of the Manor of Langley.

A general account of the

PICTS WALL
the most remarkable piece of Roman Antiquity in this country, may not be
disagreeable in this place, before we enter on the more populous parts of the
county. It was built as a barrier against the incursions of the northern
inhabitants, who were continually harrassing the Romans, by attacking them in
sundry places at one time, or by small bodies of ravagers, who swept away the
cattle and flocks of the country. The Romans called it Vallum Barbaricum,
Pretentatura, and Clausura. Hadrian's vallum was constructed of earth, and
bears date about the year 123 of the christian era. Severus's is supposed by
many to be of masonry, and built about the year 210; Spartian, p. 363, calls
Severus's work a Stone Wall.
but of the materials it was constructed, the Roman authorities are very vague
and doubtful. Bid says, Severus having been victorious at home in the civil
war, which was attended with many dangers, was drawn into Britain upon an
almost general revolt of the allies there; where after many conflicts, having
recovered part of the island, he thought it expedient to sever it from the
barbarous states; not with a wall, as some think, but with a rampire; for a
wall is made of stone, but a rampire, whereby camps are fortified to repel the
force of an enemy, is made of turfs cut out of the earth, and raised in the
manner of a wall, so that there be a ditch or trench in front whereout the
turfs are gotten; upon which were pitched piles of very strong timber. And so
Severus cast a great ditch, and raised a most strong rampire, strengthened with
many turrets thereupon, from sea to sea. Here we have a perfect description of
one of the Roman fortifications, which Bid by mistake attributes to Severus --
an outward ditch, a rampire of earth fortified with a strong palisado, and
guarded by turrets; from whence, with missile weapons, the defenders could
flank the vallum, and command the ditch upon an assault. The third and last
vallum is by many authors said to be the work of the Britons, aided by the
Romans, under the third consulate of Aetius, about the year 444, who upon
receiving a second embassy, complaining of the hardships they labored under
from the frequent inroads and invasions of the northern nations, and their
inability to resist them, a legion was sent into Britain, who, with the
assistance of the natives, built, (or rather rebuilt and reinstated) the wall
of stone, in length 68 miles, from the point of land at Boulness, on Solway
Firth, to the mouth of the Tyne. Gildas says, the Romans erected a wall after
their usual manner of building, not like unto the other (meaning the vallum of
earth or turf) or at the common charge of the empire, but aided by the poor and
miserable natives; this was carried from sea to sea, between the cities, which
were placed there as fortifications against the enemy. Bid adds, which wall,
that was heretofore famous and conspicuous, they, with public and private cost,
having with them the helping hand of the Britons, built eight feet broad and
twelve feet high, in a direct line from east to west." The ^auth^ have a^uted
the (...) to wrong personages, it being allowed by the most learned (...) that
the (...) was the w^rk of Severus, which opinion is sounded on (...) Severus
was a^ded in the work by the Bri^ in (...) ^pplies of necessaries for the
artificers in the progress of it.
Camden says, "it had many towers or fortresses, each about a mile distant,
which are called Castle-steeds; and within, little fenced towns, in these days
called Chesters. Also turrets standing between these, from whence the soldiers
might discover the approach of an enemy at a considerable distance, wherein the
Areani might have their stations. These Areani were spies, and men swift of
foot, to give alarms upon approaching danger. Camden says, in his time there
was a traditionary tale, that a brazen trumpet ran through the wall, by which
an alarm might be communicated from tower to tower. This report he reconciles
by an ancient service attendant on the border lands OF CORNAGE, for which to
this day a money payment issues out of many of the Northumbrian estates. This
service of Cornage was a kind of tenure in grand serjeantry, the nature of
which was to alarm the country by the sound of a horn when any invasion of the
Scots was perceived. The wall then was a formidable defense, 12 feet high,
guarded by castles and exploratory turrets. Whereas the Roman Empire, by the
providence of Dioclesian, was in the most distant marches securely fortified
with towns, castles, and burghs. All the military forces were stationed there,
so that the barbarous nations could not enter the country without opposition at
every pass. Constantine abolishing this order of garrison, removed his troops
from the marches to cities and towns not needful of armed force: so that he
left the marches open to the barbarians, ungarrisoned, and distressed the
cities with the maintenance of troops, where there was a settled peace. The
frontier stations became desolate, the soldiers addicted to theatrical
entertainments and other pleasures, became debauched. In a word, he it was who
brought the first cause of ruin to the empire.

Zosimus.
I examined the foundations of some of those castle-steads with attention,
where the military roads approached the wall, and they appeared to me the
remains of gate-ways, over which, perhaps, there were towers for their defense.
No other apertures are seen in the wall but at the stations, which is singular,
as the Romans, when they found it necessary to scour the outward frontiers, or
make a sally on a sudden attack, had no sally-ports, or other means to depart
their own fortification than by descending the wall, or making an egress at one
of these stations or military ways, which indeed seems strangely inconsistent.
It is very probable, that the Chesters were defended in the same manner as the
wall described by Bid, and perhaps the vallum was surmounted with a palisado,
of which the Corona Vallaris, I presume, is a model not to be denied. The
obtuse angles of the stations encourage an apprehension that they were guarded
by exploratory turrets.

The highest part of the wall now standing, is near Carr-Voran, where it runs
upon the brink of a cliff, to the summit of some eminences: it is there near
nine feet high, the outward facing of free stone, not totally removed. Where
the foundation was not good, or the wall had to pass a morass, it is built on
piles of oak: the interstice between the two facings of the wall, is filled
with broad thin stones, placed obliquely, and filled with run lime. Camden
says, the wall near Carr-Voran in his time was 15 feet high, and 9 feet thick,
built on both sides of apiece ashler stones; which greatly exceeds Bede's
description. At some little distance from Walwick, the remains of the turf or
earth fence, are to be seen in three distinct bankings, or rampires; the
principal one about the height of 9 feet, and 33 feet at the base: at the
distance of 24 feet to the south, is a trench 21 feet wide, from the southern
brink of which arises a rampire of earth, about 10 feet at its base, and 6 feet
in height: 16 feet distant from this is another rampire of equal height, and 19
feet at its base; these two last on the south side of the trench, forming a
perfect covered way, in breadth 16 feet. The most northern of these rampires,
in this part, is distant from the stone wall 30 paces; the present military
road passing between them.

The particular description of these fortifications of the Romans, given by Mr
Horsley, in his Brit Romans and Mr Warburton, in his Vallum Romans would be too
tedious to be inserted here, and inconsistent with my plan. Their more general
observations, together with my own, must suffice.

It is evident there have been three different Praetenturae erected here at
different times, and by different persons: the first of which was a series of
stations or forts, placed quite cross the country; and this, it is presumed,
was done chiefly by Julius Agricola, and is the most ancient of the three. Next
to this was erected Hadrian's vallum, and its appurtenances; after which the
aforesaid stations might probably go by the name of Stationes per Liniam Valli.
The last and strongest fence of all was (as most learned antiquaries agree)
built by Severus, which is a stone wall, that lays north of the rampires of
earth.

Hadrian's vallum was the second Praetentatura, and seems rather to have given
the former the name of Stations per Liniam Valli, than the wall of Severus.
What Bid says of the wall's being rebuilt afterward by the Romans, is
applicable to this: that it is carried on from town to town much in a strait
line. What belongs to this work, is the Vallum on the brink of the ditch,
having the ditch on the north, another Vallum southward, distant from the
former about 16 feet, and a large Vallum on the north of the ditch. The south
Vallum has either been made for an inner defense, in case the enemy might beat
them from any part of the principal vallum, or to protect the soldiers against
a sudden attack from the provincial Britons. These four works keep all the way
a constant regular parallelism one to another. The third Praetentatura was
Severus's stone wall. We have the express testimony of some ancient writers,
concerning this Emperor's building a wall cross our island; which will be
explained hereafter. To this work belongs a paved military way, which has
attended the wall on the south side, though it be not always parallel to it. It
sometimes coincides with Hadrian's north vallum; but whenever this is too
distant, or perhaps has been too ruinous, or in any other respect inconvenient,
the new military way (which is a reparation of the old Roman road made by order
of government) always accompanies Severus's wall, and comes up near to every
Castellum upon it; and therefore it is to be presumed the Roman military road
has been a work cotemporary with the wall, and directly for its service. It is
apprehended there has been also a lesser military way near to the wall, for the
convenience of small parties passing from turret to turret. There is also
belonging to this work, a large ditch on the north side of the wall; but there
are no remains, to prove that there was any breastwork or Agger of earth on its
northern brink. Upon this wall certain castles and turrets have been regularly
placed, and at proper distances one from another; and in order to form a
general idea of the wall, and its original state, it will be necessary to have
some knowledge of these.

All these castles, except one near Harlow Hill, (which may have been built
before the wall) are 66 feet square, the wall itself falling in with and
forming the north side of them. The intervals between these castles are not
always exactly the same, but excepting two or three at the east end of the
wall, always less than a mile, that is, from six furlongs and a half to seven.
They are constantly called castles or castle-steads by the country people,
(which seems to make it probable that the latin word has been castellum) and by
the form and use of them, seem to have been a smaller sort of a castle for a
small garrison. So likewise they call the Castra Stativa, or Aestiva usually
Chesters, from the Latin: and this is a usual criterion whereby to discover a
Roman encampment or station. These Castella seem to have stood closest, where
the stations are widest, and are by some modern authors called mile castles, or
milliary Castella. In the last edition of Camden, they are, through mistake,
said to be of a very different shape and size. Perhaps the remaining ruins of
two or three castle-steads, that do not join the walls, and of one that does,
which are all plainly of another sort, have occasioned this error. It is not
improbable, that there may also have been some exploratory castles belonging to
Hadrian's work, though there be little appearance of such at present, unless
the small remains at Chapel Houses, near Newburn, and those near Heddon on the
Wall, which are Castle-Steads, be of this sort. But be that as it will, (in
relation to Hadrian's vallum) above two-thirds of these castella are yet very
visible upon the wall of Severus, and for a long way together, especially about
the middle of the wall, they have their distinct vestiges remaining without
interruption. But the original number and situation of these castella may be
best known by the following table, taken from Mr Warburton's Vall. Romans and Mr
Horsley's Brit. Romans

Castles coinciding with the stations. Castles whose remains are visible.
Castles quite destroyed. Sum total of castles. Miles. Furlongs. Chains. From
Segedunum Wall's End to Pons Aelii Newcastle 3 5 1 1 4 1 6 Pons Aelii to
Condercum Benwell 2 0 9 0 6 2 8 Condercum to Vindobala Rutchester 6 6 5 0 9 0 9
Vindobala to Hunnum Halton Chesters 7 0 3 0 5 1 6 Hunnum to Cilurnum Walwick
Chesters 5 1 7 1 8 0 9 Cilurnum to Procolitia Carrawbrugh 3 1 8 Procolitia to
Borcovicus House-steads 4 5 3 Borcovicus to Vindolana Little Chesters 1 3 8 1 9
0 10 Vindolana to Aesica Great Chesters 3 6 4 Aesica to Magna Carr-Voran 2 1 6
0 10 0 10 Magna to Amboglanna Burdoswald 2 6 0 Amboglanna to Petriana
Cambeckfort 6 2 8 0 5 4 9 Petriana to Aballaba Scaleby Castle 2 6 6 Aballaba to
Congavata Stanwicks 5 1 9 Congavata to Axelodunum Brugh 3 3 4 1 1 12 14
Axelodunum to Gabrosentum Drumburgh 4 0 9 Gabrosentum to Tunnocelum Boulness 3
4 1 4 57 20 81 68 3 3

The small turrets (in Latin, Turres) have been more generally and entirely
ruined than the Castella; so that it is hard to find three of them any where
together with certainty. The distance between two, where it was thought surest,
was measured, and found to be near 14 chains, or 308 yards. It therefore seems
most probable, that there have been four of these between every two Castella,
at equal distances from the Castella and one another; for thus five intervals
will be found between every two Castella, each consisting of 14 chains; which
five intervals will just amount to 7 furlongs, the usual or mean distance
between the Castella. And this scheme answers with a good deal of exactness to
the situation of all the turrets, that have yet been discovered. These
exploratory turrets, or watch towers, seem to have been only about four yards
square at the bottom; and by placing sentinels at each of these, who must have
been within call of one another, the communication quite along the wall might
be kept up, without having recourse to the fiction of a sounding trumpet, or
pipes laid under ground, from one end of the wall to the other, though this
seems to be credited by Mr Echard and others.

There have also been several larger forts or stations upon the wall, or near
it, whose distances from each other will be particularly shown hereafter, and
may be seen in the foregoing table.

Whilst I am giving a general view of the ancient state of the wall, it may not
be improper to observe, that there have been 18 of these stations upon it, with
17 intervals between them: the wall is in length 68 miles and three furlongs;
this divided by 17, gives the mean distance, which is very little more than
four miles: but the stations are much closer and thicker at each end, and in
the middle, than in the intermediate spaces, between the middle and the
extremities; which is not disagreeable to reason, or the usual rules of
fortification. Besides, if according to the common tradition, the inroads of
the enemy were in, or near the middle, it was necessary to make it stronger,
and guard it more; especially since the advanced stations were fewest, if any,
where those upon the wall were closest.

This wall runs generally upon the top or ridge of the higher ground, keeping a
descent on the north or enemy's side, and has thereby both a greater strength,
and better prospect; for the sake of which, it often forms an angle. In
Hadrian's vallum it is different, but both in the main seem to have been
carried on pretty much in a straight line, from station to station: there is
indeed now and then a gentle turn in crossing a rivulet, or at a station, and
sometimes too in passing a height; but this last happens usually at coming
within sight of a station, and perhaps in order to reach it. Hadrian's vallum
keeps more in a straight line than Severus's wall, as much as the nature of the
ground and other circumstances would admit. It is plain, a military way has
constantly attended Severus's wall, and no doubt was made at the same time with
it: this always keeps nigh to the wall, and never coincides with the north
vallum of Hadrian, but when the two works approach one another. When they part,
and go at a distance one from the other, the way leaves the vallum to accompany
the stone wall; but where the wall passes along the brink of precipices, the
way does not follow every little turn, but in these lesser windings, is like
the string of a bow, and keeps upon the sides of the hill, in order to avoid,
as much as possible, the sudden ascent or descent in passing from hill to hill,
and yet so as at the same time never to be at a great distance from the wall.
The rule therefore by which this way seems to have been conducted, is in
general by keeping pretty close to the wall, and and at the same time going on
a line from Castellum to Castellum, and shunning the ascent of hills as much as
possible. And as the smaller military way went from turret to turret close by
the wall, so this greater way attended the Castella, falling in with Hadrian's
north vallum (which Mr Warburton conceives was the old military way, though
north of the ditch, vallums, and covered way) when that did not take too much
out of the road, or was not too ruinous to be made use of. The old military
way, as Mr Warburton calls it, has been the best and most direct passage from
station to station, and when the line of the stations fetched a compass,
another distinct military way, and shorter, was laid; not from one station to
the next, but between two stations more remote.

This was certainly done in Northumberland, from Walwick to Carr-Voran; and I
have reason to apprehend the like was done also in Cumberland, from Carr-Voran,
or at least from Cambeck, to Stanwicks. The military way of Severus seems to
have been well paved, but not raised so high as what Mr Warburton calls the old
military way.

Mr Warburton says, he was not able to discover any gates in this wall, or
passes through it, except just in the stations, or where the grand military
roads have crossed it: where the Ermin-street (not the Watling-street, as Mr
Horsley calls it) passes the wall near Halton, there is a visible track of a
square gate, and the ditch belonging to the wall manifestly goes about the half
of it, the inner half not being now so visible. This gate seems to be much of
the same size with one of the Castella, 66 feet square; only these are wholly
within the wall, and the gate half within, and half without. Mr Warburton says,
he expected to have found some other gates of the same form, or some passes
through the wall in the Castella, but could not. The other two military ways
which cross the wall, seem to have passed at the stations of Carr-Voran and
Stanwicks.

What the several dimensions of the walls, ditches, Vallums, and military ways
have originally been, may not be easy to determine with exactness; but the
length of Severus's wall is certainly known, it having been three times
measured of late; once by Mr Gordon, a second time by order of Mr Warburton,
and a third by the Board of Ordnance, A. D. 1750; and as there is little
difference between the three measures, it is a proof there is no material
mistake in either. Mr Gordon gives a summary account of his work in these
words: The number of stations taken in my actual survey from sea to sea, were
in all 159, wherein I made Severus's wall the principal line of the said
stationary distances; the total amount of which was 73959 Roman paces, equal to
73 Roman miles and 959 Roman paces, equal to 68 English miles and 169 paces.

The number of stations (or places of observation) upon the same principal
stationary line, in the survey Mr Warburton ordered to be made, were 164; the
length of the wall, 68 miles and 3 furlongs, including the length of the
stations at each end. In this account English measured miles and furlongs are
retained, in order to make it more plain and intelligible. It is easy to reduce
an English mile to a Roman one, by considering that 1000 Roman paces, that is,
5000 Roman feet, make a Roman mile; and allowing for the inequality between the
Roman foot and the English, an English mile is nearly equal to a Roman mile and
one-thirtieth; so that 13 English miles will be much about 14 Roman.

From what has been said, it appears to be a mistake to suppose Hadrian's
vallum longer than Severus's wall, as Mr Gordon seems to have done. It is
certain the former has gone more in a right line than the latter, and it seems
probable, that Severus's wall has at each end been carried further than
Hadrian's: so that the very exact agreement, which Mr Gordon supposes between
the actual survey of the wall, and the account given of it by the Romans
themselves, is in a great measure imaginary. For according to Spartian,
Hadrian's vallum was 80 Roman miles long; but the actual mensuration cannot
stretch Severus's wall up to 73, and Hadrian's vallum is certainly two or three
miles shorter, upon account of its being straighter. There had just been 81
milliary Castella upon Severus's wall, and consequently just 80 intervals
between the castella. So that if the Romans, in a general way, called every
interval a mile, one with another, and Hadrian's vallum was near the same
length with Severus's, this might be looked upon as a plausible reason, why the
historian should say it was 80 miles long.

According to Bid, the wall was eight feet in breadth, and twelve feet in
height (as probably there was a parapet or palisado at the top, so this would
first go to ruin; Bede's measure is most likely to be exclusive of these): the
thickness of Severus's wall has been measured several times of late, and by
several persons, without any great variation; and by the measures taken in
different parts, it seems not to have been every where equal. Near Harlow-hill,
it measured seven feet four inches near the foundation; and at another place,
where the wall is two yards high, it was at that height about seven feet thick;
which shows that the usual breadth near the foundation was a Roman pace and an
half. Near Boulness on the Solway Firth, at a place called Kirklands, it
measures near nine feet: and there seems to be an obvious reason why it should
be stronger here; for at full sea, the water has certainly flowed up to it.

The breadth of Hadrian's ditch, at a limestone quarry west of Harlow-hill,
where the original breadth and depth is apparent, and may be exactly
ascertained, it measured near nine feet deep and eleven feet over; it was wider
at the top than at the bottom, the sides being sloping. The ditch belonging to
Severus's wall, was in all places both wider and deeper than that which
belonged to Hadrian's vallum.

The distances between the several parts of these works seem, some of them, to
have all the way been constantly the same; others of them vary. Among these
variable distances, is that between the two walls, which sometimes come very
near within a chain of each other, but at other times are at 50 chains
distance. The distance also between Severus's wall, and the military way
belonging to it, is, as I have said, not always the same, though generally
about two or three chains: upon some particular occasions, it may run at the
distance of five or six chains from it, or considerably more, as between the
two Castella west of Shown Sheels, where the distance of the military way from
the wall, is at one part 15 chains or more; but the distance between Hadrian's
Vallum, ditch, and north mound, are every where the same, and so are constantly
parallel one to the other. The north mound is about 24 feet on a medium from
the ditch; and of the two mounds of the Vallum, one arises on the very brink of
the ditch, and the other is about the distance of 16 feet. The materials of
which these fortifications were constructed, are certainly known. Hadrian's is
of earth, though sometimes mixed with stone; but I could discover no appearance
of timber. Severus's was of free stone, as is certain from what is yet visible
of it: in some places, where the foundation was not good, they seem to have
made use of oaken piles. The inner part of this wall is filled after a
remarkable manner; the filling stones are generally pretty large, and mostly
broad and thin. These are always set edge-ways, and usually not erect, but
obliquely: upon these the running mortar or cement, has been poured, and by
this contrivance (together with the great strength of their cement, in most
places) the whole has been bound as firm, as a rock. People are much at a loss
to know, from whence the Romans had the stones which they used in building the
wall in several parts, and for other occasions. In some places, particularly in
Cumberland, no free stone is to be had, but from a very great distance; and in
other places, where some might have been had, the Romans seem not to have used
it, but stone of a very different grit. This appears more particularly in the
station, at the end of the wall, near Cousins House; where the Roman stone is
of a very coarse grit, so as to be easily distinguished from others: and both
the learned authors before me, say, they were assured, that there was no such
stone, nor any quarry of such a grit, in the neighborhood. The devil's arrows
at Boroughbridge, in Yorkshire, are yet of a coarser nature, and seem to be
artificial stone. The composition of the devil's arrows prove them to be
artificial, pieces of brick being intermixed with the small pebbles and
granules of spar. They appear to have been formed in a mould, the tops of the
columns being channelled as the flowing in of the liquidated composition might
be conceived to occasion.
Some particular places, from whence they were furnished with stone, may be
guessed at with probability. Such, for instance, are the rocks between Walwick
and Carraw, through part of which Hadrian's ditch was cut: and in the late
edition of Camden, it is supposed, that stones were got at Hellbeck Scar, on
the Gelt, and Leugh Cragg; the truth of which Mr Horsley proves in his remarks
on the inscriptions there.

Some have wondered, how this work could be carried on, in the face of the
enemy, supposing the wall to be the very boundary at the time it was built: but
there appears no reason to entertain this opinion; for when the Romans had
advanced their conquests in Scotland, beyond the Firth of Tay, they only
fortified the other isthmus, between Forth and Clyde, which might be 30 miles,
or more, south from the utmost extent of their conquest, as appears from
Tacitus's account of that matter: so that they kept their Pretenturae, or
series of fortifications, cross the country, a good way within the bounds of
their conquest; and probably when the walls were erected here, the Romans were
possessed of part of the country beyond them, and of son^ advanced stations
there, as may be concluded from the inscriptions yet extant; so that this wall
might probably not be built, till Severus had driven the enemy so far to the
north, as to render them incapable of giving any interruption to the Romans,
when carrying on the work.

At which end they began the several Pretenturae, may be another enquiry. The
Pretentura of stations, was most probably begun from the west; because Julius
Agricola first conquered the western parts of the northern country: and
Hadrian, I believe, in erecting his vallum, began there too, as seems probable
from the inscriptions. Severus, it is likely, did so too with his wall, which
is much confirmed by the situation of the Castella, that are at a regular
distance, if we begin our reckoning from the west; but if we begin to reckon
from the east end of the wall, the first Castellum appears within less than
three furlongs of the Station there.

It is the opinion of some ingenious persons, that both the walls, with all
their appurtenances, and the Stations upon them, were the work of the same
time, and the same person; and that the one is only an interior Vallum or fosse
to the other. But that this was not the original design of the Vallum, though
it might be so used by Severus, appears plain from the testimonies of the Roman
historians; nor does this notion suit the circumstances of the work itself, as
they yet appear. The coincidence of Severus's military way, with the north
Vallum without the ditch; the exact parallelism of all the parts of Hadrian's
work, and the very unequal distances, that are between the two walls
themselves, are convincing arguments, that the walls have been erected at
different times. It is also the opinion of some, to whose judgment I pay a
great regard, that Severus's wall was built upon the same foundation with
Hadrian's principal Vallum. This conjecture is supported by plausible reasons;
for if the north eminence or line has been an old military way, the supposition
of a rampart, and ditch to the north of that way, would remove the difficulty
of the soldiers being exposed to the enemy, whilst they were on their march,
since then the way would have been defended on both sides. Again, the stations
too, as well as this supposed military way, are generally (though not always)
included between the two walls and ditches; (or between the works of Severus
and Hadrian, as they are now called) the stone wall of Severus frequently
falling in, within the north rampart of the station, as the turf wall of
Hadrian does with the southern.

Besides this, the advantageous ground is often left on the north side of
Hadrian's Vallum, which in one place, near Halton Chesters, is just carried
round the south skirt of a tumulus, or small hill, making a sudden turn,
seemingly, with a design to avoid passing over it. Now if this was intended to
be the most northerly fortification, and to be a fence against the northern
enemies, this conduct seems to offend against right reason, as well as against
the rule of Vigetius, that care should be taken to have no neighboring hill
higher than the fortification; which being seized by the enemy, might be of ill
consequence. And it must be owned, that the southern prospect of Hadrian's
work, and the defense on that side, is generally better than on the north;
whereas the northern prospect and defense, have been principally or solely
taken care of in the wall of Severus. Such considerations as these have induced
some to believe, that what now goes by the name of Hadrian's work, was
originally designed for a fence against any sudden insurrection of the
provincial Britons, and particularly of the Brigantes; whilst others look upon
it as a Fossa Interior, for the soldiers to retreat to, after they had been
beaten off, by the northern enemy from their principal Vallum. Both agree in
this, that Hadrian must have built a more northerly Vallum, than those which
now bear his name; and that this must have stood upon the same track, where
Severus afterward erected his wall. This, according to their opinion, would
render the whole fortification rational, and regular; whereas, without this, it
must have been in many places very weak, and open to the inroads of the
Caledonians. But on the other hand, plausible conjectures and speculative
arguments, must give way to stronger proofs on the contrary side; though at
this distance of time, we cannot see into the designs of the Romans, nor
account for every particular part of their conduct in this affair. Mr Horsley
conceives, that what is now called Hadrian's north Agger or Vallum, was the
most ancient military way, leading from Station to Station; and that Hadrian's
work, after this, was guided and limited by it, as it keeps a constant
parallelism to it. The north Agger, considered as a military way, is conducted
according to the Roman art and rules, in every part of it. It is carried on, in
the shortest line, from Station to Station; and this, without doubt, is the
true reason why it runs so much upon the southern skirts of the northern hills,
the shortest line leading that way. This is particularly remarkable, in the
small hill near Halton Chesters, before observed. The direct line of the way
would have lead over the hill; but to avoid climbing it, a small turn is made
to carry it round the skirt; and it passes on the south side rather than the
north; because, this is the shorter and more convenient way to the Station, to
which it is tending. The other parts of Hadrian's work, keep their due distance
and parallelism, bending exactly in the same manner, as the north Agger or
Vallum does, and so running at a few yards distance to the south of the hill.
In a word, the north Vallum, or as Mr Horsley terms it, the old military way,
keeps just such a course, and runs through such grounds, as one would expect
such a Roman way should do. And if it was determined, that Hadrian's work
should strictly accompany this, and keep all along an exact parallelism to it,
they must then by this rule, be tied down to these seeming irregularities and
misconduct, which appear in this work. It may be said, that they might at least
have made the fortification on the north side of the military way, if there was
no other more northerly fence; but to this it is replied, that it was scarce
practicable to carry on the work on the north side of the way, so as to be near
and parallel to it; and such is the situation of the ground, that if they had
done so, it would have been generally weaker than it is, running along the very
sides of the hills; unless they had made it where Severus's wall stands, and
where, as has been said, some suppose Hadrian's principal Vallum to have stood;
but that in fact Hadrian had no Vallum here, and that the whole of his work was
comprehended, in what still goes by his name, appears most probable from the
following considerations.

Among all the historians that mention the building of such a wall by Severus,
there is not the least hint to be met with, of his building it upon the same
foundation with Hadrian's Vallum. The expression of Spartian, "apud Vallum,"
looks the likest it of any; but it is certainly more agreeable to this
expression, to suppose it to be only near the Vallum, and not directly upon it:
and to build a stone wall upon the foundation of an earth one, does not appear
very probable. If I am not greatly mistaken, it would be more laborious and
expensive to build such a wall upon the ruinous Vallum, than to erect it upon
ground that was entirely clear; and there is not at present the least evidence
of such a Vallum; yet it seems hard to suppose, that the mound of earth has
been every where so entirely removed, as to leave no visible remains of it, any
where, along the whole tract of the wall. Again, Severus's wall passes over
large spaces, where the erecting of an earthen rampart seems almost
impracticable: in some places it passes, for a considerable way, along the tops
of precipices, and sometimes, down the steep declivities of a bare rock; and in
these places there is no ditch. In one place too, the wall is carried through a
small morass, near Bleatarn, in Cumberland. Here, it is presumed, the
foundation is formed by piles of wood; but Hadrian's work shuns it, and runs at
ten chains distance from the wall of Severus. No circumstances appear in the
two works of Severus's wall and Hadrian's Vallum, that argue them to be done at
the same time, or to have any necessary relation one to the other. The constant
parallelism of the north Vallum, the ditch, and the two southern Vallums of
Hadrian's work, is a shrewd argument of their mutual relation: but this
parallelism does not hold in the wall of Severus. Where they are most distant,
there are no visible branches of any military way leading from one to the
other, whereby the communication between them might be more easily preserved.
In some places there is a morass between the two walls, which must make a
retreat from one wall to the other inconvenient, and is improper for a body of
men to stand on. The military way that now attends Severus's wall, is agreed to
have been made at the same time with the wall itself: if then Hadrian's
principal Vallum was on the same ground, where the wall of Severus has stood;
how comes it to pass, that there has been no military way accompanying it? If
Hadrian's work is supposed to have been designed for a defense against an
attack from the south, difficulties of the same kind will arise, perhaps not
easy to be removed; for sometimes the advantageous ground is left on the south,
where it might easily have been otherwise ordered, if their design had been
only to secure themselves against assailants from the south, and the course of
their fortification had not been previously determined by some other rule. In
one place the Vallum runs between higher ground on each side. Besides, if it
was designed against an enemy from the south, the ditch is on the wrong side,
being to the north of two ramparts: and why may we not suppose the most
southerly rampart to have been, either a slight fence against an attack from
the south, or an interior defense to retreat to, if the ditch should be carried
by an assault from the north? There was no occasion to draw such a line of
defense, in order to prevent their making an attack upon the Stations, for they
are stronger on all sides than this Vallum. It is to be observed, that at each
end of the wall, Severus's work is continued beyond Hadrian's. This part then
of Severus's wall at least, was not erected upon Hadrian's Vallum; and yet Mr
Horsley says he see no difference between the appearance of this work here, and
in the other parts of it.

The legionary soldiers were the persons employed in building this wall, as
they were generally in all considerable works of this nature; and that the
three Legions, which were at that time in Britain, built Antoninus's wall in
Scotland, is clear from a great number of inscriptions found in that wall,
which expressly declare it. The 20th Legion had no concern in building the wall
of Severus; it was wholly done by the other two; namely, the Legio Secunda
Augusta, and Legio Sexta Victrix; for these Legions only (as far as appears)
erected the inscriptions, which will be given in the course of this work. If
therefore 20 Cohorts, the number in two Legions, built the whole wall, it will
be easy to determine the share which belonged to each Cohort: for there being
81 Castella upon the whole wall, and so 80 milliary intervals; just four of
these intervals would fall to the share of every cohort. It may not be amiss to
try, how far we can find out the several Cohorts, belonging to the respective
Legions, and on what part of the wall each Legion and Cohort seems to have been
employed.

If we divide the wall into four equal parts, the 1st and 3d quarters reckoning
from the east, seem to have been built by the Legio Secunda Augusta, and the
2d, and last, by the Legio Sexta Victrix; for at the east end of the wall, we
have express mention of the Legio Secunda Augusta, in the stone at Denton,
which is about six miles from the end of it; and we have six, if not seven
Cohorts of this Legion, mentioned in those centurial stones found in this
quarter, viz. I, II, III, V, VIII, IX; besides there is a seeming appearance of
the 6th at Wallbottle. This quarter reaches near to Halton Sheels, or to the
next Castellum east of it; which is above two miles east of Halton Chesters. In
the second quarter, which reaches from hence, to the second Castellum west of
the House-steeds, we have the Legio Sexta Victrix, on a centurial stone, about
four or five miles from the beginning of this quarter; and at House-steeds and
Little Chesters, just at the end of it, the same legion is mentioned upon two
altars and two bricks: but the Legio Secunda Augusta does not occur in this
space, at least not on any stone that can be relied on. There are no Cohorts
upon any stones in this place, distinct and visible, except the 6th and 10th;
but no doubt several others have been mentioned upon the many stones found
here, though the numbers are now quite effaced. In the third quarter, which
reaches to Old Wall, near Watch Cross, in the county of Cumberland, we have
Legio Secunda Augusta mentioned again several times. Indeed the Legio Sexta
Victrix occurs upon a stone in Cambeck fort, but probably it has been inserted
in the face of that fort, when it was repaired upon some other occasion. The
Cohorts of this space, are the 1st, 6th, 7th, and 9th, which I believe have all
belonged to the Legio Secunda Augusta. In the last quarter, which I believe was
built by the Legio Sexta Victrix, I meet with no centurial stones, except one
at Draw-dikes, which seems to have belonged to a cohort of another kind. The
Legio Sexta Victrix is upon fine stone at Carlisle, but no particular Cohorts
appear in this space.

Julius Caesar, when he made his first descent upon Britain, brought over only
two Legions with him, which were the 7th and 10th. This latter was his
favorite legion, and both together made but an army of 12,000 foot at the
most. The horse belonging to these legions never reached this island, and the
foot the same year were transported back again to Gaul.

The next year, when Caesar made his second descent, he brought over five
Legions with him, and 2000 horse, which seem to be all the horse that belonged
to these Legions. There is nothing in the history whereby it can be known, what
Legions these were, except the 7th, which is mentioned by Caesar. These
likewise returned back again to Gaul, the same year in which they came over, as
the two Legions had done the year before.

During the three succeeding reigns of Augustus, Tiberius, and Caligula, it is
plain the Romans had no footing in Britain.

Under Claudius (who applied himself in good earnest to the reduction of
Britain) a considerable army was sent to this island; the Emperor himself
afterward coming over in person. This army consisted of Roman Legions and
other Auxiliaries, though the historians have not told us expressly what they
were, either as to their number or names: but considering the small success of
Julius Caesar before, and the much greater conquests this army made, it is
highly reasonable to suppose it was superior in number to the greater of
Caesar's, which consisted (if the Legions were complete) of above 30,000 men.
It is presumed, that the army sent over by Claudius consisted of four Legions,
with their proper auxilia, and the usual number of horse belonging both to one
and the other; and this army so composed would amount to more than 50,000 men.
Any conjecture, as to the number or names of the auxiliary Cohorts, must be
uncertain and doubtful: but both the number and names of the Legions may be
certainly collected from some incidental passages of Tacitus. They were the
second, called Augusta, the 9th, 14th, and the 20th, usually called Valens
Victrix; each of which are mentioned in the inscriptions inserted in this work.

As we have no evidence from history, that any new Legions were transported by
Nero, but that the same continued, which had been sent over at first by
Claudius; so it is plain, from the relation of the battle with Queen Boadicea,
that the four Legions last mentioned were here under Nero, in whose reign this
battle happened: for according to Tacitus's account of this matter, the 9th
Legion was surprised and destroyed by this Queen. The 14th, and the Vexillarii
of the 20th, were in the battle, and the second, though in Britain, was absent
from the fight, through the fault of Poenius Posthumus, their Commander, who
fell upon his own sword, when he heard of the glory the troops had acquired in
that engagement.

Of these four Legions, one continued very late, and another to the last. The
Legio XX. VV. though it continued very long here, yet it seems to have been
recalled before the Romans had entirely abandoned the island; for it is not
mentioned in the Notitia. The Legio Secunda Augusta is mentioned there, and so
seems to have continued here to the last, and to have been the only one that
was kept here during the whole time: for though the Legio Sexta Victrix did
also continue to the last, yet this came not over till the reign of the Emperor
Hadrian. The ninth Legion seems to have dwindled away entirely, or else the
small remains of it were incorporated with the Legion sent over by Hadrian.

It is remarkable, that the Legions which continued long in Britain, seem for
the most part to have been jointly employed in carrying on the most
considerable works or wars that have been in this island. Thus they were
jointly engaged in building the wall in Scotland, and most or all of them, in
erecting those in the north of England: and the Legions and legionary Cohorts
seem to have been the only soldiers who were employed usually in erecting forts
or raising fences. Auxiliary Cohorts appear by inscriptions to have been
concerned in some other buildings; but forts and fences seem to have been the
province of the Legionaries, agreeable to that passage in Tacitus, the
Praefectus Castrorum, and legionary Cohorts, who had been left among the
Silures for erecting fortifications. Thus among all the inscriptions found upon
the Roman wall in Scotland, there is but one that mentions any auxiliary Cohort
as having a hand in the work, but always either a Legion or a Vexillation of a
Legion. And I take it for granted, that all the centurial inscriptions upon the
face of the wall in the north of England, and which probably were inserted
there at the time of building it, respect only the Legions and legionary
Cohorts, and yet the Stations upon the wall, as well as most of them elsewhere,
were garrisoned by the Auxiliaries. The Legio Secunda Augusta came into Britain
in the reign of Claudius, under the command of Vespasian, and continued in it
as long as the Romans had the least footing here. In Hadrian's time this Legion
was in Cumberland, at Netherby and Beau-castle, and in the western side of
Northumberland, and so probably had their share in the work of Hadrian's
Vallum; or when in the advanced Stations of Netherby and Beau-castle, they
might be posted there to secure those who were employed in that work. In the
beginning of the reign of Antoninus Pius, they were most probably upon the
eastern part of the Roman wall in Northumberland. In Severus's time, it is very
probable, they were employed upon the wall that goes by his name.

The Legio Sexta Victrix is usually thus expressed, LEG. VI. V. to which is
often added, P. F. that is, Pia fidelis; for that it is to be read so rather
than Pia felix. It is certain, from a great number of inscriptions and other
testimonies, that this Legion was a long time in Britain; and it is equally
certain, that it came not over so soon as the others. The account of this
Legion whilst in Britain, must be taken chiefly from such hints as ancient
inscriptions afford us. I do not find it is mentioned in any inscription
belonging to the southern parts of this island. It is probable that they made
no stop in the south, but marched directly by the usual rout to the west end of
the Vallum, and had their share in raising that work. We have several
inscriptions on the wall, and near it, in Northumberland and Cumberland,
wherein this Legion is mentioned; as at Stanwicks, Cambeck fort, Burdoswald,
Little Chesters, House-steeds, and other places; some of which, from the
character and other circumstances, may be supposed as ancient as Hadrian's
reign; the most of them do certainly belong to the time of Severus. In the
former part of the reign of Antoninus Pius, they were in Scotland, and had
their share in building the wall there. Probably they marched along our
Watling-street in the north, either to Scotland or from it, or both; and in
their march the sepulchral inscription might be erected for a soldier of this
Legion which was found near Richester, in Northumberland. Whether this Legion
had taken up its stated quarters at York, before the reign of Antoninus Pius,
and continued there between the time of building the Vallum and their march
into Scotland, I cannot certainly determine: however, after their return from
Scotland, and about the middle of Antoninus Pius's reign, they were settled at
York; for Ptolemy places them there: and there, I believe, they statedly
quartered, till the very last, though they marched at a distance from this
place, upon special occasions. Thus, for instance, this Legion was certainly
employed upon the stone wall of Severus, as appears, from several of the
centurial inscriptions found on that wall, which bear the name of this Legion:
perhaps several of its Cohorts might be dispersed into some neighboring
Stations, though York was still the place of its stated quarters. Thus,
according to Mr Gale's conjecture, by the Legio Gordiana, in the inscriptions
at Lanchester, in the county of Durham, we are to understand the Legio Sexta
Victrix. The first Cohort of this Legion must then, in all probability, have
been detached at that time from the Legion at York, to assist in building the
works mentioned in these inscriptions. This was in the reign of Gordian, and so
after this Legion was settled at York.

The Legion called Valeria, or Valeriana, according to some, or Valens Victrix,
according to most, is another of these Legions, which were at the first sent
over into Britain by Claudius. In the Roman inscriptions it is thus expressed,
LEG. XX. VV. but Critics and Antiquaries are not well agreed in reading the
former V; some will have it to stand for Valens, and others for Valeria or
Valeriana. The motions and employments of this Legion, seem to have been much
the same with the Legio Secunda Augusta. It is probable they were jointly
concerned in erecting Hadrian's Vallum, though we have no inscriptions to prove
it. That this Legion was employed in building the Roman wall in Scotland, under
Antoninus Pius, is clear from several inscriptions found on the wall,
mentioning this Legion or their Vexillatio, and the quantity of the wall which
they built. If the altar found at Benwell fort was erected by a Centurion of
this Legion, at the same time as the other was, by a Centurion of the Legio
Secunda Augusta, this legion must probably have been thereabout in the former
part of Antoninus Pius's reign, either doing somewhat upon Hadrian's Vallum, or
in their march against the Caledonians.

One would expect, that this Legion bore its part in building Severus's wall;
but among all the centurial inscriptions upon the face of this wall, there is
not one of this Legion, or of any Cohort said to belong to it: and yet it
appears by an inscription, that this Legion was employed in some work at the
Station at Whitley Castle, the ancient Alone or Alione.

In the beginning of the fifth century, about the year 402, Theodosius the
Second, when but two years old, was made Emperor, and joined to Arcadius, and
Honorius. This Theodosius reigned half a century; and it is evident, that in
his reign the Romans quite abandoned this island. It must have been much about
this time those usurpers started up in Britain. Echard says, the inhabitants
and troops that were quartered in Britain, fearing least the Vandals should
pass over the sea, and subdue them with the rest, revolted from their obedience
to Honorius, and set up one Mark, whom they declared Emperor: but they soon
deprived him of his life and dignity, and placed Gratian in his room, who was a
countryman of their own. Within four months they murdered him too, and
conferred the sovereignty upon one Constantine, not so much in respect to his
courage or quality, for he was a very inconsiderable man in the army; but in
regard to his name, which they looked on as fortunate; hoping he would do as
much as Constantine the Great had done, who was of the same name, and had been
advanced to the imperial dignity in the same island. This new prince,
immediately after his promotion, passed over into Gaul, and taking with him the
very flower of the British youth, so utterly exhausted the military force of
the island, that it was wholly broken, and the island left naked to new
invaders.

Britain being thus drained and exhausted both of the Roman soldiers and its
own youth, was, according to Gildas, and Bid after him, much harrassed by the
Picts and Scots, and other invaders; upon which they applied to the Romans for
help, who sent a Legion to their assistance. But the last certain account of
the Romans' footing in Britain, I believe, is in the Notitia, if it hold true,
that this part of it which relates to Britain, was wrote before the middle of
the fifth century, or under the reign of Theodosius the Second, at which time
the Roman force was much abated, though their soldiers were not yet finally
withdrawn from Britain; for besides a considerable number of auxiliary forces,
there were yet two Legions at least remaining in this island; and the Romans
seem still to have been in possession of that part of the island which lays to
the South of Severus's wall, though of no part beyond it. The Stations upon the
wall were well garrisoned at that time; but excepting the Kentish coast, and
the northern frontiers, the garrisons in the other parts of Britain were very
thin, and widely dispersed, and the rest of England was entirely naked. On the
other hand, it is certain (to use Echard's words) that under the reign of
Valentinian the Third, Africa, Spain, Great Britain, and almost all Gaul,
Germany, and Illyricum, were dismembered from the western Empire. Now
Valentinian the Third began to reign with Theodosius about the year 425, and
died in 455; so that we may safely affirm, that in the beginning of the fifth
century, the Roman Power was become low in Britain; and near the middle of that
century, the Romans had entirely quitted the island.

I have dwelt long on this subject; Mr Warburton in his preface says, All
antiquaries that I have conversed with, who have made the accustomed tour of
Europe, allow the Picts Wall to be the most superb remains of Roman grandeur,
that is now to be seen on this side the Alps." And he adds, "The venerable
remains of Monasteries and Castles, with other Monuments of Antiquity, are not
to be equalled in any nation or country whatsoever.

From the Manuscripts of the late Roger Gale, Esquire Extract of a Letter from Mr
John Horsley to Roger Gale, Esquire 24th March, 1728-9.
Had we an accurate Map of England, and a faithful and impartial account of
matter of fact, where there are stations and military ways, and where there are
none, I am fully convinced that many difficulties might be removed, and the
time and situation of several ancient places be determined with a great deal of
certainty, about which at present we are much at a loss.

This was the method I took in the northern counties; first, to be well assured
from occular demonstration, where there were any visible remains or certain
proofs of Roman settlements, and then to compare this account with that in the
Itinerary and Notitia Imperii. The success of this method was not only
answerable to my expectation, but vastly beyond it. -- After this manner I have
settled, I humbly think beyond exception, the Stations per Lineam Valli, and
the 10th and part of the 2d Iters in Antoninus, and at the same time perfectly
reconciled that Itinerary and the Notitia Imperii to one another.

JOHN HORSLEY."


Extract of a Letter from Mr Horsley to Roger Gale, Esquire 23d June 1729.
SIR,
I acknowledge the receipt of another most agreeable letter from you, which
came last night, and return you my hearty thanks for it. I am sorry that you,
who have so many affairs upon your hands, should give yourself the least
concern to make a speedy return to mine: I only beg leave to communicate to you
any thing that occurs, and that you would at any time honor me with a line or
two at your convenience and leisure.

I have nothing more to add with relation to the antiquated Cup, unless it be
to beg leave to ask, whether the size, shape, and loose bottom, if any at all,
The bottom, which had been of thinner metal than the rest, was consumed and
worn out by time and rust.

R. G.
favor its being a common Patera? If it be admitted a Patera, I despair of
seeing any conjecture more plausible and ingenious than your own.

I have sent you enclosed a hasty sketch of my scheme concerning the Stations
ad Lineam Valli, that you may better understand what I have said with respect
to the places mentioned on this scale; your great candor will excuse any marks
of haste and inadvertence. I take the stations rigorously upon the line of the
wall, to end with Tunocellum, and other five to have been a kind of secondary
series proceeding regularly from east to west, viz. Glanoventa (Lanchester)
Alone (Whitley Castle confirmed by an old inscription) Brementuracum (Brampton
if not Old Perith) Olenacum (Old Carlisle) and Virosidum (Elenborough); or if
we suppose a transposition of the two last places, then Virosidum may be Old
Carlisle upon the river Wiza, and Olenacum, Elenborough upon the river Elen.

I hope to get all the stones that have been discovered at Riechester into my
possession, and then I shall re-examine them all, with the greatest care and
attention I can, and if I discover any thing more, I shall be sure to acquaint
you with it.

You must be right with respect to the Vardii, and therefore I thank you again
for having been my Apollo.

The altar with the inscription DEAE SYRIAE is yet at Connington, but the
latter part of the inscription, together with the upper stratum of the stone,
is quite gone. I guessed it might be Gallorum, but Vardiorum will suit the
vacant interval better, if that can be relied on as exactly represented.

My representation of the inscription at Lanchester, was not in my last so just
as it ought to be.

VARDIOR / -- REQ I cannot find the copy, though I have sought for it, and
therefore may not be exact in the position of the letters, but the upper line
which goes before in the inscription, is upon one piece of an altar, and the
lower line with the following part on another piece, that was lying separate
from the other: when I put them together, they tallied with so much seeming
exactness, that I concluded they had made one and the same altar; but if we
suppose them to have been fragments of two different altars, the difficulty you
mention will entirely vanish.

I am much obliged to you for your account of the Military Ways: if I can make
any improvements upon it, I shall presume to communicate them to you.

Salmon I have, but found it was not safe to follow or trust him too far.

I think it was in the Monthly Atlas, that I read of a Roman inscription at St
John's chapel at Shattesbury, in the wall; but though I use that author, as
having made a collection or abstract of some principal matters, yet he has no
great authority or esteem with.

SIR, Yours, etc. JOHN HORSLEY.


Stationes ad Lineam Valli.
Segedunum Station at the east end of the wall near Cousins's House. Pons Aelii
Newcastle, where there must have been a considerable bridge over the river
Tyne, upon the bank of which the ancient station has been, and here Hadrian's
Vallum has terminated. Condercum Station on Be^well Hill, confirmed now by an
inscription. Vindobala Rutchester. Hunnum Chesters near Halton and Audon
Castle, confirmed by several inscriptions. Cilurnum Chesters near Walwick and
Chollerton, favored by a sculpture. Procolitia Carrowbrough, proved by an
inscription. Borcovicus House-steads, proved by many inscriptions. Vindolana
Little Chesters, confirmed by an inscription. Aesica Great Chesters. Magna
Carr-Voran. Amboglana Bird Oswald, proved by a vast number and great variety of
inscriptions. Petriana Cambeck Fort, called Castle-steads. Aballaba Watch
Cross, near Old Wall and Bleatern. Congavata Stanwicks. Axelodunum Brugh on the
Sands. Gabrosentum Drumburgh. Tunnocellum Boulness, which is in fact
Promentoriotum Itunae impendens.

In our way to Thirlwall Castle, we viewed the intrenchments mentioned by Mr
Wallis, called the Black Dykes, where he says lead bullets have frequently been
found: an occasional and temporary defense, cast up for a small force, of
modern date, and in no wise resembling those which fortified an ancient camp.

THIRLWALL CASTLE
is seated on the edge of a rock, above the little river Tippal; a dark and
melancholy fortress, much in ruin. It may be called, with propriety, the
stronghold, rather than seat, of the family of Thirlwalls. John de Thirlwall 7
King Edward III. Robert -- 10 Queen Elizabeth. Eleanora married Matthew
Swinburn, Esquire
Wallis.
It was vaulted within, and defended by a strong wall without. The THRILWALL
CASTLE
floor of one of the apartments was lately cleared, and discovered to be of
singular construction; consisting of three tiers of flags, laid upon stratas of
sand. Some of the walls are nine feet thick: the casing in many places has been
taken away, to erect the adjoining tenements. The builder has even been afraid
of the light, for the apertures are no larger than those in the stair-cases of
ancient castles. The whole carries the appearance of a horrid gloomy dungeon,
where its ancient tyrants dealt in deeds of darkness. The last of the Thirlwall
family, Eleanora, sold this castle, with its demesnes, to the Earl of Carlisle.

Under the south front of this castle the Roman wall crosses the Tippal, and
stretches up the opposite eminences. The name of Thirlwall, by some authors,
has been derived from those breaches made in the wall by the Scots, in their
incursions.

Spelman's calculation of the Roman forces stationed on the wall, makes them
amount to the number 13,800, allowing 600 to a cohort; exclusive of a whole
legion, and 13 detachments of horse and foot, on other stations, and attendants
on the Emperor. Constantine created an officer styled "Comes Spectabilis
Litoris Saxonici," who commanded seven companies of foot, two troops of horse,
the second legion, and a cohort to guard the coasts. In the reign of Nero, some
authors allege, the Roman army in Britain consisted of 70,000. Ph. Trans. No.
337.


In passing down the road below Thirlwall Castle, we perceived a large stone
lay in the way, which bore marks of the sculptor. We had curiosity to examine
it, and found it the head of a Colossian statue, measuring in circumference
near five feet, cut on a rag-stone. It seemed to appertain to some statue of
Jupiter, and probably was rolled down the steeps from Carr-Voran, and lodged in
the river Tippal.

A mile from Thirlwall, lays

WARDREW,
famous for its Spaw. The waters have been analized, and require not my pen to
repeat their virtues, so well known to the public. The conveniences for a few
visitors are narrow, but commodious enough; the situation is retired, not much
of the romantic; the walks are solemn, and the whole scene befits a mind that
carries its ideas and meditations to distant regions; for there are few objects
present which either elevate or entertain. Calmness and tranquillity are the
effects such sameness of subject insinuates to the mind; and indolence, with
that degree of ease styled negligence, succeed to take the place of pleasure.

We now proceeded by the military road, and made a little excursion to the left
to

WALLTOWN,
formerly the seat of the Ridleys, part of the ruins of the old castle
remaining. Travelers are shown a well among the cliffs, where it is said
Paulinus baptized King Egbert; Wallis
but it is more probable it was Edwin King of Northumberland. Such spectacles
gratify the religious enthusiast, who would be in transports on viewing this
hallowed font.

From thence to

GREAT CHESTERS
is little more than a mile: the Vallum of this station is very
distinguishable, of an oblong square, near the dimensions of Carr-Voran; the
interior parts rugged, from the ruins of many buildings. In the course of the
Notitia, this station is called Aesica. It was garrisoned by the Cohors Prima
Astorum, but no inscriptions have been found here, that mention this or any
other cohort.

Great Chesters must be reckoned, Mr Horsley says, among the forts that have
been well preserved: the ramparts about it are very visible; some part of the
original stone wall is standing a good height; the ditch is also to be seen on
all sides, but toward the east, where it is somewhat flat. On the west side
there is a double Agger and ditch. The ruins of the rampart on this side are
very high: several regular courses of stones are to be seen in this side of the
rampart, where the ruins have been cleared out. The Praetorium is very visible,
being about 50 yards from east to west, and 40 from north to south. To this is
joined another parallelogram at the east end, of the same breadth with the
Praetorium, and 26 yards from east to west. This I take to have been the
Questorum. On the north side of the Praetorium are large ruins of some
considerable building, which probably was a temple. On the south side of the
fort has been a regular entry. Part of the jambs and some other stones are
remaining entire; which may show for what purpose such stones must have been,
which are found in other Roman forts. Some pieces of an iron gate and hinges
have been found in the ruins not long ago. From this gate there goes a paved
military way to Hadrian's Vallum, which is distant about 15 chains, which way
is also continued till it joins the other military way. The out-buildings are
most considerable on the south side, though there are also some on the east.
There are vast ruins of buildings in this field, which, as usual, has a gentle
descent, and is open to the south.

The distance between this station and Little Chesters, the next in my rout, is
about three miles and three quarters; and here again all the Castella are
visible, being four in number, besides one more which seems to have fallen in
with the station at Great Chesters. The interval here again between the
Castella is seven furlongs.

A little to the west of Great Chesters, near a house called Cockmount Hill,
the Picts wall begins again to ascend the rocks. From Great Chesters to this
place the ditch is but faint, except for two or three chains, where it is
distinct.

A little to the west of Walltown, and between that and Carr-Voran, there is a
part of the wall which is in the greatest perfection of any now remaining in
the whole track: it is about three yards high, as I before observed, has about
14 regular courses, and at one part 16, of the facing stones entire.

As for Hadrian's Vallum, it is visible all the way till it comes near
Carr-Voran. It passes near Low Town, just on the south of it; and particularly
the vallum or rampart on the south brink of the ditch, is here very visible. Mr
Horsley says he was informed there were the ruins of some Roman works at Low
Town, but upon viewing them, nothing like it appeared. They look (he says)
somewhat like the houses of Moss Troopers, which seems confirmed by what Camden
says, that he durst venture no further this way for fear of them. He mentions
Carr-Voran on the one side, and Carraw on the other; so that the two Chesters
and the House-steads must have been the stations that he was afraid to visit.

The distance between Great Chesters and Carr-Voran is almost two miles and a
quarter. In this space there are three Castella, and all of them visible.

The remains of broken altars and some effigies are scattered on the eastern
side of this station, but of no significance to the antiquary, as the
inscriptions are totally obliterated. -- The following fragment was dug up
here, and is thus given in Camden: I^. CAS. M. AVR. SEVE
RVS. MECANDER. PFE
AUG. HORREVM. VETV
STATE. CO^. AR. SVMM
COH. II. ASTVRVM SA
A SOLO RESTITVERI^
PROVINCV. ARECNT
MAXIMO LEG. W GPRP
SAL MARTI MED LEGA
TVS CO. II. ET DEXT.


Near a mile on the south side of this station, is a monumental stone about
three feet high, with the effigy of a man in a nich, cut in relief, with the
inscription as represented in the plate.



Mr Horsley, No. 64, gives a monument very like this in figure, but the
inscription varies greatly: DIS M
PERVICAE FILIA F
which he reads, dis manibus Pervicae filia fecit. -- A funeral monument
erected for one Pervica, by her daughter who is not named.

I took the drawing and inscription with great attention, and am induced to
believe the whole monument is here represented with truth.

At the mill gate a stone placed upside-down has this inscription: D. M.
AEL. MERCVR
RIAE CoRNICVL
VACIA SOROR
FECIT.


Mr. Horsley gives this inscription in the same manner, but his drawing of the
stone has a man's head above the inscription. This might be sunk in the earth,
as the stone now serves for a gate-post, and is reversed. Dis manibus Aelio
Mercuriali, Corniculario Vacia soror fecit. This is a funeral monument erected
for Aelis Mercurialis, by his sister Vacia. A Cornicularius was an inferior
officer under the Tribune. Mention is made of the Cornicularius, by M.
Laetorius Mergus the Tribune by Valerius Maximus; and Suetonius, speaking of
Orbilius the grammarian, says, "In Macedonio Corniculo mox equo meruit." The
name of this officer is upon several monuments in Gruter, and occurs frequently
in the Notitia: he was a kind of a clerk or secretary, and in the lower times
of the empire, he was rather of higher rank or quality than before.

Camden says, this was the second Station of the Dalmatians, called in the old
book of Notices MAGNA; and that Sir Robert Cotton took from hence the two
following inscriptions: PRO SALUTE
DESIDIENIAE
-- LIANI PRE
ET SVA. S.
POSVIT VOT
-- AO. SOLVIT LIBE
NS TVSCO ET BASSO
COSS
From these consular names, the date of this inscription is 259 in the
christian era.

DEAE SVRI
AE. SVB CALP
VRNIO AG --
ICOLA. LEG. AVG
PR. PR. A LICINIVS
-- LEMENS. PRAEF
-- III -- A -- IOR -- This by some antiquaries is supposed to be dedicated to
the Syrian goddess Astarte. Mr Horsley has objected to Camden's reading: but Dr
Stukeley, in his Carausius, thinks it is confirmed by the altar in Mr Graham^s
collection at Netherby, inscribed to that goddess in the Greek character and
language.
Cohortis primae Hamiorum.
Camden gives the following reading: Deae Suriae sub Calphurnio Agricola Legato
Augusti Propretore Licinius Clemens Prefect. Unto the goddess Suria under
Calphurinus Agricola, Lieutenant of Augustus and Propraetor, Licinius Clemens
the Captain. This Calphurinus Agricola was sent by Antoninus, philosopher,
against the Britons, about the year of our Lord 170; at which time some cohort
under his command erected this altar. Mr Horsley has treated of this
inscription as being found at Little Chesters, under which head I have inserted
it in the notes. Lucian describes the goddess Suria with a turretted crown on
her head, a tabor in her hand, set in a car drawn by lions. This was the
favorite divinity of Nero, till he grew so weary of his devotions, that, as
the translator of Camden has it, he defiled her with his urine. Besides the
inscriptions before mentioned, Mr Horsley's work contains the following:

LXI. Dis man^bus dicatum Sabinae Hinae Regulus Duilius.

The inscription itself is thought to be sepulchral, and I have given a reading
of it suitable to this opinion. But I must own, that the seemingly plain
appearance of an O at the first, rather than a D, and the manifest deficiency
in the stone and inscription at the beginning of the lines, have raised a
strong jealousy in me that it has been I O. M. D. for Jovi Optimo Max^mo
dicatum; though i^ this be the truth, I know not why the following name Sabini
or Sab^ae should be in the ge^ive. The last word is uncertain, and very
probably the greater part of the inscription is broken off, for otherwise the
plane of the altar does not seem to bear any (...) proportion to the capital.
The figures at the top are so much defaced, that I know not what to make of
them. The first looks almost like a toad, which we find upon another altar or
two in this collection: the other perhaps is a dog or wolf, but very obscure.
Mr Wa^b^rtes, imagining this inscription to have some reference to the Ae^
Sabinia^, because of the word Sabin^e, as I suppose, concludes this ^ce to be
Hunnum.

Now in the Dean and Chapter's Library at Durham.

LXIII.

Not far from Great Chesters, near a wicket or hatch at Cockmount Hill, lies a
curious sculpture exposed to all the injuries of the weather, by which and
barbarous hands, it has suffered too much already. Mr Gordon was the first, I
believe, who discovered or took any notice of it; but his draught has several
defects in it, the most considerable of which is the omission of the two
eagles, on whose wings the victories stand that support the vexillum: each
eagle rests upon the branch of a tree; and the boar on the right plainly
appears to take hold of the stock of the tree on that side, as if he
endeavored to tear it up: the other boar attacks the vexillum, and lays hold
of the tree, on which the other eagle is perched, with both his feet. I think
there can be no doubt but the boars and trees were designed to represent this
wild and woody country, as it then was; and the Roman ensigns often signify a
Roman settlement: this sculpture therefore plainly denotes the Roman conquest
of this country, their victories over the inhabitants, and their making a
settlement here, in opposition to all the attempts of their enemies. The heads
of the eagles are both broken off, but the rest of them is very distinct.

LXIV. Centuria cohortis Septimae Maximiana posuit.

Under this number are expressed two centurial stones, now placed in the sore
wall of a cow-house, adjoining to a house called Allaley, almost half way
between Great Chesters and Carr-Voran. One has the centurial mark and the
number of the cohort tolerably plain; the name of the century is obscure, but
it must, I think, been Maximiana. Nothing more is certain about the other, but
that it has been erected by some cohort or century.

LXIV. Centuria Valerii Maximi.

This is of the common centurial kind, and has nothing remarkable in it: it was
found at a small rivulet called Haltwhistle Burn, near Great Chesters.

An urn was also found at this mill.




We passed a monument on the left hand, placed on a hill, consisting of three
large erect stones or pillars, two of which seem broken off in the midst. They
are called the Mare and her Foals, appearing to be monuments of some memorable
action, and not druidical, as has been conjectured; their figure and position
in no wise corresponding with any monuments of the Druids.

At a little distance from the Chesters, and ne^ the 35th mile stone, are four
Tumuli placed in a square figure, which Mr Wallis says were cut through by one
Curry, a dissenting minister, whose curiosity disturbed the ashes of the dead,
reaping nothing but the Salina which had consecrated the remains of the
interred, without being able, from this undertaking, to discover to what age or
people these monuments appertained. Mr Wallis has the following remarks on the
Interment of the Ancients:

The Romans were not very careful to separate the human ashes from the rest,
but sometimes put coals and other things into the urn. Their urns were of gold,
silver, and other metal, of glass, stone, and marble, but most generally of
potters earth. Trajan's was of gold. They were of all figures, but commonly
round and bellied; those of metal generally embellished with sculpture and bass
relief. Urns for persons of distinction, were either set under marble
monuments, or in niches of sepulchral chambers. Severus provided his before his
death: it is said to have been of porphyry or of alabaster. The ashes of
persons of quality were usually sprinkled with wine, before they were collected
into an urn.

Postquam collapsi cineres, et flamma quievit,
Riliquias vino et bibulam lavere favillam;
Assaque lecta cado texit Chorinaeus aheno. Virg. Aen.
Soon as the pile, subsiding flames no more,
With wine the heap they sprinkled over:
Then Chorinaeus took the charge to place
The bones selected in a brazen vase. Pit.
Salt was used in their solemn sacrifices, as well as in urn burial.

Dant fruges manibus salsas. Virg. Aen. Urn burial is not so ancient as the
present mode of interment: burning the dead is first attributed to the Greeks,
and Herculus is said to be the first of the Greeks who used it. This he did to
free himself from the obligation of an oath. He had sworn to bring back a youth
to his father from the siege of Troy, and he had no way of doing it but by
presenting him with his ashes. From the Greeks this custom passed to the
Romans, but it was not general among them. From the authority of Pliny it
appears, that it was not used in many families, and that Sylla the Dictator was
the first of the Cornelii whose body was burnt; which is the reason assigned by
Antiquaries, why we find Roman bones both burnt and unburnt. It was the choice
of some, because they would preserve their bodies from the resentment of their
enemies. Th^s probably was Sylla's motive. It is supposed the Gauls had it from
the Romans, the Celtics or ancient Brito^s from the Gauls; but it is not so
easily accounted for how the Danes, and other nations called Juli and Angli,
Saxons and Germans came by it. It is believed they had it from the Grecian
customs and learning, and that they all laid it aside on the introduction of
Christianity.

To distinguish which are Roman, Danish, or British Tumuli, has been observed
to be difficult. Some Antiquaries pretend to fix them from their shape; but
that is reckoned guess-work, unless inscriptions, arms, or coins be found in
them; the latter of gold, silver, or copper, but neither of them of brass.
Instruments and coins of that metal, belonging to the northern nations, and
where they are found in Tumuli unquestionably Roman, they are supposed to have
been taken from the enemy, and thrown into it in honor of the deceased. The
Roman Tumuli were cespititious or mounts of earth like those here. Such was
Hector's viridi cespite, Virg. Such was Dercennus's "terreno ex aggere bustom,"
Virg. Such was that made by Aeneas: -- "Pius Aeneas ingenti mole sepulchrum,
"Imponet, suaque arma viro, remumque, tubamque;
"Monte sub aerio." Virg.
No greater misfortune could happen to a Roman, than to be denied the "Hono^
Tumuli," the "Solamen Humandi." The Atheist Mezentius could not die in peace,
without begging it of his enemy with his last breath.

Corpus humo patiaro legi --
Et me consortem nati concede sepulchro. Virg.
If a vanquished foe this grace may crave,
Oh let me find the refuge of a grave.
-- guard my coarse, and lay me by my son:
Grant, grant that pleasure, ere I yield my breath,
To share this dear society in Death. Pit.



WILLIMOTESWICK
laying at a little distance, induces the traveller to quit his direct road. --
This was the ancient house of the Ridleys, from whence descended many eminent
men, amongst whom was Nicholas Ridley, Bishop of London, who suffered at Oxford
with Bishop Latimer Oct. 16, 1555; also Lancelot Ridley, D. D. Fellow of King's
Hall, Cambridge, and the great Civilian, Sir Thomas Ridley, Knt. L. L. D.

From thence we passed to

LITTLE CHESTERS,
a small Roman station, laying on the western side of Bardon Burn, now called
the Bowers, on account of the trees which cover it. It does not contain above
three acres of land in its enclosure, the Vallum of which is very
distinguishable, forming an oblong square with obtuse angles. The Via Vacinalis
from Carr-Voran to Walwick Chesters, passes close by its northern side, near
which a Roman military guide stone is standing; and at a mile west another; and
again, another mile further west, a third, in a direct line. These stones are
cylindrical, six feet four inches in circumference, and near six feet above
ground. On one of these is the following inscription: BONO REIpVBLICAE NATO,
the letters large and coarse. No doubt this was a compliment to the Emperor
then reigning, and not an uncommon one.

Little Chesters was the Vindolana of the Romans, where the Legio Sexta Victrix
kept garrison; as also the Cohors Quarta Gallorum, as the inscriptions found
here prove.

Mr Horsley's description of this station is as follows:

This station is south from both the walls near a mile and three quarters, but
stands on the military way before mentioned, which is very visible for a
considerable space from this station: so that Little Chesters must be reckoned
among those which belong to the wall, it being in this rout, and the only
military way, which belongs to it, coming from the wall and returning to it.

There are two or three Forts more, as Carr-Voran and Cambeck Fort, detached to
the south of the wall, though none so far as this; yet this is not above half a
mile from Hadrian's Vallum.

This is one of the least Stations on the wall. It is only seven chains long
from north to south, and four broad from east to west. The ramparts are visible
quite round, and very large, but the ditch is near filled up. The town or
out-buildings here have been chiefly to the west and south-west of the fort;
there being a small brook to the south-east, and a descent from the Station to
it. The Praetorium may be distinguished; and there seems to have been some
towers at the corners of the fort, and perhaps two in the sides of the
ramparts.

Severus's wall, which keeps upon the precipices all the way, is almost at a
mile distant from this Station.

The Royal Society received a few years ago some Roman Sandals found here. A
Roman Hypocaustum or Sudatory was discovered here, of which Dr Hunter gave the
following description: -- It was a square room vaulted above, and paved with
large square stones set in lime: under which was a lower apartment supported by
rows of square pillars, about half a yard high -- the upper room had 16 flues
in the walls then open, and appearing as niches; the pavement and roof were
tinged with smoke. These sudatories, from this description, were certainly
heated by flues in the wall like the modern stoves. Mr Horsley speaking of it,
says it looks very like a Balneum with the Hypocaustum below it: and somewhat
of this nature I saw at Lanchester and Risingham; at the latter place it was
not far from the Praetorium. -- An engraving is given by Mr Horsley of a
sculpture found here; the principal figure of which represents Mercury. He
gives the following description of it. Mercury is represented with his caduceus
in his left hand, and purse in his right. Above his right arm is somewhat like
a petasus, or perhaps a cap of liberty. The head of the figure and upper part
of the stone is broken and confused, so that we cannot be certain, whether or
no Mercury has had his petasus on. If we could be sure that he was here
represented, as wearing his petasus on his head, I should then have thought it
more probable, that this other figure was the cap of liberty. Mercury's loose
and flying chlamys is visible; and beside him an altar with this inscription
upon it: DEO MERCVRIO. A Camillus lays the incense on the altar. Mercury is
usually represented with a juvenile briskness, according to the poet's
description: Omnia Mercurio similis, vocemque coloremque,
Et crines flavos, et membra decora juvente.
Virg. Aen. IV. 558. It is well known what sort of people were peculiarly
devoted to Mercury. "Callidum, quicquid placuit jocoso condere furto." Hor.
Carm. -- Whether the ancient inhabitants of this part, had the same disposition
with their posterity, who dwelt hereabouts in Camden's time, and to whom we owe
the good laws for preventing of theft, upon the northern borders, I shall not
determine.

Mr Warburton presented this stone to the Royal Society, in whose Musaeum it
now is.

It is observable, that the trading inhabitants of this country held a solemn
festival to Mercury, on the 25th of October.

A centurial stone (now at Ridley Hall) was found at this Station inscribed
IMP. CAES. TRAIAN
HADRIANI AVG
LEG. II. AVG
A PLATORIO NEPOTE LEG. PR. PR.


A large stone lately found here, now placed in a field at Archy Flat, as a
rubbing-stone for cattle, is rudely sculptured with the figure of a deer under
the shade of a tree, with two fauns at his feet. This seems to have been an
ornament to some small temple of Diana, which perhaps stood near this place, as
pilasters and capitals, of the Doric order, were dug up some few years ago,
with multitudes of stags horns, the remains of the sacrifices to that goddess,
on the 13th of August, when the hunters held their festival, and offered the
devoted stag. Besides the inscriptions already mentioned, Mr Horsley's Work has
the several following ones.

LII. Gallorum vota numini ejus Principis Optimi turribus fundamenta posuerunt
sub Claudio Xenophonte Legato Augustali Propraetore curante.

Great numbers of inscriptions have been found here, but most of them are now
lost or destroyed: there is one which seems to have been the most curious and
useful, the inscription whereof is now quite destroyed. This stone was some
years ago removed from Little Chesters to Beltingham, where the masons wrought
it up for a gravestone, and utterly destroyed the inscription.

Dr Hunter published the inscription in the Philosophical Transactions, No.
278, from the orig^al^ the inscription is curious and useful upon a double
account, both as it has probably contained the name of the C^hors Quarta
Gallorum, and so proves this place to be Vindolana, and al^o it seems to me to
mention a new Propraetor, Claudius Xenophon, whose name I remember not to have
met with elsewhere, either in the inscriptions or history; for I am persuaded
that the three last words in the fifth line have been LEG. AVG. PR. PR. and
what is wanting in the last l^ne, has been the name of the person who took care
of the work. The to^rs here mentioned, might be some of those upon the ramparts
of the Station, which are still very v^sible. Dr Hunter says, the field where
this inscription was found goes by the name of the Bower. The title Optimo
Principi, together with the name of a new Legate, who does not occur in any
hi^tory, would incline me to ascribe the monument to Trajan, during whose reign
the Roman historians are silent as to Britain; but as there is nothing in this
inconsistent with several of the succeeding reigns, and it is doubted whether
the Romans had any considerable footing here in Trajan's time, we cannot fix
the date of this inscription with any certainty.

The two following inscriptions Camden places at Great Chesters. In these notes
I follow Mr Horsley's course and numbers, for the sake of the reader's readier
reference to his works.

LIII. Deae Su^ suo Calpornio Agricola Legato Augustali Propraetore Aulus
Licinius Clemens Praefectus C^hortis Primae Hamiorum vel Cohortis Quartae
Gallorum).

It is plain from Camden's own account of his journey, that he went no further
along the wall eastward, than a little beyond Carr-Voran. The altar now before
us was erected to the Syrian goddess. Lucian among the ancients, and Seldom
among the moderns, have professedly treated on the subject of this deity: and
Sir Isaac Newton says, it is one of the names of Venus. It is very certain,
that what is physically the same, is often represented by several deities; and
the same deity has several names considered under different relations, or as
confering different benefits. Thus Cybele, Ceres, Ve^ta, Rhea, and Tellus, all
signify the earth; and Dea Syria is only another of Cybele^s names, who is
usually called the mother of the gods. The like may be said of Apollo and
several others. As for the inscription, the letters in the first line, and CALP
in the second, and part of the AG in the third, are yet very plain and
distinct, though the rest of it s^ce Camden's time is entirely gone, together
with the outer or upper Stratum of this part of the stone, deeper than the cut
of the letters, which obliges me to take most of the inscription from Camden^s
copy: and this I have observed to happen frequently when the inscription is cut
along the plane of the Stratum; but when it is cut across, or through the
several Strata, the letters are more lasting, and much better secured; and thus
the Romans u^y cut their inscriptions. There is at the end of the first line
something like a cross, which Camden has omitted; but with what design this was
done, I am unable to say. Calphurnius Ag^ was Propraetor or Lieutenant here,
under Marcus Aurelius The inscription confirms and il^u^trates the historian's
testimony. Adversus Brittannos quidem Calphurnius Agricola m^ssus e^t. Capitol.
in Vet. Script. Hist. Aug. p. 169. as this determines the time, or at least the
reign under which this altar was erected. What Cohort this Licinius Clemens
commanded, is not so clear to me from the inscription: I know some read it
Cohors Prima Hamiorum at large, and have so represented it; but this I doubt
has been mere conjecture: it is plain that the letters in the last line are not
placed at a due distance, and that the letters on each side should be farther
removed from the four, and the same room which is sufficient for Harniorum,
will do as well or better for Gallorum; and I cannot but suspect this to be the
true reading. The former inscription favors this conjecture, and so I read it
at first sight of the copy, without considering where it was found. If this
conjecture should be admitted, this inscription does further confirm the
Station at Little Chesters to be Vindolana.

LIVE. Pro salute Desidieni Aeliani Praefecti et sua sacrum posuit voto solvit
lib^ns Tusco and Basso Consulibus.

This, after the authority of Camden, I also presented to the reader, as
belonging to Great Chesters. -- It is an altar erected by some person, whose
name is not expressed, for the safety of Desidienus Aelianus the Prefect, and
for his own. The letters are but meanly cut, and of the later and ruder form.
There is a small break in the right side of the altar, whereby a letter or two
is defaced, but the rest still continues legible. I think voto in the fifth
line must be ex voto, as usual, and then there is no difficulty as to the
meaning. The writing part of the word libens, upon the plane of the altar, and
part upon the base, is observable, but the S. for sacrum, in the end of the
fourth line, is not uncommon. The express date of this inscription adds to its
value; namely, when Tuscus and Bassus were Consuls, that is, according to
Camden, in the year 259, but in the Fasti Consulares 258, where the former name
is Fuscus instead of Tuscus.

LV. Fortunae Populi Romani Caius Julius Raticus Centurio Legionis Sextae
Victricis.

To this place also belongs, as I suppose, that noble altar erected to the
fortune of the Roman people by Cajus Julius. I find no centurial mark in the
inscription, unless the C at the beginning of the last line, which Mr Gordon
overlooked, be supposed to stand for Centurio; or else the mark before LEG,
through mistake turned the wrong way. But I rather take this to be only a stop,
and the C to be the Praenomen of the person. There is nothing very peculiar in
manner of this inscription, unless it be the humor of making the size of the
letters in the different lines so very unequal.

This altar is deposited in the Dean and Chapter's Library at Durham.

LVI. Legio Sexta Victrix.

This is the impression of the Legio Sexta Victrix, in the usual manner upon
two Roman bricks, which were found here.

LVII. Antoni -- Pio --

This is an imperfect inscription upon the fragment of a very curious and
beautiful stone, the nature and grit of which is finer than usual, and the
remaining letters very fair, and well cut. I can only guess that the
inscription may have been to the honor of one Antonines, and that the word in
the second line may have been Pio, and perhaps Pra in the last for Praesectus.

LX. This is a small but fine stone, and a curious sculpture. It came from
Little Chesters, but is now in the jamb of a door at Ramshaw Field, a single
house, about a mile or more south-west from this station. It has not been
observed or published before, though it very well deserves a place in such a
collection. The sculpture manifestly represents a Roman Verillum, with a
Pegasus on one side, and a Sea-goat on the other; and in the Vexillum, an
inscription, in very small letters, III CH
VEXI
as I have given it. The first line, except the cross stroke of the H. was very
visible. Vegetius tells us, it was the ancient custom of the Romans, to put the
number of the Cohort or Century upon the Vexillum, which was a square piece of
cloth fastened upon a transverse piece of wood. This after Constantine had the
name of Labarum.




The reader will pardon a short digression, which the subject of Roman
Sacrifices necessarily leads me to. When we read of piles of stags horns, bones
of sacrificed animals, and such remains of religious acts; or of hecatombs and
mighty slaughters, which stained the altars of Roman devotees, we might
conceive the country abounded in cattle, or the havoc and waste of such a
profuse gift to the gods would endanger a famine. The first impressions of the
unlettered reader on these acts of devotion, would mislead him into an idea,
that these sacrifices were only a lavish destruction of animal beings, under
the irrational presumption, that the gods delighted in the service of burning
carcasses: but by attending to the ceremony, we are relieved from this mistake,
and acquit this learned and polished people of such an error against common
sense. -- From national prejudices they had assigned persons to the attributes
of the Great Creator, whom they universally confessed; and presumed to depict
them, as being distinct emanations from the supreme, by the figures of Apollo,
Bacchus, Pallas, Ceres, and all the multitude of their divine personages; yet
by the intelligent and wise, the religious services paid to the images of those
attributes, were in fact, and from the heart, addressed to the God of Nature.
Seneca says, it is of very little consequence by what name you call the first
Nature, and the Divine Reason which presides over the universe, and fills all
the parts of it; he is still the same God. He is called Jupiter Stator, not as
historians say, because he stopped the flying armies of the Romans, but because
he is the constant support of all beings -- they call him Fate, because he is
the first Cause on which all others depend. We Stoics sometimes call him Father
Bacchus, because he is the universal Life that animates nature -- Hercules,
because his Power is invincible -- Mercury, because he is the eternal Wisdom,
Order, and Reason -- you may give him as many names as you please, provided you
allow but one sole Principle every where present. -- Thus, if the Roman devotee
petitioned for success in war, he resorted to the temple of Mars, or raised to
him an altar; and so on, through the chain of those images, with which their
pantheon was crowded.

This error arose very early in the world; and before letters communicated
wisdom and science, it is no wonder it prevailed almost universally among
mankind -- the eye carries images to the mind most immediately -- the mind thus
impressed was warmed into an energy, which nothing but outward objects could
convey to the ignorant. Besides, we find those personages, who had rendered
themselves important to their country, and by their superior talents and
virtues, won the love of the people, in commemoration of such their
excellencies, had their images erected, and became representatives of the
divine attributes. -- Here we trace a strong influence to promote devotion; the
love borne to the very person whose image was so erected. The danger to
religion among the vulgar is obvious, and was proved in the event: the great
architype was forgotten, and the smoaky and inanimate statue became the idol of
the vulgar worship.

Let us now examine the sacrificial rites. -- The altars which remain in
Britain, are chiefly formed of one stone, like the pedestal of a column: above
the cornice are two rolls, commonly called the horns of the altar; the center
rises in a conical figure, in which is an aperture, wherein was placed the
charcoal and embers for the ceremony. These altars were fixed before the statue
of the God to whom the devotee paid his rites, or at the Ostium of the temple,
which during the time had its gates thrown open; or otherwise, they were
erected in groves, consecrated to the Divinity: the Priest, together with the
devotee, dressed in white garments (emblematical of purity and innocence,
characteristics presumed most acceptable to heaven) went foremost in the
procession. The animal ordered for sacrifice had its horns gilt, or its
forehead bound with white fillets, decked with garlands, and crowned with the
leaves of that tree, which it was supposed the Deity most affected; but in
fact, that which was esteemed emblematical of the peculiar virtue of the Deity
then addressed. Several attendants walked in the procession, amongst whom were
the public Crier, the Musicians, the Aruspex or Diviner, and all those whose
office it was to slaughter and dress the animal. As soon as the Victim was
brought, the Priest, laying one hand on the horns of the altar, began the
ceremony with a most solemn and devout prayer, either for the public weal, or
the private prosperity of the devotee offering sacrifice, as the occasion
required. The sacred fire being placed in the aperture of the altar, the Priest
strewed corn and frankincense, meal and salt, upon the head of the animal; then
taking the Patera, (a shallow basin) in which was contained the wine, he
touched it with his lips, and after giving it to those who stood near him to do
the same, poured it between the horns of the beast; then plucking some hair
from between them, he cast it into the fire, and turning his face to the east,
drew his knife along the animal's spine, from head to tail, as the ensign or
mark of consecration: after which, the inferior officers performed the
slaughter. The carcass being opened, the Aruspex examined the intestines, and
if deformed, deficient, or diseased, he pronounced the omens inauspicious: if
on the contrary, healthy and vigorous, the heart large, and the animal parts
strong, the indications were propitious. After this ceremony, particular small
parts were placed on the embers, to occasion a pleasant savor, and the rest
was dressed for a solemn festival. Here we view the ceremony in its proper
light: the sacrificial rites were no more than a public exhibition of the
cattle, given on some singular occasion, when they were presented before heaven
with prayers, the Priest imploring a blessing. It is a doubt with me, whether,
by men of enlightened minds, whose understanding overlooked the idol, and whose
religion spiritually addressed the only true God, these were not acts of piety
and fervent devotion, equal to most we find in this age. T^ (...) more places
than (...) contemplating with amazement the (...) the ^^te, and the (...) even
of the (...), so that him^ It could (...) of the military princi^ (...) all
other people? The (...) the Gauls more strong; truly (...) way they (...) be
more vic^ than o^ nations, but that they ^re (...).

D. S^y's Ca^^^, p. 9.
We have avoided Scylla, and sunk in Charybdis. To reform the abuses of the
heathen world, we have too much abolished ceremony; and from fervor, have
fallen into a slovenly lethargic indolence, which comprehends so little of
piety, that men often find their minds, even during the act of kneeling,
abstracted from the Divinity, and wandering in worldly occupations. We have
taken away the idol, which betrayed the vulgar, but have left them in such
jeopardy, that few even remember there is a God. Religious rites warm the mind:
pure and sentimental devotion only befits the most enlightened, and most
learned: ceremonies catch attention, as it were in wiles; and those who would
think little of prayer, may sometimes be induced thereto almost involuntarily,
by joining in, or being present at religious rites. The soul full of wisdom,
worships in silence; but wayward minds soon sink away from such spiritual
service. The contemplation of the Deity, by the enlightened and wise, is so
replete with wonder, and inspires such reverence, that silence becomes it best:
but the ignorant mind conceives little more than its wants; and the God of
miracles, with such, is concluded in the God of daily bread. I reverence the
Roman in his sacrifice: it was a noble exhibition of piety; an august mode of
supplicating the Deity. The solemnity of craving a grace on the appointed
festival in these rites, was strikingly devout. In this boasted age of
christianity, where is the devotion attendant on the hecatombs of a Lord
Mayor's Feast. The hecatombs of the Ancients, were festivals on great and
memorable events, and were preceded by the most solemn rites of consecration;
-- a commencement of festivity, worthy the imitation of the most enlightened
nations.

Dr Stukeley, in his Carausius, says, In reading the Roman history, we see such
a spirit of Religion, breathing in general, upon every occasion, through all
they did, as a nation, as is no where else to be found in the least comparable.
To enumerate particulars, would make an agreeable volume. I can only take
notice, that it makes a great part of their story. So honest, so warm, so
grateful was their zeal to heaven, at every public act, that providence could
not but look favorably upon them, wink at what they were ignorant of, as the
the Apostle professes, Acts xvii. 30. and prosper them accordingly. Every
single person, of any note, had a part of his house consecrated, like as our
private chapels, called the Lararium. Upon every success, we read of their
vowing temples. On occasion of misfortune, pestilence, floods, thunder, and the
like, they consult the oracles, order public lustrations, supplications, and
sacrifices. Even their theatrical spectacles began with an act of religion;
many altars in their circs and places of games. They never began or ended a
war, took up the military standards every morning, without an act of religion,
a libation of incense. In their calendar, most days in the year have some
religious solemnity. Look into their sculptures and monuments, and observe the
extravagant expense and pomp of their religious processions: even their coins
are counter-signed with some Deity, and innumerable sculptures of their
Emperors sacrificing, incensing. They never began their harvest, their vintage,
without a sacrifice: without the Flamen Dialis gathering the first bunch. The
genius of the people and city were ever represented with a Patera in its hand,
before an altar incensing. In short, religion makes the greatest part of the
history; the greatest part of those authors that write of their customs; the
greatest part of the monuments, coins, and sculptures, which are now come to
our hands, of this truly magnanimous and virtuous people. And if we read
Polybius particularly, we obtain a just idea of the noble spirit, the honor,
and uprightness of the Roman senate, which made them courted by all the world.
Religion cannot be separated from Roman history, because, in their way, they
were the most religious of all people; and for that reason, Providence gave
them the Empire of the World.

To return. -- In the wall of Mr Smith's house, at the west end of the Station
of Little Chesters, an altar is preserved, inscribed MARTI VICTORI
COH. III. NERVIORVM
PREFECT. I. CANINVS


I have seen a brass coin, struck in honor of the festival of Mars, held on
the 1st of March. -- Mr Wallis says, the late Rev. Mr Walton was possessed of
one, upon which was the figure of Mars, armed and helmeted, a shield on his
left arm, and a sprig of olive in his right hand.

The distance between the Stations of Great and Little Chesters, is about three
miles and three quarters: in that space there are four Castella visible, and
one which seems to have fallen in with the Station at Great Chesters: the
interval between each is seven furlongs. From the Manuscripts of the late Roger
Gale, Esquire

Extract of a Letter from Mr John Warburton to Roger Gale, Esquire 21st Nov. 1717.
I cannot possibly recover your essay upon the four great Roman roads, unless
you think fit to favor me with it. It is strange there should be but four
recorded, when there are such numbers of them; and more, that the greatest of
them all should want a name, This is the Erning-street.

R. G.
viz. that which comes from the Roman Wall near Dunbritt^ Fryth, in Scotland,
to Rochester, in Northumberland, where Antoninus begins his first journey, and
from thence continues its course by Corbridge, E^chester, Langchester,
Binchester, Piersbridge, Caterick, Aldborough, and I believe might be thence
traced directly forward through London to Dover; and this without interfering
with any of the four great roads mentioned, except where they cross or
accompany it for a few miles.

It is well if Higden, or whoever was the first describer of these ways, was
not mistaken in his placing the Watling-street. The course he has taken for
it, seems too short and out of the way, and I rather agree with Talbott, who
thinks that Antoninus's second journey was along it, (viz.) from the west end
of the Picts Wall to Southampton, which I think much more probable, as it
enters this county on Gatherley Moor.

I was surprised to see so visible a Roman Station in the Yorkshire Dales, as
that of Ethelburg ^^l, near A^^rigg, and for some time could not imagine what
it had been, but now begin to have hopes of proving it to be the fourth Station
of Antonine's 10th Iter Bremetonacis, and that it stands on the military way I
discovered in Northumberland, called the Devil's Ca^s^way.

I have observed a military way to range along the road from Thirst to
Eafingwold, but where it should come from, or lead to, It comes from
Cataractonium, and leads through Thirsk, Easingwo^d, Aldby, Der^ and Wighton
(Delg^) to Brough, over against Wintringham upon the Humber.

R. G.
am yet at a loss, but look upon it to have been the direct road from
Cataractonium to Eboracum, without going by Isurium, and seems to be more
entire, and of a newer form than the others I have observed in the north, as if
it had been erected nearer the declension of the Empire.

I have below given you the sketch of an altar, which some workmen found in a
vault, as they were lately digging, by my order, in the platform of a Roman
Castrum by the Picts Wall, which as it is the beautifullest and most entire I
have ever seen, am thinking to present it to the King, to be set up in St
James's Gardens. Mr Wanley, my Lord Oxford's Library Keeper, was treating with
me about it, and several others in my possession, in order to have them placed
in the new Library at Wimple, but we could not agree about the price.


Found at Chester in the Wood, 1717. FORTUNAIE P. R. C. IVL. RAT. LE. VI. VV.
Alt. p. 4 Lab. p. 1 Fortunae Populi Romani Coius Julius Rationalis Legionis VI.
Valentis Victricis.
This altar I have since seen at Durham, and a print of it is in Mr Gordon's
Iter Septentrionale, by both which it appears that the third word in the last
line is RAET. and therefore should read Caius Jul. Raticus.

R. G.


I am well assured the third word in the last line is Rat, but as it is in
Northumberland. I have not had an opportunity of a strict examination, as you
desired me to make. The place where I dug it up, is by Mr Camden called Magna,
but by the Vulgar, Chester in the Wood: its situation is on a very entire
raised military way, that runs from Carr-Veran to Newbrugh, on the inside of
the Picts Wall. but for the most part at two miles distant from it. My workmen
had not dug above two yards in the area of the platform, before they struck
into a cault of a very irregular figure, three quarters of a yard in height,
and three or four in breadth and length, all blacked on the inside with smoke,
and at the first opening smelt like burnt straw: this great altar lay with its
face downwards, and by it another of the same size, but broke in pieces, and
the inscription imperfect.

Bedale, 21st Nov. 1717. J. WARBURTON.
The vault wherein the above mentioned altar was found, seems to have been made
originally for receiving the offal of the sacrifices, and sweepings of the
altar, the smoke with which it was blacked proceeding from the hot ashes that
had been thrown into it, as did also the smell like that of burnt straw. I was
told, when I was at Cirencester, of much such another vault, with ashes and
burnt bones in it. When the Romans were forced to quit this country, they might
very probably throw these two altars into the vault, and cover them up, to
preserve them from being profaned by the Barbarians that possessed themselves
of it upon their retreat; and they were effectually concealed from them by
their lying bid so many hundred years as they did.

There is nothing difficult in the inscription, the word Rationalis is not very
common, it being more usual to style an Accemptant (the officer here denoted) a
Rationibus. It proves also by the VI. V. V. that the Legio Sexta was called
Valens Victras, as well as the Vicefima.

R. G.







Returning to the military road, we passed a Tumulus of considerable magnitude:
There are several Laws, Barrows, or Tumuli, near the military way, particularly
four where the way goes off to Great Chesters, called the Four Laws.
it has been called an exploratory Mount; but its situation contradicts this
appellation, as it commands no extensive country, or important pass.

The Roman Station now called

HOUSE-STEADS
presents itself in a confusion of ruins, laying on an easy descent. -- This
was the Borcovicus of the Romans.

The first Cohort of Tungrians appears, by several inscriptions under different
Prefects, to have been stationed here. Some inscriptions prove this Cohort was
also in other places; but the number, and variety of monuments erected here,
plainly show, that their settled quarters were at this place, and continued
here the latest.

Mr Horsley says, I cannot say that Hadrian's Vallum has made the south rampart
of this Station, but I think it has passed not much to the south, and seems to
have made a small turn just at the brook, in order to come near, if not up to
it. The southern boundary of this Station is uncertain, though the other limits
are distinct. The ditch about the Station is also flat and obscure. Severus's
wall makes the north rampart. From south to north it is about five chains, and
from east to west about seven. The area of the most northerly part of the
Station is nearly plain; but the south part is more upon a descent than any
other Station that I remember. I think the Praetorium is visible, and the ruins
of a temple near it. The vast ruins of the Roman Station and Town are truly
wonderful; and a great number of inscriptions and sculptures have been found,
and many yet remain at this place. The town or out-buildings have stood upon a
gentle declivity, to the south and south-east of the Station, where there are
streets, or somewhat that looks like terrasses.

The best view of the walls, and the greatest variety, is between Walwick and
House-steads.

From this Station there seems to have gone a military way to Little Chesters,
some faint vestiges of which I thought I observed, but was not certain. As such
a military way might be of service for marching forces from one of these
Stations to the other, so it might also be further useful, for a more
convenient passage from House-steads to Carr-Voran, or to any other Stations
along the wall more westerly. Near to this way, and to that part of
House-steads where a temple is supposed to have stood, are some old wrought
quarries, now grown over with grass.

The distance between Little Chesters and House-steads is about a mile and
three quarters, and the distance between House-steads and that part of the wall
which is directly opposite to Little Chesters is about a mile and three
furlongs; and in this space there are two visible Castella, the interval
between which seems to be just about six furlongs. This is the least interval
between any two Castella upon the whole track of the wall; the reason of which
may be the distance of the Station at Little Chesters from the wall.

The headless effigies of the Deae Matres remain on the spot (they are said to
be the tutelary Deities of the Forest of Lowes); are represented attired in a
short robe to the knee, each holding something circular between their hands;
supposed to be the work of the Thracian or Syrian Auxiliaries; and are of rude
and ill-proportioned sculpture. Mr Wallis says, on Chapel Hill, a place not far
distant, the Romans had a temple on the eminence, where fragments of Doric
capitals were found not many years ago, one consisting of two torusses plain,
and many broken columns. Mr Horsley's work contains the following Inscriptions
and Sculptures found at this Station.

XXXVI. Jovi Optimo Maximo et Numinibus Augusti Cohors Prima Tungrorum militum
cui praeest Quintus Virius Superstes Praefectus.

This and the following altars were dug up at a place now called the Chapel
Hill, supposed to be the ruins of a considerable temple. The inscriptions were,
not long after the discovery of them, published in the Philosophical
Transactions, by Dr Hunter, by Mr Warburton, and lately again by Mr Gordon:
they are also in Camden's Britannia. The unusual shape of the I in the capital
is remarkable: the Tungri mentioned in this and the following inscriptions,
were a people of Belgic Gaul. The next thing which deserves consideration is,
what we are to understand by Numina Augusti in this and other inscriptions,
where those words occur: Writers are not agreed as to this, and probably it has
not always the same meaning: here and in some other instances, it should seem,
as if those Deities were meant, to which the Emperor was peculiarly devoted;
and that they who erected the altars, complimented the Emperor, by paying
honor and professing their devotion to the same Deities. We find several
inscriptions in Gruter, that are consecrated Numinibus Augusti, and one like
this I. O. M. et Numinibus Augusti: and that addresses were made to the Gods in
behalf of the Emperors, notwithstanding they were often complimented as Deities
themselves, is likewise evident from many of their coins, on which we have
Jovi, Apollini, Marti, Mercurio, consevatori Augusti, with several others of a
like nature: however some have thought, that if this interpretation should be
admitted, Jupiter Optimus Maximus would be excluded from the number of the
Emperors Deities; but in answer to this it may be said, that either the words
may be so understood as if it had been expressed, Jovi Optimo Maximo et
(ceteris) Numinibus Augusti, or else that Jupiter is by way of eminency,
distinguished from the Lares or tutelar Gods of the Emperor, which were often
many in number, and made up partly of deceased persons, as well as other
fictitious Deities. So Flavius Vopiscus, in his life of Aurelius, speaking of
his going into the temple of Heliogabalus, says, There he found that image of
the Deity which he saw favoring him in the war: and Julius Capitolinus, in the
life of Aurelius, addressed to the Emperor Dioclesian, says, The statues of
Marcus Antoninus are to this day set up in many houses among the family
Deities; and soon after, He is to this time esteemed a God, as you always
thought, and do think, most sacred Emperor Dioclesian, who worship him among
your Deities, not as the rest, but in a peculiar manner. But in some other
inscriptions the word Numina, in the plural, is applied to a particular Deity;
so we have Numina Dianae in Horace, and in Virgil, Numina Phoebi; and what
comes nearer to our purpose, the same poet, when speaking of Augustus himself,
and by his sordid flattery ranking him among the Gods; but uncertain where to
place him, uses these words: Au Deus immensi venias maris, actua nautae
Numina sola colant.
On the other hand, Numen in the singular is sometimes joined to a plurality of
Deities, as in Virgil: Non haec sine Numine deorum eveniunt.

XXXVII. Jovi Optimo Maximo et Numinibus Augusti, Cohors Prima Tungrorum cui
praeest Quintus Julius Maximus Praefectus.

It is plain by the tenor of this inscription, the I. O. M. Jovi Optimo Maximo,
was placed in the capital, as well as it appears to be in that of the former,
though nothing of this nature appears in any of the copies which have been
published before; but upon a close view of the original, I plainly discovered
the I. but could not perceive neither O. nor M. This however inclines me to
charge this defect rather on time and the weather, than upon the workmen; but
without these letters, it is evident that the sense of the inscription is not
complete, the ET with which it beg as on the plane of the altar, necessarily
supposing somewhat on the capital. On one side of this altar is a
Praefericulum, and on the other a Patera, each included in a waved ornament. I
dare not venture positively to say, these inscriptions are as old as Antoninus
Pius, though I know of no other in this form but these here at House-steads,
and one upon the altar at Benwell, which last expressly mentions this Emperor;
nor do I think, that any objection, against this antiquity of them, can be
taken from the cut of the letters, or the numeral stroke above the I, which
have nothing in them that favors the lower times: I only add, that some
gentlemen choose to read these inscriptions Cohortis Primae Tungrorum Milites.

XXXVIII.

This is a large and very fine altar, but the inscription entirely gone: I have
given a representation of one side of it, because the Patera and ornaments
about it seemed to be singular: perhaps the circle and cross line at the
bottom, may represent the place of the Patera in the temple. Mr Gordon says,
there were five or six altars within the ruins of this temple. I saw no more
here but the two preceding; the rest which that gentleman describes, with a
good many more sculptures and altars lying at the bottom of a field, south-east
of the Station, in which field remain the visible ruins of streets and buildings

XXXIX. Jovi Optimo Maximo, et Numinibus Augusti. Cohors Prima Tungrorum cui
praeest Quintus Ju^s Maximus Praef^ctus

Th^s with the nine follow^ng inscriptions and sculptures, were lying, as I
said before, at the foot of the field where the Roman town stood, and most of
them were also erected by the same Cohort of the Tungrians, and this in
particular, when under the same Prefect, or at least one of the same name as
No. 37, Quintus Julius Maximus. The letters I. O. M at the top were obscure,
and have been overlooked by Mr Gordon. The US in the fifth line were visible
enough, and no doubt are the last letters in the word Maximus; and probably the
word Praefect^ has followed, but this is effaced The letters are not so large,
or so well cut as in the ^o^^er inscriptions.

XL. Deo Ma^i^ Quintus Flav^s Maternus Praefectus Cohortis Primae Tungrorum
votum so ^ens merito

This is erected to the God (...), by Quintus Florius Matermus, Prefect of the
same Cohort. The globe on the base of the altar is remarkable, and the letter A
is without a transverse. The inscription is well cut, and has nothing of the
lower Empire in it.

XLI. Herculi Cohors Prima Tungrorum Militum cui praeest Publius Aelius
Modestus Praefectus.

Probably this may be later than the former; it is dedicated to Hercules, by
the same Cohort, under a new Commander, Publius Aelius Modestus. Nothing more
is remarkable in it.

XLII. Matribus. Cohors Prima Tungrorum.

This is to the Deae Matres. The name of the Cohort is very plain and distinct,
and part of the word Matribus, but the rest is obliterated, only half of a V
appears in the under line, which I take to be the V in the last syllable of
Tungrorum: but the Commander's name, if it ever has been mentioned, is not now
visible. These Matres are supposed to have been local Deities, and worshipped
at this place.

XLIII. Jovi Optimo Maximo, and at the bottom, Praefectus.

This is another fine altar here, erected to Jupiter Optimus Maximus, and I
believe by the same Cohort; though the names both of the Commander and Cohort
are now destroyed by the weather, and only part of the word Praefectus left
visible upon the plane of the stone. I cannot find that this altar has been
published before.

Mr Warburton has given us a funeral inscription at this place, in his Map of
Northumberland, which I could no where meet with upon the strictest enquiry.
According to his representation, it is thus: DM
HVRMIO
LE. VBASNI
MIL CoH I
TVNGROR
BE PRAEF
CAPURIS
HER. E. C.
This copy is without doubt incorrect, though the main design is obvious
enough. The same Cohort of the Tungrians is plainly mentioned, and enough
beside to show, that it was now under a different Commander, from any of those
whose names occur in the former inscriptions. I imagine we must read it, D^s
manibus Hurmio Leubasinus miles Cohortis Primae Tungrorum cui praeest (perhaps
Capurnus or Capurnius) haeredes secerunt. It is plain that this may justly be
reckoned among the inscriptions, in which the name of this Cohort distinctly
appears, under five different Commanders, besides two or three more which are
doubtful, by reason of their being defaced. These inscriptions strongly prove
this place to be Borcovius, the station upon the wall where, according to the
Notitia, this Cohort was in garrison.

XLIV. Centurio Legionis Sextae Victricis Piae Fidelis votum solvit
libentissime merito.

This inscription is upon a piece of an altar, the upper part being broken off
and lost. It has been published in the Philos Transactions by Dr Hunter, and
more lately by Mr Gordon. But in both, the remains of two imperfect letters in
the break at the top are neglected: and yet I take these to be material,
because the last is plainly the half of an inverted C, the usual mark of a
Century or Centurion. But the name of this Centurion of the 6th Legion, and the
God to whom the altar was dedicated, are gone. The inscription, as to that part
of the form of it, may be compared to the altars and inscriptions upon them at
Benwell. I read LL libentissime, because it is supported by the best
authorities, and seems also the most easy and natural. Some choose to read
Libens Lubens, as the words occur at length in some inscriptions; and others
read Libens Laetus, from the expression of Cloanthus in his vow.

Di, quibus imperium pelagi, quorum aequora curro,
Vobis Laetus ego hoc candentem in littore Taurum,
Constituam ante aras voti reus.
But I keep to the usual reading. Sometimes we have MM, which must be read
Meritissimo.

XLV.

At this place also are several curious sculptures, most of which are described
by Mr Gordon, and in the main very justly. But the account we have of them in
Camden's Britannia, seems to me not so exact. For what is there called a
Mercury, is plainly a Victory. And we are told of the statues of Jupiter,
Bacchus, and a Flamen, which by all I can possibly discern, are only the
figures of two Roman soldiers, and three female figures, supposed to be the
Deae Matres or Campestres. The first is a Victory standing upon a globe on the
right foot, the left being cast behind in the attitude of alighting, or of
taking flight. On her head is a cap of a Conic figure; she is naked to the
waist, from a girdle a vest hangs in plaits to near the knee, and from thence a
flowing robe, open before, which shows the right leg: the arms are broken off
by the wrists: the wings are half elevated. The sculpture is good, in alto
relievo, and the figure is placed in a nich.

XLVI.

This is also in alto relie^o, being the figure of a Roman soldier at length,
in the usual military dress; his bow in his left resting one end on the ground,
and his poinard in his right; his sword hung by his side at his girdle, and his
quiver with arrows behind his right shoulder. This figure also stands within a
n^ch.

XLVII.

This is the figure of another soldier in his accoutrements, but somewhat
imperfect His two belts are vis^^le, crossing each other agreeable to the
description of Ajax's armor in Homer. The broader belt over the right shoulder
must have been that of the shield, as we learn from the same poet.

XLVIII.

These are three female figures seated. The draught given by Mr Horsley, he
says, was taken from the originals. They are naked to the waist, and their legs
naked up to the knees, and therefore (he says) I know not the reason why Mr
Gordon, who published them before, has drawn them with their legs covered down
to the ancles. The figures have lost their heads. These are not improbably
supposed to be local Goddesses, or the Deae Matres or Campestres. We have three
female figures represented together at two other places in this Roman Station,
which I shall describe in their order. The vessels which these three have in
their hands, appear not unlike the Colathus or Modius, on the heads of Sorapis
and Fortune, and often upon the heads of the Roman Emperors; which may favor the
opinion of their being the Deae Campestres, who in these parts had the care of
corn and country affairs, and were supposed to give plenty. Whether these
vessels be of that sort, or whether they represent those in which the sorts or
lo^s were cast, (which also might be a proper attribute of the Deae Matres) and
whether there being three in number has any relation to the number of the
Parcae, I shall leave to others to explain. Perhaps their savage dress may have
some reference to that madness which was always ascribed to the Matres, or
ancient Prophetesses.

XLIX.

About a furlong or less to the east, near the side of a brook, and close to a
hedge, are three other female figures, seated, each in a separate chair. Mr
Gordon takes notice of two only, but a third was also lying near the others,
covered with grass and bushes. The heads and hands are broken off from all the
three, and the drapery is somewhat different in all of them. They are intended
to be represented as sitting. The first in the plate is naked to the waist, her
vest makes several folds above the knee, and falls about half way down to her
ancles; the rest of the legs covered with a kind of stockings. The second is
naked to the waist, the garment also forms many folds about the knees, and
falls about half way down the legs, which are naked to the feet. The chair in
which this figure is placed, has two side feet and a center foot, round which a
cord is twisted, passing thrice round each leg, as binding the figure to the
chair. The third figure has its vest up so as to conceal the breasts, the robe
descends a little below the knees, from whence the lower parts of the legs are
naked. Mr Ward subjoins, I am inclined to think these six figures were
originally placed in some temple, built in the Roman town adjoining to this
Station, together with the three following, whom I do not take to be Deities,
but rather Priestesses, two of which hold some sort of vessel in their right
hands, as a symbol of their office. The difference of their habit seems to
favor this opinion, likewise that of their posture; for they are standing,
which is the posture of attendants, but the others sit, which was always
esteemed a posture of Majesty.

At this place there lies a broken altar of the largest size, but no visible
letters upon it.

L.

In the Station itself, and against a hedge, were three other female figures,
but standing, which are published likewise by Mr Gordon. The Sea Goat and two
fishes above, must probably have some reference to Britain's being an island.
The Sea Goat occurs in some other sculptures found in the north.

The vessels which these hold in their hands, do not appear like the Patera.
They may possibly be intended for Vases of the same sort with those in the
hands of the three sitting, only in another position. If they are vessels into
which the Sorts were put, these figures may represent the action of throwing
them out. It may not be amiss to observe here, that Virgil in the Prophecy of
Helenus, uses the expression sortiri fata for the decrees of heaven.

"Sic fata deum Rex
"Sortitur."
In the sculpture inscribed Deabus Mairabus in Montsaucon, the Goddesses are
represented standing, in an attitude not very unlike these. The middle figure
there holds fruit, either in a vessel or in the folding of her garment; the
figure on the right hand holds a vessel he calls a Patera, and she on the left
holds a branch downwards. That great Antiquary observes, that the Ancients
usually made three of those Goddesses that were worshipped in the plural
number, whether good or bad; as the Gorgons, the Graeae, the daughters of
Phorcus; as also the Parcae, the Sirenes, the Harpyies, the Hesperides, the
Stymphalides, the Graces, nay even the Sibyls, and the Muses according to the
most ancient authors.

LI.

Mr Gordon, when upon the spot with Baron Clark, dog up from the ruins of the
Roman town here, a small statue of a soldier in the Roman military habit,
holding a spear in his right hand, and resting with his left upon a shield.
This is now in the Baron's collection.

There are also in the same honorable person's collection, two other small
altars found here; but as they have no inscriptions, or any thing remarkable
about them, I have not given the draughts.

Besides all these, there are likewise several other pieces of sculptures,
altars, pedestals, and pillars scattered here and there; and one piece of a
fine channelled pillar lying in the midst of the Station. There may be two or
three other Stations in Britain (as Burdoswald, Elenborough, and Lanchester)
that exceed this in number of inscriptions; but none I think equal it, as to
the extent of the ruins of the town, or the number, variety, and curiosity of
the sculptures which yet remain here.

There is one inscription more which belongs to this place, that was published
in the Transactions by Dr Hunter, several years ago. The Doctor says the stone
lay against a hedge, at about a quarter of a m^le distance. I myself saw a
stone in a hedge, which I believe to have had a sepulchral inscription upon it,
and at nearly this distance; but there was not one letter visible upon it. The
inscription was imperfect when the Doctor saw it, who gave it thus: NI VENORI
G OFERSIONIS
ROMVLO ALIMAHI
MANSVETIO SINICIONI
REVINCE QVARTIONIS
ERESI PROCVRAVIT DELF
US RAVTIONIS EX. G. S.
-- ni Venotrionis (filio)
-- g -- Osersionis
Romulo Alimabionis
Mansuatio Senecionis
Revincio Quartionis
Erigi Procuravit Delfius
Rautionis ex gratia sua.


I imagine the to have been a sepulchral monument erected for several persons,
whose fathers (...) ended (...) as well perhaps as some of their own. I am apt
to think these remaining I ^spand^ have been read as above. Mr Ward disliking
the expression ex Gratia sua, chooses (...) Germ^ a S^peri^^.

Dr S^ had the (...) suppose of the common sepulchral kindly which he saw at
this (...) to be found.




The next remarkable place we arrived at was

SHEWING-SHEELS,
between the military road and the wall, near the 28th mile-stone; the remains
of a Roman Station, about sixty yards square, which Camden concludes was
Hunnum, where the Notitia places the wing Sabiniani. Mr Horsley thinks it
belonged to Hadrian's Vallum, and became useless, when Severus's wall was built.

We advanced to

CARRAW-BROUGH,
near the 25th mile-stone, the Roman Station Procolitia, garrisoned by the
first Cohort of the Batavians. Severus's military way appears to enter the east
gate of the fort, and go out at the west. A great part of the rampart here
still continues very entire, especially on the east side; and Severus's wall,
which forms the north rampart, is in good preservation. The ditch is most
visible on the west. Here it may plainly be seen, that the corners of the forts
were not strictly angular, but turned off in a quarter of a circle.

According to Mr Horsley, the buildings without this fort have been chiefly on
the west side, where, some years ago, a well was discovered with a good spring:
the receptacle for the water is about seven feet square within, and built on
all sides with hewn stone: it is now almost filled up with rubbish. There had
also been a wall about it, or a house built over it.

From this fort to the village of Carraw, Hadrian's Vallum and ditch are not
very conspicuous; but Severus's wall is very visible, though the ditch is
obscure. About half a mile south-west from Carraw, upon a high ground, is a
square fort, now called Broom-dykes: it is as large as the fort of
Carraw-brough, and probably has been for exploration, or for the Aestiva of
this fort About halfway between Carraw and Thropfell-house, there seems to be
some vestiges of the smaller military way, supposed to have gone close by
Severus's wall, from turret to turret.

For about a mile the walls keep near to each other, and for that space are
themselves and all their members very large and conspicuous; several of the
regular stones appear in Severus's wall, and the united military way is very
noble. After this the walls part, and take different courses. The north Agger
of Hadrian's fortification, continues after the separation large and high; is
mixed with stones, though no regular pavement appears: whereas Severus's
military way, after this parting, appears little raised, but regularly paved.
Hadrian's Vallum keeps the low ground all the way, whilst Severus's runs along
the brink of the precipices, which in some places seem to have been made
steeper by art, in order to render them more inaccessable. For this reason
Severus's wall is for this space very crooked, whilst Hadrian's in the main is
pretty straight. They have made no ditch to Severus's work, when they had the
advantage of a precipice; nor was there the least occasion: but in these
intervals between the rocks, they have often drawn a ditch, and in these places
usually erected their Castella.

After their separation, Severus's military way accompanies the wall pretty
closely, and is generally, for the whole space that the walls continue so far
parted, visible and distinct; yet the way does not follow every smaller winding
of the wall, upon the tops of the precipices, but generally takes a shorter
course, and passes along the slope of the hill, from Castellum to Castellum, in
the shortest and most convenient line that it can: this is very remarkable at
the first great turn of the wall, after it enters upon the precipices. The wall
itself is almost all this way visible, in an eminent degree, and sometimes it
only wants the battlements, as near Busy Gap, which is an aperture or pass
between the hills so called, where there is an opportunity of crossing the wall
on horseback. Thus it passes by Shewing-sheels Houses, leaving Shewing-sheels
Castle on the north. Mr Horsley further observes, that this Castle, or
something else near it, is called a square Roman Castle, in the new edition of
Camden; and Camden himself thought this was the Station of Hunnum: but he says,
he saw nothing that was Roman about it. The Castle itself, (in ruins) and the
Moats about it, are undoubtedly of a much later date. And he adds, I observed
several trenches thereabouts, particularly a large and long one, which reaches
from Busy Gap cross the passes between the mountains. But these are all on the
north side of the wall, and must certainly have been made in later times, for
securing the neighboring passes. Probably they are no older than the times of
our famous Moss Troopers, who might conveniently shelter themselves among these
hideous mountains and mosses. The height of one of these rocks is near forty
yards perpendicular; Warburton, p. 58. Horsley's Brit. Rom
but in other parts they are considerably higher. As such steep rocks are a
sufficient fence of themselves, the wall has not in these parts had either
strength or thickness, equal to what it has had in others. The remains here are
not so considerable, though it seems very improbable that any of the stones,
especially in some places, could have been removed. In the hollows between the
rocks, besides the addition of the ditch and a Castellum here and there, the
wall itself seems to have been stronger and thicker. Where there is a small
break of the precipice inward, the wall forms an internal angle, fetching a
compass. In other cases, it passes directly from one rock to another, and then
is usually continued down the side of the one, and up the side of the other,
except where the descent is almost perpendicular, in which case it is only
carried close to the side of the rock, beginning again at (...); which was all
that was needful or practicable.

The distance between House-steads and Carraw-brough is somewhat more than four
miles and five furlongs. All the Castella between these two Stations are very
visible, being five in number, but their distances are a little unequal. The
two first intervals from Carraw-brough are just seven furlongs, but the next is
only six. There is a turret near Busy Gap, the distance of which from the
nearest Castellum is, I find, just one-fifth of the interval between that and
the next Castellum.

An altar found here, and deposited in the Dean and Chapter's Library at
Durham, has the following inscription: FORTUNE
CoH. I. BATAVOR
CVI PRAEST
MELACCINVS
MARCELLVS PREF.
Fortunae Cohors Prima Batavorum cui praeest Melaccinus Marcellus Praefectus.
This altar, dedicated to the Goddess Fortune, is most curious and valuable,
because by mentioning the Cohors Prima Batavorum, it confirms the Station to be
Procolitia. The altar is still entire, and the inscription easy enough to be
read. Mr Horsley reads the Commander's name Melaccinus, as it had been read
before: Dr Hunter reads it Marcus Flaccinus; but on a review, Mr Horsley still
thought the second letter in the last line but one to be rather an E. In Mr
Horsley's work we have the following sculpture and inscriptions:

XXXIII.

Mr Warburton, in his Map of Northumberland, gave a drawing of a curious altar
and inscription, being a sepulchral stone, or an altar without any focus at the
top, erected to the Dii Manes by Tranquilla Severa, for her and here is. The
inscription is read thus. Dis Manibus dicatum Tranquila Severa, pro se et suis
votum solvit Libens Merito. This is deposited in the Dean and Chapter's Library
at Durham. The principal curiosity, in the form or manner of the letters, is
the expression of the V and I together, like a Y; though it is only placing the
V above the I, as is very evident, both from the original and the draught I
have given of it; for in the fourth line there is a visible distance or
separation between them, though it is not so in the second, which with some
other small matters has been overlooked in the copies published before: the
letters are strong and well cut, though involved and connected. The name
Tranquila. I find in this and other inscriptions with a single L.

XXXIV.

This stone contains only a human figure, which Mr Gordon supposes to represent
a man, but to me the face appeared rather to be a female: I took the stone to
have been sepulchral, and the image may possibly have been the abovementioned
Tranquila Severa.

XXXV. Centuria Alexandri Posuit.

This is an inscription of the centurial sort, that has not been regarded
before: it is upon a broken stone lying at the door of one of the houses at
Carraw-brough.


It is remarkable that this altar has no focus.

We searched for the sculpture, which Mr Wallis says was found at this Station,
and is built up in a gable of the house at Car^aw: he describes it as a curious
representation of Neptune with his trident. The stone on which this effigy is
cut, is placed so high, that it is difficult to come near it; is almost square,
about 16 inches on the longest side, and has so imperfect a resemblance of
Neptune, that I should not have known what it was, had I not seen Mr Wallis's
description.

We arrived at

WALWICK:
the country through which we had passed from Walton to Carraw was dreary, and
had not our minds been engaged with objects of antiquity, would have proved
wearisome. In some parts we had distant prospects, various in their beauties,
and rendered more striking by the barrenness over which we looked upon them.
When we came within five miles of Chollerford, the vales of North and South
Tyne opened upon us, and the scene was filled with all that pleasing variety
which arises from cultivation, receiving additional beauties from the incidents
of the season. Verdant meads, dotted or patched over, as it were, with the hay
that stood in pikes, The improvidence of the people in Northumberland touching
their hay, is singular; it is put together in several heaps, or as they are
called there, pikes, in the field where it is won, and stands in that form for
many weeks before it is gathered into the mow or stack; by which negligence
much is wasted in the bottoms and outsides of the pikes.
mixed with rich fields of corn, some cut and others ready for the sickle,
interspersed with woodlands and stately trees, formed the Landscape, where
several gentlemen's seats, and well built farmholds, were dispersed; the whole
graced with the winding streams of Tyne: -- the clay-built cottage, and
naked-footed poverty, were no where in view.

In Walwick the Roman wall is in good preservation. From the seat of Thomas
Dixon, Esquire the prospect is filled with the most agreeable subjects: -- to the
left Houghton and Swinburn Castles are seen, with the villages of Hunshaw and
Chollerton -- the north branch of the Tyne, with a fine stone bridge of five
arches at Chollerford, ornament the front ground -- and to the right, a wide
cultivated country, terminated by the town of Hexham.

The seat of Henry Tulip, Esquire also commands a beautiful prospect over this
valley.

The Inn at Chollerford tempted our stay; a spacious room built for the resort
of the neighboring gentlemen, afforded us a pleasing view upon the river;
whilst excellent accommodations indulged us with that degree of satisfaction,
which truly constitutes the traveller's ease.

We visited

WALWICK CHESTERS,
situate near the elegant new-erected Mansion of John Errington, Esquire -- This
was the Cilurnum of the Romans, Camden cal^^ it Gallana.
where, as some authors assert, the Cohors Prima Vangionum was stationed; but
according to Mr Horsley it was garrisoned by the Ala Secunda Astorum. It is
placed on an inclining plain, near the banks of North Tyne; the Vallum forms an
oblong square with obtuse angles, in length from east to west 170 paces, and in
width 130 paces. In Mr Warburton's plan it is set out as being 570 feet long,
and 400 feet broad. The site of the Praetorium, at the eastern end, is very
distinguishable, with two entrances through the Vallum, answering to each side
of the Praetorium and a road leading down to the river. The ground within the
Vallum is crowded with the ruins of stone buildings, which appear to have stood
in lineal directions, forming streets, two on the south side and two on the
north, intersected in the middle by a cross street from north to south. On the
south side without the Vallum and Fosse, many ruins of buildings appear, and
some on the north. I remember, on a tour in Cumberland, I found Caerleud, near
Wigton, crowded with ruins.

This being the first Station in my tour where the direct appearance of regular
streets was observed, I thought it the properest place to introduce the
following remarks.

The Roman manner of encamping a large army, according to Polyhius, and other
ancient writers, is thus represented.



Fig. 1. The Praetorium, a square plot, every side containing 200 feet, for the
General's lodging and his train; the ground so chosen, as might be fittest both
for prospect and direction.

Fig. 2. A street 50 feet broad, leading from the midst of the Praetorium to
the gate fig. 3.

Fig. 4. A street directly opposite to the former, of the same breadth, leading
from the Praetorium to the gate fig. 5, on the right hand of which street was
lodged one Legion, with her Auxilia, and another on the left. Now from the
Praetorium toward the gate 3, measuring out 150 feet, employed to uses
hereafter specified, we are there to begin the lodging of the common soldiers.

Fig. 6. A row of lodgings for the horsemen of the first legion, divided into
10 partitions, according to the number of Turmae in Polybius's Legion, which
consisted of 300 horse, and 4200 foot; the first Turma being quartered in the
lodging nearest to the Praetorium, and the rest in order toward the gate 3.
These lodgings lay lengthways, and open upon the street 2-2, each side being
100 feet; so that to one horseman they allowed a standing equal to a square, a
little exceeding 18 feet every way. Next comes the lodgings of the December
Ordines Triariorum, 10 lodgings for the 10 Ordines, or Manipuli Triariorum
Primae Legionis, with their Centurions and under officers, joining back to back
with the lodgings of the Equites, and opening into the street 8, 8, of 50 feet
broad; Primus Pilus being quartered next to the Praetorium, and so in
consequence toward the gate 3, where all the Decemi Ordines do lodge. Every
one of these lodgings, in length 100 feet, in breadth 50 feet, lodged 60
Triarii, and a rateable part of the Velites, which, considering the proportion
that one of the Ordines Triariorum bore to one of the Ordines Principium and
Hastatorum, and the number of Velites in Polybius's Legion, falls out to be
24 persons: according to which reckoning, to one footman they allowed a
standing equal to a square somewhat more than eight feet every way.

On the other side of the street 8, 8, the lodgings of the December Ordines
Principium Primae Legionis, and at their backs the lodgings of the December
Ordines Hastatorum, opening, the one into the street 8, 8, and the other into
the street 9, 9, being also 50 feet broad. Each of these 20 lodgings was
square, every side containing 100 feet, and lodged 120 Sui Ordinis, and 48
Velites, beside, proportionably, as in Tabernaculis Triariorum, there was for
half as many men half as much ground.

On the other side of the street 9, 9, are the lodgings of the Auxiliares
Equites in Dextro Cornu, and at their backs the lodgings of the Auxiliares
Pedites in Dextro Cornu, the horse opening into the street 9, 9, the foot into
the void place between the lodgings and the trenches, of which further notice
will be taken. Now the Equites Auxiliares of a Legion (the extraordinary band
being deducted) amounting, according to Polybius, to 400 horse, allowing to 300
legionary horse, 10 lodgings of 100 feet every way; we are to allow to these,
following the same proportion, 10 lodgings, each 100 feet in length, and 150 in
breadth, to quarter the one as conveniently as the other. Likewise the footmen,
after the deduction of the extraordinary band, being 3360, that is 336 persons
for every lodging.

Upon the left hand of the street 2-2, are the lodgings of the second Legion,
with her Auxilia, in the same proportion and order in all points with the
first; and so we have the breadth of the camp, from the utmost auxiliary
footmen of the one legion, to the like of the other, 1650 feet, or 330 paces,
accounting five feet for a pace.

AA The Via Quintana, 50 feet broad, passing from side to side through the
whole breadth of the lodgings; so named a Quintis Ordinibus, which quarter all
upon it. In this street, as being in the middle of the soldiers quarters, and
therefore the best adapted to that purpose, was holden a market Forum rerum
utensilium.

BB Of the space of 150 feet between the soldiers quarters and the Praetorium,
100 feet was employed in the Via Principalis; especial care was taken to
beautify this street and keep it clean, as being the usual place of resort for
the soldiers in the daytime. In the other 50 feet toward the Praetorium, was a
row of lodgings opening upon Via Principalis, each lodging bearing every way 50
feet, for the 12 Tribuni and 12 Praefecti Socio^um, their train horses and
carriages. 6, 6, 6, 6, 6, 6, are the lodgings of the six Tribunes of the first
Legion, the first lodging answering directly to the legionary horsemen's
quarter, and the last to the street 9, 9, with passages 30 feet wide between
each. c, c, c, c, c, c, are the lodgings of the Praefecti, answering exactly to
the breadth of the Auxiliary-quarter, with a void space of 50 feet between the
third and fourth tent: and so on the other side for those of the other Legion.

D, D, A cross street 100 feet broad before the Praetorium, where I presume was
held the watch mentioned by Polybius.

e, e, e, e, Here were lodged the Extraordinarii Equites and Extraordinarii
Pedites, the plot was 150 feet by 450 feet, answering the Quaestorium and part
of the Praetorium for the extraordinary band of the Auxilia Primae Legionis,
consisting of 200 horse and 840 foot, the footmen quartered toward the
trenches, and the horse toward the street: and so on the other side for the
other Legion.

f, f, f, f, A plot of the same length, and in breadth 350 feet, for the
foreign Aids, such as by occasion came in.

G, G A plot 200 feet by 350 feet, where the Selecti ac Voluntarii Equites and
Pedites were quartered, being chosen men of the extraordinary band of the
Auxilia Primae Legionis: the foot quartered toward the trenches, the horse
toward the Praetorium: and so on the other side for the other Legion. There was
a reserve therein for Voluntary-men, who from kindred or friendship, or on
other respects attended the General. These Selecti and Voluntarii did not only,
says Polybius, quarter near the General, but also in marching, and all other
times of service, were continually attendant upon the General and the Quaestor,
in the nature of a Cohors Praetoria.

H The Quaestorium, a plot 200 feet by 375 feet, for the Quaestor and his
train, with their treasure and provision; for the Pioneers, Carpenters, Smiths,
Armourers, etc. with their tools and officers. There was also the Auguraculum,
and peradventure the public prison.

I The Forum, a plot equal in dimensions to the Quaestorium. This was the place
of all public assemblies, and the tribunal, with the seat of estate. Here were
probably those seats of which Josephus makes mention, on which the Tribunes and
Centurions sat in judgment, to decide the controversies happening between the
soldiers. Here were placed the eagles and ensigns of the Legions, with the
bearers Aquiliferi and Signiferi, certain images of the Gods, and in later
times, of the Prince and his children, and sometimes of his great favorites.
Tacitus, describing a solemn assembly in that place, says, Inde, Eques, hinc
agmina Legionum stetere fulgentibus aquilis; signisque and simulacris Deum in
modum Templi. Medio Tribunal sedem curulem, and seeds effigiem Neronis
sustinebat -- the Eagles were placed in little chapels. Dio. lib. 4. says, In
all the Roman armies there is a little chapel, and in it a golden eagle does
stand. The ensigns were placed sub dio, as indeed being certain long spears
covered with silver, with the Prince's image hanging upon them, they could
hardly be placed under a tent.

K, K, K A void space 200 feet broad, between the lodgings and the trench,
calculated for the easy issuing of the troops, and to prevent the enemy
throwing fire upon the quarters: also used for lodging the cattle.

L The Vallum, in the summer camps composed of earth, defended by a palisado of
large stakes bound together: these were carried by the common soldiers (usque
ad septenos Vallos) says Livy. In the Vallum were contrived platforms like
turrets, where the engines were placed, the Balistae and Catapultae. -- Without
the Vallum was a ditch six feet in depth at least.

There were four gates in the camp -- the Porta Praetoria, the chief gate,
placed opposite to the enemy; the back-gate, opposite to the former, placed for
the convenience of water and forage -- the other sides had each a gate opening
to the Via Principalis.

This camp was calculated for two of Polybius's ordinary Legions, with their
Auxilia, which was the ordinary army of one Consul.

The General Officer over the camp was named Praefectus Castrorum, who ordered
the staking out the camp, its being kept regular and clean, to order the
trenches and ditch, and to quarter the soldiers. -- To keep in order the Smith,
Carpenter, Engineers, and Artificers, was an Officer named Praefectus Fabrum.

The ruins which appear at Walwick camp, must necessarily induce an enquiry
from the traveller, in the first place, what number of men were stationed
there. -- By every monument remaining to us, one single Cohort only appears to
have held each of these Stations on the wall. 1 Manipuli made 2 Centuries or
Ordines; 3 Manipuli, 1 Cohort; 10 Cohorts, 1 Legion; Legio Romuli, 3000; Legio
Plutarchi, 6000; Legio Freestate, 4000; Legio War with Hanibal, 5000; Legio
Polybii, 4200.
-- Stations defended by a stone-built Vallum, were the permanent ones, and
winter quarters: the encampments in summer were defended by a rampire of turf,
with a palisado, (of which, as I mentioned before, I presume, the Corona
Vallaris was a pattern, composed of pointed stakes) and an outward ditch. Few,
if any remains are left us of such, to ascertain their situation or magnitude.
In a square of 170 paces by 130, there appears room sufficient for a Cohort,
when lodged in tents or hovels of wood: but when in that square, you have
allotted room for the Praetorium, with the apartments of the chief officers,
what kind of tenements of mason-work must there be erected in streets, which
should contain that number of people, with their accoutrements, wives,
families, and household stuff? -- I should conceive, the excellent discipline
of the Roman army would not admit the women within the wall of the camp, except
only in time of imminent peril; but that they were lodged in the suburbs. --
The enquiry naturally brings on this result, that those edifices whose remains
now appear in some of the Roman Stations, (for they are not in all) are of more
modern date, were built (after the Romans forsook this island) by the Britons,
or their Saxon allies, and arose in that Era in which the appellation of Caer
or City was given to many of them. The Britons, in their dispirited situation
on the final retreat of the Romans, would necessarily resort to those barriers
and strongholds, which the Romans had filled. I am induced to believe, that no
castle of any considerable magnitude was erected by the Romans in this country:
the Castellum or Turret on the walls, was not worthy the appellation of Castle;
being, as I before observed, most probably no more than a tower to guard the
gate; or no better than a mere bastion to command the Vallum. Our castles, of
which such noble remains appear at this day, are of much more modern date, and
derived from the Saxon and Norman visiters. The strongest fortifications of the
ancient Britons, were formed of piles of loose stones, heaped to a ridge, and
reduced into a circle, or a square. Such a Vallum was difficult to be
surmounted by assailants. The Vallum of the Roman permanent Station, was built
of hewn stone, inside and out: those which I have seen most perfect (among
which Lanchester, in the county of Durham, is one) were formed of stones about
16 inches long, and 10 inches deep, of rough ashler-work: the outside of the
wall was perpendicular, and might, in its original strength, be 14 or 15 feet
high, and eight feet thick at the foot, but thining or decreasing on the inside
toward the top, by steps and gradations at the distance of about 16 inches,
and the summit covered with a broad flat cape, having a parapet or palisado in
front. Lanchester has four of those steps or gradations now remaining. The
interstice between the inward and outward casing of ashler-work, was filled
with flat stones, in an inclining position, run full of lime mixed with small
pebbles and rough gravel; so that the cement is more impenetrable than the
stone itself: the angles were obtuse, to suit the superstructure of an
exploratory turret; or to give greater power to the garrison, upon an assault
in annoying the enemy on their flanks. The gradations allowed them not only a
power of ascending the wall readily, but of lining it several ranks deep; those
at the top were at liberty to manage their several weapons and engines; those
below to use the bow; and the soldiers engaged during an assault, were easily
relieved when fatigued or wounded.

Some of the Stations had an entrance on each side, defended by a gate; but
whether with a tower or not, it is difficult to ascertain, though it may
reasonably be conjectured.

I apprehend a Roman Station in Britain, when in the occupation of its proper
people, would greatly resemble the following imaginary drawing.



At Walwick Chesters, Severus's wall falls in upon the middle of the camp, on
the east and west sides; and Hadrian's Vallum falls in with the south side of
it: Severus's wall and ditch being never continued through a Station, are here,
as in all the like cases, supplied by the north rampart and ditch of the fort;
and they are both very conspicuous.

From this Station, a military way Horsley's Brit. Romans 144. Warburton's Val.
Romans 51.
has gone directly west, by Little Chesters to Carr-Voran; it is very visible
for the greatest part of the way, and paved with large stones. In its eastern
course, it seems to have passed through this Station, and crossed the river
North Tyne, just below it, by a bridge; and at the distance of three miles and
a half from thence, falls in with the great Ermin-street way, (by the country
people called Watling-street) in its course between the south and north parts
of Britain; which military way crosses, and soon after coincides with another
Roman way, called the Devil's Causeway, which enters into Scotland near to
Berwick upon Tweed. Mr Warburton says, in his opinion this is (though contrary
to the sentiments both of Mr Horsley and Mr Gordon) the true course of the
Roman road, called the Maiden Way; which they supposed to have terminated at
Carr-Voran, or to have entered Scotland by a shorter direction.

From Walwick Chesters to the village of Walwick, Severus's wall and ditch are
very observable; but Hadrian's Vallum, with what belongs to it, is more
obscure. From hence, all the way to Carraw-brough, both the walls and their
ditches are very conspicuous; and for most part of the way, several regular
courses of the original facing stone, are to be seen in Severus's wall: the two
works keep pretty close together, and nearly parallel one to the other: the
military way is within a chain or two of the wall. Taking all the works
together, they are no where in the whole tract, more conspicuous and
magnificent than they are here, at least for so long a space.

Near Towertay, there are five or six regular courses of the facing stones of
the wall: and a little west from thence, are large remains of a Castellum,
detached about a yard from the wall, the reason of which is not very obvious.

There are, for a small space, heaps of rubbish laying on the north side of
Hadrian's ditch, at a place where the ditch passes through some rocks; which
looks as if stones had been wrought there for the use of the wall. There are
also in this part of the north Agger, several breaks, as if they had been made
for the passage of carriages; which I also observed in other parts: none such
are observable in those places where the military ways are united. And both the
rubbish upon the north Agger, and the breaches in it, are where Severus's
military way leaves it, to go off to a Castellum.

The distance between Walwick Chesters and Carraw-brough Fort, is almost three
measured miles and a quarter; and in this space there are three visible
Castella. The fourth has either been very near the Station at Carraw-brough, or
just fallen in with it.

We passed down to

WALWICK-GRANGE,
the former residence of the Errington family. The situation of the house is
romantic and retired. Anthony Errington, Esquire 6 Edward VI. William -- High
Sheriff of Northumberland, 1739. John -- now of Walwick Chesters.
Wallis.


Here we found a monumental stone, having the figure of a woman to the waist,
surrounded with a wreath; the inscription totally obliterated, from its laying
as a bridge-stone over a water-drain, for the passage of cattle to the stable
-- it is represented in the plate. The inscription was communicated to me by Mr
Collier of Newcastle, and by him extracted from a manuscript at Mr Errington's.
Mr Horsley reads this inscription thus:

XXIII. Dis manibus Ursae sorori Juliae conjugi Carrioni filio Furio Germano.

The figure on the top of the stone is, no doubt, one of the women deceased:
the fourth line is reversed. The first letter in the last line is represented
as it appeared upon washing the stone. It is plainly an F, though Mr Gordon has
made VA of it, and VAVRIO of the name. This person was brother to the party who
erected the monument, as is intimated by the word Germanus.


The next plate is the sculpture described by Mr Wallis, as an altar, with a
female Deity, supposed by him to be Cybele; adjoining to which is the figure of
a Lion, raising the head of a man who lays prostrate -- the drawing is taken
with accuracy. This, with the others at the Grange, appear to be merely
monumental; and we were informed they were found to the east of the camp, not
far distant from the Vallum. The sculpture, I apprehend, was dedicated to the
manes of some deceased personage of note. The lion is boldly relieved; his left
foot is placed upon the head of a human figure, naked to the waist, the hands
cast forward in the position of one fallen. Separated from these, by a
moulding, on the left hand of the stone, is a human figure robed to the feet, a
spear resting on the left arm, a small altar at the right knee, and in the
right hand what seems to be a blazing torch. The construction I put upon the
whole, when I saw it, (though contrary to the conjectures of others) is, that
it was erected to the memory of one who was slain in battle, and that the
figure to the left was in the act of incensing and performing the rites and
honors of the dead. The Romans on their monuments expressed particular nations
or people by some animal; so the lion may denote some noble enemy. Scotch
expeditions are by some authors said to be distinguished by the figure of a
boar. Mr Horsley represents this monument somewhat different; he makes the Lion
turning his face from the person on whose head he rests his foot, and the
standing figure holds a key in his hand. -- He gives the following thoughts
upon it.

This is but a coarse, though I think a curious sculpture, which has never, as
I know of, been published before. I first imagined it to have been sepulchral,
as most of the other inscriptions and sculptures are, which belong to this
place. But if it be the mother of the Gods, who is here represented, or any
other principal Deity, the stone has probably been of a more public nature.
There is a broken stone with an imperfect sculpture upon it at Corbridge, which
I take to be of the same nature. The sculpture before us, represents a female
seated, holding a key in her right hand, and I think a thyrsus or hasta in her
left; and on the other part of the stone, a human figure lying along, and a
lion with one of his paws gently raising up the head. The lion respects Cybele,
the mother Goddess, and the thyrsus and hasta are her common symbols, and
sometimes the key. And I am of opinion, that this is the figure of Cybele, the
Syrian Goddess; for as Montfaucon observes, Dea Syria was one of the most
celebrated names of Cybele; and she was so called, because much or chiefly
worshipped in Syria. The symbols were the same, a towered head, Lions, a
Tympanum, Thyrsus, etc. This sculpture then may very probably represent Cybele,
for both the key and the thyrsus were her symbols, by one of which was
represented the opening of the earth, and by the other the producing of wine.
And as we have an altar at Little Chesters devoted to her, this may still
render it more probable: and if it be Cybele who is here represented, the lion
that is gently raising up the head of the human figure, may signify the revival
of man, by the spring and produce of the earth, or by the wine and fruits it
affords: the lion does not seem to be in a devouring posture, but rather
guarding or cherishing. In the sculpture at Corbridge, the reviving figure has
not been human, but some other animal; and the produce of the earth restores
and cherishes both man and beast.


In the wall of the same barn in which the last described sculpture is now
placed, is a monumental inscription, to which we could not pay so much
attention as it required, to make it out, it being grown full of moss, and much
obliterated; and indeed inscriptions of that class are in general of very
little value. The following inscriptions are also in the same wall: M -- AVR --
IANVAR -- SEMERITVS
COH. V CAECILI -- PROCVL
COH X MAEFLLF -- VRSI


In a wall as we approached the house, is the effigy of a man on horseback, cut
in relief, weilding a javelin or sword. Underneath is a monumental inscription,
defaced, beginning in the usual manner, D. M. The inscription as in the plate
was transmitted to me by Mr Collier. In Mr Horsley's work, this inscription is
different to that given on the plate.

XXIV. Dis Manibus M. Suillus victor vixit annos.

The letters D. M. prove this also to be a sepulchral monument; and the figure
shows that the deceased belonged to the horse, and therefore probably was one
of the Ala Secunda Astorum, which in the low Empire kept garrison at Cilurnum,
as the Notitia informs us. Suillus is among the Consular names. M. Suillus
Rupes was Consul in the year 50. according to the Fasti C^nsulares It is
therefore very probable, that this name may have been designed for Marcus
Su^lus Victor The sword in the right hand of the image seems to be of the
Dac^an form. In copying both these monuments, I was obliged in some things to
differ from Mr Cordon's representation. They were found, as I was told, in a
field called the Oxclose, between Walwick Grange and the Chesters.

Mr Horsley's work also contains the following inscriptions found here:

XXV. Jovi Optimo Maximo.

This is a fine altar, but the inscription, by being exposed to the weather, is
so defaced, that only I. O. M at the top are legible; whereby it appears to
have been dedicated to Jupiter Optimus Maximus.

XXVI. Dis Manibus sacrum. Fabiae Honoratae. Fabius Honoratus Tribunus Cohortis
Primae Vangionum, et Aurelia Egleciane fecerunt; filiae Dulcissimae.

This altar was also at the same place, but is now deposited in the Durham
Library. It has also been published before in Mr Warburton's Map of
Northumberland. I take it to have been erected to the D^ Manes by Fabius
Honoratus and Aurelia Egleciane, the parents of Fabia Honoratae, deceased. I
suppose the letter E is wanting at the beginning of the sixth line. Egle^ane
has been of Grecian extract.

Three centurial stones imperfect. No. 27, 28, and 29.

XXX. Cohortis Sextae Centuria Deliviana.

This was in the face of the Roman wall, about a furlong west from Towerlaw,
and near an exploratory turret. It is one of those which have been published in
the Transactions by Dr Hunter.

XXXI. Cohortis Sextae Logus suavis posuit.

This is built up in the inner wall of the cottage at Towerlaw. I perceive that
it must be the same which was published by Dr Hunter in the Transactions, being
a small monument erected by the sixth Cohort in that Loco Suavi, as the Doctor
reads and explains it, who observed to me also, the peculiarity of connecting
the O and C together. I once suspected that it might be Laus Suavis: the
original favors the other reading, but I rather incline to Mr Ward's opinion,
that it is to be read Logus Suavis, both which names occur several times in
Gruter. When the Doctor copied this, it was with the others in the face of the
wall.

Dr Hunter has given more of these inscriptions, but Mr Horsley could not find
the originals. Two of them are thus, according to his description: COH X IVNRV
COH VI ^ LIRE M. S.
These must have been erected by the Centuries or Centurions of the 6th and
10th Cohorts, though the names of them are not complete, and therefore
uncertain.

The Doctor has added two more, consisting each of a line: ELIVLIANI and ^
CVSINIO. I think there is no doubt but these also must have been the names of
Centurions; the former is the genitive, and the latter is the nominative case,
both which are usual. I suppose the first had the centurial mark prefixed to
it, though then effaced, or else overlooked by the Doctor: and I think his name
must have been Flavius Julianus.




At a little distance from the Grange, is the fragment of a cross, with a
sheathed sword cut on it, as the token of a treaty of peace; but to what event
it relates is not known.

Before I quit the Chesters, I must remark a Consular Medallion of Hadrian's
found there, four inches in circumference, with the head in bold relief; the
legend, Hadriano Aug. Caesari; with a lauriated border or civic garland on the
reverse, and this legend, S. P. Q. R. Optimo Principi, S. C. Senate. Popul^.
Roman. -- Cives Servator or Senatus Consulto.
The Consuls entering on their office on the 1st of January, (a day sacred to
Janus) it was observed with great solemnity, as preparatory to the felicity of
the new year; and the Cusular coins were then minted.

Below the Chesters, the foundations of a bridge are apparent at low water,
supposed to be of Roman construction; and it is said cramps of iron have been
observed in the work.

We passed over Chollerford Bridge, in our way to Hexham. Walter Skirlaw,
Bishop of Durham, in the 17th year of the reign of King Richard II. granted a
release from penance for 13 days, to all such as should contribute by labor or
money to the repairs of this bridge. To all christian people to whom these
presents shall come, Walter Bishop of Durham, Health in our Lord Everlasting.

Whereas the Bridge at Chollerford, as we hear, is decayed by the innudation of
the waters, by which there used to be a frequent passage, and now wants repair:
We therefore, confiding in the mercy of Almighty God, and the sufferings of his
Holy Mother and all the Saints, do release unto all our parishioners, and those
in our diocese where this indulgence shall be received, 13 days of their
injoined penance, upon condition they lend a helping hand to the repairing of
the said bridge, or contribute their pious charity thereto. These presents
after three years nothing availing. Given at Chester the 8th Kal. of August, of
our pontificate the 7th year.

Walter was translated from Bath to the Sea of Durham, 3d April, 1389.




As we approached Hexham, the prospect opened upon us in a beautiful manner;
the cultivated vale was painted with all the happy assemblage of woods,
meadows, and corn lands; through which flows the Tyne, (the northern and
southern streams having united) forming upon the valley various broad canals by
its winding course. At the conflux of the rivers lays the sweet retirement of
NETHER-WARDEN, defended from the north-west by lofty eminences, and facing the
vale toward the east, hallowed to the churchmen, as being the retirement of St
John of Beverley, a Bishop of Hexham, in so distant an age as 685. -- A little
further, and opposite to Hexham, on an eminence, stands the church of ST JOHN
LEE; beneath whose site, the banks for near a mile, are laid out in agreeable
walks, formed in a happy taste, appertaining to the mansion of the Jurin
family; a modern building, seated at the foot of the descent, and fronting
toward Hexham; having a rich lawn of meads between it and the river. This
place is called the HERMITAGE; its situation favors the title, but from whom
it was derived, is not known. This was the estate of Dr James Jurin, a
Physician of eminence in London, Fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge. He was
editor of Varenius's Geography, and author of many learned dissertations. He
was Fellow of the College of Physicians, and of the Royal Society: is st^ed by
Voltaire, in his Journal de Scavans, "the famous Jurin."

Wallis. Mr Pennant says, St John of Beverley made the adjacent woods his
retreat from the world; which gave name to the place.

A Tour to Scotland, part 2. p. 290. From what authority this is asserted, I do
not know: it seems to be supported by the name of Mr Jurin's House only.


From thence the vale extends itself in Breadth, and is terminated with the
town of Corbridge: the hills which arise gradually from the plain, on every
hand are well cultivated, and own the seats of many distinguished families.
Over this pleasing scene, Hexham, from an eminence, looks like a gracious
Princess on the opulence of her dependants, rejoicing in their prosperity and
peace.

HEXHAM
is a place of great antiquity; Bid called it Hangustald; by the old English
Saxons it was named Hextolderham; and some authors (particularly Camden) say it
is the Axelodunum of the Romans, that name implying its high situation, by the
application of the old British name Dunum, a hill, by Hextol, a little rivulet
so called, which washes its western foot. Richard, a Prior of Hexham, who
flourished near 800 years ago, writes, Not far from the river Tyne, southward,
there stands a town, in these days of no great magnitude, and thinly
inhabited: but in times past, as the remains of antiquity bear witness, very
large and stately. This place is named He^tolde^ham, from a little rivulet
which runs near it. Etheldreda, wife of King Egfrid, gave it to St Wilfrid,
that it might be created an Episcopal See, about the year 675. He built a
church here, which for its beauty and excellent architecture exceeded all the
Ministers in England.

William of Malmsbury writes, This was crown land when Wilfrid obtained it of
Queen Etheldreda in Exchange. It was wonderful to see what buildings were
erected there, with mighty high walls, and how they were set out, and contrived
with diverse turnings in and out, by winding stairs all polished and garnished
by the curious workmanship of Masons and Pargetters, whom the hope of his
liberality had allured from Rome. So that these buildings carried the show of
the Romish magnificence, and stood very strong, struggling with time.




Most of our Antiquaries believe the origin of Hexham to be derived from the
Romans. Camden says the first Cohort of the Spaniards had their Station here;
but Horsley contradicts Camden's name of Axelodunum, and conjectures it was
Epiacum, placing the Cohors Prima Hispaniorum at Burgh, on Sands, in Cumberland.

In the reign of Egfrid King of Northumberland, A. D. 674, it was made an
Episcopal See by St Wilfrid, then Archbishop of York, who through the
enthusiastic fervor of Etheldrida, Etheldrida was daughter to Anna King of the
East Angles, and was first married to Tonberet, a Grandee in her father's
court, with whom she lived a virgin three years. She lived with Egfrid 12
years, still preserving her virginity. By unceasing importunities, she
prevailed with the King to permit her to retire to a nunnery. She received the
veil from Finam Bishop of Lindisfern, in the abbey of Coldingham, then under
the government of Ebba, the King's aunt. Bid, L. 4. Rich. Hagul. c. 1. Dugdale
Monast. vol. 2.
Egfrid's Queen, which that skilful Ecclesiastic knew how to possess, the
territory of Hexhamshire was granted to the church of St Andrew, which he had
founded. The church was raised by workmen brought from Italy, and by Historians
of that time, said to exceed in beauty and elegance every other edifice in the
land. On Chad's retiring, Wilfrid became sole Bishop of Northumberland; that
is, of all King Osway's dominions, which extended from the Humber to the Firth
of Forth; and had been increased by the conquest he had lately made of
Lincolnshire, which was then part of the Mercian dominions, on the south of
Humber. Besides this vast diocese, Wilfrid had the government of nine abbeys:
and being ever ready to accept, and also to solicit, the most extravagant
donatives, which the ignorant superstition of the age prompted the great ones
to bestow, he built and adorned in the most sumptuous manner his churches and
abbeys, employing in those works, the most skilful artists he could procure
from France and Italy. His magnificence in other respects was in no wise
inferior, for in his family the sons of many of the Northumbrian Nobles resided
for their education, his attendants were numerous, his furniture splendid, and
at his table, he is said to have been served in gold. Bid, L. 4. R. Hagulst.
c. 3. Edd. c. 21.

His principal works were the reparation of the cathedral of York, the roof of
which he covered with lead, and glazed its windows. A D. 670, and the building
of the two magnificent churches of Ripon and Hexham. Eddius describes him, as
attended in his progresses, when performing his episcopal functions, not only
by his fingers, of whom Eddius himself was one, but by masons and artists of
almost every kind. Ed c. 14. Wilfrid's adversity was derived from an aversion
the King took against him, apprehending the Bishop had influenced the Queen to
turn Nun. Which aversion was not a little increased by the Bishop's immoderate
wealth and ambition. Bid. L. 4. He died at his monastry of Oundle, in
Northamptonshire, and was buried in the church of St Peter, at Ripon. Bid
gives his Epitaph, as follows: Wilfridus hic magnus requiescit corpore presul,
Hanc Domino qui aulam, ductus pietatis amore
Fecit, et eximio sacravit nomine Petri.
Cui claves Coeli christus dedit arbiter orbis,
Atque auro ac tyrio devotus vestiit ostro.
Qui netiam sublime crucis, radiante metallo
Hic posuit Tropaeum; necnon et quatuor auro
Scribi evangelii praecepit in ordine libros.
Ac thecam e rutilo his condignam condidit auro.
Paschalis qui etiam solemnia tempora cursus
Catholici ad justum, correxit dogma canonis
Quem statuere patres, dubeoque errore remoto,
Certa suae Genti ostendit mother anima ritus:
Inquae locis istis monachorum examina crebra
Collegit, ac monitis cavit, quae regula patrum
Sedulus instituit, multisque domique forisque,
Jactatus nimium per tempora longa periclis,
Quindeces ternos postquam egit Episcopus annos,
Transiit, et gandens coelestia regna petivit,
Dona, Jesu, ut grex pastoris call sequatur.



They particularly praise the variety of the buildings, the columns, the
ornamental carvings, the oratories, and the crypts. They dwell with great
wonder on the richness of the covers for the altar, the gilding of the walls
with gold and silver, and the fine library, collected at a great expense.
Hexham having suffered much by the Danes, it is presumed no part of the ancient
church remains at this day.

Many successive Bishops held this See.

Eata, Eata was of the Society of Mailross, a disciple of Aiden: Quod esset
idem Eata unus de duodecim pueris Aidani" -- "prepositus est Abbatis jure vir
reverentissimus ac manfuetissimus Eata, qui erat Abbas in Monasterio quod
vocatur Mailross.

Anno Dominicae incarnationis 678 qui est annus Imperii Regis Egfridi 8,
Wylfridus qui totius Northanhymbrorum Provinciae Pontificatum non parvo tempore
administraverat, orta inter ipsum and predictum Regem dissensione, ab
Episcopatu pulsus est and duo in locum ejus Episcopi ordinati sunt Eboraci ab
Archiepiscopo Theodoro, qui Northanhymbrorum genti praeessent. Bosa videlicet,
qui Deiorum, and saepe memoratus Abbas Eata, qui Berniciorum Provinciam
gubernaret. Hic in Civitate Eboraci, ille in Hingustaldensi and Lindisfarnensi
ecclesia Cathedram habens Episcopalem, ambo de Monachorum collegio in
Episcopatus gradum assciti. Igitur Eata, cum 14 annis ecclesiae Lindisfarnensi
Abbatis Jure Praefuisset duarum ecclesiarum suscepit Praesulatum, tertio anno
ex quo Pater Cuthbertus anachoreticae sedis adierat solitudinem. Post tres
autem annos abscessionis Wilfridi Theodorus ordinavit, Tumbertum ad
Hagustaldedsem Ecclesiam, Eata ad Lindisfarnensis Ecclesiae Praesulatum per
quatuor annos remanente.

SYMEON DUNELM." Haec quae sequntur de Episcopis Hagulstalden. decerpta sunt ex
Libro superiori de Episcopis Eboracensibus.

Expulso Wilfrido ab Ecberto rege Northumbr. Eata successit ad Hagustaldensem
Episcop. adjecta praeterea sede Lindisfarnenfi, et utramq. fedem 3. annis
tenuit. Sed postea ad solam Lindisfar. remans^ et ad Hagustaldensem ordinatus
est pro eo Tumburtus. Cui cum 3. annis praefuisset depositus est, and S.
Cuthbertus pro eo subrogatus. Sed quia ille maluit ei prefici in qua
conversatus fuerat, Eata reverso ad Hagustaldensem, ad quam primo ordinatus
fuerat, Cuthbertus ad Lindisfar, ordinatur, quam 2 annis regens, ad Insulam
Farne postea rediens solitariam vitam in sancta conversatione usq. ad mortem
duxit.

Defuncto Eata successit Joannes ad Episcop Hagusteldensem.

Wilfridus expletis tandem 8 annis expulsionis suae a Roma reversus, auditis
Epistolis Agathonis Episcopi To. Episcopatum Hagustaldensem recepit. Et S.
Joannes defuncto Basan Ebor. Episcopatum accepit.

Successit Wilfrido Acca Presbyter ejus, qui post 24 annos in Episcop. expletos
obiit 3 Call. Novembr.

Successit 3. Freodebertus 30 annis. -- Alemundus 13. -- Successit Tilbertus.
-- Deinde Ethelbertus, -- Headredus, -- Eanbertus, -- Tidfertus.

Collectanea Joannis Lelandi, vol. 2. p. 338. edit. 1774.
in the year 678, succeeded the founder as Bishop of Hexham.

Theodore Archbishop of Canterbury having taken displeasure at the insolence of
Wilfrid of York, and possessing the moment of Egfrid's aversion to that
Prelate, obtained the royal license for dividing the kingdom of Northumberland
into three dioceses, York, Lindisfarn, and Hexham; thereby dismembring Hexham
of great part of its territories.

Eata soon afterward being translated to Lindisfarn, was succeeded at Hexham
by Tumbert, A. D. 680. This Bishop was deposed, by a Council held at Twiford,
near the river Alne, A. D. 684; at which King Egfrid was present, with Theodore
Archbishop of Canterbury, at whose instance this Convocation was held, for the
intent of examining Tumbert's denial of his jurisdiction, as Provincial, over
the churches.

St Cuthbert, a Monk of Lindisfarn, then an Anchorite on Farn Island, was
elected to Hexham, and with great reluctance received the Episcopacy: he was
translated to Lindisfarn, and Eata returned to Hexham.

John de Beverley Miracles were not the least of the merits for canonization.
St John of Beverley was of noble birth, and a man of great learning. Venerable Bede was educated by him, and Bid admits he received his order of priesthood
from him. Now though John Baptist did none, yet John of Beverley is said to
have done many miracles. By making the sign of the cross on a dumb youth, with
a scalled head, not only restored to speech and a head of hair, but eloquent
discourse and brave curled locks. Some years before his death he quitted his
archbishopric, and retired to his monastry at Beverley, where he died: and
which afterward King Athelstan made (I will not call it a sanctuary because
unhallowed by the largeness of the liberties allowed thereunto) but a place of
refuge for murderers and malefactors So that the freed Stool in Beverley became
the seat of the scornful; and such heinous offenders as could recover the same,
did therein securely defy all legal prosecution against them.

Fuller's Chapter Hist. He spent the rest of his time in his monastry of Beverley,
and died there in May 721, and was buried in the church porch. He was famous
for working miracles, both living and dead. Malmsbury, Westminister, and Higded
report one very strange thing, which continued to their time, and was shown as
it were for a sight. They tell us that the people of the place used to bring
bulls, the wildest and fiercest they could meet with; these unmanageable
creatures they used to bring hampered with cords, with several strong men to
drag them along; who as soon as they entered the church yard in Beverley,
dropped their fierce and formidable nature, and were as came as if they had
been metamorphosed into sheep. And the people were so well assured of their
inoffensiveness, that they used to turn them loose, and play with them.

Collier's Eccl. Hist.
was the next Bishop of Hexham, and succeeded to that See A. D. 685, a Saxon of
quality, born at Harpham, in Yorkshire, or Beverley, for authors disagree in
the point. He was a scholar of St Hilda, Abbess of Whitby, and a student at
Oxford, and was translated to York, A. D. 687.

St Wilfrid was taken from his retirement after his deposition from the Sea of
York, and succeeded to Hexham on the translation of John of Beverley.

Acca, Translatae fuerunt reliiquiae Accae ex Caemiterio in Ecclesiam
Hagustaldensem post ducentos et quinquaginta annos per Alfredum Presbyterum
Dunelmensem.

Leland's Itinerary.
his Chaplain, was successor to St Wilfrid, A. D. 709. He was greatly esteemed
by Bid, who dedicated several of his works to him. His successors were,
Fredbert, who was Bishop of Hexham 34 years. Alcmund, Bishop 13 years. Tilbert,
Bishop 8 years. Ethelbert, Bishop 7 years. Eadfred, Bishop 3 years. Eanbert,
Bishop 13 years.


Tydfrith Tidferdus, Nunt Danis omnia late depopulantibus, cessavit Episcopatus
Hagustaldensis.

Leland's Itin. v. 7. p. 60.
was the last, who during the ravages made by the Danes, died on his journey to
Rome, in the year 821. -- The bishopric of Hexham, after a long vacancy, was
united with Lindisfarn at Chesterle-street, in 883. It became afterward parcel
of the Sea of Durham, Inscription in the Church at HEXHAM
Hu^hinson del
when Lindisfarn was translated thither, and so remained till the reign of
Henry the First, who in resentment of the conduct of Bishop Flamberd,
dismembered it, and gave it to York.

Thomas Thomas Archiepiscopus Eboracensis induxit Canonicos Regulares in
Ecclesiam Hagustaldensam an. Dom. 1112.
Archbishop of York, on his visit to Hexham, being moved with the desolation of
the church, and the ruins of its ancient magnificence and splendor, together
with the dreadful devastation which had laid in dust the munificent gifts and
works of piety of so many learned and religious men, in the year 1112,
constituted here a Prior and regular Canons of St Austin, and endowed the
priory amply. The present edifice is to be attributed to this Archbishop,
Hexham in the reign of Henry the First being given to the Sea of York. The
architecture is mixed, of the Gothic and Saxon; in one part the narrow sharp
windows appear, which began to be in use about that King's reign. The first
Prior, Aschetill, Aschetillus primus Prior Hagustaldensis Ecclesiae. --
Robertus Pisethe Secundus.

Lel. Itin. V. 7. p. 60.
died March 17, 1130. He was made Prior on the resignation of Richard de Maton,
Richardus Macon fuit Rector Parochialis Ecclesiae de Hexham ante inductos
Canonicos.

Lel. Itin. V. 7. p. 60.
Rector of this church. Robert Pisethe, second Prior, succeeded him in 1131.

As a testimony of the restoration and repair of this church, a curious
inscription, on 12 square pieces of wood, (originally 14) unnoticed by most
visiters, is represented in the annexed plate. I did not discover it on my
first visit to Hexham in 1774. It is cut in wood, and intermixed with gilded
ornaments in rose work, in a fillet of the great screen, which closes the
entrance to the choir, (whereon is painted Death's Dance) and is thus read,
Orate pro anima, Dni Thomae S..... Pater hujus Ecclesiae, Qui fecit hoc Opus.
The Italicks supply the parts of the inscription now lost. Mr Pennant has given
the reading of this inscription in the second part of his Tour in Scotland,
having had the same communicated to him by my fellow-traveller, Mr Bailey; but
therein he introduces the word Prior, for Pater.


Hexham having suffered great distress under an incursion of the Scots in the
reign of Edward the First, A. D. 1296, when the priory and part of the
cathedral were burnt; in the 25th year of that reign, (soon after this
devastation) an inquisition was taken of the possessions of the church, dated
at Newcastle on Tyne, July 7, 1297; in which the particulars of the revenue
were set forth, too tedious to be inserted here, and of little consequence to
the traveller. I will extract the names of Benefactors from Mr Wallis's book,
as it may gratify the curiosity of the reader.

Thomas Archbishop of York gave to this priory, founded by him, the church with
all its rights, the manor of Ainwick, villages Sandhoe and Yamzigg -- all
tithes in Hextoldesham, liberty, soke and soken. Thuritan Archbishop of York
gave considerable property in Hexham and the villages of Dotland, Knitilhessel,
and two Grottingtons, with all tithes of animals in the liberty of Hexham.
Robert de Skipton, the village of B^ngfield, etc. Walter Gray and Walter
Gifford Archbishop of York, several small parcels of land, etc. Adam de
Tynedale, manor and church of Warden, chapels of Stonecroft, Heyden and
Langley, pasture for 160 sheep in Heyden, etc. Adam de Setlingstones, small
parcels of land. Adam de Thorngrafton, small parcels of land. Uctred de
Allerwash, and small parcels of land. Richard Bailiff, small parcels of land.
Odinell de Unframvill, the church of Chollerton with its four chapels, and
several lands, etc. Gilbert de Unframvill, and several lands. Richard de
Unframvill, several lands. Ralph de Gunnerton, -- the like Margery de
Unframvill Walter de Insula Walter Corbe: Alice de Bolam James de Cause Stephen
Battle Gilbert de Wircester de Caderon Gilbert de S^ealy, the church of
Slealy, etc. Robert de Insula, several lands. John de W^rcester, several lands.
Sir Thomas de Dev^on, manor of North Milbourn, etc. Abbot of New Minister,
Shilden, etc. William King of Scots, Whitfield, etc. Richard Cummin, several
lands, etc. Briceus de Thirlwall, and Roger his son, several lands, etc. Ivo de
Vetere Ponte several lands, etc. Laurence de Ticket several lands, etc. Henry
de Graham several lands, etc. Hubert de Delavale and Richelda his mother,
several lands, etc. Thomas de Echwick, several lands, etc. Peter de Faw^n,
several lands, etc. William son of Bos^, several lands, etc. John son of Elias,
several lands, etc. Walter de Bolbeck, several lands, etc. Hugh de Delavale,
Benwell manor, etc. Christian de Throckley, East-Matfin manor, etc. Roger de
Merlay, several lands, etc. Henry de Ferlington several lands, etc. Walter son
of William and Isabel, several lands, etc. Roger Bertram, two fisheries in
Tyne, etc. John de Normanvil, Cheesburn manor, etc. Richard Bishop of Durham,
tithes, etc. Bernard de Baliol, Stelling manor. Ralph de Gunnerton, homages
with rent service. William de Dalton, homages with rent service. Richard de
Humfranvill, homages with rent service. Hugh de Baliol, homages with rent
service. John de Wircester, homages with rent service. Alice de Bolham, homages
with rent service. James de Cause and Alice his wife, homages with rent service.
Bricius de Thirlwal, homages with rent service. Adam de Tynedale, homages with
rent service. William the son of Boso, homages with rent service. Theophania de
la Bataile, homages with rent service. William King of Scots, homages with rent
service. Christian de Throckley, homages with rent service.
On burning the monastery, the deeds being lost, this inquisition was taken as
the foundation of a royal grant of confirmation.


The whole at the dissolution was valued at 122l. 11s. 6d. according to
Dugdale, and 138l. 1s. 9d. as it is set forth in Speed. There were then 14
Religious in the abbey, Edward Tay, Prior.

This church possessed that ignominious privilege called Sanctuary, till taken
away by Henry VIII. in 1534, on which the disqualifying statute fixes an
everlasting stigma, by enacting, that gross offenders against the laws, taking
sanctuary at the altar, or any consecrated place, should be out of the
protection of churches: implying, that such pollutions had rendered obnoxious,
even the most sacred places.

The famous TRIDSTOL, or Stool of Peace, is still preserved here. Whoever took
possession of it was sure of remission. The like in Beverley.
This place had the privilege of a sanctuary, which was not merely confined to
the church, but extended a mile four ways, Steven's Cont. Dugdale, II. 135.
and the limits each way marked by a cross. Heavy penalties were levied on
those who dared to violate this sanctuary, by seizing on any criminal within
the prescribed bounds; but if they presumed to take him out of the stool,
Richard of Hexham, as quoted by Stavely Hist. Chapter 173.
the offense was not redeemable by any sum; it was esteemed botoless beyond the
power of pecuniary amends; and the offenders were left to the utmost severity
of the church, and suffered excommunication; in old times the most terrible of
punishments. Pennant's Tour in Scotland, part II.


In Hexham were two Hospitals, one for Lepers, the other for the Sick, both
well endowed.

The Archbishop of York enjoyed great privileges here; to enquire of which, a
Quo Warranto was issued in the 21st year of the reign of King Edward I. to show
by what authority he claimed to have all Capitulas of the Crown, delivered to
his Bailiff, to be pleaded by Justices, whom he should assign for that purpose,
concerning all things arising within his manor of Hextoldersham; and that all
pleas, as well of the Crown as other pleas, be pleaded by his writs, and his
Justices in his said manor to take and have the issues and profits arising
thereby; and to do and execute by his officers, all things pertaining to the
office of Sheriff and Coroner; and that no Bailiff of the King do enter into
the said manor, to execute any office. And to have the custody of prisoners,
and make delivery of them at his will. And to have market, gallows, chattels of
fugitives and felons condemned in the said manor, without leave of the King and
his progenitors; which things do pertain to the King's crown and dignity. -- To
which the Bishop pleaded his claim from ancient time, and usage from time
immemorial; -- in consequence of which these privileges of a Palatine were
confirmed by the King and Council. In the 13th year of the reign of King Edward
III. Hexham had Jura Regalia confirmed, and the right of levying Tenths and
Fifteenths.

In the second year of Henry the Fifth's reign, Hexham was stripped of those
privileges, as being an asylum of thieves and robbers.

The tenants within this manor, as subjects of a Palatinate, were exempt from
all other public subsidies than those raised by their Palatine.

Hexham came to the Crown under Archbishop Holgate, who exchanged this manor
for some abbey lands, in the 36th year of the reign of Henry VIII. retaining
nothing but the special jurisdiction. In the 14th year of Queen Elizabeth, it
was annexed to the county of Northumberland; and the manor being soon after
sold, devolved on the late Sir Walter Calverly Blackett.

The remains of this ancient cathedral bear innumerable marks of magnificence.
Many ancient tombs are here: within the quire is the recumbent effigy of an
Ecclesiastic hooded, on a table monument of black marble, in relief; at the
foot, a shield with uncommon arms, or rather an emblematical device to denote
mortality, being the resemblance of cross bones. The people who keep the doors,
say it is the tomb of Prior Richard, an Historian of the 12th century. He was
some time a Monk here, and occurs Prior A. D. 1153. The device on the shield,
if it is presumed to be the tomb of Richard, will then appear to be the letters
ri placed one over the other. Mr Wallis's Antiquities, which I have frequent
occasion to quote, says these arms are argent, a saltier gules; and that
contiguous to this tomb, an helmet is fixed, denoting that this personage,
before he was an Ecclesiastic, was of some military order. He also supposes he
was Prior here. -- If it were not for the ample field of imagination, and
inexhaustable conjectures, the employment of Antiquaries would be dull indeed
-- I cannot forbear dissenting from this learned visiter. Immediately adjoining
this tomb, stands a shrine In the choir is a beautiful Oratory, of stone below
and wood above, most exquisitely carved, now converted into a pew. Near that is
the tomb of a Religious, probably a Prior. Above in a shield are in Saxon
characters the letters RI: these being in many parts of the building, are
probably the initials of some of the pious benefactors.

Pennant's Tour in Scotland, part II.
of wood-work, after the ancient form, supported on pillars, canopied, and
ornamented with tabernacle-work; such as in the early ages of the church
distinguished the place where the remains of great personages or saints were
deposited: this is surrounded with stone-work, having figures in various
niches, which by reason of the stalls built against them, I could not make out.
At the eastern end of this shrine, within, is an altar; above which are painted
the sufferings of our Lord. On the canopy or roof are the arms on a shield,
very fresh, Azure, the saltier (if it is such) Or. Behind the high altar, and
in other parts of the church, I perceived the same arms, and also in the walls
of the priory: from whence I am led to believe this is the tomb of one of the
Priors, a great benefactor to the church, and the Insignia, a cross of the
dedicatory St Andrew, formed of the two first letters of the Prior's name.



The Religious of the Order of St Austin were hooded.

I observed under a seat near adjoining, two effigies, each about 18 inches
high, cut in alto relievo, in niches, on a grit stone; In a square hole in a
corner of the Oratory, is an uncouth head of Jupiter; and in the inside a Hare,
the emblem of watchfulness. Against a pillar is a ridiculous figure of a
barefooted man, with a great club: perhaps a pilgrim.

Pennant's Tour in Scotland, part II. It in no wise represents a Pilgrim; he
carries no scrip, and wears a cap or helmet.


the one (fig. IIII.) I conceive represents Silenus, large eared, fitting
resting his head on his hand, his elbow supported on his knee.



The other (fig. I.) I apprehend is designed for Jupiter. And near the altar
stands a figure of stone, about three feet eight inches high, supporting
himself on a staff, on his head something that appears like a helmet or a cap
and plume, and round his ancles three wreaths or fetters. This (fig. III.) I
apprehend is the figure of Pan. It is reasonable to conjecture they have been
saved from the ruins, when the Roman remains in the vaults were obtained. Some
travelers have concluded these were the works of monkish times. The effigies
are accurately represented in the annexed plates, and the reader will from
thence determine according to his own judgment.

The tomb of Umfrevill, one of the family of the Earls of Angus, mentioned by
Camden, Within the quire is to be seen a tomb of a nobleman of that warlike
family Umfrevills, with his legs across, and his escutcheon of arms at his
side: after which fashion in those days were they only interred, who took upon
them the cross, and were marked with the badge of the cross for sacred warfare,
to recover the Holy Land from the Mahomedans and Turks.

Camd. Brit.
remains in the south aile, not much mutilated. This family were benefactors to
the church of Hexham.

A little below, in the same aile, is the tomb of Sir Robert Ogle, with the
arms of Bertram and Ogles, quartered, and an inscription in brass, dated 1404.
These were ancient families in Northumberland; the Ogles owned seven Lords and
thirty Knights of their race, having large possessions before the conquest.

In the north aile is a monument in the wall, of such a form as usually
designed at the building of churches, for founders or great benefactors; but to
what personage this belongs, is not known, no insignia or inscription
remaining. It is supposed to be the tomb of Alfwold, King of Northumberland,
who was assassinated at Cilchester, by Sigga, a factious Lord of his Court, on
the 23d of September, A. D. 788. I measured an effigy which lays near this
tomb, and found it answering exactly in length. The tomb is formed in an
aperture made through the wall by an elegant piece of arched work. The effigy
represents an Ecclesiastic with his hood thrown back to his forehead, his hands
elevated, and robed to the feet; the folds of the drapery thrown into excellent
order, easy and elegant.

On the screen at the entrance of the quire, are some strange monastic
paintings, vulgarly styled Death's Dance; a ludicrous representation of the
universal influence of that insatiable tyrant, over all ranks of men; beginning
with the full-chested Cardinal, and triply coronated Pope, and leading into his
mazes the Prince and Peasant: but I am so disgusted with the church paintings I
have seen in other places, that I had not patience to attend to this defilement
of the tabernacle. There are some grim and lion-like Saints painted in the
ailes, among whom stands St John of Beverley, of hideous aspect.

In the pavement of the cross aile are several monuments; one inscribed "Hic
Jacet Thomas de Devilston," and ornamented with a crosier; another with a
crosier and chalice, inscribed "Johannes Dew," with the usual legendary prayer
in the margin, Orate per anima, etc.

In a part behind the north door, is the recumbent effigy of a Knight, which Mr
Wallis says represents Henry Beaufort, Duke of Somerset, taken prisoner and
beheaded at Hexham by King Edward the Fourth; his shield Or, bearing a fesse
az, with three garbs proper. I think it improbable this monument was erected
for a traitor, who died an ignominious death: besides, it cannot be any of the
Beaufort family, as they quartered the arms of England. I rather conceive this
was one of the Aydens of Ayden Castle, the arms assumed by the Edens of the
North at this day, being greatly similar. The male line of the family of Aydens
of Ayden Castle, was extinct in Edward the First's time; and Emma the heiress
and relict of that family, was by him, as a royal ward, given in marriage to
Wallis.

The interior architecture of this church, is highly finished, in the mixed
Gothic order; the pillars are clustered, supporting Gothic arches; the members
of the archings, and the pilasters, finely proportioned. The quire is roofed
with wood covered with lead, and the side ailes are arched with stone; a double
gallery runs round the whole, opening with Saxon arches; each opening is
composed of three arches, the center circular, the side ones pointed, of which
the workmanship is very fine, and the pillars light. The principal pillars of
this structure in general are rather disproportionate and heavy; an error seen
in most of the Saxon churches.

The Mercers Company in London, under the will of Richard Fishborn, Esquire about
the year 1630, founded a Lectureship here, which they endowed by a purchase of
tithes. Sir Walter Calverly Blackett gave several valuable gifts for the
augmentation of the living; and many charities have been left for the relief of
the poor. It is a doubt with me, whether these donations to the poor do not
induce indigent and impotent persons to crowd a town, and in effect encourage
idleness. Had the donors disposed the same sums for instituting and supporting
a manufactory, the encouragement to industry would have brought with it
opulence, instead of crowds of mendicants.

Mr Gale and Dr Stukeley, in the year 1726, visited the vaults of this church,
now used as a private burial-place. What will not Curiosity attempt! They have
given two inscriptions discovered there; the one containing a new name of a
Legatus Augusti, viz. Q. Calpurnius concessinius, and that of a body of horse
at Corchester, called Equites Caesarienses or Caesariani Coronotatae, not
mentioned either in the Notitia Imperii or elsewhere. The other of Lucius
Septimus Severus, by them said to be of the best sculpture, the letters large,
but the inscription imperfect. The curiosity remarked by these Antiquaries,
consists in this monument having so distinctly the name of that Emperor, and
its being the only genuine one found so near the wall with his name on it.

Mr Horsley gives the first of these inscriptions in the following manner: LEG.
A --
Q. CALPVRNVS
CONCESSINI
US. PRAEF. EQ
CAESA. OORI
ONOTOTAR
VM. MANVPR
AESENTISSIMI
NVMINVS DEVS
Legato Augustati Propraetore Quintus Calpurnius, Concessinius Praefectus
equitum Caesariensium Coronototarum, manu Praesentissimi Numinis dei votum
solvit.

To this reading he adds the following remarks:

The Rev. Mr Andrews of Hexham, obliged a friend of mine with a copy of the
same inscriptions, which he had taken. This inscription is upon a Roman altar:
I had leave to descend into the vault and view the inscriptions. I spent some
time in examining every particular, and have here represented them as I found
them, with the greatest impartiality. Every word and letter that remains in
this, is so plain as to leave no room for any doubt. The not taking notice that
the altar and inscription are both of them imperfect at the top, is the only
material defect in the former representation. I look upon it as certain, that
the letters which have filled up the deficient part of the line, have been VG.
PR. PR. for thus the number of letters in this line will answer to the number
in the others. I think also there have been two or three lines above, which are
broken off: these have probably contained the name of the Legate, and of the
God to whom the altar had been inscribed. The conjectures in the letters in Mr
Gordon's appendix are very ingenious, and the arguments used in support of
them, very learned and curious. The author supposes, that here is the name of a
new Legate, as also of a new body of horse, called Equites Caesarienses (or
Caesariani) Corionototae: the name Equites Caesarienses, is there justified by
a parallel instance in Gruter; and the name Corionototae, that gentleman
supposes to be a corruption of the Roman name of a people in these parts,
perhaps Curia or Coria Otodinor, and that Corbridge was the place. The rest of
the inscription he judiciously explains to be a flattering acknowledgment of
this person, that he was promoted by the immediate hand of the Emperor; it
being no new thing to call the Emperors Gods, and erect altars to them. But in
a matter so entirely conjectural, it is very excusable to suspend one's assent;
and the more explanations are offered, it is the more probable that the truth
will be found out. If Q. Calpurnius Concessinius was the Imperial Legate, I
scarce think that he would in the same inscription style himself Prefect of
Horse: I rather believe, as I hinted before, that the name of the Legate has
been above, and is broken off. Perhaps it has been sub Legato Augustali, or pro
saluti Legati Augustalis. As to the word Corionototarum, Extract of a Letter
from Sir John Clerk to R. Gale, Esquire

As to your inscription from Hexham, it is evident the artificer has been very
unsuccessful, and that his chisel has stammered into more syllabus than were
necessary in the word Corionototarum. I humbly think it ought to have been
Coriatarum, and that the people of Corchester were called Coriatae, as the
Spartans of old were called Spartiatae, or Spartietas, much used by Herodotus.


I rather suppose that Ptolemy's Coria or Curia, was a town of the Gadeni, than
of the Otadini. Ptolemy's Coritani, are a people of one of the Provinciae
Caesarienses in Britain, and possibly, from hence these horse might have the
name of Caesarienses Coritani. Coriotiotar in the anonymous Ravenuas, is not
unlike this name. I suppose it may have been mistaken by some transcriber for
Coriotiotae or Corionototae; the shape of the Gothic E is not unfavourale to
this: but it seems more probable to me, that it was from some more distant
country, than any part of Britain, that these troops had the name of
Caesarienses Corionototae or Caesarienses Corionototarum. The Crotoniatae
(inhabitants of Croton, a city in Greece) are celebrated by Strabo; according
to whom, 'the last of these was equal to the first of the other Greeks.'
Possibly this name may have been designed for Crotoniatarum: if this be
admitted, we may more easily account for the Greek inscriptions at Corbridge
and Lanchester, and for the more evidences of Grecian Auxiliaries, that appear
in the neighborhood. The explication of the rest of the inscription by the
same learned gentleman, whom I mentioned above, is certainly just; that
Praesentissimum Numen dei signifies the Emperor, and manu intimates that Q.
Calpurnius was advanced to his post by the immediate From the Manuscripts of
the late Roger Gale, Esquire
hand of this Emperor, supposed to be Commodus, who least deserved such titles,
and yet most insisted on them. I find Numini Praesenti in an inscription to
Caracalla. The word Praesenti seems to be used in a different sense in these
cases from that of Horace: Praesenti tibi maturos largimur honores,
Jurandasque tuum per Numen ponimus aras.


And again in his Ode concerning Regulus: -- Praesens divus habebitur
Augustus adjectis Britannis
Imperio.


To what particular Emperor this inscription must be referred, is hard to
determine with certainty.

Our curiosity urged us, at the distance of 49 years after those learned
visiters had inspected the vaults, to see the antiquities they mention: perhaps
they had entered into open cells, then unused for sepulture: our descent was
more solemn. These vaults have for several years past been used as a private
burial-place, and the entrance is covered with a table of marble, of prodigious
size, which is not usually moved but at the denunciation of mortality. The
massive Claustrum was heaved from the mouth of the vault by iron crows and
rollers, at which the ground trembled over the arches -- by a ladder we
descended about 20 feet, into the regions of the dead, where avaricious
curiosity making an anxious research after the objects of its desire, so
completely occupied the mind, that scarce one reflection was agitated, for
those, over whose ashes we wantonly trampled. These vaults, which anciently
were within the west end of the cross, have been built of the stones of a Roman
station, many cornices, mouldings, and ornaments, with fragments of
inscriptions, are scattered through the walls. We found the preceding
inscription correspond exactly with the plate in Mr Horsley's works. The narrow
vault, on the left hand, is roofed over with flat stones, on the furthest of
which the following inscription is preserved, but from its situation, and the
stone being reversed, rendered difficult to be read. My companion and I took it
with great attention, both in the letters as reversed, and (as well as we could
see them) direct. Our copies exactly corresponded with each other, and yet they
differ from Mr Horsley's, in whose plates it is thus represented: IMP. CAES. L.
SEP --
PERT^AXET. IMP. C --
AVRANTONIN --
VSII --
-- HORT
VEXILLATION --
FE -- RVNT.
Imperator Caesar Lucius Septimius Pertinax et Imperator Caesar Marcus Aurelius
Antoninus Pius Felix Augustus et Geta Caesar, Cohortium Vexillationes fecerunt.

To this reading he adds, There can be no great doubt, with relation to the
former part of it, which is not unlike the inscription at Burgh, in
Richmondshire; a copy of which was long ago published by Mr Camden, and runs
thus: Imperatori Caesari Marco Antonino Pio Aurelio Felici Augusto, etc. Then
follows a space where the name of Geta has been erased. Just so in this
inscription at Hexham; after much the same names and titles given to Severus
and Caracalla, there follows a small space, where it is manifest the words have
been designedly erased with a tool. I suppose the Vexillatio Legionis was made
up of the several Vexillations of the particular Cohorts: and perhaps they
might retain the name of Vexillationes Cohortium, when the Vexillations of all
the Cohorts of the Legion, that is, the whole Vexillation of the Legion itself
was not present. These then might be the Vexillations of some Cohorts of one of
the Legions which were employed in building the wall, that might be
occasionally at Hexham, and erect this inscription. Some of the inscription,
facing the right hand, is covered in the wall, on which the inscribed stone
rests. The lower part of the stone is also fixed in the end wall of one of the
passages into the vault; but not so as to hinder the lowest line from being
read, though not without difficulty. The letters FE -- RVNT are distinct and
certain, and as much room is between the E and R, as will contain CE: so that
beyond all question it has been fecerunt, which compleats the inscription. The
stone has had a raised bordering, which was spoiled, and made level with the
rest of the stone, when it was built up in this place.

It is with the utmost diffidence I offer to the public remarks upon this
inscription, where they do not agree with the very learned Antiquaries who
before copied it. The beginning of the inscription seems to be IMP CAES SEV --;
but the line is imperfect and broken off: I could not discover the L in this
line. The second line appeared to be VERON. AXEL. IMPO. And the beginning of
the third line an AA mixed.

An inscription in the Cottonian collection, found at Bows, in Yorkshire,
mentions the Vettones as follows: VIRIVS LVPVS
LEG. AVG. PR. PR Propraetor under Severus.
BALINEVM VI
IGNIS EXVST
VM COH. I. THR
ACVM REST
ITVIT. CVRAN
TE VAL. FRON
TONE. PRAEF
EQ. ALAE VETTO --


These people were sometimes styled Verones, and at other times Vettones.
Verones, a people of Spain, so called from the river which washed their
borders. Sil. 3. 378. sed alii codd. habent Vettones. -- Vettones, bordering on
Celtiberia. Sil. 373. 8.

Ainsworth.
Camden says, a Cohort of Spaniards were stationed at Hexham. The inscription,
by having one side lodged in the wall, may now appear with a great diminution.
I would not have offered my observations, but that they may induce some future
visiter to reconcile these differences. I own it difficult to give a reasonable
conjecture how the names of Severus and Antoninus could be mixed in this
inscription. S. Imp. A. D. 193.
A. -- 137.



Before I quit the subject of these inscriptions, I must add, that Mr Horsley
says these stones and inscriptions argue Hexham to have been a Roman Station;
for the plenty of free stone so near, makes it improbable that in the modern
buildings (or those later than Roman) they would have fetched any stones either
from the Roman Wall or from Corbridge. And this might have been a town in the
Roman times, and yet not be mentioned in the Itinerary, nor continue so late as
till the writing of the Notitia. I know not what name to give it, unless we
suppose it to have been Ptolemy's Epiacum. The situation of this does by no
means answer, but it is plain from Vinovium and Galatum, that Ptolemy is here
in confusion; and the mutual distances between these three places, are not so
far wrong as their situation.

I have elsewhere proved, that it is not Axelodunum, though it has long been
possessed of that, name.

At the west end of the church are the remains of the priory. It was a spacious
building, with an adjoining cloister. The refectory is yet entire, and serves
as a room of entertainment at public times; is very spacious, with a roof of
oak work. What remains of the cloisters, shows they were of excellent
workmanship: the tabernacle work and pilasters above the seats are elegant: the
door case opposite, which formerly was an entrance into the church, is richly
wrought with pierced work of fruit and foliage, in a style easy and bold.

The town of Hexham was burnt by the Scots in the year 1296, together with the
priory, the west end of the church, and school-house.

It was pillaged by David King of Scots, in the 20th year of the reign of King
Edward III. A. D. 1346, who entered the borders with 40,000 men, making their
way by Lanercost Priory and Nawarth Castle, in Cumberland; on which incursion
they were over thrown at Nevil's Cross, near Durham, and David was taken
prisoner. Jo. Copeland took David Bruce King of Scotland prisoner in the battle
at Nevil's Cross, for which he was rewarded with knighthood and 500 l. per
annum. He was Sheriff of Northumberland 25 King Edward III. -- Note, the
Sheriffs of this county never accounted in the Exchequer until 3 King Edward VI.

England's Worthies.


This place is not very populous, the inhabitants being computed at 2000 souls:
the streets are narrow, and ill built. The Marketplace, near the center of the
town, is a spacious square; in which is a convenient piazza for the
butcher-meat, the stalls being moveable. The town is supplied by a fluent
fountain of water, in the Marketplace. Two markets are held here in the week,
on Thursday and Saturday; and there are two annual fairs.

Leading to the priory, is a gate-way of very ancient architecture; the arches
form a semicircle, and are molded in a style which denotes their antiquity to
be much greater than any part of the priory or cathedral. There is nothing
similar to this work, in proportion of members, about the church, or any thing
in Hexham I could discover that appeared cotemporary. The roof of the gate-way
is of ribbed arching, meeting in the center; the interstices, filled with thin
stones or bricks, such as are seen in Roman works. The passage is divided into
a large gate-way for horsemen or carriages, and a narrow one for foot
passengers. The superstructure is in ruins. Mr Pennant says this gate is of the
old Saxon architecture, and perhaps part of the labors of the great Wilfrid.

There are two ancient towers in the town, the one used as a Court or
Sessions House, anciently an exploratory tower, belonging to the Bishops and
Priors of Hexham; the other situated on the top of the hill toward the Tyne,
of remarkable architecture; being square, containing very small apertures to
admit the light, and having a course of corbels projecting a long way from the
top, which seem to have supported a hanging gallery, and bespeak the tower, at
present, not near its original height. The founders of these places are not
known. Camden says "he heard they appertained to the Archbishop of York." This
last-mentioned tower, having two dreadful dungeons within it, doubtless has
been the chief fortress of the place, and was used as a prison when the Bishops
of Hexham possessed their palatine jurisdiction.

In one of the chambers remaining in this tower, is the inscription on the
plate. Mr Bailey, who was my companion, was informed of it on a late visit to
Hexham, and did me the favor to communicate it. He describes it as cut with a
knife on the oak lintle of the chimney, which remains rough and uneven. The
room is of a considerable size, but appears to have had no windows, or any
lights but what was received through loop-holes in the walls. The Jailer now
uses the apartment for a hay-loft. The inscription seems to be the labor of
some Scotch prisoner, and by the character is of no very distant antiquity. By
the two letters at the beginning of the inscription, I apprehend it was done in
the reign of one of the James's; and give it the greatest antiquity, under the
Scotch royal line of that name, it will only carry it to the beginning of the
13th century. Notwithstanding I am obliged to confess I do not understand it, I
thought it necessary to insert it, and shall be obliged to the reader for an
explanation, which may appear in some future edition of this work.

This place has owned several learned men: John de Hexham and Richard de
Hexham, both Superiors of this religious house, and great Historians. The
Addenda to the book of Symeon of Durham, from the 9th of King Henry II. to the
1st of King Richard, we owe to Prior John. Richard was the author of a
Chronicle, from Adam to Henry the Emperor; he wrote the Histories of King
Stephen and King Henry III. but the principal work we have from his hands, is
a^ account of the State and Bishops of the Church of Hexham.

There is a School here founded by Queen Elizabeth, 25th June, 1599, with an
ample stipend for a Master and Usher. The Master's house was built by
subscription. In 1713 a small pamphlet was published by Mr Ritschel, Minister
of Hexham, containing an account of the charities and benefactors to the
churches, poor, and free schools in Tyndale ward, to which is added a brief
account and description of the parish and parish church of Hexham, with an
abstract of Queen Elizabeth's patent for the free school, and the statutes
thereof.


In the Marketplace, on the front of an old house, are three coats of armor,
in plaister-work: opinions are various what they denominate: the most probable
is, that the dexter arms is that of the Dean and Chapter of York; the center,
the cross of St Andrew, to whom the church was dedicated; and the sinister one,
being one of the Arm^ Cantantia, or Rebusses, anciently adopted, comprehends
the name of some great churchman. Beneath these, is a legend divided into three
portions, which I read Ma -- ne -- ria --; perhaps importing the Manor House,
and probably was the mansion of some of the Bishops of York. Plate, fig. III.

This town is not incorporated, but being a manor of the late Sir Walter C.
Blackett, is governed by a Bailiff and Jury.

Hexham has been unhappy in civil bloodshed; the slaughter made by the
North Riding Yorkshire Militia on the Miners, in their insurrection, is
remembered with horror. No troops in the world could have stood with greater
steadiness and military propriety than they did, sustaining the insults of an
enraged crew of subterranean Savages; whilst the timorous Magistrates delayed
their command for defense, till the arms of the Soldiers were seized by the
Insurgents, and turned on themselves; and an Officer Mr Joseph Heart, a native
of Darlington.
was shot at the head of his Company, as he was remonstrating to the Mob.

In the levels beneath Hexham, the decisive battle was fought in 1463, In
Fuller's Church History we have these unhappy conflicts reduced into the
following Table.

No. Battles. Place. Betwixt. Time. Number slain. Conqueror. 1 St Alban's, in
Hertfordshire. Richard Duke of York, and King Henry VI. for Lancaster. A. D.
1455 34 K. Henry VI. June. Slain on the King's side 5000; on the Duke's 600.
York House. 2 Boreheath, in Staffordshire. Rich. Earl of Salisbury for York,
and James Touchet L. Audley for Lancaster. A. D. 1459 37 K. Henry VI. 21st
Sept. 1400 most Cheshire men slain on Lancaster side. York House. 3
Northampton. Rich. Earl of Warwick for York, and King Henry VI. for Lancaster.
A. D. 1460 38 K. Henry VI. 9th July. 10,000 slain and drowned on both sides.
York House. 4 Wakefield, in Yorkshire. Richard Duke of York, and Q. Margaret
for Lancaster. 31st December. same year. 2200 slain on York side with their
Duke. Lancaster. 5 Mortimer's Cross, in Shropshire. Edward Earl of March,
afterward King, for York. A. D. 1461 39 K. Henry VI 2d Feb. 3800 slain on
Lancaster side. York House. 6 St Alban's in Hertfordshire. Rich. Earl of
Warwick for York, and King Henry and Margaret his wife in person for Lancaster.
17th February same year. About 2000 on both sides. Lancaster. 7 Towto^, in
Nottinghamshire. Edward Earl of March for York, and King Henry VI. Same year,
Palm Sunday, March 27th. 35,091 on both sides. York House. 8 Hexham. John Nevil
Lord Montague, and King Henry VI. and Queen. A. D. 1464 4 K. Edw IV 15th May.
Number great, but uncertain. York House. 9 Banbury or Edgcot. in the confines
of Oxford and Nottham, ^^^shire. William Herbert Earl of Pembroke for York, and
Robin of Ridsdale, alias Hilliard, for Lancaster. A. D 1469 19 K. Edw. IV 26th
July. 5000, most Welchmen. Lancaster. 10 Barnet, in Middles^^. Richard Nevil
Earl of Warwick for Lancaster, and K. Edward IV. for York. 11 K. Edw. IV
Easter Day, 14 April, 1471. 4000 on both sides. York House. 11 Townsbury,
Gloucestershire. King Edward IV. for York, and Queen Margaret and Edward her
son for Lancaster Same year, 4th May. 3000 of the part of Lancaster. York
House. 12 Bosworth. Leicestershire. King Richard III. for York, and Henry Earl
of Richmond for Lancaster. A. D. 1485 3 K. Rich. III 22d August. About 4000
slain in all. Lancaster. 13 Stoak, in Nottinghamshire. John Delapole Earl of
Linc^la for York, and King Henry VII. for Lancaster. A. D. 1487 2 K Henry VII.
16th June. About 4000; many of them Irish. Lancaster, or rather the two Houses
united in King Henry VII


when John Nevil, Marquis of Montacute, afterward created Earl of
Northumberland, General of the forces of the House of York, forced the
intrenchments of the Lancastrian party, and made a dreadful slaughter. The
Ogles and Manners' of this country were with the victors; the Percies, Roes,
Nevils, Tailbois, and Greys, among the vanquished. The Earl of Somerset, Sir
William Tailbois, Sir Humphrey Nevil, and Sir Ralph Gray, being among the
prisoners, were executed; Sir Ralph being first degraded, by cutting off his
spurs, defacing his armorial ensignia, and breaking his sword over his head.
The miserable estate of the great personages, whose fortunes were reversed on
this day of carnage, remains in history a dreadful lesson to those who
adventure in civil discord.

Hexham is conveniently situated, for a traveller to make his excursions over
the neighboring parts of the county: the accommodations are excellent.

The road to

HAYDEN BRIDGE
is highly pleasing. Here is a small village, entitled to a market on Tuesday,
and an annual fair on the 21st of July, obtained by the first Anthony Lord
Lucy; but at present they are neglected. There is a fine bridge over the Tyne
at this place, consisting of six arches; near to which is a Grammar School,
endowed with lands by the Rev. Mr Shaftoe, formerly Vicar of Nether-Warden; the
Master to be of the degree of Master of Arts: his salary at present is upwards
of 50 l. a year, with an Usher's fee of 15 l. a year. Over the entrance of the
school-house, is an inscription setting forth the foundation. Haec schola
fundata et
Munifice dotata suit anno
Domini MDCXCVII a
Reverendo and Doctissimo viro domino
Johanne Shaftoe, A. M. Ecclesiae
Nether-Warden in hoc agro vicario
In tam benigni capitis elogium
Deesse nequit: hoc unum opus pro
Cunctis aliis suis beneficiis fama loquctur.
Wallis.


From this place

LANGLEY CASTLE
is in view; situate on a fine eminence, built in the form of the letter H,
having four towers, one at the extreme of each wing. It was defended toward
the west by a deep fosse. The walls are near seven feet in thickness, and the
north-east tower is about 66 feet high. Eight groundfloor rooms remain entire,
four to the east and four to the west, vaulted with stone; four small upper
rooms also remain entire to the east. Many of the windows are of a middle size,
and larger than what are usually seen in buildings of the same date.

This was the baronial seat of Adam de Tynedale Testa de Nevil.
and his son, in the reign of King Henry III. by marriage of whose daughter it
came to Richard de Bolteby, Inq. Henry III. Tur. Land.
and descended to his son Adam de Bolteby, from whom it passed to the Lucies,
Inq. 33 Edward I. Tur. Land.
Barons of Egremont and Cockermouth, and remained with them for five descents.
Thomas Lord Lucy 33 King Edward I. Thomas -- 2 King Edward II. Anthony -- 29
King Edward III. Thomas -- 29 King Edward III. Anthony last Lord Lucy 42 King
Edward III.
The first Anthony Lord Lucy, 1323, by order of the King, seized Andrew de
Herkley, Earl and Governor of Carlisle, for high treason, in the cause of
Carlisle; assisted by Sir Richard Denton, Sir Hugh Lowther, and Sir Hugh
Moriceby, Knights, and four Esquires, Sir Richard Denton killing the porter of
the inner gate for attempting to shut it against them; one servant of the
Earl's escaping to the Peel, a castle at He^head, the seat of his Lordship's
brother, Michael Herkley, who by that means was informed of his disaster, and
fled into Scotland with Sir William B^o^nt, a Scotch Knight, and others of
their party.

The last Anthony Lord Lucy dying without issue male, and his daughter and heir
Johanna surviving him only five years and three quarters, he was succeeded in
his baronial honors and estates by h^s sister Matilda, wife to Sir Gilbert
Hum^ranvill, Earl of Angus, after whose death she married Henry Piercy, Earl of
Northumberland, and settled her whole fortune upon his Lordship and his heirs
male, under the easy condition, that as their hearts were, the arms of the two
noble families might be united, for a memorial of her affection. Quae sunt de
auro, cum une Leone de azure, rampant; quarteriant cum armis de Lucii, quae de
C^les, cum tribus Lucris, argenteis consistunt. Inq. 22 Richard II. Tur. Land.


Wallis.
Afterward it became the possession of the Ratcliffes of Dilston, and gave
title of Viscount and Baron Langley to Sir Francis Ratcliffe, created Earl of
Derwentwater by King James II. A. D. 1688. It was forfeited by James the last
Earl, and is now part of the possessions of Greenwich Hospital.

At a little distance lays

RIDLEY-HALL,
the seat of William Lowes, Esquire a modern house, on a rising ground, in a most
romantic and pleasant situation. It was anciently the estate of the Ridleys of
Willimoteswick. -- The walks on the banks of the brook of Allen, terminated by
the woody heights of Kingswood, are worth the attention of every visitant,
where Woods and Rocks are agreeably and magnificently blended. The cliffs are
scattered over with yews and hollies. Ravens, which resort to these rocks, lend
a solemn voice to join the music of the falling waters. Many agreeable views
are had from the eminences: Beltingham, the Castle of Willimoteswick, Haden
Bridge with its Village, are fine objects in this rich landscape of cultivated
lands, scattered over with cottages, and mingled with woods. Lowes, a local
name, from the neighboring forest of Lowes.

Robert Lowes, one of the gentlemen who had the direction of the watch at
Thorngrafton. 6 Edward VI.




About two miles southward is

STAWARD CASTLE,
or, as it was anciently called, STAWARD LE' PEEL, of which little now remains
but a ragged gate-way, which was defended by a drawbridge and port-cullice.
Some ruined walls appear to the westward. The outworks are a deep fosse, with a
Vallum of stone and earth. This Castle has a remarkable situation, being seated
on a peninsula formed by the conflux of the Allen and Harsingdale Burn: the
approach is narrow, on an elevated way, chiefly formed by nature, rocky steeps
laying on each side, clothed with wood; beneath which you view a pretty
picturesque plain, washed by the murmuring streams of Allen, where a cottage
fortunately disposed amidst a little grove of trees, gives a peculiar beauty to
the retirement, which is shut in on one side, by a woody amphitheatre hanging
on the western banks, and by the gloomy remains of Peel on the other. The view
from these ruins northward, takes in the village of Thorngrafton, surmounted by
the cliffs above Showing Sheels, which form the horizon.

Peel belonged to the Friars Eremites of Hexham, under the grant of Edward Duke
of York. Pat. 10 Rich. 2d p. 2. m. 9.


The rural scenes on the Allen are contracted, but are every where picturesque
and romantic; the winding rivulet forms many beautiful Bays and Peninsulas,
boundered by rocks and hanging woods, affording a multitude of little solemn
and secluded retreats, through which the waters murmur.

After crossing the Allens, you approach

WHITFIELD HALL,
remarkable for nothing but its ancient possessors the Whitfields, who held it
in the time of Richard II. John de Whitfield 22 Richard II. Sir Matthew
Whitfield, Knt. 12 Henry VI. High Sheriff of Northumberland. Ralph -- 10 Queen
Elizabeth. Matthew --. High Sheriff, 1728.
Held by the annual rent of 6 s. 4 d. of the Prior and Convent of Hexham, to
whom it was granted by William King of Scots. -- Matthew the last proprietor
sold it to William Ord, Esquire

There is a c^alibeat spring at Remires, on Whitfield Fell.

Wallis.
There is a Water-fall about a mile south, mentioned by Mr Wallis, but in a dry
season is little more than some few trilling drops weeping down the cliffs, and
not worth a traveller's quitting his road to view it.

OLD TOWN,
which Mr Horsley supposes to be a Roman Station, retains the marks of
antiquity mentioned in the letters given in the notes. From the Manuscripts of
the late Roger Gale, Esquire Extract of a Letter from Roger Gale, Esquire to Mr John
Warburton, Somerset Herald, F. R. S.
London, August 17th, 1717. SIR,
I shall endeavor to procure you what you mention in your last to me, out of
the Alienation Office, as soon as I can, and transmit it to you. Among the
books you tell me you are master of, I find Doomsday to be one: pray let me
know what it is you have of that, for I cannot think it is an entire copy of
what is lodged in the Exchequer, though I could heartily with it were; as also
what you call Bede's Albinus Anglus, for I do not remember any thing among
Bede's works under that title. The MS. volume of Leland in my study touches a
little upon the North Riding of Yorkshire, but, I fear, will be of little
service to you: he treats of ^gain in another of the printed volumes; but what
he gives you of it is there also very thin and trivial I have ordered a copy of
my E^sa^ to be transcribed here by the printed one, with some corrections I
have made to it, and shall send it you by the next return of Mr P^ing, and hope
it may be of some service to you. You will find in it, that I have taken notice
of five great Ways instead of four, according to the general account of our
Historians who only copied from one another, and have pointed out their several
courses more exactly than has been done by any body else. The reason they have
given you an account but of four, I take to be their notion that there were no
more of them which can cross the island from sea to sea, and that, I believe,
is true; but that there were others in great numbers is unquestionable. The
great Way you mention that comes from Dunbritton Frith to Rochester, in
Nor^and, falls into, or may be a continuation of the Ermin street, which you
will find in the Essay. I have traced from Arundell, in Suffex, to Gatherley
Moor, in your neighborhood, and there followed two branches of it, one to
Carli^le, and the other to Tynmouth; but I was wholly ignorant of this third
discovered since by you. I shall not here give you the reasons why this is the
Ermin-street, but refer you to the Essay for them, and in the mean time only
further add, that the Watling street is the truliest described by Higden of any
of them; but it did not terminate at Cardigan, as he says, but at West Chester,
and that the course of it is very visible almost every where that he mentions
it, and that I have myself, one time or other, traveled upon the greatest part
of it, and found it seldom or never loses its name. I fancy, the country people
calling that which you suspect to be the Watling-street in Northumberland by
that name, has been the chief motive for your opinion; but I could give you
several instances of old Ways sometimes called Watling-street, and sometimes
the Fosse Way by the vulgar, in counties where it is certain those Ways never
came; so that nothing is to be built upon that.

Antoninus's second journey, indeed, takes in the whole length of it, but not
till it falls into it at Deva or Chester. The Roman Station at Ethelburgh is
taken notice of by Camden, who makes it more than probable, from an inscription
there dug up, that it was called Bruchium. To confirm this opinion. I will give
you a conjecture of mine, taken from the Monasticon Anglicanum, vol. I. p. 178,
where, in an old deed, this very place is named Enthelbert, as I believe, from
Enchelberi, the word Enchel in Welsh signifying an Arm, brachium, the very name
in Latin and British thus corresponding. Besides, I cannot but be of opinion,
that Brementonacis was at Overborough, on the edge of Lancashire, it lying in
the direct way between Gallacum, Whellop Castle, and Coccium, Ribblechester,
from which latter place it keeps the just distance allotted it by Antoninus;
and though the copies of that Itinerary place it 27 from the former, instead of
32 miles; upon a little consideration, you will find the mistake might be
easily occasioned, by the transcribers turning the third X into V. I do not
know whether you have seen the edition of Antoninus published by me some years
ago; if you have not, my brother, at Scruton, can lend it you; it may, perhaps,
be diverting to you, though I must own I have, since the publication of it,
found reason to make several alterations in it, as I have done upon my own book
that I have here by me; and among others, I must acknowledge it, that your Map
has fully convinced me, that Glanoventa and Gallana, in the tenth Itinerary,
are at Thornton and Portgate, and not where my unacquaintedness with the
country had induced me to place them; but Alone, I take to be Whitley Castle,
in Alondale, as well from the better agreement of the miles, as from an
inscription there left by the Cohors Tertia Nerviorum, which the Notitia
Imperii quarters at Alone. I am pretty much of your mind, that the military way
from Easingwould to Thirst, came from York toward Caturactonium, or rather
into that which went from Caturactonium toward Gatherley Moor, because I am
very much mistaken, if there is not a military way running along the northern
bank of Swale, from Catterick Bridge eastward toward Bolton. Now I take the
course of this road to have gone by Thornton in the Street to Thornbrough, and
by Romandby, near Northallerton, which I doubt not has been a Roman Station, by
the name of it; and you will find great works cast up about the Castle Hills
there, which are very evidently far larger and beyond the confines of the
modern castle. I have also been told of a Roman Way some where about Romandby,
though I could never well understand where it was. To this I shall add, that I
hardly ever met with a place named Thornbrough or Thornton, that was not near
some old Station; such a one you have by Catterick; another, called Thornton
and Thornaldby, near Ethelbury; Thornton, where Glanoventa stood, in
Northumberland; Thornbrough, near Nostrefield Moor, and just by the Via
Vicinalis that led from Ethelbury over that Moor into Leeminglane, (part of the
Ermin-street) and not far from Well, where any of the inhabitants can show you
a Roman te^lated pavement. Having made so much use of this word, I shall only
add, that these towns take not their names, as most people imagine, from Thorns
that might grow there, but from the Saxon THorn, i. e. Turris; a plain
indication of their having found some such building hereabouts; but which way
it went from Romandby till it came where I told you above, upon the very edge
of Swale, I must leave to your discovery; neither can I so much as guess what
might be the Roman name of the Station near Northallerton; but these have
brought into my mind what I had like to have passed over, and that is the
derivation of the name Glan^enta, which assuredly comes from the British or
Welsh Glenwent, i. e. Ripa Ventae, the bank of the river Went, or Wentsbeck.
The works upon Nostrefield Moor consisted of a square intrenchment, as I
remember, and a small round intrenchment with two entrances into it, one on the
south-west, and the other on the north-east side of it; but what is most
remarkable, is the ditch or graft, which is within the Agger; it ^es 150 or 200
paces to the north of the square one, just by the road side: if I do not
forget, there were three or four Tumult thrown up within the square one, and
six or seven more over the hedge of the field that lies on the west side of it.
The military way, or Via Vicinalis, mentioned on the other side to come from
Ethelbury, runs very near these intrenchments, and falls into Leeminglane not
far from Wath, and I think another ancient way seems to cross the road between
Exelby and Cathorp, toward the same line. I am afraid Antiquities are not so
much in vogue at Court, as to obtain that reception for your Altar there as it
really merits, and perhaps, after all the trouble and charge you may be at in
sending it thither, his Majesty may never see it, or be so much as acquainted
with your dutiful intentions I do not mention this to discourage you, but only
that you should not meet with too great a disappointment, if you meet not with
the returns you may expect for it. I should be glad to know, what Mr Wanley
offered you for it, for though the altar is so very beautiful and entire as you
represent it, yet the inscription contains little or no instruction, it being
to be read, as I take it, Fortunae Pop^^ Rom^^ Caius Julius Rationalis Legionis
Sextae Virtricis vocit. I have indeed some doubt as to the letters RAT. having
seen at Durham an altar dedicated to Fortune, whereon the initial letters of
the word Prafectus were wrote RAEF, the P and R being both included in the
first or same letter: I desire you therefore to look a little closer upon your
inscription, when you have an opportunity, to see if you cannot trace the
initials of Praefectus, it being much more usual for the Commanding Officers of
Legions to erect altars, than their Accomptants; and indeed I do not remember I
ever met with the Rationalis of a Legion in an inscription before; but this
will make yours the more valuable, if it appears to be undoubtedly RAT, for
Rationalis. Pray let me know also the name of the place where you got it dug up.

I am yours, etc. R. GALE.


Extract of a Letter from Mr John Warburton to Roger Gale, Esquire about some of
the Roman Roads.
21st November, 1717.
I have read your Essay Printed in the 6th Vol. of Leland, Itinerary, published
by Mr Hear^e, at Oxford, 171^, p 53.
toward recovery of the four great Roman Ways over and over, with greater
pleasure than I ever read any thing in my life; I am fully convinced, that the
courses you have taken for those ancient roads are perfectly right, excepting
that you loose the stem of the Erminstreet upon Gatherley Moor, and follow only
two branches of it, that go directly to Tinmonth and Boulnesse, the two
extremes of the Picts Wall, whilst the main street proceeds northward, almost
in a straight line, and an uninterrupted ridge from Piercebridge close by a
small village called Denton, where there are many remains of antiquity, and
from thence continues its course by Bolham, Houghton, St Helen's Auckland, and
soon after crosses the Wear to Binchester (Vinovium) where are to be seen the
Vestigia of a Roman Fort, several broken Altars, in the possession of Farrer
Wren, Esquire the Lord of the Soil, and a great number of Roman Coins dug up there.
From this place its course is generally over moorish grounds to Langchester,
where most of those altars and inscriptions in Durham Library were found; See
Philos. Transactions, No. 357.
and at six miles further to Ebchester, where it crosses the River Derwent, and
enters Northumberland, from which place my Map will show its course into
Scotland.

But before I leave Ebchester, which is inferior to no place I have mentioned
for Antiquities, I cannot but acquaint you, that I look upon it to have been
the Vindomora of Antoninus, and not Wall's End, where that Station has
hitherto been fixed, since it exactly answers the distances between Corstopitum
and Vinovium, the second and fourth Stations in the first Iter. (viz.) nine
miles from the first of them, and nineteen from the latter, and this in a
direct line along one of the most entire regular and large ways I ever saw, the
ridge being for the most part two yards in height, full eight yards broad, and
all paved with stone, that it is at present as even as if new laid; whereas
from Corstopitum or Corbridge to Wall's End (the third Station in the first
Iter) it is twenty miles directly east, and from thence back to Vinovium, the
fourth Station, twenty-five miles to the westward; so that we are carried
eighteen miles about, along a road that has no appearance of a military way,
except just where it touches the Picts Wall, and has the river Tyne to pass in
a part where it never could be crossed without boats, which are difficulties I
think the Romans would never subject themselves to.

I have your edition of Antoninus, which I frequently read, and value beyond
any thing of that nature, but cannot yet absolutely agree with you in placing
Alone at Whitley Castle; not but that it appears plainly to have been a Roman
Station, from the greatness of its ruins, and it having the Roman road called
the Maiden Way running through its center; and from the inscription left by the
Cohors Tertia Neeciorum, that Mr Camden gives us, it is not to be doubted that
they were quartered thereabouts: but when I consider that the distance which
the Itinerary gives betwixt Gallana, Portgate, and Alone, if at Whitley Castle,
is but twelve miles, and the real distance is twenty; and on the other hand,
that Old Town, in Alondale, exactly answers the distance allotted it by
Antoninus, has a port-way seven yards broad, all paved with stone, ranging
between them, its situation on an eminence on the very brink of the river Alon,
and of a square figure entrenched; and if we may give credit to the author of
the additions to Camden's Britannia, has produced several Roman antiquities, I
am persuaded that Station is to be placed here; besides, I begin to think
myself wrong in joining this Roman road, which I am speaking of, with that
called the Maiden Way at Whitley Castle; and am partly of opinion, that it did
not go so far west, but rather struck over by the head of the river Teys to
Ethelburgh, in Yorkshire, and from thence went by Coccuim to Mancunium and that
Whelp Castle and Overburrough (if Roman Stations) are either in the military
way that comes from Ambleside toward Kendale, which perhaps unites with it at
Coccium (Ribblechester) or on that called the Maiden Way, which goes by Whitley
Castle. This opinion is very much strengthened by a new discovered military
way, of the very same dimensions and work with that on which Glanoventa stands
and Galana, and which runs from Ethelburgh full north over a moor called
Windgate, and at a small village called Crackpot crosses the river Swale, and
soon after enters another named Feetham, where I must leave it at present, on
account of the season. At my parting with it, it seemed to point at Barnard
Castle, See Mr Warburton's Map of Yorkshire, which shows it to have gone
northward to Barnard Castle, and to Overburrough south-westward.
and if so, probably Stratford, near that place, was where it crossed the river
Tees, both on account of its name and being in a direct line to Old Town, in
Alondale, where I have chose to place Alone. As a further proof of Old Town's
being Alone, it may not be improper to acquaint you, that Mr Camden is wrong in
placing Whitley Castle upon the river Alo^, for it is six miles distant from
any part of it. There is indeed about a mile from it, a small stream called
Yal, which empties itself into Tynt, but I think this argues but little for it;
neither can I believe that the inscription left by the Cobors III. Nerviorum,
is a certain proof of its being Alone, for I have often observed altars set up
by one and the same Cohors in places several miles distant, as for instance, at
the House-steads, where I place Bor^, at Willeford and other places along the
Picts Wall, I find altars erected by the Cohors I. Tungrerum; and as Old Town,
on the river Alon, in Alondule, is but eight miles distant from Whitley Castle,
I do not see but they may have both been the habitation of the Cohors III.
Nerticrum.

The military way that comes from E^singwold to Thor^aldby, shows itself very
plainly in the village of Romandby, from which place it goes to Yafford,
Langton, Bolton upon Swale, Brunton, and by the north side of the friery wall
in Richmond to the top of Richmond Moor, where I loose it, but believe it
shoots north west, and meets with that which goes north from Ethelburgh, some
where about Barnard Castle. This Roman read comes from Br^^ upon Ham^er,
perhaps the Praetorium of Antoninus, to Delgo^itio (Wigton) De^ cu^^ (A^dby)
and so to Easi^^ wa^^, Thi^^ Rom^ Bolton upon Swale, the north end of Catterick
Bridge, and so to Richmond, etc.

R. G.


The observation you make upon such places as bear the name of Thornton The
observation above mentioned (...) such tow^^ have the word Thorn in their
names, as Thornton, Townb^gh, are not so called from the word Thorn, (...), but
from the Saxon THorn, Terris, Castellum, and are generally seated near some old
Roman Station as Thorn^^ugh near Catterick Bridge, and another near Roman^^,
Th^^^y near Oldbury, in Gloucestershire, the Projectors of Antoninus,
Thornton-Rust, not far from Ethelburgh, etc.

R. G.
is very good, and daily proves serviceable to me. I have traced the Roman way
that comes from Ethelburgh into Leeming-lane, and find that it passes through
Thornton, Asgarth, Bolton Park, Middleham, to Ulshaw-bridge, where it crosses
the Ure, and continues its course by Danby, Thornton-Steward, Watlass Church,
and over Wa^^^ Moor, where there are several Tumuli of different sizes, to the
west side of Causick Part; thence it goes by Thornbrough to Middleton-Quernhow,
and enters Leeming Lane, about half a mile south-east of the last place.

Bedal^, 21st November, 1717. J. WARBURTON.


Extract of a Letter from Roger Gale, Esquire to Mr Warburton, in Answer to the
preceding Letter.
SIR,
I have been long indebted to you for your most entertaining letter of the 21st
of November, which should not have laid so long unanswered, but that your being
upon the road I very well knew would give you no time to peruse what I might
write to you, if it did come to your hands. What you say of your transcript of
D^omsday, I believe, is very right, the lesse^ Doemsday, in the Exchequer,
containing only the description of Essex, Norfolk, and Susf^^k: Norfolk you
seem to have again in your second volume with Richmond, which, I believe, has
been transcribed from a most curious and valuable manuscript in the Cottonian
Library, called Regifirum H^noris de Richmond, where you have not only this
extract from Doomsday, but several charters inquisitions. quo warrantos, and
other ancient deeds relating to that country. When you write next, pray let me
know if your copy have any thing more in it than what belongs to Richmondshire.
Albinus, or as others will have his name, Alcuinus, composed a poem, De^ (...)
et Sanctis Ecclesiae Eboracensis, all which is taken from Bede's History; but
h^ w^^ his name came to be prefixed to your Bid, if it is Bid, I cannot
imagine. You must not think it strange if my Essay upon the Roman ways is not
complete; I only call it an Essay; some parts of those roads I have
occasionally observed in my travels, others, and as I must acknowledge by far
the greatest part, I have only traveled in maps, or picked out of authors as I
was upon other subjects; so that it is no wonder, if I cannot help omitting
large tracts of them in some places, and leaving them short in others, as I
have done in the middle branch of that on Gatherley Moor, which I believe you
we now satisfied is the Er^instreet, as that I was Ehchester is Vindemora, upon
my first fight of your excellent Map of Northumberland; which likewise obliged
me to change my opinion as to the situation of Glanoventa, which my addition of
Antoninus had placed upon the river Bowent, in Glendale; for though the
distances between Glanoventa and Gallava (Thornton and Portgate do not exactly
agree with the numbers in that Itinerary, yet they are not so wide as the
number of miles between Anterchester upon Bowent and Portgate, which is
thirty-four; but if we six Gla^o^a at Thornton, Gallava at Walwick, as I have
done in Antoninus, and Alone at Old Town, all these distances will agree pretty
well with the Itinerary. Another argument for Glanove^a's being placed at
Thornton, may be deduced from the name itself; you very well know that
Wentsheck, the name of the little river upon or near which Thornton is
situated, is the same thing as Went-sluviolus; Glen or Glan in British is Ripa,
so that Gl^ went (Gl^^^ta) is Ripa Wentae, a town upon the bank of Went. The
Notiti^ Imperii also places Gla^be^^am ad Lineam Valli, which, though not
strictly true, is much nearer the truth at Thornton than at Anterchester. As I
remember, in my last letter to you, I did not found my conjecture of Alona
being at Whitley Castle, so much upon the inscription found there, as upon the
due distance it would then obtain in respect to Brementonacis, and only made
the inscription a concurrent argument. Now as the distance between Walwick and
Old Town holds as good as that other between Whitley Castle and Overburrough
(Bre^^^to^is) so the argument is equally strong for Alone being at Old Town,
and I really give up my former opinion to you as the rightest. I should have
mentioned Galacum (Whell^p Castle) as lying between Alone and Bremet^nacis or
Brementonacis, as some copies have it: the distance allotted it by Antoninus is
nineteen miles from Alone, which also agrees better with Old Town than Whitley
Castle; but the distance between Whellop Castle, in that Itinerary; and
Brementoncis, agrees well with neither Overburrough nor Ethelburrough, the
former being thirty-two and the latter but twenty-four miles instead of
twenty-seven: however I was, and am still inclined, to fix it at the former, it
lying more directly in the road to Coccium (Ribblechester) the distance
agreeing better, being about twenty-two; whereas it is thirty-six miles betwixt
Rehelburgh and Ribblechester, and as for the thirty-two between it and
Gallacum, the mistake may have easily been committed, by a transcriber's making
an X for a V; if you turn the third X in 32 to V, the numbers will be 27, and
correspond to those of Antoninus; however, I shall suspend giving up myself
entirely to my opinion, till I hear whether you find reason to alter yours,
about this Roman road's joining with the Maiden Way at Whitley Castle, or that
it came by the head of Teys to Ethelburgh, and from thence to Coceium; the
latter part, I believe, you will hardly prove to do so, because I am pretty
certain you will trace it from Ethelburgh over Nostrefield Moor into
Leeming-lane, except two ways lead from it, and then perhaps one of them might
lead to Coccium: this way, you say, goes directly, by its pointing upon Barnard
Castle, to Old Town: now if we could discover any Station that might prove to
be Gallacum upon it, between Old Town and Ethelburgh, at a due distance from
them both, according to the Itinerary, it would put the matter out of dispute;
but I cannot think of any such, and if it passed the Teys at Statford, as there
seems to be no great doubt it did, it points a little too much eastward for
Alone (Old Town) and rather inclines to fall into the great Roman road at or
near to Vinonium (Binchester). I have been very long upon this subject,
therefore shall only add, that the miles I reckon by are shorter than those you
make your computation from; for as Antoninus is my chief guide. I make an
allowance for the difference between the Roman and English mi^e, which is as
972 to 1000. I do not know whether I mentioned the Roman road from Romanby,
etc. running by Bolton, on the north side of Swale, to you, but I find you have
observed it. If you have leisure at any time, when you are at Northallerton, to
view the Castle Hills there, between that town and Romanby, you will find great
works and trenches out of the limits, and beyond the ditch of the modern
Castle, westward and southward, which I dare say were Roman, and gave name to
the neighboring village, though what was the ancient appellation of it, is now
entirely lost. As for the name of Allerton, it is very hard to tell whence it
came; the Saxon Kings generally built on or near the ruins of ancient and
decayed Roman towns, and as we have no memorials that contradict my conjecture.
I am apt to think this town might be built here by King Alfred, who restored
many places that had been destroyed by the Danes; or else by Guthrum the Dane,
to whom, upon his being baptized, he gave all the kingdom on the north side of
Watling-street, who might call it Alvertun or Alsreton (for that is the
ancientest name it occurs by) in honor of his godfather and benefactor: this,
I think, is more probable, than that it should be so called from aller trees,
as some have fa^cied, since the ancient writing of the name makes for it.

I am much obliged to you for your kind offer of your Coins, but I am unwilling
to rob you of them, having most of them already; as for the Altar found at
Elsdon, I should be very thankful for that, and desire you, when opportunity
serves, to get it conveyed to Scruton where I hope to see it next summer, but
the carriage must be at my charge. The circumstances of your finding the altar
at Chester in the Wood, are very odd; I cannot suppose that vault to have been
the place where the altar was primarily erected and used, since they only
sacrificed under ground to the infernal Gods, and Fortune was not one of them:
it seems, most probably, to have been concealed there by the Romans, or Roman
Britons, when they were drove from those Stations by the P^cts, to prevent its
profanation by those barbarous enemies, and that other which accompanied it,
may have been accidentally broken in the burying; but then as to the smoaky
smell, it will be a little difficult to form any conjecture. I was once at
C^rencester, in Clocestershire, shown the top of much such a vault, as you
describe, in a garden there, but the ground all over and about it being sown, I
could not persuade the Gardener to give me admittance into it, but he assured
me it was filled near three feet deep with burnt bones and ashes; this made me
conclude some altar might have stood near it, and that this vault was the
receptacle of what was swept from the altar; and why may not the vault at
Chester in the Wood have been for the same purpose, and thence contracted its
smell? I think you were much in the right not to part with it and the rest to
the Lord you mention upon general promises: I dare say all the gratification
you would have had from him, would have been the honor done you, of erecting
marble pedestals to set them on.

I am, Sir, your, etc. R. GALE.





ALLENDALE TOWN
is situate on an eminence on East Allen, is chiefly inhabited by Miners. In
the neighborhood is a Free School, founded in 1700, and endowed several
liberal benefactions. See Ritschel's account thereof.
We passed from thence to Allenheads, a part of the county barren and
mountainous, inhabited only by Miners and Shepherds: the scene on every hand is
dark and deplorable; the Mines only inducing inhabitants to this desolate spot.
Near Allen-heads is a place called Shorngate, where the Scots made their
retreat from Stanhope Park, in the reign of King Edward III. A. D. 1327. They
passed a morass, as some authors say, by cutting through the mossy earth to the
rock, or by laying a road with stones; This retreat is said to be conducted by
the address of Lord Douglas, who in a dark night led the Scotch army over a
morass, two miles broad, formerly deemed impassable, by the help of flakes made
of branches cut from the wood in the neighborhood of their last encampment;
and which casting before them into the broken parts of the bog, as they
advanced through it, they led their horses over those parts.

Ridpath's Border Hist. This is the most probable account -- he quotes Barber
and Carte for this account. -- Flake is a Scotch word, implying a hurdle, twigs
of hazels woven together, of which great use is made in Scotland and the
Borders; they serving as doors to hovels where their cows and other cattle
stand, and for gates to stack-garths, etc.


an astonishing act in the perils of a retreat.

By a disagreeable road, in a desolate country, we traveled to

BLANCHLAND,
seated in a narrow deep vale, on the river Derwent; a few strips of meadow
ground lay along the margin of the stream, and some cultivated lands skirt the
feet of the hills, whose summits are covered with heath. This is a very
different situation from others I have seen, chosen by the Religious for the
foundation of their houses; the country around is barren and mountainous; the
narrow vale in which the abbey is placed, seems in no-wife suited to the
maintenance of its former inhabitants -- poverty for ages past has reigned over
the face of the adjacent country. The scites of religious houses are generally
in well-sheltered and warm situations, where the retirements are surrounded
with rich lands. This place looks truly like the realm of mortification.

This abbey was founded by Walter de Bolbeck in 1175, dedicated to the blessed
Virgin, for twelve Premonstratensian Canons, having liberty to exceed that
number, with the consent of the Bishop of Durham. Part of his donation was
twelve fishes for their table, out of his fishery of Stiford, in lieu of tithes
of fish. The Abbot was summoned to parliament 23 King Edward I. At the
suppression, here were fourteen Canons; the annual revenue of the house,
according to Dugdale, being 40l. 0s. 9d. and 44l. 9s. 1d. according to Speed.
After passing from the Crown by sale, it became the possession of the Fosters,
and was forfeited in 1715, by Thomas Forster, Esquire after which it was purchased
by Lord Crew, and by him left to charitable uses.

The west end and tower of the church and the south aile of the cross remain;
the latter neatly fitted up for parochial duty. The gateway entering into the
square, where formerly the houses of the Canons stood, still remains; the
towers on each hand converted into alehouses: the buildings which are standing
are now inhabited by poor people, who are perhaps employed in the leadworks;
the distress and ragged appearance of the whole conventual buildings, being
most deplorable; no one relic of church pomp remaining. To compensate for the
disagreeable review of cells of poverty, we walked in the levels adjoining the
church, when it happened to be the time of divine service: the psalm of the
congregation, at our distance, had a degree of solemn harmony, which inspired
serious though pleasing reflections: sentiments and ideas succeeded, which
dignify the mind of man, and give him competition with angels.

Near Blanchland lays the Barony of

BOLBECK,
the ancient baronial inheritance of John de Bolbeck, in the reign of King
Henry III. John de Bolbeck -- Temp. King Henry III. Hugh de Bolbeck 1 King
Edward I. He had four daughters: Margery -- married first to Nicholas Corbet,
and to her second husband, Ralph son of William Lord Greystock. Alice --
married Walter de Huntercomb, Baron of Wooler. Ph^ppa -- married Roger de
Lancaster. Maud -- married Hugh Baron of Delaval. Alice and Maud having no
issue, the Barony devolved on Nicholas Corbet and Roger de Lancaster. -- A
moiety descended to Robert de Herle, heir of Lancaster, and the other moiety
passed to William Lord Greystock, by Margery's second marriage.
Wallis. The Barony of Sir Hugh de Bolbeck, who fetched his descent by his
mother from the noble Barons of Mon-Fitchet.

Camden's Brit.
It is now the estate of George Baker, Esquire of Ellemore, in the county of Durham.

We passed from Blanchland by a woody declivity to Acton Mill, a smelting mill
for lead, where, in vast heaps of ore, the wealth of the late Sir Walter
Caverley Blackett was displayed: the road from thence to Prudhoe was harrowed
up by lead carriages, and in innumerable places the name of Blackett struck our
eye, on the lead which lay on the road. We passed by

MINSTER ACRES,
where the advances of cultivation gives a most pleasing countenance to the
decreasing desert.

The country in general is heathy and naked, near these new and beautiful
enclosures, where planting succeeds admirably: -- at length we gained a distant
view of Tynedale, colored with the happy teints of corn and meadow: we
hastened from the dreary country which had detained us too long from scenes of
pleasure.

When we had gained the summit of the hill above Hedley, we had a good prospect
of Tyne toward the north-west; the river, by its winding course, formed seven
distinct canals, one of them near a mile in length: the fore-ground of this
landscape is enriched with the village of Bywell, surmounted by Mr Fenwick's
elegant mansion, and decorated with plantations and garden grounds, so disposed
to the eye, as to retain all the ease and inartificiality of nature: the water,
brightened by a western sun, appeared through the trees, as if the mansion and
pleasure grounds were insulated: the rising ground to the right is crowned with
a gloomy ruin, once the fortress of the vale, held by the Baliols, and after
them by the Earls of Westmoreland, now contrasting beautifully with the modern
and excellent taste of Mr Pain, of whose mode of architecture the
mansion house of Bywell is constructed: to the left, extensive woods filled the
landscape.

Behind the town of Bywell, grounds in high cultivation, interspersed with
wood, ascend gradually from the river; in one part terminated by heathy
eminences, and in another, by distant lands stretching away through an extended
valley toward Hexham, where the distinction of objects was lost to the eye in
the blue vapors which covered the extremity of the vale.

We descended through a woody passage to

PRUDHOE,


which, though situate on a very lofty eminence near the banks of Tyne, is much
inferior to the hills by which we advanced toward it.

The Castle of Prudhoe stands on the summit of a vast rocky promontary, which
communicates with the adjoining grounds by a narrow neck and pass toward the
south; the ground on which the fortress stands forming seven parts of a circle,
on an octagonal section. It is guarded by an outward wall toward the Tyne,
built on the brink of the cliffs, in this part not less than sixty
perpendicular feet in height, above the plain which intervenes between the
castle and the river; this wall at intervals is defended by square bastions.
The entrance to the castle is from the south: on our approach the whole
structure was viewed from the heights, and made a very noble and formidable
appearance. The narrow neck of land leading to the entrance, was formerly cut
through by a deep ditch, over which a draw bridge has given access to the
outward gate: the water which anciently supplied the ditch, is now collected by
a reservoir before the gate, and serves a mill: the outward gate was originally
defended by several outworks and a tower, as appears by their ruins. From the
situation in which I drew my view of this place, I could overlook the top of
the first gate, and the eye penetrated the inner gate-way, the superstructure
of which is a lofty embattled square tower, about sixty feet high, now so
mantled with ivy, that the windows, loop-holes, and apertures are almost wholly
concealed. I will describe the whole from the station I occupied on that
occasion: To the right, the outward wall extended to some distance, terminated
by a turret or exploratory mount, the wall of which is embattled, and there the
landscape was closed by a fine grove of stately trees. The outward wall to the
left, from the inner gate-way, extends to a considerable distance, without any
turret or bastion; over which several interior buildings, and among them the
remains of the chapel, were discovered, in all the confusion of ruin; mingled
chimneys, windows, buttresses, columns, and walls, in that wildness of
irregularity, which constitutes much picturesque beauty in scenes of this kind:
above all which objects a square tower, the Keep of the Fortress, (on the side
toward me almost perfect, twenty-five yards in height, and eighteen in
breadth, but without ornament or windows, with an exploratory tower on the
south-west corner) overlooked the castle, with that gloomy and sullen majesty
which characterizes the age in which it had its rise. The wall still extending
to the left, on its angle is defended by a square bastion, with broken
loop-holes; from whence it turns northward, and is terminated by a broken
circular tower, situate on the brink of the cliff, whose inner recess the eye
sufficiently penetrated, to mark the distraction of its interior works. The
fine levels between the castle and the river, opened to the left, the Tyne in
view, with the town of Ovingham hanging on the opposite shore. In Mr Grose's
Addenda we have the following survey of Prudhoe Castle, taken the 5th of
August, 1596.

There is an old ruinous castle walled about, and in form not much unlike to a
shield hanging with one point upward, situate upon a high moate of earth, with
ditches in some places, all wrought with man's hands, as it seems, and is of
content, all the site of, with a little garden plat, and the banks by
estimacon, sc. 111 acr.

The said castle has the entrey on the south, where it has had two gates, the
uttermost now in decay, and without the same is a little turnepyke; and on the
west part a large gate room, where there has been a passage into the
lodgings there situate, without the castle as is supposed, or to the chapel
there standing; and between the gates is a strong wall there on both sides, and
as it appears has been a draw bridge; and without the same, before it come
to the utter gate, a turnepyke for defense of the bridge. The gate is a tower,
all massy work on both sides to the top of the vault. Above the vault is the
cheppel; and above the cheppel a chamber which is called the wardrobe; it is
covered with lead, but in great ruin, both in lead and timber; it is in length
ten yeards, and in breadth six yeards, or thereabouts.

There is opposite to the said gatehouse tower, joining to the north wall of
the said castle, one hall of eighteen yeards in length, and nine yeards in
breadth, or thereabouts, within the walls, covered also with lead, albeit the
timber and lead in some decay.

Between the said gatehouse tower and hall, on the left hand at your entrey in
at the gate, is a house of ijo* house height of length xxiiij yeards, in
breadth, 6 yeards or thereabouts, divided into two chambers, covered with
slate; the lower house has a great room to pass out of the court through that
house to the great tower; and the south end, a chamber called the parlour; and
in the north end a little buttery. In the house is two chambers, called the
utter chamber and inner chamber; out of the utter chamber is a passage to the
great tower by a little gallery, on the other side a passage down to the
buttery. Out of the inner chamber is a passage to the chapel, and on the other
side a passage to a house called the nursery.

On the west part of the said house is another little house, standing east and
west upon the south wall, called the nursery, in length ten yeards, and in
breadth six yeards, or thereabouts, of two house height, covered also with
slate.

At the southwest corner is a house standing north and south, called the
garner, adjoining to the west wall, in length ten yeards, in breadth 6 yeards
or thereabouts, of ijo house height; the under house a stable, the upper house
a garner, covered also with slate.

At the northwest corner of the said castle, is a little tower called the west
tower, of three house height, round on the outside, in length seven yeards, or
thereabouts, covered with lead, but in decay both in lead and timber.

Joined to the said tower is another house of two house height, in length nine
yeards, in breadth six yeards, or thereabouts, covered with slate, but much in
decay.

In the middle of these houses, by itself, stands the great tower, one way 18
yeards, another way xij yeards north and south, of 3 stories only, and of
height xv yeards, or thereabouts, besides the battlements. It has no vault of
stone in it; it is covered with lead, but in some decay of lead and timber, but
necessary to be repaired: and a toofall or a little house adjoining thereunto,
in utter decay.

At the east end of the hall is a house called the kitchen, of one house
height, in length xij yeards, in breadth six yeards, or thereabouts, covered
with slate.

In the east end, as it were at the lower point of the shield, is a little
square tower, in length vij yeards, in breadth ^ yeards, or thereabouts,
covered with lead, but in utter ruin and decay both in timber and lead.

Adjoining to the same, is a house called the brewhouse, in length viij yeards,
and in breadth vij yeards, covered with slate.

There is within the scyte, and without the walls, an elder chapel, which
has been very fair, and covered with slate. In the time that diverse dwellers
were on the demesnes, one dwelled in the said chapel, and made it his
dwelling house and buyers for his cattle, and by that means defaced; saving the
timber, walls, and great part of slate remains.

There was an orchard set with all fruit trees, now all spoiled, and an old
house wherein the keeper of the orchard did dwell.




We advanced by a narrow path on the side of the reservoir, to the first
gate-way, which is formed by a circular arch: by the fragments and broken
walls, it evidently appears this gate was originally flanked with various
outworks, and had a tower. This gate gives admittance to a covered way, leading
to the inner gate, about 30 paces in length; a sally-port opening on each side,
to flank the walls and defend the ditch. There is no appearance of a
port-cullice in either gate-way. The second gate-way is also formed by a
circular arch, above which is a high tower, the windows showing that it
contained three tiers of apartments. A lattice or open gate still remains,
jointed with studs of iron. The roof of the gate-way is arched in semicircles,
with an aperture in the center, from whence those in the upper chamber might
annoy an enemy who had forced the gate. From thence you enter an area, now so
blocked up by the buildings of a farm-yard and tenement, that it is not
possible to form any idea of its original magnitude; though it appears by the
other parts, that an open area had surrounded the great tower, which does not
show any remains of communication with the outworks, but seems to have stood
apart, on an eminence in the center. The outward wall was defended on the angle
to the south west by a large square bastion, with loop-holes; to the
north-west, by a circular tower, containing several tiers of low chambers,
singular in their form and height, and such as I never observed before in any
ancient castle: the inhabitants could not stand erect in them at the time of
defense. Toward the river and northward, the wall is guarded by several small
square bastions; and toward the south-east, a small mount, placed within the
walls, overlooks the ditch, which guards the southern side, and terminates at
the brink of the cliffs. The large tower is in ruins, only the the southern
wall now standing; and not one bastion remains entire, they being all in ruins
toward the area. A passage runs in the center of the wall, from bastion to
bastion. Steps ascend from the area to the top of the wall, in several places,
which is broad enough to allow the armed men of the garrison to pass each
other, covered by a parapet.

Camden conjectures this was the Prodolita of the Romans, and the Station of
the first band of Batavians. It was the possession of the Umfrevills. This
family came into England with the Conqueror, who bestowed on Robert with the
Beard the Lordship of Redesdale, to be held for ever, by the service of
defending the country against thieves and wolves, with the same sword with
which William entered Northumberland; and also the Barony of Prudhoe; by the
service of two Knights fees and a half. Dugdale's Baronage, 504.
This castle was famous in the reign of King Henry II. for the opposition it
gave to William King of Scotland, in his incursion, and the gallant defense it
then made, he being obliged to raise the siege. It was the possession of
Robert, or, as some authors say, of Rogerus de Umfrevile, Rogerus de Umf^evile
King Henry I. He had the Forest of Reedsdale and the Castles of Otterburn and
Harbottle, etc. Odonel 20 King Henry II. Richard 11 King Henry III. Gilbert 30
King Henry III. Warden of the Marches Gilbert 35 King Edward I. Gilbert 1 King
Edward II. Gilbert 11 King Henry IV.
Wallis. Rogerus de Umf^ville te^er Baronium de Proudebow per servitium 2.
millic. and d^^. ^t antocessores sui a tempore Henrici I^. Regis Angliae.

Lel. Collect. V. 1. p. 201.
in the reign of King Henry I. as appears by the escheats of that reign. Sir
William Dugdale, in his Barony, says, According to the Monk of Tynmouth, in the
18th of Henry II. Odonel greatly oppressed and plundered his neighbors, in
order to repair the roof of his castle of Prudhow, presuming on his own
eminence, and the interest he was possessed of by having married his daughter
to one high in the King's favor.

In the 14th of King John, Richard de Umfrevill delivered up his four sons and
his castle of Brudhow, as pledges for his fidelity; notwithstanding which he
put himself in arms among the B^ro^s, in the 17th of the same reign. The
consequence of which was, that the castle and lands were given to Hugh de
Baliol. But in the reign of Henry III. he obtained a restitution, but never had
the confidence of that King, who was offended at and distrusted him on account
of his fortifying his castle of Harbottle. He gave one toft and eight acres of
land in the town of Prudhow to the Monks of Hexham. His son Gilbert succeeded
to this Barony, and dying the 30th of Henry III. was succeeded by

Gilbert the second, who was styled the famous Baron, the Flower and Keeper of
the northern parts of England.

Gilbert the third was by King Edward I. made Earl of Angus in Scotland, and
under that title summoned to parliament, A.D. 1297. The Lawers at first refused
to acknowledge him as an Earl, because Angus was not of this kingdom; but
submitted on sight of the King's writ, wherein he was summoned by that title.

Gilbert the fourth, in the 25th of Edward III. exhibited a petition to the
King and his Council assembled in parliament, setting forth, that he and his
ancestors, time out of mind, used to have custody of all prisoners taken within
the liberty of Reedsdale, to be kept in his prison of Harbottle Castle: which
being so ruined by the Scots wars, that it was insufficient to retain them, he
desired he might have leave to keep all such prisoners in his Castle of
Prudhow, till his Castle of Harbottle could be properly repaired. The King
being satisfied that the fact alleged in his petition was true, and
considering that the ruinous state of Harbottle Castle did not arise from
neglect, granted him leave to keep such prisoners in his castle of Prudhoe for
ten years.

This Earl Gilbert died without issue in 1381, having had by his wife Maude,
daughter and heir of Thomas Lord Lucy, a son named Robert, who, although he
died before his father, had been married to Margaret daughter of Henry the
second Lord Percy of Alnwick, but without issue. It seems to have been in
consequence of the settlement made on this marriage, that the Castle and Barony
of Prudhow descended to the Percies; for it appears among the pleas in the
King's Bench, 15 King Henry VI. and Roll. 9. on a traverse then tendered by
Henry Earl of Northumberland, that John Hawborough and John Pykeworth, Ao. 49
King Edward III. gave to Gilbert Hamfervile, and to Mawde his wife, and to
their heirs lawfully begotten, the said Castle and Barony, and the Manor of
Ovingham; and for lack of such issue, the said Castle, Manor, and Barony to
remain to Henry Lord Percy, and to his heirs for ever.

In consequence of this disposition, after the death of Earl Gilbert his widow
the Countess Maude enjoyed it for her life. She married to her second husband
Henry Percy, first Earl of Northumberland, who after her death entered into
full possession of the Castle and Barony, with its appendages, and the same
continued in his posterity, without any other interruption except what was
occasioned by the attenders in different periods. Thus on the forfeiture of the
said first Earl of Northumberland and his son Hotspur, in the reign of King
Henry IV. the Castle and Lordship of Prudhow were bestowed by the said King (6
King Henry IV.) on his son John, afterward Duke of Bedford and Regent of
France, who appears to have held them till his death, except for a short time,
viz. 4 Henry VI. when Ralph Earl of Westmoreland was possessed of the Mano^ of
Prudhow. So again, 28 King Henry VI. the Castle of Prudhow was in possession of
Sir John Bertram, Knt. but afterward the whole reverted to the Percies, till
they underwent another attainder for their adherence to the House of Lancaster,
in the 4th of King Edward IV. The Castle of Prudhow was given to Sir William
Bertram, Knt. in the 5th year of that King's reign. After the restoration of
Henry the fourth Earl of Northumberland, this Castle and Barony were again
given back to the Percies: and though their possession of it suffered again
some short interruptions from future attaintures, in the reigns of King Henry
VIII. and Queen Elizabeth, yet the Castle and Barony of Prudhow have constantly
descended, with their other great possessions, through the succeeding Earls of
Northumberland, down to their illustrious representatives the present Duke and
his late Duchess.

Grose's Antiq.
He was succeeded by Odonel de Umfrevile, who with Barnard de Haliol and
others, took William King of Scotland prisoner at Alnwick, in the 20th year of
the reign of King Henry II. A. D. 1174, after his retreat from the siege of
Prudhoe. Gulielmus Rex Scottorum, perambulavit Northumbriam, obsedit Prudehou
Castellum Odonelli de Wimframvile, sed illud capere non potuit, etc. Quorum
adventu cognito, Rex Scour inde recedens obsedit Alnewic, et ibidem captus est
Rex.

Lel. Collect. V. 3. p. 207.
According to Mr Gross, he was succeeded by Robert his son, whose successor,
Richard de Umfrevile, was a benefactor to the priory of Hexham. Gilbert was the
next successor, in the 11th year of the reign of King Henry III. and after him
a second Gilbert, A. D. 1245, who was created Earl of Angus, and summoned to
the parliament held at Carlisle in the 35th of King Edward I. A. D. 1307: -- he
founded a chantry in the chapel of Prudhoe Castle, and endowed it with two
crofts, 118 acres of land, and 5 acres of meadow, for the maintenance of two
Chaplains. He was succeeeded by Gilbert the third, who was summoned to the
parliaments at Westminster in the 26th of King Edward III. A. D. 1352, and the
1st of King Richard II. A. D. 1377. He was succeeded by Gilbert the fourth, the
11th of King Henry IV. A. D. 1411: he attended King Henry V. in his French
campaigns, and was made Governor of Gournie and Melun for his bravery. He lost
his life at a pass in Anjou, by the treachery of a servant belonging his
General, the Duke of Clarence, corrupted by the enemy. After him Prudhoe came
to Walter Tailbois, by marriage with Gilbert the fourth's sister; and under
attainder, in the 3d of King Edward IV. A. D. 1463, after the battle of Hexham
Levels, it came to the Crown; from whence it passed by grant to John Duke of
Bedford, and afterward to Henry Percy, Earl of Northumberland, and now
constitutes a part of the princely possessions of the present Duke of
Northumberland.

We passed over the ferry-boat at Ovingham, from whence we had a fine view of
the Castle of Prudhoe; the river beneath us washed the margin of a level of
corn land, above which arose the precipitous cliffs on which the castle is
erected, in the form of a half moon, crowned with the remains of the fortress,
of an aspect awfully majestic; over these the rising grounds behind, clothed
with woods, and the thick groves on each flank, seemed to cast a solemn mantle.
The scene struck me with the image of mourning royalty, weeping in ashes for
the dissolution of Empire, and lamenting the cruel vicissitudes of Fortune, in
which all its honors are extinguished, and nothing but memorials of calamity
left behind.

OVINGHAM
had heretofore a religious house of Black Canons, subordinate to Hexham,
founded and endowed by one of the Umfreviles, Barons of Prudhoe. At the
dissolution it was valued at 11l. 2s. 8d. by Sancroft, and 13l. 4s. 8d. by
Speed. It is now the estate of Thomas Charles Big, Esquire of Little Benton. The
church is in the cathedral form, but retains nothing antique or curious.

The road from Ovingham to

WYLAM,
the seat of the Blackets, John Blacket, Esquire High Sheriff of Northumberland
1692 John Blacket 1714 John Blacket 1729
Wallis.
is delightful; the river with its varied beauties on the one hand, and hanging
woodlands on the other.

CLOSE HOUSE,
the mansion of the Bewicks, Robert Bewick, Esquire High Sheriff of Northumberland
1695 Robert 1726 Sir Robert Bewick, Knt. 1760
Wallis.
claims the traveller's visit, for the excellent prospect it commands: placed
on a gently inclining lawn on the banks of Tyne, it has all those beauties in
view, which arise in a well cultivated and rich country: the river is seen,
graced with a small island, where some stately oaks are fortunately scattered;
the enclosures at the time of our journey abounded with the riches of harvest,
mingling the teints of gold with the velvet of the green meads; whilst tufts of
trees, well disposed, filled the nearer landscape: on this hand, Bradley, the
seat of John Simpson, Esquire on that, the village of Newburn, are on the offscape;
whilst an elegant curvature of the river, surmounted by Ryton spire, is in from.

Near Close House, on the north of the military road, lays

RUTCHESTER,
the Vindobala, according to Mr Horsley, of the Romans; where the Cohors Prima
Frixagorum kept garrison. Camden calls it Vindolana; and by some authors it is
said to be the frontier station of the fourth Cohort of the Gauls. Severus's
wall runs upon the middle of the east rampart, but is not continued through the
station: Hadrian's Vallum passes about the distance of a chain to the south of
it. This fort has been very considerable, and the ruins of it at present are
remarkable: on the north side there have been six turrets, one at each corner,
one on each side the gate, and one between each corner, and those adjoining to
the gate. On the east and west sides there is also a tower between the gate and
the angle, in that part of the fort that is on the north of the wall; but it is
doubtful whether there has been the same number of towers in that part that
lays within the wall. The ramparts are still very visible. If there has been a
town without, which there can scarce be any doubt of, it has been, as usual, on
the south, where the village of Rutchester now stands, and covers its ruins.

To the north-west of Rutchester, is a place called Whitchester, sometimes
Outchester; in Camden it is called Old Winchester, or Vindolana, and there are
said to be some remains of a fort here; but all this seems to be a mistake.
There is somewhat like the remains of an earthen rampart, which added to the
name, may make it probable that here were the Castra Aestiva of the garrison of
Rutchester; and perhaps it was called the Outer Chesters.

Between Whitchester and Harlow Hill, is a round hill with a trench about it,
which seems to have been exploratory, and by the situation one would judge it
had been as ancient as the time of the Romans.

It is curious to observe the passage of Hadrian's ditch near Harlow Hill,
where it passes through a limestone quarry; though nothing is to be discerned
on the surface, yet below it the exact dimensions of the ditch may be taken;
because that part of the quarry, through which the ditch has been carried on,
is now filled up with earth only, so that the shape and measure here are very
plain. It is made sloping, the depth between eight and nine feet, and about
eleven feet broad. At this place a Castellum has stood; the foundations yet
appear. It has had a high situation, and commanded an extensive prospect.

At the usual distance from Harlow Hill, a Castellum is visible, and about a
furlong west from this, the walls approach very near to each other, being not
above a chain distance. Again, at the usual distance, another Castellum
appears, but somewhat obscure, and of an uncommon shape; two of the sides
(those which lay east and west) being about double the usual length, and the
south side of it reaches very near the north Agger of Hadrian's work. Mr
Horsley was of opinion this was one of Hadrian's exploratory Castella; but the
north side of it falling in exactly with the line of Severus's wall, it has
been used also as a Castellum by him. Severus's wall, in part of this tract,
has four courses of the original stone appearing.

From Rutchester to Halton Chesters is little more than seven measured miles:
there are nine Castella between these two stations, and all of them visible,
the interval between every two of them being near upon six furlongs and an
half; and it is remarkable, that as the interval between these two stations is
the greatest of any upon the whole line of the wall, so the intervals between
the Castella are the least of any, except in one single instance.

Many Roman Antiquities have been gained here, besides those mentioned by Mr
Horsley, viz. an Effigy of Hercules some years ago was removed from hence by Mr
Duane; two Fibulae of silver, Roman Bricks marked LVIV, and Coins of the low
Empire, were lately discovered; but the most valuable acquisition gained from
hence, was an Urn found in 1766, containing gold and silver Coins, in the
possession of the late William Archdeacon, Esquire in which, it is said, is a
complete series of those of the higher Empire. In the same year was discovered
a Coffin, cut in the rock, twelve feet in length, containing many bones, teeth,
and vertebree or joints, supposed to belong to animals sacrificed to Hercules,
whose festival was observed on the third day of June. Mr Horsley's Work
contains the following Inscriptions found here:

XIII. Centuria Voconii Cohortis Posuit.

This is a centurial inscription in the usual form: the Centurion's name
Voconius is visible, but the number of the Cohort is effaced.

XIV. Cohors Nona Posuit.

This contains the number of the Cohort, which might probably be one of those
that carried on the work of the wall, from Walbottle hither. It is remarkable,
that though we have all the intermediate numbers from one to ten, yet ten is
never exceeded on such stones: this confirms them to be the numbers of the
Legionary Cohorts.

XVII. Centuria Turriai Prisci.

This was found near this place; it appeared at first fight to be plainly
centurial, and of the usual form; but the implication of the letters is very
odd, part of the letters of both the names being thrown together in the same
cipher, in which no fewer than four or five letters are united. The name
Priscus is in another centurial inscription at Cousins House, and two in
Cumberland.




Near this station stands Rutchester Tower, the possession of the family de
Rutchesters in the reign of King Edward I. The county of Northumberland, as was
before observed, contains the remains of a multitude of such towers, apparently
calculated for a family defense against the Moss Troopers and Scotch Ravagers.

CHEESBURN GRANGE
lays to the north. The manor belonged to the priory of Hexham, afterward to
the Widdringtons, and now is the possession of Ralph Riddle, Esquire

But I must return to the banks of Tyne, to speak more fully of

BYWELL.
The reader hitherto has only had my distant view from Hedley Hill.

I cannot forbear taking notice of a public grievance, which is so very
notorious in the county of Northumberland, that every traveller experiences it.
When I entered this county, I was prejudiced in its favor, and had not the
least apprehension that any matter necessary for the public weal could be
neglected. The resolutions of the Magistrates given to the public, will
transmit their virtues to posterity. Merchandise has occasioned, within the
last century, such an influx of wealth to this county, that it proves Trade is
advanced by good roads for carriages, and an easy communication with the ports:
-- how then, in the midst of such professed virtues, and such public
conviction, can it arise, that the plain directions of the law, touching the
highways, are totally neglected or overlooked? There is scarce one Guide-post,
to mitigate the grievances of traveling, erected through the whole county,
except in the neighborhood of Wallington; and some of those are obliterated.
On the public road from Newcastle to Hexham, and on the wilds of Wooler, the
traveller is equally embarrassed.

As you look upon Bywell from the most pleasing point of view, the landscape
lays in the following order: -- From the road near the brink of the river, the
ruined piers of a bridge become the front objects; behind which, in a regular
cascade, the whole river falls over a wear, extended from Bank to Bank, in
height about eight perpendicular feet; a mill on the right hand, a salmon lock
on the left: the town and two churches stretch along the banks of the upper
basin of the river, with a fine curvature: the solemn ruins of the ancient
castle of the Baliols, lift their towers above the trees on the right, and make
an agreeable contrast with the adjoining mansion house: the whole back ground
of the landscape appears covered with wood.

There is a tradition, that two sisters quarrelling about precedence, one of
them founded a church of her own, from whence she excluded her sister; which
was the occasion of two churches in this small town. Both are served at present
by one Clergyman, who does duty in the morning at one, and in the evening at
the other.

Bywell was the Barony of the Baliol family for many generations, Guy de Baliol
being invested therewith by William Rufus: Dugdale's Baron. 523.
Hugh de Baliol possessed it in the reign of King Henry III. Dugdale's Baron.
523.
Camden says, he held it by the service of thirty Knights fees Hugh de Balliolo
tenet Baroniam de Biwelle cum pertinentiis per servitium quinque militum, et
tamen debet ad wardam Novi Castelli super tinam 30 milites, ut antecessores sui
tenuerunt a tempore Gul. Rufi Regis qui eum feofavit de feodo illo.

Lel. Collect. V. 1. p. 301.
to the ward of Newcastle. And after him, it passed to John de Baliol, 1 King
Edward I. Hugh de Baliol, Sheriff of Northumberland for 10 successive years.

John de Baliol, one of the 12 Lords chosen by the Barons to treat in the three
parliaments of Henry III. to save the charges of attendance.

Wallis.
It became the possession of the Nevils, Lords of Raby; A survey was taken of
the forfeited estates by her Majesty's Commissioner Sir William Humberston, in
the 12th year of her reign.

Bywell and Bolbeck are two ancient Baronies, and are situate on the extreme
south part of Northumberland. To the Barony of Bywell belongs a forest of red
deer. Within the barony are many gentlemen and freeholders, who hold their
lands of the said barony by services, and are always attendants upon the Lords
in time of service, when they shall be thereto commanded. In the wastes are
diverse woods, and very fair coursing with greyhounds.

The town of Bywell is builded in length all of one street, upon the river or
water of Tyne, is divided into two several parishes, and inhabited by
handicraftmen, whose trade is in iron-work, for the horsemen and borderers of
that country. They are subject to the incursions of the thieves of Tynedale,
and compelled winter and summer to bring all their cattle and sheep into the
street in the night season, and watch both ends of the street, and when the
enemy approaches, to raise hue and cry.

To the barony there belongs a fishery of salmon in the river Tyne, three
miles in length, with a dam or bay over the river for preserving the fish.

In Bywell town the ancestors of the Earl of Westmoreland built a fair tower or
gatehouse, all of stone, and covered with lead; meaning to have proceeded
further, as appears by the walls, the height of a man, left unfinished.

The Barony of Bywell comprehends Bywell St Peter, Bywell St Andrew, Acomb,
Newton, Ovington, Mickley, Bromley, Newlands, Ridley, Nova, Styford, Sheryden,
and Easing-hope, inhabited by men of good service, and have very good farms,
and able to keep much cattle, and get plenty of corn and hay, were it not for
the continual robberies and incursions of the thieves of Tynedale, which so
continually assault them in the night, as they can keep no more cattle than
they are able to lodge either in house or like safety in the night

The Lord of the said Baronies has the leet, within all the limits of the
same, and all waives, estrays, fellons goods, and amerciaments, and all other
royalties, casualties, and profits arising or growing by reason of the leet.


and by the attainder of Charles Earl of Westmoreland, was forfeited to the
Crown in the year 1571, with his other large possessions.

In the Life of Lord Keeper Guildford, we have an account of a custom held
here. As this country was perilous to travelers, the tenants of each manor
were bound to guard the Judge through their respective precincts. Lord Chief
Justice North describes his attendants with long beards, short cloaks, long
basket-hilted broad swords, hanging from broad belts, and mounted on little
horses, so that their legs and swords touched the ground at every turning. The
Sheriff presented his train with arms, viz. a dagger, knife, penknife, and fork.

By the two piers yet remaining in the river, it appears there was an ancient
bridge over Tyne here; but as it is remarked by workmen, that the piers have
not had a spring of arches, it is evident the superstructure was of wood. The
ruins of the chapel appertaining to Bywell Castle, are situate on the southern
banks of the river.

I cannot quit this delightful scene, without making a comparison between the
era of 1580 and the present age: -- the record I have given in my note,
affords a deplorable evidence of the circumstances attending the inhabitants of
Tyne, when they were obliged to guard their cattle every night, and to
cultivate no more lands than in proportion to the places of defense they had to
secure their crops; living in a state of perpetual warfare and jeopardy. And
even these calamities, which arose from a vicinity of thieves and robbers, were
trifling, when compared to the devastation and ruin, which marked the
incursions of the Scots. These were only the incidental grievances of the
times; but there was one which was continued -- the vassalage and misery of a
feodal tenure; by which genius was kept in fetters, and industry was
distinguished only by the name of slavery. What then was the estate of this
opulent and beautiful county of Northumberland, when compared to the present
time? What blessings have flowed in upon this land, from the union of the
kingdoms, and the excellent police of the age? The ferocity of the inhabitants
is subdued; traffic, arts, sciences, manufactories, and navigation, have taken
place of the brutal warfare, which is extinguished; Cultivation, with all the
comeliness of Plenty, laughs in the valleys; the streams are taught to labor
in mechanic systems, to aid the manufacturer; every Creek and Bay is thronged
with Ships; the gloomy Tower, that frowned defiance from each Eminence, sinks
in the dust, whilst a Palace receives the descendants of her Lord, with all the
bounties of Opulence and Peace. Desert plains stained with Slaughter, and
track'd with the progress of Rapine and Violence, formerly spread forth an
extensive scene of desolation, where now rising woods, enclosed farms,
villages, and hamlets are disposed under the smiles of Prosperity. The original
naked inhabitants (savage from hunger and necessity, lurking in dens, and in
the mountains prowling as wolves, subsisting in perpetual jeopardy on robbery
and rapine) has furnished the land with a race, who, at the time they enjoy the
comforts of life, reap the fruits of industry and the profits of genius, and
thereby are progressively advancing their families toward opulence. Happy
reverse! -- But to return from this digression.

In the year 1760, an angler found in the river, near Bywell, a small silver
cup, of Roman work, with a motto engraven on the bottom, Desideri vivas.

The custom of wishing health or prosperity, at the time of drinking, is very
ancient -- it is not possible to trace it to its source: we have testimonies of
it among the customs of most of the ancient nations: it was used as a religious
ceremony with many; the wine was offered in the sacred vessel, and the Deity
invoked; after which a little was spilt on the altar, and the public prayer
being made, the petitioner put his lips to the cup.

It would afford great astonishment to a foreigner, in whose country no such
custom has gained acceptance, to be brought into a company of Englishmen,
where jollity and convivial mirth had begun to take place: we will presume the
visitant, by his interpreter, is introduced to a knowledge of the characters
before him, in order that we may heighten the lines of his surprise: -- how
would he be amazed, to hear a man, who in common life and conversation
expresses no religion, morality, principles, or public virtue, praying with all
the vehemence of an Enthusiast, on his knees, before he drinks to the
prosperity of the object of his wishes; who is, perhaps, no other than some
factious wretch, and rebellious disturber of the commonweal; whilst the circle
of communicants, standing around like Canibals at some horrid festival, or
Demons at an infernal convocation, in every distortion of body and
countenance, which can express an agitated soul and an inflamed mind, halloo
with all the ardour of unlimited licentiousness, in the hideous yells of
Hottentots? -- When such a visiter, returned to his native land, should relate
the scene, and tell his astonished countrymen, that with the polished Britons
this was jollity and public spirit; could he be believed? -- Would he not, like
Mandeville on his visit to the vale of Devils, to save his credit, be obliged
to add, "Men sayen for I hav' not seyen." As to my part, I think a vehement
Partizan, in the ardent act of drinking a constitutional Toast, as he would
term it, is as odious and ridiculous an Animal as Nature can exhibit.

Returning to the wall,

STAMFORDHAM
claims my attention, consisting of one street only; it has three annual fairs,
on the 12th of April, Holy Thursday, and Thursday succeeding the 26th of
August. Here is a free school, founded by Sir Thomas Widdrington, in the year
1663, well endowed. The vicarage house is pleasantly situated.

About a mile from thence is

FENWICK TOWER,
now in ruins, in a low situation, the seat of Thomas de Fenwick Thomas de
Fenwick King Henry III. Robert -- 33 King Edward I. John --, High Sheriff of
Northumberland 32 King Richard II. Sir John Fenwick King William III.
Wallis.
in the reign of King Henry III. It continued for several generations in that
family, till it came by sale, in the reign of King William III. to Sir William
Blacker. In pulling down pan of this tower, since I visited it, a treasure was
found by one of the workmen, of the broad gold coin of King Edward I. as fresh
as if new from the mintage. The poor wretch, elate with his success, exceeded
those limits of discretion necessary to secure his wealth; by launching out
into extravagance, he alarmed an envious neighbor, and the simple man was soon
left to his original poverty, by a claim from the owner of the tower.

WEST MATFEN,
in the neighborhood of Fenwick Tower, next attracted our notice. In the
reigns of King John, and King Henry III. it was the manor of Philip de Ulcote,
who held it by Grand Sergeancy, on keeping the pleas of the Crown. He was
joined in commission with Hugh de Baliol, 17 King John, A. D. 1216, to hold the
castle and town of Berwick upon Tweed against the Barons. It afterward became
the inheritance of the Feltons, till by marriage it devolved on Sir Edward de
Hastings. In the reign of Queen Elizabeth it was in the possession of Sir Ra.
Lawson, and after changing its owners several times from that period, is now
the estate of Sir Edward Blacket, whose mansion house is seated on a fine
eminence, shielded by extensive woods, above the river Pont, with a vista of
considerable extent opening upon the military road. The house and pleasure
grounds are highly pleasing, though not pompous: there is that elegance which
perfect neatness constitutes, to be discerned in the whole.

Adjoining to the east side of the vista, is a rude stone Column, nine feet
high, near which lately stood a Tumulus, which on account of building a
farm-house, has been destroyed; the people living near it, say it was near 30
yards in circumference at the foot; but as no remains were left for me to make
my observations upon, I will give the description found in Mr Wallis's book
verbatim. In a field on the east side of the vista, about three quarters of a
mile from the house, is a circular Mount, with a round cavity in the middle, of
the form of the Celtic Tumuli, or Temples; an upright stone pillar standing by
it, of a great size, nine feet high above ground, with flat sides, three feet
broad, and a foot and a half thick. The mount is composed of earth and numerous
masses of stone, of the coarse rag kind, many of which have been dug up for
the use of this farm, and among them were discovered two stone chests or
coffins, consisting of four flags set edgeways, with a bottom stone and a stone
cover, containing the ashes of the dead, appearing like a white dust.

From this description, I apprehend it was one of the most curious pieces of
antiquity, of the Tumuli order, that was in this county, or perhaps the north
of England. I humbly conceive it was not a Celtic Temple, as Mr Wallis calls
it, being evidently appropriated to the sepulture of the dead; a defilement at
no time permitted by the Druids in their holy places. Its distant antiquity is
proved by the mode of sepulture; the burning of the deceased, after the manner
of the Romans, was not attended with the mode distinguished herein interment;
the Danes used burning the deceased, but we have no evidence in what manner
they practiced it in England. From the cavity on the crown of the mount,
similar to some of the Druids monuments I have seen, I am induced to apprehend,
this was the mausoleum of the Druid tribe, and of the remotest antiquity; and
that such cavity was adapted to rites paid to the manes of the deceased.
Pillars and other memorials of sepulture, were originally devised as mementos
to the passenger, of the precariousness of our existence, and by remembrance of
the virtues of the dead, to promote our emulation. The custom of burning the
remains of men of rank or power, gained an acceptance in very early ages; it
was consistent with the general ideas of those who held the Amonian rites; the
spirit or human soul was esteemed to be a spark of etherial fire, an emanation
of the Deity, who made his throne in the orbit of the sun, to which they looked
up in worship; which divine essence, in this life, was cased up in members of
mortality, during a pilgrimage allotted to it in a terrestrial state: to
restore to that element again this offspring of heavenly light, they reduced
even the loathsome memorials of its bondage, that nothing should remain which
might cause it to linger on earth. But I will add no further to this subject,
than by way of note, to give the reader the quotations and reflections of Mr
Wallis. Temples and funeral memorials like this, with cepititious or stone
altars, and an upright pillar untouched by the chisel, are the most ancient of
any in the world, were raised in Judea and all over the Holy Land, by the
eastern Princes and Patriarchs, by whom they were called Bethels and Elbethels.
The manner of consecration, was with oil poured on the pillar. -- One of these
pillars was erected by Jacob, and he called is the house of God. Jacob rose up
early in the morning, and took the stone that he had put for his pillow, and
set it up for a pillar, and poured oil upon the top of it. And he called the
name of that place Bethel; but the name of that city was called Luz, at the
first. And he said, this stone which I have set up for a pillar shall be God's
house. Jacob came to Luz, which is in the land of Canaan, (that is Bethel) he
and all the people that were with him. And he built there an altar, and called
the place Elbethel. And Jacob set up a pillar in the place where he talked with
God, even a pillar of stone, and he poured a drink offering thereon, and he
poured oil thereon. And Jacob called the name of the place where God spoke with
him Bethel.

The making of altars of earth, or of natural stone as formed in the earth, was
by the direction of God to Moses. An altar of earth thou shall make unto me.
And if thou will make me an altar of stone, thou shall not build it of hewn
stone, for if thou lift up thy tool upon it, thou have polluted it.

These temples were generally erected on the higher ground, such as were most
conspicuous and obvious to fight. The one was built by Moses and another by
Joshua on Mount Ebal, composed of whole natural stones, or pillars plaistered
with plaster, whereon they wrote the divine laws, in a great and general
assembly of all Israel, of all the princes, great officers, judges, and people
of every rank and quality, strangers and others, old and young.

Single pillars were also erected by these holy men over the graves of the
illustrious dead by some public and much frequented road, to have their
memories preserved, and to put the traveller in mind of their exemplary virtue
and piety, of his own short continuance on the stage of life, and to fit and
make himself worthy of such another honorable memorial at his death, and of an
eternal diadem. Thus Jacob buried Rachel, the solace and partner of his cares,
who died with the birth of their son Benjamin. "Rachel died and was buried in
the way to Ephrah, which is Bethlehem. And Jacob set a pillar on her grave,
that is the pillar of Rachel's grave to this day."

Persons of inferior condition and figure were buried under the shady oaks that
flourished at the bottom of the mounts on which the bethels or temples stood.
They were called the oaks of weeping. Deborah, Rebekah's nurse, died, and she
was buried beneath Bethel, under an oak, and the name of it was called Allon
Backuth.

Heaps of stones rudely cast together were the tombs they assigned to infidel
enemies after execution, even crowned heads, in avenues and places of great
concourse, to be warnings to the rest of mankind, how they rose up against the
God of Israel, and dishonored his bethel or holy temple. Such a memorial had
the King of Ai, executed by Joshua. As soon as the sun was down, Joshua
commanded that they should take his carcass down from the tree, and cast it on
the entering of the gate of the city, and raise thereon a great heap of stones,
that remains to this day.

Such a memorial likewise had Achan and his family, whose bodies were first
burnt to ashes, with all their treasure and wealth.

Hence the open temples, the pillars, the obelisks, the consecrated groves of
oak, the heaps of stones reared by the Pagans to their false Gods, and to the
memory of the dead. Hence the Egyptian pyramid, hence the fair column of the
Greeks, the Romans, and of the several nations taught and ruled by the Druids:
the primitive religious rites accompanying mankind upon their grand dispersion
at the tower of Babel, about the 400th year after the flood, according to the
Samaritan computation.

Wallis.


Returning to the military road, between the 12th and 13th mile stone, is a
view of

WELTON TOWER,
situate on a rising ground, adjoining a small village. There is nothing
singular in the structure. On entering Northumberland, my companion, the
ingenious Mr Bailey, assisted me to draw views of many towers, but such a
sameness reigned through the whole, and they multiplied upon us so fast, we
were obliged to desist from further prosecution of so wearisome and
unprofitable a work. -- We trod the hallowed ground where Finan, as Bede tells
us, then Bishop of Lindisfarn, baptized Sigebert King of the East Saxons, and
Penda King of the Mercians, with a numerous train of nobles and adherents. This
was the ancient seat of the Weltons, Simon de Welton 10 King Henry IV. Thomas
25 King Henry VI. Simon 5 King Edward IV. Michael 19 King Charles I.
Wallis.
of Simon de Welton in the reign of King Henry IV. and continued in that family
till the reign of King Charles I.

At a little distance from thence stands

HALTON TOWER.
There is nothing remarkable in this structure. It appertained to the ancient
family of Haltons, and was possessed in the reign of King Henry III. by John de
Halton. John de Halton King Henry III. William --, of Denum 17 King Edward I.
High Sheriff of Northumberland 25th of that reign. Margaret married Robert de
Lowther -- married Carnaby The whole vested in the Carnabys King Richard II.
William Carnaby 9 King Henry IV. High Sheriff of Northumberland. Sir John 35
King Henry VI. Sir Reginold 33 King Henry VIII. High Sheriff of Northumberland.
Sir Cuthbert 9 Queen Elizabeth. High Sheriff. Sir William 21 King James I.
Member of Parliament for Morpeth. In the reign of Charles I. Member for
Northumberland, and High Sheriff.
Wallis. Joannes de Hawelton tenet in capite de Domino Rege Halton. Lel. Col.
V. 1. p. 199.


It afterward descended to two coheiresses, through whom one moiety came to
the family of Lowthers, and the other to that of the Carnabys. In the reign of
King Henry IV. the whole possession was in the Carnaby family, with whom it
continued for many generations: one of whom, Sir William Carnaby, being a
loyalist at the battle of Marsdon Moor, in the Northumberland regiment,
commanded by the Marquis of Newcastle, was obliged to fly the land.

Here is preserved a sword of the Carnabys 64 inches long, one of those
ill-proportioned instruments which was decisive at one blow, or left its owner
at the mercy of his adversary, unable to recover his weapon for a second
attack. Such swords as these were used by the Gauls in their wars with the
Romans; as a defense against which, the Roman General Camillus contrived a
shield or buckler of iron, of the Parma kind, of a round form, and adorned with
studs of brass. Mars Bellator of Gradivus, is usually described with such a
shield. It was part of the Armatura Equitum, and borne on the left arm.

Wallis.
It was difficult to be wielded with any effect by a footman, and undoubtedly
appertained to the horse service; Mr Wallis gives the following anecdote of one
of the Carnaby family. "At the time that this country was infested with those
thieves called Moss Troopers, one of this family had a commission to apprehend
and try them. Whilst he was deeply engaged on the trial of some of them, a very
notorious and desperate villain was seized by his son, who asked his father
what he should do with him. Do with him, said the father, why hang him. As soon
as the trial was ended, he ordered the man to be brought before him, but was
told he was hanged instantly according to his order. On complaint being made to
the Crown, a fine of 4l. per annum was laid on the Halton e^tate, which is
still paid."

Wallis. A similar story is told of Lord William Howard, at Nawarth, in
Cumberland.


the shield devised by the Romans as a defense against the same was borne by
the horsemen.

Halton was purchased by John Douglas, Esquire He rebuilt the old parochial chapel
there (which was then in ruins) for the case of his tenants, though at no great
distance from the mother church. The Vicar of Corbridge officiates here every
third Sunday, in the forenoon, and at C^rbridge, the parish church, in the
afternoon.
of Newcastle, in the year 1706, and by marriage has become the possession of
Sir Edward Blackett.

Within view from the tower is

HALTON CHESTERS,
the Hunnum of the Romans, situate on an easy descent; the remains of the
Vallum not perfectly to be traced. -- This station is the next fort that
appears upon the wall between Rutchester and Walwick Chesters, and comes at a
due distance, and in proper order for the ancient Hunnum, the fifth station in
the series of the Notitia, garrisoned by the Ala Saviniana.

Mr Gordon, omitting the station at Halton, makes Walwick Chesters to be
Hunnum, and supposes Cilurnum, the next station in the Notitia, to have been
between Walwick Chesters and Precolitia or Carrawbrugh, but now entirely
demolished. This cannot hold, for the walls and their appurtenances are here in
the greatest perfection; how then should a fort on that part of the wall be
entirely ruined, so as not to have the least vestige remaining? Besides, the
great distance between Rutchester and Walwick, which is above twelve miles,
shows that there must have been at least one station between them; and on the
other hand, the small distance between Walwick Chesters and Carrawbrugh, which
is little more than three measured miles, renders it most unlikely that there
ever should have been another station between them.

Hadrian's Vallum seems to have fallen in with the south rampart of this fort,
and Severus's wall with the north line of the inner part. There seems to have
been an aqueduct to convey water to this station, from a spring on the higher
ground, near Watling-street-gate: when Mr Horsley passed that way, he says he
was shown a part of it by a countryman, who said, it was what the speaking
trumpet was lodged in: of this matter I have treated before.

The ruins of the out-buildings are to the south and south-east of the fort.
Near about a furlong to the east of Watling-street-gate, is a visible
Castellum, and at the gate there has been a square Castellum, half within the
wall and half without.

Mr Horsley remarks, that Severus's military way appears very distinct for the
small spaces where it is separated from Hadrian's north Vallum; regularly
paved, but not much raised above the level of the ground. When the two are
united, they make a military way very beautiful and magnificent: and the rest
both of Severus's and Hadrian's works are ample and conspicuous all this way.
As for the course of Severus's military way, and its coinciding with Hadrian's
north Vallum, and going off from it again at every Castellum, it seems very
curious, and it is remarkable that it has not been more observed.

From St Oswalds to the river of North Tyne, some parts or appurtenances of the
walls become more faint and obscure, and some not visible at all; but yet
Severus's wall, the ditch, and Hadrian's Vallum and ditch, are very apparent.
After the wall has crossed the Tyne, it goes to Walwick, as before described:
the distance from whence to Halton Chesters is near five measured miles and a
quarter, and in this interval there are five visible Castella, besides one that
must have stood near the river Tyne, but is now entirely lost. The constant
distance between these Castella seems to have been seven furlongs.

Dr Hunter, Mr Smith, and others, take notice of some remains at Portgate, or
near it, within a mile of the Chesters: and in the new edition of Camden, it is
observed, that there is at Portgate, a square old tower still standing, and
great ruins of old buildings. But it was Mr Horsley's opinion this tower had
nothing in it that was Roman, being of the same form with a multitude of others
that are in the north, and of a much later date. The ruins are at Halton,
before spoken of.

Besides the inscriptions mentioned by Mr Horsley, the following were found
here.

A centurial stone, now in the custody of Sir Edward Blackett, with a civic
garland rudely sculptured, and a figure of the Roman Eagle, inscribed LEG. II.
AVG.
E


At the same time was found an Extispicia of wood, the instrument used by the
Auspices in examining the Entrails of sacrificed animals. Another centurial
stone was also found here, inscribed LEG. XX. V.V.
HORTENS
PROCVL.


Urns have been dug up here, with some Coins of Nero and Constantine; and also
some of Magnentius and Decentius: the remains of sacrifices have also been
discovered here. This Legion, according to Dr Stukely, after harvest held a
solemn festival dedicated to Ceres and Ops: the usual victim was a boar. Mr
Horsley treats of the following inscription found here.

XX Cohortis Se^ae Centuria Statii Solonis Posuit.

This was in the w^ of an enclosure not far from Portgate Castle: it was
erected by the Century of Statius S^l^a, a Centurion of the sixth Cohort,
probably of the sixth Legion called Victorious: which Legion erected th^s
inscription.

At a C^ll^m were found some Ur^, coarse and whitish.




We approached

AYDEN CASTLE,
now greatly in decay; the situation is formidable, and from the solemnity of
its ruins, is at this time strikingly august. It is placed on the west side of
a deep gill, on the brink of a precipice, at whose foot runs a little brook. By
the traces remaining of this edifice, it appears to have been of considerable
extent and strength, encompassed by an outward wall, in which the loop-holes
remain. One thing remarkable here, is a stable, with an arched roof of stone,
without any wood in its structure, the mangers being formed of stone troughs.
It seems constructed for the preservation of cattle, at the time of assault.

The precipice is famous for a Lover's Leap, an exploit in amor totally
neglected in our degenerate days, and incompatible with the silken softness of
modern gallants, who court the hand of destruction by modes more truly French,
when despair ruffles their plumes. This custom is truly British, the influenza
of our heavy and gloomy atmosphere -- we read of no such thing in antiquity, or
the manners of other nations. Jack who made his leap here, has immortalized his
name, but we are deprived of that of his Dulcinea, whose frowns had such power
over his forlorn heart. Intercourse with polite nations has introduced many
changes in our manners; most Suicides nowadays, are in despair of getting a
separation from the sex, and not their possession.

The prospect from hence is delightful, comprehending the vale, over which
Hexham, with imperial looks, smiles graciously; the river is seen in various
meanderings, and the opposite banks are graced with the elegant mansion of
Beaufront, flanked with its extensive plantations.

Ayden Castle was the inheritance of the family of Aydens Emma de Ayden 1 King
Edward I. Escheats of that reign.

for several generations: it appertained to Emma de Ayden, a rich heiress, in
the reign of King Edward I. he gave her in marriage to Peter de Wallis, whose
name is said to be local, and derived from Wallis in France; and that he was of
the same race of the Scotch patriot Wallis, whose ancestor came into Britain
with the Conqueror. Ayden afterward became the inheritance of the Raymes
William de Raymes 43 King Edward III. High Sheriff. Edward 35 King Henry VI.
Robert 10 Queen Elizabeth. High Sheriff. Henry King Charles I.
Wallis.
of Bolham, and was in that family from the reign of King Edward III. to that
of King Charles I. A part of the Ayden estate is said to have been in the
family of the Carnabys.

Camden says, near this place was dug up an ancient monument, on which the
effigy of a man was cut, resting on his left arm upon a couch, in the attitude
used by the Romans, his right hand laid upon his right knee, with the following
inscription: -- -- -- -- --
NORICI. AN. XXX
-- ESSORIVS MAGNUS
FRATER EIVS
DVPL. ALE
SABINIANE
which may be read thus: Norici annorum triginta Messorius Magnus Frater ejus
duplaris alae Sabinianae. This is a curious and useful inscription, as it
confirms this place to be the Station of Hunnum. The cut of the letters is
neither very good nor exact; nor are they very regular as to their magnitude or
distances one from another; and the the whole favors of the lower Empire. The
original is at Conington. Norricus is a Roman name that occurs several times in
Gruter: and the name Messorius is found also in an inscription at Risingham, in
this county. The mark at the bottom looked like a part of a letter, as if this
stone had been parted from another, upon which there was some inscription.
Camden supposes, that Sabina, Hadrian's wife, gave the name to this Ala: but it
was thought more probable by Mr Horsley, that it was taken from Sabinia, the
wife of the Emperor Gordian; to whose time this inscription much better agrees.

Also the following inscription is mentioned by Camden: M. MARI
US. VELLI
A. LONG
US. AQVI
S. HANC
POSVIT
V. S. L. M.
M. Marius Vellia Longus Aquis hanc Posuit V. S. L. M. Mr Horsley presumed that
Aquis here is for Eques, so Equis for Eques we meet with in other instances;
and perhaps an A for an E has been the error of the transcriber. This horseman
might also belong to the Ala Sabiniana.

We descended to

CORBRIDGE.
Though the town makes a pretty appearance at the foot of the vale when you see
it from Hexham, it disappoints the traveller greatly on his entrance, to find
it dirty and disagreeable.

This is an ancient borough, Joannes filius Roberte tenet in Capite de Domino
Rege Corbruge, quod est Burgus, pro ^t^ per annum ad feodam firmam.

Robertus filius Rogeri tenet V^lam de Corbridge cum pertinenties ad feodam
firmam reddendo 30^ annua^m de veteri firma.

Lel. Col. V. 1. p. 199. 201.
and sent Members to Parliament; but on account of the expense of
representation, the privilege was disused. Brown Wallis names Adam Fitz Allan
and Fitz Hugh, Representatives.
Roger de Clavering, Baron of Warkworth, had this manor by a grant of King
John, with the privilege of an annual fair, on the day of St John the Baptist,
and a weekly market. The manor, by the surrender of John the last Baron
Clavering, came to the Crown in the reign of King Edward I. by King Edward III.
it was granted to Henry Lord Percy, and is now part of the possessions of the
present Duke of Northumberland.

In the reign of King Edward I. A. D. 1296, the Scots burnt Corbridge, on their
incursions, at the same time that they destroyed Hexham. In the reign of Edward
II. Corbridge again suffered by the Scots, A. D. 1311.

The church is ancient; under an arch in the north aile, is the tomb of one of
the founders, inscribed Hic jacet in terris Alsini filius Hugo. King Henry I.
presented his Chaplain, Richard de Aurea Valle, to this church; and gave the
impropriation and perpetual advowson, to the Church and Canons of St Mary,
Carlisle.

Many considerable donations were made by the Dilston family and others, to the
poor of this parish.

In the year 1735, there was found near Corbridge, a curious piece of Roman
plate, now in the possession of his Grace the Duke of Northumberland. It weighs
148 ounces, is 20 inches long, and 15 broad, a print of which, engraved by
Virtue, some years ago was published by Mr William Shaftoe. We intended whilst
upon our journey, to have procured a drawing of this curious piece of
antiquity; but on our arrival at Alnwick, found the castle crowded with
visitants, it being one of his Grace's public days, when the popularity and
libera spirit, so eminently distinguished in his Grace's character, laid open
the gates of his palace. The annexed plate is a copy taken from the Engraving
by Virtue.


It is probable this piece of plate was not for sacred uses, but was a Lanx,
for the service of the Emperor's table on high festivals; and expressive of
some great achievement to the glory of the Roman Eagle: the locality and the
event being lost to us in the distant antiquity.

The best description and definition now extant, have been communicated to me,
among the manuscripts of the late Roger Gale, Esquire and I do not doubt the
curious reader will readily pardon my inserting the papers at length, which
relate thereto.

From the Manuscripts of the late Roger Gale, Esquire

Extract from the Newcastle News-paper, with an account of an ancient Silver
Plate found near Corbridge, in Northumberland.

"A few days since, near the Roman wall in Northumberland, was found by a
smith's daughter in Corbridge, an ancient piece of silver, in shape like a
tea-board, 20 inches long, and 15 broad, hollowed about an inch deep, with a
flat brim, an inch and a quarter broad, neatly flowered with a vine full of
grapes, etc. -- On the right hand is a figure of Apollo, with the bow in his
left hand, and a physical herb in his right, under a canopy supported by two
Corinthian pillars; near his left leg is attire, under it an Helistrope, and at
his feet a Python; near the right hand pillar is another of a different form,
with a sun for its capital; against this sits a Priestess on a tripod, who
looks over her shoulder at Apollo, under her feet is an altar, near which lies
a stag on his back. -- The next figure to the Priestess is another female, her
head unveiled, with a spear or wand in her left hand, on the top of which is a
ball, and near her is Minerva with a helmet on her head, a spear in her left
hand, pointing with her right to a man (supposed an Hunter) on the other side
of a large tree; on Minerva's breast is a Medusa's head, under her feet an
altar, and near it a wolf looking up to a man who has a bow in his left, and an
arrow in his right hand; below him, at one corner of the plate, is a rock with
an urn in the midst of it, from which flows a stream. The figures are raised
large, and well proportioned and cast-work, without the least sign of a graver
upon it. There are a few scratches of a punch or chisel on the back of it; the
three first are I. PX, but the rest is very unintelligible. It had under the
middle of it a low frame, about 7 inches long, 4 broad, and one and an half
deep, but this was broken off by the smith, though once all of a piece. It was
found by a little brook or watercourse near the abovementioned place, and
weighing about 148 ounces, was bought by Mr Cookson, a goldsmith of Newcastle,
who values it at a high rate. It has been described by several Virtuosi to the
Royal Society, that of the Antiquarians, and others, who esteem it a valuable
relic of antiquity."

Letter from Mr Robert Cay, with an account of the Corbridge Silver Plate. 4
March, 1734.
"SIR,
"My fondness to antiquity is revived, and with it the memory of my obligations
to you, by a Silver Table that has lately fallen into the hands of Mr Isaac
Cookson, a goldsmith in this town. It was found near Corbridge, by some
ignorant poor people, who have cut off the feet in such a vile barbarous
manner, that they have broke two holes through the table, and a small piece off
one of the corners too. It is 19 inches and long, and 15 broad, the feet 7
long, and 5 broad, and about one inch high; it weighs about 150 ounces. I
imagine it to have been cast all in one piece, most of the work is in basse
relief, the rest engraved. It represents a sacrifice to Apollo, whose image
stands in a small temple by two Corinthian pillars, against one of them seems
to be a pile of some square blocks, and close to it sits a Priestess upon a
stool, that shows but two feet; behind her is a column with a globe upon it, I
suppose to represent the sun, though had it been alone I should not have
thought so: near her stands another in the same habit, and a third that seems
to have the attributes of Pallas, particularly the headpiece. Near the last is
a man This figure is Diana, not a man. -- R. G.
with a bow in his left hand, and an arrow in his right, before him is an altar
and a dog, I think a greyhound near him; behind him is a large spreading tree,
with an eagle parched upon it; there are also several small birds about it, but
these are only engraved. In the lower corner next the man, on the left hand as
you look at it, there is a rocky hill, and on the side of it lies an urn, with
a stream of water running out; perhaps designed to represent the river Tyne.
The two standing women hold each of them a staff of their own height. Before the
temple is another altar, on one side of which lies a griffin, and on the other
side next the man, a buck, which seems to be killed for a sacrifice; near the
buck grow two ears of corn tied together, and near the griffin a shrub of three
or four branches, that has at the end of each branch somewhat formed like a
fan. There is a border raised round the whole, higher than the plain, which is
adorned with a vine; the branch is engraved, but the grapes and leaves are in
basse relief. I am, Sir, yours, etc.

ROBERT CAY.
Newcastle, 4 March, 1734. "I heartily wish this table was in the hands of some
curious gentleman well able to make such purchases, for I find Mr Cookson will
expect profit, though I hope he will not be unreasonable. I should have taken
notice, that the workmanship appears in all respects to be of the lower Empire."




Another Letter from Mr Cay, on the Corbridge Silver Plate.

15 March, 1735. "SIR,
"Soon after the post was gone from hence, I received yours of the 11th. This
morning I went to the goldsmith, who soon convinced me of my error in saying
the birds, etc. were engraved; and that all which I thought to be engraved, was
struck with the chisel and punch; so that I must own your suspicions were well
grounded. Mr Cookson's father happens to be here now; I take him to be well
versed in the art of casting of metals; he showed me several marks near one
end, in the middle of which end there is a crack; which marks and crack, he
says, are proofs that it was cast in one piece.

"I enquired again about the price, but Mr Cookson waved saying any thing
different from what I mentioned to you yesterday; which was, that he hoped it
would produce him about 200 guineas.

"As to the place where it was found, he says, he can tell me no more, than
that it was somewhere near Corbridge. He apprehends the person who sold it to
him was afraid to name the particular place, or to confess in whose manor it
was discovered, as fearing a claim from the Lord of the Manor.

"Since writing the above, I am told a kind of a claim has been made on behalf
of the Duke of Somerset, though neither his Grace's officer nor the goldsmith
know in whose manor it was found.

"On the back of the table there is a kind of inscription, which I cannot
pretend to read, but will endeavor to represent it below.

I am, Sir, yours, etc. ROBERT CAY.
"P. S. I am told two other pieces of antique plate have been since found in
the same place. One of them was sold to a gentleman in Cumberland, and the
other to a goldsmith in this town, who thinking it much damaged, had melted it
down before I heard of it.

R. C."




Letter from Sir John Clerk, in answer to one from Mr Gale, giving an account
of the Corbridge Silver Plate.
"The account you have sent me of the silver table found near Corbridge is very
surprising. How happy had Mr Gorden and I been, when we were hunting for Roman
Antiquities in that country, if this valuable curiosity had fallen into our
hands! As to the use of it, I make no question of its being a tabula votiva,
and that it has been hung up, or kept in a temple, at Corbridge; dedicated
perhaps to Apollo or Ceres. No doubt the Roman officer, who commanded in these
northern parts of Britain, thought himself very happy, to find good meat and
drink, in a country where he expected to find nothing, but famine and
barbarity; and therefore in gratitude made this present to the God of the place.

"I cannot help, since I am in this way of thinking, to reflect a little upon
what I observed in a church, called Notre Dame de Halle, about 12 miles from
Brussels; the walls were hung round with silver legs and arms, cups, and
several other things in silver, as tokens of gratitude to the blessed Virgin,
for having by her means and intercession, been recovered from infirmities and
distempers.

"Among other things, I could not but take notice of a Silver Pen, which old
doting Justus Lipsius had sent thither some years before, out of gratitude, as
an inscription told us, for that by the assistance of the Virgin Mary, he had
been enabled with so much eloquence, etc. to write a Treatise de Miraculis B.
Virginis Hallensis. I called to mind upon that occasion, passages very
agreeable to your Silver Table and applicable.

Hic steterat nautis olim venerabile lignum
Servati ex undis ubi figere dona solebant
Laurenti Divo, et votis suspendere vestes. Virg. Aen. Lib. 12. V. 767.

-- me Tabula sacer
Votiva paries indicat uvida
Suspendisse potenti
Vestimenta maris Deo. Hor. 1 Lib. Carm. Od. 5.

"You are pleased to express some doubt, as to the engraving; and I think you
have reason. The Romans, I believe, never practiced our way of engraving, yet
they did what was next to it, for they were used to cut some remarkable laws
and edicts in brass tables, as they used to make inscriptions in marble or
stone. I have seen some of these, particularly at Lions, which at that time
made me reflect on the dullness of the Romans, and all mankind besides, that by
means of these brass plates they had not fallen upon the art of printing; for
if these had been daubed over with any sort of color, and clapped upon the paper
or parchment, they would soon have introduced that art; but there are many
plain things that mankind cannot see into all of a sudden, and which are
reserved for posterity. I Would be glad to hear from you after you have seen this
fine plate; it is well the goldsmith did not melt it down, as some modern Goths
of this trade have frequently done.

I am ever, Sir, Pennycink, 28th March, 1735. Your most faithful humble
servant, JOHN CLERK.
"By way of corollary, I must add to what I have said above, that if search was
made in the very place where this plate was found, many fine things may
probably be discovered.

"See postscript to Mr Cay's letter, 15th March, 1735."




Letter from Maurice Johnson, Esquire in answer to one from Mr Gale, giving an
account of the Corbridge Silver Plate, etc.
3d May, 1735. "SIR,
"It was with much pleasure I received and communicated to our little
fraternity, your very obliging and ingenious account of the Corbridge Silver
Table, which honor I am commanded to return you thanks for, and for your very
kind promise of continuing to us the most valuable favor, of your ever
entertaining, judicious, and improving correspondence. On reading your account
of that massy piece, some of us thought it might have been part of an Acerra,
or sacred coffer, wherein incense and odours were preserved for the service of
the altar, or salt, etc. for some sorts of sacrifices; others have perhaps with
more reason conceived it to be a stand, salver, or sort of waiter to set such
things on, or even the Acerra, or perhaps for domestic uses; for we are too
apt to apply every relic of antiquity, as being venerable, to sacred
purposes. The Society next succeeding (which was the 1st of last month) we had
much the like account, but the dimensions a little different, and the figures
or characters on the back said to be I. P. X. with the unintelligible traces of
more: to us they are so.

"Our friend and brother member, Mr Bogdani, in a letter I lately received from
him, tells me, you now seem to think this piece cast or wrought in the Saxon
This is a mistake in Mr B. for I never told him so, or ever had the least
surmise of its being Saxon. -- R. G.
times; of which people, as we have fewer remains in the arts of designing
(when they are said to have been in a great measure lost, I should be glad if
this showed us somewhat of their ceremonies or customs) than of the Romans; of
which we have many, and under whom, from the Graecia Capta to the utter
declension of their empire, we have in almost every part of the world most
splendid remains; but from what I remember to have read in Verstegan or
elsewhere, of the Saxons, I cannot apply any part of this design, peculiarly to
any piece of their sacred or civil history; from the coins even of their latest
Princes, they seem to me to have had less notions of designing after nature,
and to have done their work in a much worse taste than our old British
ancestors, of whom I am satisfied, I have seen several coins or medals in every
one of the three metals, not imitating or borrowed from the Romans, or made by
Roman workmen; and of these, some by the extraordinary boldness of the relief,
and all by their convexity, more in the manner of some of the eastern people
than the Romans; to whom the manner of chariot-fighting seemed strange, though
very customary with the eastern nations, whose strength for the battle was
frequently calculated or estimated by the number of their chariots and
horsemen: and I cannot say I ever saw a fair piece of old unequal coin found in
England, but had on it some design of a horse, horseman, chariot, or wheels,
and sometimes with more things with them. Notwithstanding what has been
advanced against the judgment of Sir Robert Cotton, Seldom, Speed, Camden, etc.
I cannot but think that in the main they give us rational conjectures about the
British coins or medals, if we should not allow them to be current coin; for
which yet I see not any reason, unless we are bound to take all for truth and
fact which the Romans relate, and admit also, that they told the whole truth,
and all that was really fact, of those brave, polite, and honest people, whom
they so gloried in annoying and distressing. Sed manum de Tabula. -- Only give
me leave by you, Sir, to present our thanks to your good brother, for his
ingenious Dissertation on Caesar's Landing, which gave our Society much
pleasure, particularly our worthy President, and another member, who having
some years resided in those parts, well knew all the places therein mentioned.

"What we have had of late communicated, Spalding Society.
has been chiefly poems, and some philosophical experiments, schemes of
draining, and several petrifactions presented to our petty Musaeum, where we
continue to amuse ourselves every Thursday, and remember with pleasure our
friends at the Mitre.

"On the 17th ult. the Rev. Mr Ray, V. P. showed the Society a sculpture in
ivory of a Skeleton sitting on a monument, with a winding sheet thrown over him
like a loose robe, resting his right hand on an hour glass, and his left on his
scythe, with sculls and bones in bass relief, on the sides of the monument. The
blade of the scythe had teeth like a sickle, the work seemed of some age, but
as a Physician said, not accurate.

"He also showed a paper MSS. in 24o. of the whole book of Psalms, in number
150, written in French most elegantly in all the hands in use throughout
Europe, by Mrs Esther Anglois, a French Lady at Lislebourgh en Esosse, 1599,
dedicated to Prince Maurice of Nassau, with a complimentary copy of Latin
Verses to his Highness, by B. K. her husband, and several on the Lady's elegant
writing, by Andrew Melvin John Johnson, Robert Rolloe, and on her person and
great abilities, under her picture, neatly drawn by herself with a pen; as are
also the Arms of that Prince, and a Head and Tail-piece to each psalm. This
curious little MSS. is bound in velvet embroidered with gold, the leaves finely
gilded and painted, with a running foliage stamped thereon: the said Prince of
Orange's cognizance or device is embroidered on the corners in silk of proper
colors, and drawn with a pen at the end of the book, within a laurel wreath, a
branch of palm with the motto, VIRESCIT, on an escrol, wrapped round it, and a
coronet over it. It was, by tradition, given by the Prince to a French Refugee
Gentleman, who was his Surgeon; and from him came into the hands of a Lady, who
now owns it, and sets a very high value upon it. The Prince and Poets, we know,
are eminent enough, though their compliments are puns, and their wit low; but
who B. K. called dictae Esthrae Maritus, should be, we know not. -- I wish,
good Sir, I had any thing better to divert you with; I write now however as
soon as I could, rather than be rude, in neglecting by answer, to acknowledge
the receipt of yours, and the great pleasure and honor you have done to us
all; and more particularly to,

Dear Sir, Your most obedient humble servant, MAURICE JOHNSON."
Spalding, 3 May, 1735.

Part of a Letter from Sir John Clerk, relating the Corbridge Silver Plate.
"SIR,
"I had yours of the 1st instant in due time, but since you was to go down to
Cambridge, I delayed giving you any trouble till now. I am very much obliged to
you for the particular account you have been pleased to send me of the Silver
Table. I am sorry that you think it not ancient, and yet by the figures it
should seem so still. I humbly think, that if these figures relate to any known
piece of history among the ancients, they may be modern; but if they relate to
nothing of this kind, they may be ancient still, at least of the lower Empire,
or the Greek. In Father Mabillon's Diplomata there are several engravings which
one would believe to be modern, and yet are of the 5th, 6th, 7th, 8th, and 9th
centuries. The argument I now would draw from these is only this, that in the
3d and 4th centuries there might have been some heathen engravings much of the
same kind; but you can best make the comparison, who have seen the table.

"I am surprised with what you write me about the reception Mr Blackwall's book
Essay or Enquiry into Homer's Life and Writings. London printed, 1735.
had with my good friend my Lord Islay: -- something or other has disobliged
him, for I know his respect for all men who are lovers of learning only, as
well as the Literati themselves. He had a particular regard for Mr Horsley, who
printed the Britannia Romana, and was positively resolved to have done him
service about the time when he died. I am, etc.

JOHN CLERK."
Pennycinck, 30 May, 1735.

Part of another Letter from Sir John Clerk, on the Corbridge Silver Plate.
"DEAR SIR,
"I am glad that upon viewing the Silver Table you think it ancient. This was
always the notion I conceived of it, for I could not imagine any modern
Sculptor could get into his head so much ancient imagery, without any
foundation from ancient history or fable. I am indifferent who gets the better
in the lawsuit, Duke of Somerset against Mr Cookson.
but I hope it will be preserved and kept in the country. I fancy with myself
you will be able to discover some piece of our history from it; for I make not
the least question but it has been a present from some of the Roman Emperors,
and alludes to some memorable affairs at the time. The table has served, I
believe, for an oblation of fruits or corn on some remarkable altar near the
wall, erected to the honor of perhaps Diana, Ceres, or Bacchus, and that it
has afterward been hung up in the temple dedicated to one of these Deities. An
Irishman would perhaps discover the antiquity of Ireland from the Harp, and I
believe you will be inclined to think one of the figures is a representation of
Britain. I am, etc.

6 August, 1735. JOHN CLERK."


Letter from Roger Gale, Esquire to Mr Robert Cay, upon the Silver Plate found at
Corbridge.
"When I wrote last, I had only time to return you thanks for the favor you
procured me from Mr Cookson, of taking a draught of his most curious Silver
Table, being to go out of town next morning. Since I came back, upon perusing
the letters I received from you on that occasion, I find in one of them a
desire of knowing my thoughts upon that subject, which I cannot refuse to a
gentleman who has laid me under so many obligations, and to whom the pleasure
and entertainment I have received from the frequent views of that uncommon and
valuable piece of antiquity, are entirely due; and the less, because the
accounts hitherto published of it seem to me not a little erroneous.

"I shall begin to describe it from the right hand to the left, as you look
upon the face of the plate, where Apollo, the principal figure in the whole
piece, is placed in a fanum or small temple, (the roof of which is supported by
two wreathed columns with flowered capitals) almost naked, having only a
pallium hanging down from his left shoulder over his back; in the same hand is
his bow, which he holds up toward the top of the column on the same side; his
right hand is extended downwards with a branch in it, perhaps of laurel, cross
that pillar; against which, almost to the middle of it, rises a pyramidical
pile of 12 pieces: for what it is intended, I must confess my ignorance. -- See
the plate.

"Against the basis of the left hand column, rests a lyre, whose form is truly
antique; and beneath it grows a plant with three spreading flowers at its three
extremities, designed, as I suppose, for an Heliotrope; close by it couches a
Griffin, with its wings elevated over its back. The Ancients had so high an
opinion of the sagacity of this fictitious animal, that they consecrated it to
the God of Wisdom: Begerus gives us a medal of Commodus, the reverse whereof is
Apollo in a chariot drawn by two Griffins; and the poet Claudian alludes to
this manner of his riding, in the following distich: Ac si Phoebus adest, et
fraenis Grypha jugalem
Riphaeo, tripodas repetens, detorsit ab axis, etc. Claudian VI. Cons. Honorii.



"Against the right hand column and this pyramidical pile, sits a woman, upon a
square four-footed stool, though no more than two of its legs are visible; she
looks backward over her left shoulder toward Apollo, and is wrapped up in a
long garment or stola, from head to foot, and veiled. By this attire, and the
altar which was brought from Troy, with the eternal fire burning upon it just
by her, I take her to be Vesta.

-- Manibus vittas, vestamque potentem
Aeternumque adytis effert penetralibus ignem. Virgil.
Et vos Virginea lucentes semper in ara
Laomidontiae, Trojana altaria, flammae. Sil. Hal.
Her left hand is reposed upon her breast, and in her right, which rests upon
the same thigh, she holds a little bundle (bound about with a ribbon) perhaps
of wool.

"Below her lies a buck, dead, on one side, turning up his belly; and behind
her rises a tall pillar with a globe upon it, probably to denote the earth, of
which she was Goddess.

"The next is a woman erect, her hair gathered up and tied with a knot behind,
upon her forehead rises a Tutulus, and she is habited in a Stola from her
shoulders to the ground: her right arm is wrapped up cross her breast in her
garb, only the hand appearing out of it; in her left she holds a spear, the
shaft twisted, the iron of it something obtuse. This seems to be the only human
figure in the company; but a very learned gentleman Mr Blackwall, author of the
Inquiry into the Life and Writings of Homer.
of my acquaintance thinks it may be designed for Juno, who is often thus
accoutred with a spear; if so, it must be the effigies of Juno curis, or Juno
hastata, we have it from Ovid, " -- Quod hasta curis priscis est dicta
sabinis." She was the same with Juno pronuba; Celebri hasta nubentis caput
comebatur, vel quia Junonis curitis in tutela esset, vel ut fortes viros
ominaretur; but as there is no peacock, nor any other attribute of her divinity
attending her, and her appearance no ways majestic or adequate to the -- Divum
regina, Jovisque
Et soror et conjux.
I cannot be entirely of his opinion, especially as she seems by her posture
and attitude to be a follower and attendant of the next figure, which is
plainly "Pallas -- Galea effulgens et Gorgone saeva," the head of that monster,
as usual, being fixed upon her breast. In her left hand she holds a
sharp-pointed spear, her right is extended toward Diana, with whom she seems
engaged in a very earnest discourse, to which also that Goddess seems very
attentive: she is the last figure in the group, though called a man in all the
accounts I have seen of this table, and represented here as the Diana venatrix
by the coif and feminine dress of her head, tucked up with a knot behind like
the hair of the third figure, as well as by the bow in her left and arrow in
her right hand. Her short Tunica, which reaches down little more than to the
middle of her thighs, and her buskins, that come up no higher than the calf of
her legs, has occasioned this mistake of her sex, but Ovid tells us, "Talia
succincta pinguntur crura Dianae
"Cum sequitur fortes, fortior ipsa, feras."
Between the two figures of Pallas and Diana, rises a tall slender tree with a
crooked waving stem, the branches of which are displayed almost over two-thirds
of the top of the plate. On the main branch is perched an eagle, with one wing
expanded, as if going to take a flight: this is of raised solid work, like the
rest of the figures, but there are several small birds sitting among the
boughs, that are only punch'd, or cut in with a tool, as are also several
festoons hanging down from the tree, and many other little shrubs and flowers
interspersed all over the area of the table. The great bird sitting directly
over the head of Pallas, made me conclude at first that it was her owl, till I
had seen the original, which convinced me that it can be designed for nothing
but an eagle.

"Under this tree stands an altar, and so close to Diana, that she holds her
left hand and bow over it. It is but little, and has nothing upon it except a
small globular body, perhaps a mass of the Libamina, ex far, melle, et oleo.

"I should have told you, that below the feet of Pallas grows a plant, which
seems to bear two ears of corn upon the same stalk, but cannot say what it is,
or how it belongs to her. Beneath the tree and the little altar, stands a
thin-gutted dog, like a greyhound, his nose turned up in a howling or barking
posture, as often exhibited with this Goddess on medals, and in other
representations of her: some -- Acutae vocis Hyclator
Aut substricta gerens Sicyonius Ilia Ludon.
Ovid. Under her, in the very corner of the plate, rises a rock, upon which she
sets her left foot, and against the side of it lies an urn with the mouth
downwards, discharging a plentiful stream of water. As she stands upon this
rock or hill, and so near to this spreading tree, I cannot but think of
Horace's address to her, "Montium custos, Nemorumque Virgo." The whole table is
encompassed with a border, raised near an inch high, and ornamented with a
creeping vine, whose grapes and leaves are in relievo, but the stalk only
tooled.

"The work of this curious piece is neither of the best or worst of times: the
figure of Vesta, particularly, is extremely well executed, the posture free,
the drapery soft and easy; and what is very remarkable, the instita or border,
an ornament of the stola, appropriated to the Roman ladies of quality.

"Quarum subsuta talos tegit instita vest," Horace.
is neatly worked all round this of our Vesta, and those of the other female
Deities, nor is the next figure much inferior. I cannot, nor has any body else
who has seen it, discover that the plan has any relation to any story in the
Heathen Mythology, but seems only an assemblage of the Deities it represents:
this may be some argument of its antiquity, See Sir John Clerk's Letter, 6th
August, 1735.
for had a modern workman had the designing of it, he would in all probability
have taken some known piece of history for his subject; to which I may add, all
the symbols are genuine, and truly adapted to their owners.

"I was once of opinion, that it might have been the cover of an Acerra, but
the foot which supported it puts an end to the surmise. We don't well know what
the Anclabris was, the definition of it is in Festus as follows: Anclabris
mensa divinis ministeriis apta: dicebantur autem anclabria, et Anclabris ab
anculare quod erat ministrare. This is big enough to contain the Exta of a
sheep, or other small victims, which seems to me to be the likeliest employment
for it, and that it was one of these sacrificing utensils that Virgil more than
once calls Lances: "Lancibus et pandis fumantia reddimus Exta Virg. G. 2. v.
194.

" -- Lancesque et Liba feremus. Virg. G. 2. v. 394.

"Dona ferunt, cumulantque oneratis Lancibus Aras." Virg. Aen. 8. v. 284.

These Lances were both round and square, but the Discus used for the same
purpose seems to have been always round.

"If you have the patience to read this over, you will have reason to think me
not a little impertinent, in giving you so minute a description, of what you
had seen so often, and so long before it came under my view; but as I chance to
have some notions different from what appeared to you, and as I could not well
explain my thoughts upon it without entering into the particulars, I hope you
will excuse me. My service to Mr Cookson, if he is desirous of seeing this, he
may command it, but pray let no copy be taken of it.

I am, Your most obedient humble servant, R. GALE.
London, 23d Aug. 1735. "N.B. Letters to the same purport, though not so full,
were wrote to Mr Maurice Johnson, Dr Stukeley, and Sir John Clerk, by me,

R. G."




Letter from Maurice Johnson, Esquire about the Corbridge Silver Plate.
"SIR,
"Your most obliging and ingenious account of the Corbridge Silver Table, and
Dissertation upon it, I received and read to our Society last Thursday, the
21st instant, at which were present our Rev. President and 13 other Members,
and 2 Honorary, and return you their and my thanks for that excellent
entertainment. As you give leave to conjecture at the female figure, erect, her
hair tied up with a knot behind, with a small oval, The oval is much too big
for a pearl.
perhaps a British pearl (for which our coast was in the Roman times famous)
her right arm wrapped up, a spear with an obtuse point in her left; permit me
to opine this may be in honor to our isle, and to represent Britannia, as on a
coin of Hadrian in my collection, or the Genius of Great Britain still retained
in the reverse of our copper coin, but in a sedentary posture; sometimes by the
Ancients with an hasta pura, sometimes armed with an iron sharp-headed one;
here, as between both, with an obtuse blunt-headed one; as worn in war se
defendendo amongst the Romans. I know not what else to think it, and as formed
amongst us, who so likely? The pyramidical figure I take only to denote
stabilitas aeterna, and was, though in a less elegant form, the device of
representing the Deity in the earliest times of art, before statuaries had
taught marbles to assume limbs, and almost to breathe. Whatever this noble
piece of plate was designed for, I take it to have been a grand compliment to
our native country, and am therefore now the more desirous of being possessed
of a drawing of it.

Spalding, 25th Aug. 1735. M. JOHNSON."


Mr Gale's Answer to the preceding Letter.
"SIR,
"I am much pleased that the last account I sent of the Corbridge Plate met
with so good a reception from the gentlemen for whose entertainment I designed
it. We must yet call it the Corbridge Plate, since at present it is said to
have been found near that town; though I am inclined to think it is only given
out so, to conceal the true place where it was discovered. When the bill that
the Duke of Somerset has filed in Chancery, against the present possessor of
it, for treasure-trove in his royalty, comes to be argued, we may come to the
truth. This contest with his Grace, made the owner very shy of letting it be
seen by any body, and it was not without great importunity that a gentleman, to
whom he was under the strongest obligations, procured me the favor of taking a
draught of it, and upon condition that I should not permit any one to copy it,
nor know where the original (which has been shifted into two or three hands) is
now deposited. My promise to comply with these terms must plead my excuse for
not permitting any body to take a copy of mine till the dispute is determined,
or I have leave to impart it to my friends, among whom you may then command it
with the first. I had some weeks ago given a very short account of the figures
on this table, to Sir John Clerk at Edinburgh, a gentleman whose learning and
judgment are of a superior degree. He had, from what I said to him, the very
same opinion as yourself about the unknown figure, viz. that it might represent
Britannia, but I believe both you and he would change your thoughts upon
inspection of it: it is entirely Roman by the habit, and not the least
circumstance attending it that may honor our country with being in so
celestial a rendezvous of Deities.

"Your conjecture upon the pyramidical pile I like well: I was once of opinion
that it might have been some sort of an altar dedicated to Apollo, and that the
12 pieces of which it consists, might have some relation to the 12 months of
the year. Tellus Stabilis we have upon the coins of Hadrian, Sabina Faustina
Pii, and Commodus, but without this pyramid; in our table it is erected as near
to Vesta as to Apollo, and so may be an attribute belonging as well to her, the
Goddess of the Earth, as to him, the God of the Year. My best services attend
your flourishing Society, and I am, etc.

R. GALE."


Letter from Dr Stuleley, concerning the Corbridge Plate, and a like piece
found in Risley Park, in Derbyshire, to Mr Gale.
"DEAREST SIR,
"I thank you for the account of the Roman Salver; it is exactly such a sort of
utensil, as that found in Risley Park, in Derbyshire, eight years ago, of which
I wrote a large account, and traced it from an altar in France, where it was
given by Exuperius the Bishop, a friend of St Jerome's, till it got to Derby,
and probably thence to Dale abbey altar, near which it was found.

"We may conjecture it to have been buried at the dissolution, or in war time.
It Is not unlikely that the Northumbrian plate was St Wilfrid's originally, and
belonged to his cathedral at Hexham, buried there at his banishment, or since.
He might purchase it in his travels in France, or at Rome. I take them to have
been to adorn the side-boards of the Romans upon festivals.

"I have drawn lately Abbot Fountain's (of Croyland) Chair at Upton, preserved
by Bishop Dove at the dissolution: I am become a great Mandarin, and have wrote
two or three verses of the beginning of the book of Genesis in Chinese.

I am, etc. W. STUKELEY."
Stamford, 12 Sept. 1735.

Two altars of the greatest value to Antiquaries were found here; the one
adorned on one side with a wreath, and on the other with an ox's head and a
knife, dedicated by Diodora Hercules was the symbol of the sun. Julian informs
us, that magnificent sports were celebrated at the conclusion of the year to
the invincible sun. And the inscription Soli invicto, is found upon the medals
of many of the Roman Emperors. Divine honors were paid to him in open temples
and groves.

Wallis. The Corbridge altars have been learnedly wrote on by several ingenious
persons, besides those quoted, which are published in the 1st volume of the
Archaeologia, V. 1. p. 92, 98. but the best explanation has been given by the
Hon. Danies Barrington, in the 4th volume of that work, from whence the
following extracts are made.

Both inscriptions, if read at length, make two regular hexameters, (viz.)
(...). Which conjecture has been confirmed by Mr Graham of Netherby, who says
there are still traces of the cross stroke forming the top of the P, which is
the first letter in the name of the person who consecrates the altar.

(...). Mr Wallis (if not an error of his printer) seems to be more mistaken
than Dr Todd in his opinion of this altar, supposing it to be an altar in
honor of Tyrian Hercules, dedicated to Diodora the Priestess. V. 2. p 127.

There are some singular circumstances attending these altars, which may
perhaps be deemed companions. -- They furnish the only Greek inscriptions which
were ever found in Great Britain; they both consist of a single hexameter; they
are inscribed to Syrian Deities; and they are discovered in the same parish of
Corbridge -- It is not extraordinary that Greek inscriptions should be scarce
in England, it is rather necessary to account, why any such should have been
discovered: Though the Romans most commonly used their own language and
characters, yet some of them must have been born under circumstances which made
the Greek tongue more familiar to them; we need therefore only suppose that
Pulcher and Diodora (who dedicate these two altars) were the son and daughter
of a Roman officer quartered in Greece, or some neighboring province, and who
died soon after he had children by a Grecian wife; the Greek language would
certainly be more familiar than the Latin to a Roman with such an education.
They both consisting of hexameters, seem to prove, they were dedicated about
the same time, and and that they were intended to be companions, especially as
their outward form is very similar, as well as the characters made use of. The
greater difficulty seems to be, why both altars should be inscribed to the
Syrian Deities, Astarte and Tyrian Hercules. This however it seems may be
accounted for to ways, Pulcher and Diodora might possibly have either resided
or been born in Syria, and had perhaps received some good fortune, which they
might ascribe at least to these Deities. It is conceived, that wherever a Roman
continued for anytime, he probably worshipped the local Deities, when there
were not temples at hand which were erected to the Gods adored at Rome. Such
Romans therefore might continue their veneration for Astarte and Tyrian
Hercules, when removed from Syria to Britain. But possibly, it is not necessary
that Pulcher and Diodora should have been at all in that province. There is one
difficulty however still remaining, with regard to the altar dedicated to
Tyrian Hercules, which is, that it is inscribed by a Woman and Archpriestess.
At first it strikes, that she must have been Archpriestess to such a God, and I
believe there are few instances of women having this dignity in the temples of
male Deities at the same time that there would be a particular indelicacy if
they devoted themselves to Hercules.

As for these altars being found at Corbridge, it is easily accounted for, if
the above conjectures are allowed in other respects, because it is known to
have been a considerable station, and near to the Roman wall. The inscription
on the altar to the Tyrian Hercules has already been four times engraved, and
may perhaps be matter of curiosity to compare the different copies, as the
stone is soft, and seems to have suffered within these 70 years, some of the
characters being ^e ^ff^ed -- That the inscription is not more ancient than the
time I ascribe it to, may be proved, if it was necessary, by the (...)
inscribed in the last word APXIEPE'A. Though I have no less authority however
than that of Montfaucon for this remark, yet it may not be improper to observe,
that Se^o Masfe^ denies that any arguments drawn merely from the form of
characters can be at all conclusive.

Extract of a Letter from Mr John Horsley to Roger Gale, Esquire 7th April, 1729.
SIR,
I am honored with yours of the 3d instant, which this morning came safe to
hand: I was not willing to loose the find opportunity of returning an answer,
and though I am upon this account obliged to write the more hastily, yet I hope
you will excuse it, and attribute it to the true cause, my zeal to serve you in
every thing that lies in my power.

There is no inscription in Britain which I can better answer for than the
Greek one at C^bridge. I have several times seen and examined it myself with
all the nicety and care I could: at first sight I discerned a manifest
difference in some things between the original and copies that had been
published in the Ph. Tr. No. 330, p. 291.
Philosophical Transactions, and was more and more confirmed in my opinion,
when I reexamined it, with a particular view to this difference. However, being
very diffident of myself, when I happen to differ from others, I prevailed with
a curious gentleman to go on purpose to take an impartial account of it. I got
also another to do the same, and all our three copies agreed with a surprising
exactness. I have turned over all my papers this morning in quest of the first
copy, but can by no means find it; the other I have met with, and sent you
enclosed. My own is in the hands of the Engraver at London, and the plate
containing this inscription is ready, and I believe wrought off. I take the
plain meaning of this inscription to be no more than, that this altar was
erected to Hercules by Diadora the Arch-priestess, if it be to the Tyrian
Hercules, the 3d letter in the 2d line must have been a double Rho, thus PH, so
as that it is Tirrio for Tyrio. There is a flaw in the stone at the head of
this letter, so as that it may have been closed at the top, but by that part of
the letter left in the breach, I am very certain that there was no Y in the
inscription. The word in the 2d line may be Tirrio, Tiphio, or Tipsio, probably
a topical name, but Tyrio I am sure it is not.

I discovered another Greek inscription at Lanchester, which by the way I
believe to be Glanoventa, and Old Town, Galana, but it is so imperfect, that I
could scarce be sure it was Greek: if it will be acceptable, I will transmit a
copy of it to you. The last time I saw the altar erected by Diodora, it was in
the churchyard of Corbridge. The church of Durham had formed a design to
remove it thither, but failed in their attempt: I should be glad if they had
made a second with better success. Doctor Hunter told me pleasantly, he would
threaten the people of Corbridge with a prosecution from the Spiritual Court,
for keeping a Pagan altar in their church yard: I asked him then what he would
have done to those of Bows, who, according to Camden, had used a Heathen stone
for their communion table.

I am, etc. JOHN HORSLEY."


Extract of a Letter to Mr Horsley from Roger Gale, Esquire 19th April, 1729.
SIR,
I am much obliged to you for the quick return you made to my first letter, and
the most accurate copy of the Greek inscription that you sent with it. It was
at the desire of Mr Mattatre that I wrote to you, and both he and I are of your
opinion, that the second word could never have been (...); but then it is very
difficult to unriddle the word (...). That gentleman has been very busy for
some time in giving us a new edition of Dr Prideaux's Marmora Arundeliana; 170
sheets are already printed off, and as he is a person of the greatest learning,
industry, and accuracy, we may expect a performance equal to all those
qualifications. Since the other Greek inscription at Langchester is so much
obliterated that you can scarcely discern whether it is in that language or
not, you may excuse yourself the trouble of sending it to me, but I make no
doubt of your taking notice of it in your great work, if it is only to show us
that there has been one more inscription in that tongue found in this island,
where indeed it is very strange that we should have any at all.

As for the inscription DEO HERCVLENTI lately discovered at Riechester, I take
it to be the very same as if it had been Deo Herculi, and the termination ENTI
to be only a metap lasmus after the Greek manner, as in the words (...), etc.
Something like it you may see in other inscriptions, as Chryseti for Chrysae in
Reinesius's Syntagma Inser. p. 909.

ROGER GALE."



the Priestess of the Tyrian Hercules, three feet four inches and a quarter in
height.

(...)
-- (...) --
(...)
(...)
Mr Horsley published this inscription, and esteemed it one of the greatest
curiosities in Britain. It is now in the possession of the Duke of
Northumberland.

Mr Horsley gives the following reading and remarks upon it: (...), h. e.
Herculi Tirrio Diodora Princeps Sacerdos. It has been twice published in the
Transactions by Dr Hunter and Dr Todd. The differences between their copies and
this will appear upon comparing them one with another. This copy was taken
after the original had been thrice visited and examined with care, and every
variation in the former copies diligently marked. Dr Todd's delineation is
different both from Dr Hunter's and mine. He translates it Herculi Tyrio divina
dona archisacerdotalia vel per summum Sacerdotem offerenda; but he offers no
reason to confirm this translation. Dr Hunter's copy has been taken with more
exactness, but not without some little variations from the original; nor has he
translated or explained the inscription: but the most material difference
between the other copies and the original, is in the second letter of the
second line, which they represent as (...), though it is plainly (...). The
next letter in the same line is very distinct, as to the greatest part of it;
but toward the top is a flaw in the stone. If no stroke or part of the letter
is lost in this flaw, the letter must be (...); if this break be supposed to
contain a part of the letter, which is most probable, then it may either be
(...), or rather a double (...), with one face backward, as the double (...) is
frequently expressed upon Latin inscriptions. If this be admitted, the word
will be Tirrio, probably for Tyrio; and the whole may then, as I apprehend, be
translated as in the reading.

Several ancient writers take notice of the peculiar regard and worship paid to
Hercules by the Tyrians. Arrian says his temple in that city was the oldest
upon record. Diodora the Arch-priestess, mentioned in this inscription, might
perhaps be devoted to his service. That this was an office of great dignity,
and not below persons of the first rank, appears from another inscription,
produced by Montfaucon, which is, "Caracylaea Arch priestess descended from
Kings." We have likewise an inscription in the Marmora Oxoniensis, where one
Aurelia Fausta has this title given her: that inscription having been erected
at Smyrna, the learned Editor supposes the Lady was Arch-priestess to Diana;
and among other reasons he assigns this, because Priestess ministered only to
female Deities. Now if this observation was universally true, it would destroy
the supposition above mentioned, relating to Diodora. But there is an
inscription in Gruter, ATERIA SACER -- DATIS PA --, which I think can mean
nothing else but Ateria Priestess of Pluto. And Pausanias says expressly, that
it was customary for a virgin to officiate as Priestess in the temple of
Neptune, in Calaurea. It appears therefore, by these instances, that women were
not wholly excluded from the priesthood of male Deities. Caracylaea, in the
inscription of Montfaucon, is said presently after to have been wife to C.
Julius Severus; the same, as Montfaucon thinks, who, according to the Fasti
Consulares, was Consul in the year 155. And why may we not suppose that Diodora
was married to some commander of the Roman forces, who brought her hither,
where she erected this altar, in honor of the Deity to whose service she had
been particularly devoted? And the like may be said with respect to other
Grecian Deities, whose altars are found here in Britain, (as Jupiter Dolichenus
and Dea Syria) which might be set up by persons originally of those countries
where these Deities were more particularly worshipped.

The other altar is dedicated to Astarte, Astarte was the symbol of the moon,
being worshipped by moonlight in open temples and groves, first with pure and
afterward with impure rights. In the sacred writings (Judges iii. 7. 1 Reg.
xi. 5.) she it styled Ashtaroth, also the Deity and Abomination of the
Sidonians. The prophet complains, that Solomon went after Ashtaroth, the
Goddess of the Sidonians. Jezabel first paid her divine honors in Israel, the
most ancient temple, that of Ascalon, 400 prophets serving therein.

Wallis. -- With these in troop
Came Ashtoreth, whom the Phoenicians called
Astarte, Queen of Heaven, with crescent horns,
To whose bright image, etc.
Milton's Par. Lost, B. 1. l. 440. N. B. Hiram King of Tire, and contemporary
with Solomon, built two temples, which he dedicated to Astarte and Tyrian
Hercules. -- See Josephus, lib. 2. c. 1.

The observations made on this altar in the 1st volume of the Archeologis, by
the Rev. Dr Pettingal and Dr Adee, may also be agreeable to the reader in this
place.

The person who communicated this inscription to the Society a few years ago
informed us, that it was found about Corbridge, near the wall, where, as there
were many Roman Legions, particularly the Legio Secunda Augusta and Vicesima
Victrix, ordered thither, the first from Isca Silurum, the other from Deva, or
Chester, in order to keep the wall in order and defend it, we can make no doubt
of its being Roman, notwithstanding it is written in Greek characters; for this
manner of writing inscriptions was an affectation frequently to be met with in
the lower Empire, or after the time of Constantine; and was sometimes carried
so far, that when the language was entirely Latin, the character was Greek, and
vice versa, examples of which are to be found in Fabretti Inscrip. p. 390 and
465.

I read the first word ACITHC, which I suppose relative to the collective body
of Ala Prima Astorum, of which we read, the first was stationed at Condurco,
the last at Cilurno per Lineam Valli. Condurco is called by Mr Camden,
Chester-le-street, and Cilurno, Walwick.

These Asti, we are told in the Notitia, came from Asta, Colonia Ligurum, now
Asti in Piedmont: the portion of lands that in the Agrarian division fell to
the Asti, lay hereabouts. I mention this, because it may perhaps throw light
upon the particular OON EOP, which I am inclined to think stands for (...);
from whence it will appear, that this monumental altar was also an Ara
Terminalis; for (...) signifies a boundary between lands of different property;
and perhaps here, between the allotments of the different companies of the
soldiers.

The word (...) does not stand here, in a religious sense, for an altar whereon
they were to sacrifice or make libations to any God, but signified the same as
Ara in the Latin inscriptions.

What was the use of this (...) when it was (...), and erected on the bounds of
lands, we may learn from the Agrarian laws; the placing them on the bounds of
their lands, or military a ^ments as meers or bounds, to (...) property; for
which reason they are called by Dolobella. Fines Sepul^rii and C^^riti, and
seem to be confined merely to the partition of conquered lands among the
soldiers. The law of Tiberius ordered, Cum Ager divisus m^ traderetur extremis
a compag^nantibus agris limitibus, monumenta sepulchrave sacrarentur, that when
l^ds were to be divided among the soldiers, the monuments or sepulchers should
always be in the bounds. Again. Forum igitur sepulchrorum sequenda est con^tio,
qua extre^ fimbus c^nc^rrentes plu^ agrorum cursa, spectant, that the same law
about sepulchers should continue and (...) which they were appointed as limits
between adjoining lands. By which I conceive (...) meant, that all the lands
inward from that sepulcher did belong to the troop or b^d of which the
deceased, whose monument that was, had been a part; as for instance, all the
land inward from that monument to another that bounded it on the other side,
did being to the A^.

Probably this was monumental boundary on the lands of the Asti who were
stationed whereabout, (...) ^ted by the N^a.

The custom of burying on the extreme limits of their lands was very ancient,
and derived most probably from the east. In the last chapter of Joshua we read,
that he was buried in the border of his inheritance.

The date of the inscription before us seems to be between the years 408 and
455 of the christian ^a for the Not^ia, which was written after the time of
Arcadius and Honorius, as appears by the words of the title, Ultra Arcad^ and
Honorii tempora, speaks of the Asti settled ad lineam vall^ at the time of
writing it, which was after 408, the time of the death of Arcadius, and 27
years after, A. D 435. the Romans totally deserted Britain. So that this
inscription is to be placed between the death of Arcadius and the final
departure of the Romans.

Pettingal, May 8th, 1766.

Inscriptions in general, Greek ones particularly, are accompanied with great
embarrasments, ^ng to their shortness, the ignorance of carvers, and the
inaccuracy of transcribers and publishers. Few copies are fac ^miles; though
this inscription may be looked upon as such, apprehend nothing can make grammar
or sense of it, but reading it in this manner: (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)


Here the three most necessary companions in a votive inscription are expressly
declared: the Goddess to whom it was dedicated (...) the thing dedicated (...),
and the donor (...). It must be observed, that (...) always governs a dative
case of the person other expressed or understood; instances of which in
inscriptions are innumerable. Hence (...) must be read (...).

S. Adee.
a Syrian Goddess, and is now in the possession of the Rev. Mr Graham of
Netherby. The engraving is copied from an elegant one given in the
Archaeologia. Dr Stukeley gives the following reading of it: Marcus Egorast,
the son of Acherm, dedicates this altar to Astarte. Dr Stukeley seems never to
have been more unhappy in his conjectures, than when he interprets these words
as above.
The names he presumes are Syriac, Arabic, or Punic, and the adoption of Marcus
proceeds from the Roman connection.

This altar, supposed to be inscribed by the Priest, is attributed to a Marine
Legion, raised by Hadrian in Syria, called the Ulpian Legion: which followed
Carausius in the time of Maximian. The following short Anecdotes of Carausius
may not be disagreeable:

The Emperor Carausius is represented as a graceful person. He was descended of
British parents. The British Empire by sea is attributed to him. Constantine
instituted the office of Comes Litoris Saxonici, which Carausius filled with
immortal honor; the Saxons in that age sending forth a set of daring pirates,
who distressed the British coast. Under Maximian he held the office of Admiral
of the Roman navy. He advanced to such a height in the esteem of the people,
that he was induced to throw off the Roman authority, and assume the Imperial
power in Britain. Maximian, with the whole naval force of Rome, approached the
British coast to chastise him for his temerity, and his associates for their
defection. He withstood them near the Isle of Wight with the British navy: he
sought and conquered; and from that time held the supreme authority independent
of Rome, superior to all its power. But such is the precariousness of human
glory, such the instability of sublunary things, this hero fell by the hands of
an assassin, in his palace at York; slain by the traitorous sword of an
insiduous wretch, under the specious character of a friend. -- There is not in
human life a more happy acquisition than a friend, where we can find "the
feculence of falsehood long thrown down," giving all the mind to benevolence and
generosity: but on the other hand, there is not so pernicious an enemy, as he
who, under a specious character, insinuates himself into the bosom of a
generous and openminded man, and there, like Milton's toad, "poisoning the
animal spirits," carries on the operations of the Devil. If the regions of the
damned are permitted to send forth the tribes of Lucifer to torment mankind,
those of superior diabolic and infernal talents, must take upon them this most
accomplished of hellish characters.




Camden conjectures Corbridge was the Curia Ottodinorum of the Romans, noted by
Ptolomy, and the Corstopitum of Antonine. He has this singular remark -- that
here King John searched for hidden treasures of the ancients; but was deceived
no less than Nero, when he sought for the hidden wealth of Dido at Carthage.
Leland, p. 212.


From my view of the extensive ruins at Corchester, near this place, I should
conceive it was the chief Roman city in this part of Britain. Leland says, in
his time the names of diverse streets remained, and great tokens of old
foundations.

At a little distance from Corbridge is

CORCHESTER,
where are the remains of a Roman Station: it is unnoticed in the Notitia, and
is conjectured, was abandoned at the time of taking that account of the Roman
Empire in Britain. It is not larger than those stations near the wall, before
described: the remains of the Pretorium are yet very conspicuous. This station
stands on the tongue of land formed by the stream of Cor, at its conflux with
the Tyne. Nothing curious remains at this time, but the foundations of a
bridge, visible at low water, believed to be of Roman construction.

Dr Todd, in the Philosophical Transactions, supposes the name to have been
originally Herculcester, i. e. Castra Herculis. What led him to this opinion,
is the altar with the Greek inscription dedicated to the Tyrian Hercules. Mr
Horsley was of opinion, that as Corstopidum had been generally, so it is very
justly, placed at the station near Corbridge. This place has generally been
taken for Ptolomy's Curia Otadenorum, because there seems to be some affinity
between the names, and because the Otadini must certainly be placed hereabouts;
but he differs in opinion concerning this matter, and concludes that
Corstopidum and Curia were different names, and altogether different places.

The Ermin-street way, having crossed the Tyne, proceeds toward Ebchester, in
the bishopric of Durham, and continues its course almost in a meridian line to
Dover, in Kent, as may be seen in Antoninus's Itinerary. Another military way
passes from this place south-west through Dilston Park, over Hexham Fell, to
Old Town, in Alondale, and meets with the Maiden Way at Whitley Castle, as is
set out in Mr Warburton's Map of Northumberland.

The Romans were excellent architects, and by all the descriptions given of
their bridges Phil. Transactions.
in Britain, testified their geometrical knowledge: their arch was
semicircular, their pillars multangular, with a sharp angle to the stream, like
the prow of a ship. The foundations of the piers were constructed of an
horizontal arch made of stones, in the form of a wedge, as appears by the
remains here. In situations subject to rapid floods, a small arch was formed in
the pier, to receive the water when it began to reach the bow of the arch.

Many Roman Antiques have been found here; such as coins, seals, etc. but most
of them of the lower Empire. Many Seals of Roman work were found at Corchester:
Greek and Roman Antiques were always of the most exquisite workmanship;
engravings on gems, pebbles, and stones, of the first order for beauty and
luster. The beril, the chalcedony, the emerald, hyacinth, the topaz or modern
chrysolite, and the garnet, were favorites. The crystal pebble and the
amathyst were also esteemed. They also used the onyx, the sardonyx, the agate
onyx, the jasper, the haemachates or boodstone, which they valued for cameos.
Other kinds were not used by the Romans till the lower Empire, when the arts
were upon the decline: then camelians and stones of an inferior class were
introduced. Of this order and species are the intaglios found at our Roman
Stations. The Greek masters excelled the Romans in the art of sculpture and
engraving; who resigned their genius more to oeconomical and political
refinements.

Wallis. In Mr Horsley's Works we have the following inscriptions and
sculptures:

No. C. Imperatori -- Marco Aurelio Antonino tribunitiae potestatis.

This is in the fore wall of a house in Corbridge, on the right hand as you
enter the village from the east: it has no doubt been a curious inscription,
and is twice taken notice of in the Philosophical Transactions, by Dr Hunter
and Dr Todd. I do not understand Dr Todd's account, who says, there I saw
altars inscribed, one Imp. M. Aurelio -- another Leg. II. Aug. Coh. IIII. But
this and the following stone which he refers to, are honorary monuments, not
altars, and neither of the inscriptions are exactly represented, as appers from
the copies I have given, which are taken from the originals. This stone is
broken both on the left side and at the bottom; so that although the
inscription belongs to one of the Antoninus's, yet whether to Marcus Aurelius,
Commodus, or Caracalla, may be a question.

CI. Legionis Secundae Augustae, Cohors Quarta Fecit.

This is in the church wall, and no doubt must be the same with that which Dr
Todd mentions. It is of the same sort with those which have frequently been
erected by the Legions and legionary Cohorts, when they were employed in
building any work, and, I believe, usually set in the face of it. The O and H
are imperfect, part of the upper stratum of the stone being gone off.

CII. BISI -- -- VAL^ --

This inscription is more imperfect than either of the former: it is broken at
the top, and at one end, and is now fixed in the corner of a house in the town
The letters which remain are very fair, but one cannot tell how much is
wanting. I was told that this stone was found not many years ago, and that
there were more letters upon it when discovered, which were afterward broken
off by the workmen, when they put it into the wall. If we suppose the word in
the lower line to have been Vallum or Valli. and C is in the preceding line, to
have expressed the number of paces, we have still more reason to regret the
loss of the rest of it. I could not be sure that the last imperfect stroke was
the top of an I, though the situation of it so high makes it probable. The leaf
before the word Val does not favor the antiquity of it.

CIII. The sculpture represented, is in the front of an old house. The victory
is curious and entire, being winged, with the usual drapery and attitude. What
she takes hold of, seems to have been the ornamental part of a stone, on which
there has been an inscription. The only peculiarity is, that she seems to set
each foot on a ball or globe.

CIV. The lesser of these stones is in the jamb of a door, and the larger lies
at the door of another house in the town. The people call this latter a horse.
I have placed them both under the same number, as believing them to be of the
same kind. The latter appears to be a lion, with some other animals under him,
the head of which is broken off. In the other, the heads of both animals are
gone. The lion does not seem to be devouring or destroying the other animal,
but rather desending it, and I believe it is of the same nature with the
sculpture at Walw^ck Grange. The larger of these figures is very coarse, and
much defaced.

CV. The market cross stands on an altar, on which there has been an
inscription, but now defaced. On the sides of the altar are the figures
described below. They were half covered under the ground, or under the steps of
the cross; but the earth and steps being removed, they appeared at full length,
and are pl^^ly two human figures; in one hand of each nothing can be
discovered. One of the figures seemed to be in a posture of motion, with a lyre
or harp in his hand, which made me suspect it might be Bacchus; and the other
holding a bow unstrung, like Apollo; unless both may be supposed to represent
Apollo There was a faint stroke went up from the end of the bow, which possibly
may have been the string, or an arrow which Apollo he^d together with the bow.




We passed the Tyne by a fine bridge of seven arches:

DILSTON
next attracted our notice. The Mansion House is now in ruins. Its situation is
fine, on the brink of a steep hill clothed with wood, descending to the brook
of Devil's Water. The approach we made was romantic: the rivulet at its conflux
with the Tyne flows out of a deep dell, forming a grand natural cascade, after
having passed a bridge of a single arch, which leads to the mansion: through
this arch a mill is seen, over which are lofty and impending cliffs; the whole
embowered by trees, extending their branches from each side of the dell, and
spreading out a leafy canopy, at least an hundred feet in height, shadowing the
lower objects with a solemn gloom.

We approached the mansion, now consisting of disconsolate and ragged ruins --
the hollow halls, hanging stairs, and painted chambers, present a sad memorial
of the fate of their last unhappy Lord.

This was the possession of the ancient family of Devilstons, Thomas de
Devilston te^et^y ^lam de Devilston per tertiam partem unius militis, sicut
praedecessores a temp to conquesti. L^ Cell. V. 1. p. 202.
who held it from the time of the conquest for several generations. They were
in possession in the reign of King Henry III. as appears by the escheats of
that time. It afterward experienced many changes of owners, being successively
held by the Tynedales, Crasters, and Claxtons; and at length became the estate
of the Ratcliffs in the reign of Queen Elizabeth. Sir George Ratcliff 10th
Queen Elizabeth. Sir Edward, whose estate was sequestered by parliament, 4th
King Charles II, 1652. Sir Francis, married Mary Tudor, natural daughter of
King Charles II. by Mrs Mary Davis. He was created Baron of Dilston, Viscount
Langley, and Earl of Dernwater, 3d James II. James Earl of Dernwater married
Mary Ann, daughter of Sir John Webb, of Dorsetshire. His attainder, 1715. Lady
Dernwater died at Brussels, 1723. In 1731 the young Lord Dernwater died, and
left a sister who married Lord Petre in 1732, having a fortune of 30,000l.
Wallis.


The devastations made by Time in ancient structures, mark them with solemn
beauties: an inspection of castles and strongholds in ruins, gives the
traveller pleasure; historic facts arising on his mind, fraught with images of
the tyranny and oppression of feodal powers now extinguished, he rejoices that
the vassalage and cruelty which marked those times are no more; he regards such
monuments as the broken prisons, where tyrants held in chains, those whom their
avarice and love of rapine characterized with the epithet of enemy. He looks
upon them as the mementos of days of distress, when every man formed his
greatness, by the number of fellow creatures he could harness, to minister to
his pride, and contribute to his crimes: as dens of savages, and animals of
prey, who, like the wolves of the forest, held warfare with all the creatures
of the earth; and worse than wolves, employed the powers of rationality to
render them more rapacious, more cruel, and more blood-thirsty than mere animal
instinct could insinuate to the heart: even cruelty, blood-thirstiness, and
rapacity against their fellow creatures, of which wolves are not accused. He
looks upon them as monuments of sepultured oppression, over which the olives of
peace are woven by the hand of liberty. He regards them as the hallowed records
of all those inestimable jewels which beset the British diadem, and enrich the
British constitution; whose luster strikes the eye of the whole observing world
with envy, admiration, and astonishment.

But Dilston gives the observer other sentiments: tears arise upon the eye for
the crimes of men, who in opposition to salutary laws (for good effects stamp
the law with the character of propriety) through mistaken principles, imbrue
their hands in civil discord. It is the mistake in principles, gives the tears
to flow: resolute wickedness extinguishes all pity; but humanity feels for
man's hallucinations, for the errors of judgment -- for such, pity is even
divine.

Another disagreeable reflection wrestles for a place in the contemplative
mind, on such a view -- strange, is the rapacity of men, who are ready to take
possession of the moment of overthrow, and with greedy hands seek to share the
spoil, even of him for whom once they fought, of him whom they had loved, had
served, had feared -- their patron, protector, and friend. The lower class of
mankind have but few estimates to govern their actions; whilst prosperity
attends, you are served, you are beloved, you are adored: take away that, and
the wretches return to their original ferocity, and each endeavors to gain
what he can from the ruins.

From Dilston we made a short ride on the banks of Devil's Water, where there
are many fine sylvan scenes: we gained the western eminence above

NUNSBROUGH,
where lays the most picturesque, though confined landscape, the whole county of
Northumberland exhibits. We ascended to the brink of the precipice, near 200
feet high, from whence we looked down upon a sequestered vale, almoss insulated
by the brook, consisting of a fine level plot of corn land, of about eight
acres, in the exact form of a horseshoe; the brook passing over a rugged rocky
bottom, under the shadow of lofty hills, in various broken streams was seen on
each hand, foaming from fall to fall, which gave a beautiful contrast to the
deep hue of the groves. From the brook, the hills to the left arise
precipitous, clothed with a fine hanging wood, then glowing with a full
sunshine; to the right, the steeps laying from the sun, and in the deep shade,
were broken, and scattered over in wild irregularity with brushwood, and here
and there a grotesque and knotty tree presented itself impending from the
precipice; in front, a fine eminence of brown rock lifted its rugged brow, and
closed the circle, dividing the waters with a promontory a few yards wide. In
the clefts, and on the little levels of the rock, some shrubs grow; on its
crown stood ripened corn, margined with hedge-row trees, through which a
cottage was discovered; and by its foot, a winding road soon escaped the eye in
intercepting woods: the rays of light fell happily upon the cliffs, and
brightened their coloring. To the right and left, the more distant brook
showed itself in deep and rocky dells, embowered by lofty oaks. To the right
hand, the hill which surmounts the wood, is topped with a plain of grass
ground, on whose brink stands a farmhold, accessable by a narrow path winding
up the steep, from whence the woods make a beautiful curviture: the distant
back ground is composed of heath lands. On the left, woodlands were seen on the
circus, winding on the mazy channel of the brook, here and there intercepted by
heathy eminences; the back ground very distant, and tinged with a misty azure.
To grace the little enchanted vale, reapers were busy with the harvest: in some
parts the furrows looked like waving gold; in others they were embossed with
upset sheafs. This is the finest natural theater I ever saw; the circle is
almost geometrically just; the plain would have suited those exhibitions, of
which we read, with an anxious curiosity, in the histories of the Ancients;
they would have given it life, taken away the rusticity, and made it noble.
When we descended to the vale below, it appeared only to want some of the
sacred rites, to improve its solemnity, and compound the idea of hallowedness
with greatness. One possessed of a true taste for natural beauties, is apt to
be wound up to a pitch of enthusiastic rapture, at such scenes as these; where
every subject that can compose a rural prospect, are thus fortunately adjusted
and disposed. It is not possible for me to write with temperance on such a
subject.

We again returned to Hexham; an agreeable retreat after our little excursions.
From the Manuscripts of the late Roger Gale, Esquire Letter from Mr Robert Cay to
Mr Gale, of another Piece of Plate found near Hexham.
27 July, 1736. SIR,
One of the Duke of Somerset's Officers had an antique piece of plate here a
few days ago. It was said to be found in the river Tyne, at a very small
distance from the place where Mr Cookson's was discovered. I have not had the
pleasure of seeing it, but from the description given of it, I would suspect it
to be a Patera. I am, etc.

ROBERT CAY.
I send you an impression of a Seal lately found at Norton, near Stockton: I
fancy it to have been the seal of some Abbey or Abbot. Can the animal be
designed for one of the locusts described by St John in the Revelations. The
inscription round the seal is very fair, and plainly "I^SV BAB^ WINF^T: ADRAT."







On our next ramble we visited

BEAUFRONT,
an elegant situation on the north banks of Tyne, commanding a beautiful
prospect of Hexham plains. I have already given a description of this vale,
therefore to enlarge upon it, though tempted by various points of view, where
its beauties are differently disposed, would become wearisome to the reader: it
must suffice to add, that from Beaufront the river is seen in several canals,
and Hexham appears crowning the opposite eminence, with singular beauty. The
house is upon an extensive modern plan; but as we had not access to it, I
cannot say any thing of its convenience or taste.

Mr Wallis derives Beaufront from Bellus Locus, but for what reason is not
shown. This was the seat of the Carnabys, so late as the reign of Queen
Elizabeth. It is now the possession of the family of Erringtons, of Errington,
north of the Roman wall. William de Errington. High Sheriff 47 King Edward III.
Sir Thomas de Errington, one of the Conservators of the Borders 12 King Henry
VI. Sir Gilbert de Errington, a partizan of King Edward IV. Nicholas Queen
Elizabeth. Thomas -- John, the present owner.
Wallis.


We passed by the Hermin-street, or Watling-street, leading from the station of
Corchester to

PORTGATE,
an opening in the Roman wall before described.

THOCKRINGTON
was in view in our road to St Oswald's. It was impropriated by Richard Bishop
of Durham, A. D. 1204. Its first fruits 2 l. 17 s. 1 d. Brown Wallis, vol. 1.
p. 168. -- Wallis, 115.
It appertains to the Sea of York, and is one of the smallest prebends of that
cathedral.

We ascended the Beacon Hill, or Mote Law, about a mile east of St Oswald's,
fortified by a square intrenchment; in the center of which is placed a hearth
stone, used for the fire, in times of public danger, to alarm the country. From
thence we had a view of

LITTLE BAVINGTON,
the seat of the Shaftoes, in the time of King Edward I. in whose family it has
continued since that era. William Shaftoe 33 King Edward I. William 47 King
Edward III. William 16 King Richard II. Alexander 5 King Henry V. William 5
King Edward IV. John 6 King Edward VI. William 19 King Charles I. William
Shaftoe 1 King George I. George Shaftoe Delaval, Esquire Sheriff of Northumberland,
1740.
Wallis.
The ornaments around it are modern, and some of them in that taste which does
no great honor to the age. Mock-ruins, and such works of fancy, afford no
beauties. The plantations are pleasing, and the piece of water, from its
situation, is elegant.

We arrived at

ST OSWALD'S,
otherwise called Holy-den-Heauveden, Lel. Itin. vol. 7. p. 53.
or Heavenfield, Bid.
where Oswald King of Northumberland obtained a singular victory over the
British usurper, Cedwall, or as Camden has his name, Caswallon, King of
Cumberland.

Cedwell, flushed with his success over Anfred King of Bernicia, (whose army he
had lately routed) and proud of victory, approached Oswald with contempt, who
had gathered together a small body of faithful adherents, and lay in a
fortified camp, prepared to oppose the invader. Oswald beheld the numerous army
of his enemies with astonishment, when he compared them to the little band on
whose arms he must confide. He perceived, that was his dependence alone on man,
the fate of his troops was obvious; they would be overwhelmed by the numbers of
his foes. The propriety and justice of his cause, gave him a degree of fervor,
which denied dismay; and over his hitherto unenlightened soul, a new spirit of
confidence was diffused, as he cast up his eyes toward heaven, and rejected
the idols in whom he had been taught vainly to trust. He erected a cross in the
front of his army, and bending to the earth, called upon the name of Christ,
beseeching his mediation with the Father of all, in whose hand alone is the
event of battle, that he would establish justice on the face of the earth. As
inspired, he arose and called aloud to his troops, (as Bede writes) Let us all
kneel down, and beseech the Almighty, the living and true God, of his mercy to
defend us against this proud and cruel enemy. Bid says, No sign do we find of
the christian faith, no church, no altar, through the whole kingdom of
Northumberland, to have been erected, before this noble leader and conductor of
an army, directed thereto by faithful devotion, did raise the ensign of the
cross, when he was preparing to fight against a savage and bloody enemy. When
Oswald perceived in his battle, the divine aid which he had so earnestly
implored, he became a professed christian, and sent for Alden of Scotland, to
catechize and instruct his people in the christian religion. -- The place of
victory was called Heavenfield.

In Camden we have the following ancient Dystich:
Quis fuit Alcydes' quis Caesar Julius? aut quis
Magnus Alexander' Alcydes se superasse
Fertur. Alexander mundum, sed Julius hostem;
Se simul Oswaldus, and mundum vicit, and hostem.

After this prayer, he put his little army in battle array, his troops being
warmed with that energy which devotion gives, and which prompts to intrepid
actions. Cedwall advanced, arrogantly confident in his numbers, and insolent
from his victories, assuring himself of vengeance on his opposer, whom he
sought with contempt. He attacked the intrenchments, and mounted the ramparts
in person; when a fatal shaft pierced his bosom, and laid him in the dust. His
followers, dismayed at the fall of their leader, halted -- a panic seized them
-- their swords stayed from assault, and as if perplexed by inconsistent
commands, they began to retire in confusion. Oswald perceiving the change, took
advantage of the occasion, and instantly rushing upon the enemy, in a dreadful
onset, put them to flight: the carnage became horrid, the number of slain was
incredible, and those who escaped the sword were totally dispersed. It seemed
more than the human hand could effect, to obtain so complete a victory, had not
the interposition of celestial powers confounded Oswald's foes. Oswaldus, erat
namque filius potentissimi Regis Ethelfridi cujus pater Ethelricus Rex, cujus
pater Ida Rex, a quo, ut Beda refert, regalis Northanhymbrorum pro sapia cepit
orignum." -- "Regni autem sui IX anno sanctissimus ac pi^ssimus Rex Oswaldus
primus in tota Berniciorum gente signifer fidei Christianae and fundator
ecclesiae Lindisfarnensis, ex qua omnium ejusdem provinciae ecclesiarum
manarunt primordia, a paganis in bello, prostratus occubuit. Cujus caput in
cimiterio ecclesiae prefatae, manus vero cum bracn^is quas Rex interfector a
corpore praecidi jusserat, in urbe regia conditae sunt, etc. etc.

Symeon Dunelm.


The convent of Hexham built a church here, in honor of St Cuthbert and King
Oswald, in commemoration of this event. Oswald being slain at the battle of
Macerfield, in the 38th year of his age, fighting against the Mercians, was
canonized. A silver coin was found near the place where the abovementioned
church was built, with the head of St Oswald, which was used for a long time by
the convent of Durham, as their common seal, in honor of his memory. There is
an engraving of this seal in the appendix to Dr Smith's edition of Bede's
Church History.


In our way to Chollerton, we viewed a place called

HANGING SHAWS,
an exploratory mount, around whose sides are flights of terraces, where the
people in arms might at once show their force to an approaching enemy, rank
above rank, and also advantageously defend themselves upon an assault.

From thence we had a view of the village of Halyton and

HALYTON MESNES,
the seat of Christopher Soulsby, Esquire

This place, it is said, was stained with the blood of Ethwald King of
Northumberland, who fell by the treachery of Syga, a nobleman of his court.

We proceeded by Chollerton, having a view of the house of Errington, with the
adjoining tower, as we passed up the river, on one hand; and on the other,

HAUGHTON CASTLE,
situate on the western banks of North Tyne, formerly the possession of the
Swinburns and Widdringtons.

This castle is chiefly dismantled, some few apartments only remaining
habitable; among which is one, made in an aperture in the wall, whose thickness
affords a chamber, capable of receiving a bed and some other furniture. This
has been an extensive fabric, immensely strong in its structure, but now no
otherwise remarkable, than for those circumstances mentioned, and the fine
grove in which it stands embowered.

We passed the modern seat of Mr Riddle, Dukentinus de Riddell Patricius --
Walter -- Sir Jurian de Riddell 1 King Edward I. Sir William --, High Sheriff 8
King Edward II. William -- Hugh --
Sir William de Riddell- of this family, who lived in the reign of Queen
Elizabeth, was one of the Lessees, in trust for the Corporation of Newcastle
upon Tyne, of the manors of Gateshead and Whycam, in the bishopric of Durham,
worth 50000l. per annum, by Dr Cradock's computation. His seat was the Abbey of
St Edmund, in Gateshead.

Wallis. Sir Thomas of this family was a loyalist in the civil wars of Charles
I. and so formidable an enemy to the Oliverians, that they offered 1000l. for
his head. He narrowly escaped them from Berwick on Tweed.

He was great great grandfather of the present Mr Riddle.


which arose from the ruins of

SWINBURN CASTLE,
an elegant stone building, covered with woods. Nothing can be more agreeable
to the traveller, than to observe the improvements of a country, and the
advances of cultivation. Mr Riddle's house commands an extensive view, but it
is over an open and ill-fenced tract. He is making rapid progress in the cure
of this defect, and multitudes of quick fences and plantations are arising,
which in a few years will extinguish the disagreeable traces of that hostility
and devastation, which before the union marked this country with the melancholy
memorials of warfare; and in their place give to the eye all the charms of
rural opulence.

In the reign of King Edward I. it was the possession of Peter de Gunnerton,
Escheat 1. Edward I.
as a member of the Barony of Bywell, held under the service of two Knights
fees. In the reign of King Edward II. it was the property of Adam de Swynburn,
Escheat 20. Edward II. and 10th Queen Elizabeth.
who leaving a daughter, Christian, it passed by her in marriage to Sir John de
Woodrington, of Woodrington Castle; in whose family it continued for several
successions.

CHIPCHASE CASTLE
next attracts attention, the seat of the late Christopher Reed, Esquire as also
his predecessor, John Reed, Esquire who gave it great improvements. Its situation
is beautiful, on a declivity, on the eastern banks of North Tyne, commanding an
elegant prospect. The river forms a fine canal in front, washing a woody steep
on this side, and on the other the foot of a wild projecting cliff: Nunwick
enriches the more distant view, surmounted by Symondburn Castle: the Tyne,
winding through the vale in various meanderings, often shows itself; whilst
woods, rocks, and heathy eminences, in a happy manner, mingle their various
beauties with the cultivated lands upon the landscape.

Chipchase, according to Camden, once belonged to the Umfrevills. It was the
possession of Peter de Insula in the reign of Edward I. Soon afterward it
became the inheritance of the Herons, Sir John Heron, Knt. King Henry VIII. Sir
George --, Keeper of Tynedale King Edward VI. Sheriff of Northumberland 13
Queen Elizabeth. Killed on the Scotch borders, 1575, when Sir John Forster,
Lord Warden of the Middle Marches, and Lord Russel were made prisoners. Sir
Cuthbert --, Sheriff of Northumberland 1625, created a Baronet 12th King
Charles II. He made considerable additions to the castle 19th King James I. He
married Elizabeth, third daughter of Sir Richard Graham of Netherby, in
Cumberland, Bart. afterward Lord Preston. Sir Charles, a third son. Sir Harry,
who sold these possessions.
Wallis.
and continued in that family for several generations, till Sir Charles Heron
sold it to Mr George Allgood, from whom the family of Reeds John Reed of the
family of Reeds of Troughend, by the river Reed. Christopher Soulsby, his
nephew, who took on him the name of Reed. High Sheriff of Northumberland 1764.
He married the eldest daughter of Sir Francis Blake of Twisel.
Wallis.
purchased.

We advanced to

WARK,
a small town on the river Tyne, which has nothing remarkable but an
exploratory mount, called the Mote Hill, and the ruins of a house of the
Ratcliffs. It was granted in the reign of King James I. to Howard Earl of
Suffolk, and came by sale to the Earl of Derwentwater, and is now part of the
possessions appropriated to Greenwich Hospital.

We now prepared to leave the beauties of Tynedale; the cultivated vale
narrowed, and we approached to those wild and barren heights, which mark the
Highlands of Northumberland with all the characteristics of a Scottish desert.
As we advanced to Risingham, we passed within view of

BELLINGHAM,
a town seated on the eastern banks of North Tyne, the estate of the ancient
family of Bellingham, Robert de Bellingham 2 King Richard II. and 3 King Henry
IV. Richard 33 King Henry VI.
The family arms, three hunters horns, sable, stringed, gules.

Two parts of the manor belonged to the Archbishop of York, as appears by the
escheats of 3 King Henry V.


whose castle, now in ruins, is near adjoining to the village. At Hareshaw
Linn, a little way north of Bellingham, is a fine water-fall, breaking through
a rugged channel, divided by several rocks, the whole tufted with grass and
shrubs: the land on each hand is lofty, and shows many shelving rocks and
projecting cliffs, rendered highly picturesque by impending trees, which give
infinite beauties to the landscape. On the opposite side of the river to
Bellingham, lays

HEZLEYSIDE,
on an eminence clothed with wood, the seat of the Charltons, William
Charlton, Esquire King Edward VI. William King Charles I. Sir Edward 21 King
Charles I.
A loyalist, and his estate sequestered by parliament in this reign.

William Charlton, Esquire 1722. Edward the present owner, who married Teresa,
sister to Sir Edward Swinburn of Capheaton, Bart.
Wllis.
commanding a view of the town of Bellingham, and a mountainous offscape,
varied with verdent sheep-walks, rocks, and wood.

We entered Redesdale, which by the Testa de Neville, is said to be the
dominion of the Umfrevills, who held it by the service of repelling thieves and
robbers. Pleasing prospects were no longer the temptations to our progress; we
were led only by the love of antiquity.

RISINGHAM
was the habitancum of the Romans, and lays upon the Watling-street. It is not
mentioned in the Itinerary of Antonine, yet must have been a Roman Station
about the time of Aurelius Antoninus, by the inscriptions and coins found
there. It is situate on the banks of Reed, and contains within the Vallum,
three acres, three roods, and twenty-six perches of land. It is presumed the
Itinerary was composed in the time of Caracalla, before which this station
might have been deserted. Near Risingham was standing some few years ago, a
mile-stone, without any inscription. Dr Hunter communicated a coin found here,
the reverse struck with the figure of a wolf, the legends totally defaced,
except the words Augustus Pius. Horsley.


Camden says Risingham implies the Giants habitation. It is remarkable, that in
the darkness of antiquity, we find innumerable traditions of powerful persons,
and mighty achievements, under the characters of Giants; which at this time,
according to Mr Bryant's most excellent work, denote some great temple, the
character of some powerful people, some mighty Ruler, or miserable Tyrant.
Camden relates, that the inhabitants in his time had a traditional tale of the
God Magon, who defended himself here, and maintained his fortress against a
certain Soldain or Heathen Prince. This relation, he says, is authenticated, as
to the reality of such a personage as Magon, in the ages of antiquity, by two
Roman inscriptions found in the river there. From our utmost endeavors, we
could not trace any remembrance, legendary tale, or heroic song, touching such
person as Magon, now remaining.

The inscriptions given by Camden are as follow: DEO
MOGONTI. CAD
ET. N. DN. AVG
M. C. SECVNDINVS
BF. CO. HABITA
NCI PRIMASTA --
PRO SE. ET. SVIS POSVIT
Deo Mogonti Cadenorum and Numini Domini Nostri Augusti Marcus Caius Secundinus
Beneficiarius Consulis Habitanci Primas, tam pro se et suis posuit. -- Mr
Horsley reads the latter part of this inscription "Prima Statione pro se et
suis posuit." The altar on which this inscription is cut was taken out of the
river Reed, which runs near this station. He says, this altar Camden justly
supposes to have been erected to the topical God Magon, worshipped by the
Cadeni or Gadeni, a neighboring people of the Otadini, and to the Deity of the
Emperor, by one Secundinus, a Beneficiarius of the Consul. Reading the two last
words of the fifth line PRIMASTA for Prima Statione, makes the sense natural
and easy. Risingham is an advanced station beyond the wall, and for ought that
appears to the contrary, might, at the time when this altar was erected, be the
most northerly station of any. The name Secundinus frequently occurs in Gruter.

DEO
MAVNO CAD --
INVENTVS DO --
V. S.
This altar was also taken out of the river. Mr Horsley says, according to this
copy, it appears to have been erected to another topical and tutelar God of the
Cadeni. It is a question whether Mounus may have been the same with Matunus, to
whom an altar was erected at Elsdon, a few miles from this place; or, perhaps
the same Deity is here designed as in the former. The third line in the
inscription has no doubt contained the name of the person who erected this
votive altar. We find the name Inventus in Gruter.

I must leave the Roman line, and attend to more remote antiquity, to define,
if possible, the name of Magon. I presume Mr Bryant has thrown such happy
lights upon the ancient mythology, and has proved his principles by such
testimonies, that with implicit confidence I may adopt his maxims. I shall have
several occasions to resort to his work, in the progress of my journey through
the mountainous part of this county, for etymologies of those ancient names,
which without his directions I should have passed over as incomprehensible; and
so lost in the mists of antiquity, as to remain without solution. -- As it is
little doubted, fire-worship was once the accepted religion of this island,
introduced by eastern visitants, and professed and practiced by the Druids; in
these wild and uncultivated parts, it is most probable, the strongest evidence
thereof would remain to this age. I find in Mr Bryant's radicals, as he terms
them, that the word O -- ON, was one of the titles of the Sun among the
Amonians, Genesis chap. xli. ver. 45. Exodus chap. i. ver. 13.
and was often in combination with other epithets, used by the Syrians,
Cretans, and Canaanites. He also therein speaks of the word Macar, as a sacred
title given by the Amonians to their Deity, and was frequently compounded Macar
-- on: from whence a people were donominated (...), Macarones, and places were
called (...), Macron. The corruption of a name, received from the pronunciation
of unlettered and ignorant inhabitants, who had handed it down traditionally
for ages, is not to be wondered at; from Macron to Magon is a simple and easy
corruption. From the inaccuracy of these rude inscriptions (as appears in the
second, even in the name of the invoked Deity) it is not to be wondered that G
took place of CR; or from the obliterations in them through age and time, the
transcriber might mistake ^ for G, a small letter being frequently introduced
in the middle of a word. Take Mr Bryant's arguments on traditions of the like
nature, and the whole relation given by Camden is resolved into an historic
fact -- that the worshippers and priests of On, who held here their religious
rites, in the temple of the Sun, were a formidable society, powerful in their
numbers and their learning.

That the eastern religion and rites were introduced to this island is certain;
that the Romans, in many instances, are known to have adopted the topical Gods;
they also, from an error in etymology, gave to persons, names which were
relative to places; and when in Britain, they either introduced their own
manner of worship, or otherwise adopted the British Deities, or rather the
Amonian titles which they found there, and gave them persons as Divinities. To
prove this, I shall quote the inscription before spoken of, in the Cottonian
collection, found at Great Chesters (page 35) Bryant.
Sur being a title of the Sun, Syria being denominated from thence, is at this
day called Souria, from Sur and Sehor, the Sun. That Suria was not merely a
provincial title, is plain, from the Surya Dea being worshipped at Eryx, in
Sicily, and from an inscription to her at Rome.

The Romans had an aversion to the Druids, who suffered no idols to be set up:
they took infinite pains to extirpate them, and destroy their monuments. Here
then we find the remainder of Camden's tradition, that the priests of On, the
worshippers of the Sun at Risingham, long withstood the Roman arms: to pacify
the people, and incite them to mix in their worship, the Romans erected their
Altars on the sacred mount, and inscribed them with the Amonian titles.

If I may be allowed to make another conjecture, that the topical Deities to
whom these altars were dedicated, prove the worshippers of the Sun held here
the Amonian Rites, and that from thence was derived the tradition mentioned by
Camden, I would presume this latter inscription was either incorrectly copied,
having in the original an A and M mixed thus ^, or the first letter in the name
of the Deity was omitted by the Sculptor, or intentionally neglected by the
Dedicator, as appears in many other instances; and that properly it should have
been AMOUNO: Amoun being a Grecian mode of expressing AMON. I have before
shown, from Mr Horsley's authorities, that the Grecian expression is used in
many Roman inscriptions yet extant. This altar would then appear to be
dedicated to Ammon, the topical Deity of Risingham, at the time of the
accession of the Romans. For the sake of impartiality, it it is necessary to
admit, that the dedication to Ammon might be from Grecian auxiliaries; as
Plutarch says, that of all the Egyptian names which seemed to have
correspondence with the Zeus of Greece, Amoun or Ammon was the most peculiar
and adequate. And from Herodotus we learn, that almost all the names of the
Gods in Greece were adventitious, having been brought thither from Egypt.

Camden says, so much we may gather from these inscriptions, as to ascertain
the name of the place Habitancum, and that he who made the first inscription
was Beneficiarius to a Consul, and Primate of the place. The Beneficiarius was
either by promotion, or arising from exemption of military service by
dispensation: they attended the chief officers of the army: they seem to have
been somewhat like those we now call Cadets: Horsley.
and the Primaes, as appears by the Codex Theodosii, were chief magistrates of
cities, towns, or castles. Camden leaves us in the dark as to Magon, not even
determining whether he was esteemed the tutelar God of the Gadeni, whom Ptolomy
placed next the Ottodini.

The following Inscriptions found at Chester Hope, near Risingham, have been
communicated to me.

D M
AMELIANVS
ANNORVM
X
D --
IVLIONA
NI FILIA VIXIT
ANN -- S XVI. M. XI.
DI -- XIIII
The following is walled up, in a house upon the station, and reversed. It is
cut on a stone about 18 inches square.

DOLOCHENO
C. IVL. PVBL --
PIUS TRIB.
V. S. L. M.
Mr Horsley gives the following reading and remarks upon it: Jovi Optimo
Maximo. Dolocheno Julius Publius Pius Tribunus votum solvit libens merito. This
was published some years ago by Dr Hunter, in the Philosophical Transactions. I
am of opinion it has been the body or plane of an altar, having met with
several parallel instances, where the capital and bases have been struck off
from altars, in order to fit them for walls, or such other uses. The appearance
of the stone favors this conjecture, and upon this supposition, I believe the
altar has been inscribed to Jupiter Optimus Maximus Dolochenus, and that the
letters I. O. M. have either been at the top of the plane, and struck off with
the capital, or else upon the capital itself. The word Dolocheno is very plain
upon this inscription; but in all other inscriptions, and writers who mention
this Deity, the name is spelt with an I or Y in the second syllable; excepting
one, which though it be so likewise in Gruter, yet in Petrus Apianus, who had
published it before, it is writ, as Montfaucon observes, with an O, in the
second syllable, like this. Possibly the letters PVBL, in the second line, may
not be another name of the person, but stand for Publitia, the name of the
tribe to which this Caius Julius belonged. This tribe is often mentioned in
Gruter. As to the Divinity Dolochenus, I shall have occasion to quote Mr
Horsley very fully on an inscription which occurs at Benwell. Besides the
sculptures and inscriptions here noticed, in Mr Horsley's work we find the
following, appertaining to this station.

LXXXIV. Marti Victori Julius Publius Pius Tribunus votum solvit libens merito.

This Mr Horsley says remains at the station (though I could not discover it,
and presume it has been moved since his time). There are effigies of Mars and
Victory on the capital, and an o^^s head on the base of the altar. Mars has his
usual dress and symbols, a shield in his left hand, and a spear in his right.
The Victory in her usual drapery, holds a globe in her right hand, and a palm
branch in her left. The figures and inscription Marti Victori explain and
illustrate each other.

LXXXVI. Militum cui praeest Marcus Peregrinus Superstes Tribunus.

The original I found placed for a seat, at the back door of a house at
Chesterhope. The first word may have been Militum, and the other letter a C. in
CVI: and as the Cohors Prima Tungtorum, has Militum annexed, I once suspected
that this altar rather belonged to the Tungrian, than the Vangiones, from the
inscriptions at the House-steads, in one of which we also meet with the name
Superstis. The altar is of a hard reddish stone, but finer than usual.

LXXXIX. -- Cui praeest Nonnuis Aurelius Castus Vetustate. Conlabium.

This seems to be the broken inscription given in Camden, and before mentioned.
It is very evident, it was erected on the repairing or rebuilding some public
edifice, that through age had gone to ruin: for so much does the usual
expression Vetustate Conlabsum imply. Aurelius Castus seems to have been the
name of the Praesect: but what Cohort he commanded, that was employed in this
work, is not to be known by the inscription. I can imagine no resemblance
between the first letters in the inscription, and those in Gallorum or
Vangionum, and yet there is no evidence from any inscription, of any other
Cohort being there. The N in the word Conlabsum, is silent, as it often is in
the middle of a word, before another consonant; and so is frequently omitted by
the workmen, who usually wrote as they were accustomed to pronounce.

XCI. Dis Manibus -- v^it annis --

Of which little more can be known, than, that it has been sepulchral.

XCII. There is nothing more worth our notice within the station, but the
following sculpture. Three human figures are on one side, and a man holding a
horse on the other side of the same stone, which is of a cu^ical form: these
figures are much effaced. The man, who holds the horse on his left hand,
appears to be in somewhat like an Armenian dress, with a hasta in his other
hand. Two of the other figures are leaning upon pillars, one of which has a
staff in his right hand, with two serpents twisted about it, the symbol of
Esculapius, whose image I take it to be. And the short figure which stands
next, exactly agrees to Telesphorus, the God of Recovery, who is always
represented in this manner, with a cloak covering both his arms; and is often
placed between Esculapius and his daughter Hygicia, and sometimes standing by
Esculapius alone: in both cases he appears like a boy. He stands with
Esculapius alone in a medal of Caraca^la, and between him and H^gieia in the
medals of Lucius Verus and Philip the younger, as also in a sculpture of
Montfaucon. The God and Goddess of Physic and Health, and the God of Recovery,
are proper companions one of another. The third figure here may be Hygieta,
with the cal^thus about her head; the drapery is very doubtful, and the
serpent, her usual symbol, does not appear, in which the sculpture agrees with
that of Montfaucon. A man holding a horse, may be an emblem of victory, peace,
or security. In a medal of Commodus with Fortunae mane^ts on the reverse.
Fortune sits holding a horse by the bridle. There is so great a resemblace
between this fourth figure and that of Castor upon some coins, that it has
created an opinion in me, that it may have been intended for Castor, or Geta,
under that figure, holding his ^lla^us in his hand. If the habit be set aside,
(which is very obscure) how exactly does th^s answer to Vise^as^'s account of a
coin of Getas, where he is represented in the figure of Castor in a military
dress, holding a spear in his left hand, and leading a horse by the bridle with
his right. The figure here indeed, holds the spear in his right hand, and the
horse in his left; but that is no material difference. Castor is usually
distinguished from his brother by a horse, according to Horace.

Castor gaudet equis, ovo prognatus eodem
Pugnis.
But Montfaucon has given us a sculpture of Castor and Pollux together, each
holding a horse and a spear.

Two inscriptions in Mr Warburton's Map of Northumberland, whose originals I
could not find, are thus represented: FORTVNA
AVG
AEL
PROCVLIN
V. S.
Fortunae
Augusti
Aelius
Proculinus
Votum solvit
I suppose this has been an altar. The E at the end of the first line I fancy
has been overlooked. The copy of the other is more confused and unintelligible.
All we can ascertain is, it has been dedicated Marti Victori.

MARTI
VICTOR
-- RRON --
AV -- EINV --
TRIB. AV --
About half a mile north from Risingham, close by Watling-street, lies an altar
much of the same size and shape with that at Risingham, which stands in the
gate of the station. It has a Praefericulum and Patera on one side, and a
garland on the other. There has no doubt been an inscription upon it, though
now not the least sign of a letter appears. I think this cannot well be the
same altar, which with the inscription upon it, Dr Hunter has described in the
Philosophical Transactions; for the Doctor says he found that near Riechester.
The inscription the Doctor has given us runs thus: D. M.
C. IVL FL.
INGEN
--
MILEG
VIV F
Dis Manibus
Caius Julius Florus (or Flavia Triba)
Ingenuus
--
Miles Legionis
Sextae Victricis (Piae) Fidelis


According to some, there is another instance of four names for the same
person, and where Caius Julius make two of them: Though Mr Ward there also
chooses to refer one of the names rather to the tribe.




In Camden we find the following inscriptions: AVR. ANTONI
NI. PII. AVG. M
MESSORIVS
DILIGENS TRI
BVNVS SACRVM
Mr Horsley's reading and remarks on this inscription are as follow: Aurelii
Antonini Pii Augusti Marcus Messorius Diligens Tribunus sacrum. The original
was removed by Sir Robert Cotton, for it still continues at Con^gton: the upper
part has been broken off, and the first line now remaining is partly covered,
by being built up in the wall of the summer house; the rest is yet very plain.
There is no doubt but Pro Salutae Imperatoris M. has gone before, and perhaps
the altar has been to Jupiter Optimus Maximus, or to Jupiter and the Numina
Augusti. It is not easy to determine to which of the Antonines this inscription
belongs. If this station was in ruins, as some think, in the reign of
Caracalla, the supposed author of the Itinerary, then the inscription could not
be to him: besides, the titles Felix, etc. are usually added to him; and in our
British inscriptions he is often joined with Severus, after whose death he
immediately left the island. M. Aurelius Antoninus, called Philosophus, had
wars here, and his Legate, Calpurnius Agricola, is named in an inscription or
two in these parts: and I am apt to think, that both this inscription, and some
others in the north, belong to that Emperor.

NVMINIB
AVGVSTOR
COH IIII GAL
EQ
FEC.
Of this Mr Horsley gives the following reading and remarks: Numinibus
Angustorum, Cohors Quarta Gallorum Equitum fecit. The original of this is also
at Conington, and placed above the summer house door. The sculpture has
suffered by the weather, but the inscription is still very legible. The
Emperors, in honor of whom it has been erected, I take to be Severus and
Caracalla, who were much hereabout, and, I believe, were possessed of this very
station. This Cohort seems to have been like a flying squadron, for by
inscriptions we find them in several places. The inscription is included in a
kind of corona, or rather an octagon, circumscribed by a square moulding. There
are ornaments of eagles heads on each side, above which is the appearance of
two faces, probably designed for those of the Emperors referred to by the
inscription. Mars and Victory, in their usual dress and appearance, are set in
a nich, one at each end of the stone. The other ornaments seem only to be such
as pleased the fancy of the Sculptor. The Victory treads on a globe, and no
doubt the general meaning is, that the Emperors had warred successfully, and
gained a victory over the whole world.

DEAE TER
TIANAE. SA
CRVM. AEL
TIMOTHEA P
V. S. LL. M.
Of this inscription Mr Horsley gives the following reading and remarks: Camden
has given us the name of another topical Goddess in an inscription, the
original of which is lost; namely, Tertiana, which a learned friend conjectured
to be the Tertian Ague: and it is well known the Goddess Febris was worshipped
among the Romans.

DEO INVICTO
HERCVLI. SACR
LAE^L. SALV^NVS
TR^. COH. I. VANGI
V. S. P. M.
On this inscription Mr Horsley gives the following reading and remarks: Deo
invicto Herculi sacrum. Lucius Aemilius Salvianus Tribunus Cohortis Primae
Vaugionum votum solvens posuit merito. The Cohors Prima Vaugionum, a people of
Gallia Belgica on the Rhine, seem to have been in garrison here the latest and
longest, though neither this Station nor Cohort are mentioned in the Notitia. A
Tribune of this Cohort is mentioned in a funeral inscription at Walwick
Chesters. This is a very stately altar, erected to the invincible Hercules: it
remains yet at Conington very entire, and is, I think, one of the largest
altars I have seen, that are so beautiful. On one side is an ox in basso
relievo; on the other, an ornament not unlike a curtain, for I could not say it
was a festoon, and it is rather too large for a priest's veil: I imagined it to
represent the aulaeum, that separated the adytum, or some such thing.

COH. ^. VANG
FECIT. CVRANTE
IVL. PAVLLO. TRIB.
Mr Horsley's reading and remarks on the above are: Cohors Prima Vaugionum
fecit curante Julio Paullo Tribuno. The original is also at Conington. Paullus
is here with a double LL; and the F in fecit looks like the lower Empire.

HERCV
LI. IVL
PAVLLVS
TRIB
US
Mr Horsley's reading and remarks on this are, Herculi Julius Paullus Tribunus
votum solvit. This altar stands instead of a gate-post, in the side of what was
once the south gate of the station, but is now used as a gate for the field.
When I was informed of this altar, I was told that a great many more letters
were formerly visible upon it. It has been a fine altar, but is now turned
up-side-down, so that the capital was hid in the ground. It is not improbable,
that the inscriptions and altars dedicated to Hercules, have been designed as a
compliment to the Emperor Commodus, who, as it is well known, was called
Hercules Romanus. Besides this Julius Paullus, I find three other Tribunes, who
commanded this Cohort of the Vangiones.

D. M.
BLESCIVS
DIOVICVS
FILIE
SVE
VIXIT
AN. I. ET.
DIES XXI
Mr Horsley says, this inscription has in its manner so much the appearance of
the lower Empire, as to confirm that the Romans were late possessed of this
station. The original is now at Conington. The rudeness of the letters, the
scattered position of them, and the stops on each side the I, in the last line
but one, are very remarkable. Though DM be at the top, yet it is not an altar,
of which there are other instances.

ICOSCvIPRE --
M. AVRL. CAST --
VETVSTATE CoNLABS --
This station was certainly gone to decay before the reign of Caracalla, and
afterward was restored: and this opinion is favored by the last imperfect
inscription, found at this place; from whence it appears, that somewhat had
been repaired which had gone to ruin through age.

The remarkable effigy of Robin of Risingham, as it is called by the country
people, next claims my attention: I will in the first place give Mr Horsley's
description, and then offer some few remarks of my own. The remarkable figure
which usually goes by the name of Robin of Risinghom, or Robin of Redsdale, is
cut upon the face of a huge piece of rock, that has fallen off from the main
one. It is on the side of a hill or rock near the park head, and about half a
mile from the station at Risingham. The image is in basso relievo, and both the
sculpture and stone very coarse. I take it, by the drapery and symbols, to be
certainly Roman, though some, from the rudeness of the sculpture, have thought
it British: and probably it is the Emperor Commodus, represented under the
figure of Hercules. The square stone beside him, must I suppose be an altar,
and what he carries in his left arm a club: on his left shoulder are distinctly
seen a quiver and arrows, and in his right hand a bow, which agree with the
character given him by Herodian, who celebrates him as a most excellent archer.
What he wears on his head looks like a helmet. Every body knows that Commodus
affected to be called the Roman Hercules, and to be worshipped as such. We have
his coins with Herculi Romano Augusto, Herculi Romano Conditori, etc. This
figure then might represent the Roman Hercules triumphant and victorious, after
things had been settled in Britain by Pertinax, and Commodus assumed the name
of Brittanicus. The face of the whole piece of rock on which the image is cut,
is an irregular figure of five sides: the side which rests in the ground is six
feet and an half; the perpendicular from the vertex to this side, eight feet;
the two sides to the right of this perpendicular each of them five feet; the
uppermost side to the left seven; and the lower four; and the stone is just
about six feet thick. The figure stands upright.

The doubts which I entertain that this is Roman work, are founded upon the
following circumstances: The vest in which the figure is habited is open from
the waist to the knee; round the waist is a belt buckled before: the loose
garment on the shoulders, leaving the right arm bare and at liberty, is put on
in the manner of the Scotch played: the cap is not similar to any one I remember
to have seen in Roman sculptures: the bow is in the right hand. But that the
reader may pass his own judgment upon this sculpture, I have given an etching
of it.

If we descend to modern times, we will find several personages distinguished
by the name of Robin of Redesdale. One of the Umfranviles had that appellation;
and in the time of Edward the Fourth, we find one Hilliard of the Lancastrian
party thus denominated. From Banbury the northern men under the conduct of
Robbin of Riddesdale Hist. England, A. D. 1468.
hastened to the manor of Grafton, where the Queen's father then lay, whom with
his son John they suddenly surprised, and at Northampton cut off their heads.



Before I quit the neighborhood of Bellingham, I must notice the remains of a
castle situate near the confluence of the brook Tarset and North Tyne. I did
not view the place; the description, together with a drawing, was communicated
to me by my friend, at Newcastle. It stands within the Lordship of Tarset, and
has the name of Tarset Castle. Camden says it was a castle of the Comins. The
area is of an oblong square, in length about 120 yards; defended by a deep
fosse, near 10 yards in breadth, on the north, west, and south sides; the east
laying on a steep descent. At each corner of the area appear the remains of
turrets or mounds. There seems to have been an outward wall, to defend the
tower.

Near to Risingham is

ELISHAW,
a small village on the Watling-street, which crossed the river at this place,
the remains of the bridge appearing.

From Risingham to Elsden, the traveller, in all the perplexities of a rainy
and desolate country, must be proved a patient christian, if he forbears to
execrate the want of guide-posts, and the neglect of those, whose duty it is to
remedy the delay, fatigue, hazard, and anxiety of the stranger, whose stars
infatuate him to engage in the labyrinths and wilds of such a country.

ELSDEN
is a small town of antiquity, supposed to have its date from the time of M.
Aurelius Antoninus: two Roman altars were found, inscribed to that Emperor, in
a hill called the Mote Hill. Mr Horsley gives us the following inscriptions
found here: BONOGENERIS
HVMAN. IMPE
RANTE. CALPVR
NIO. AGRICOLA
AVG. PR. PR. POSVIT
AC. DEDICAVIT
C. A. ACILIVS


This was removed to Durham, where it now is. It is very curious; and the
remark is just, which the ingenious Dr Harle made, when the altar was first dug
up, that the lines which are wanting, had been evidently struck out with a
tool; which is usually observed to have been practiced on revolutions in the
Empire, or upon the persons falling into disgrace, who is mentioned in the
inscription. This particularly is thought to have been done with relation to
Geta, by the order of his brother Caracalla, in some other inscriptions in
Britain; though I cannot think that the name of Geta has been upon this altar;
for this neither agrees with the letter C, yet very plain and visible, nor with
the sequel of the inscription, which is very clear and distinct. Bono generis
Humani Imperante Calparato Agric^la Legato Augustali Propraetore posuit ac
dedicavit C^ius A^l^s Acilius. The first words in the filth line are
undoubtedly Augustali Propraetore, which makes it certain, that Legato, and the
name of the Lieutenant, have gone before, according to the usual form. If we
suppose Calparuius Agricola to be the name that has been designedly erased. I
believe that as the letters will exactly fill up the empty space, so that
supply will suit very well, both with what goes before and what follows.
Imperante Calpurnio Agricola, I take to be the same with s^^ Calpurnio
Agricola, or perhaps fussu Calpurnii Agricola, which so frequently occurs in
such sort of subscriptions. There is some difficulty in forming a notion of the
meaning of an altar erected Bono generis humani; but this may seem as
intelligible as an altar erected Bono sato, Bono event^i, etc. and perhaps has
much the same meaning. There are coins with Salus Generis humani upon them. If
the conjecture concerning Calpurnius Agricola be admitted, it will then follow,
that this inscription belongs to the time of M. Aurelius Antoninus, whose
Legate this Agricola was; and consequently that the Romans were in his time
possessed of this station.

Having given my own sentiments of this inscription, I must acknowledge, that a
different conjecture has occurred, which several of my friends incline to
prefer: and that is, that the following fragment and this may have been
originally but one stone, and that the whole inscription has run thus: DEO
MATVNO
PRO SALVT ET
--
BONO GENERIS
HVMAN. IMPE
RANTE GETA. AVG.
SVB -- -- -- LEG
AVG. PR. PR. POSVIT
AC DEDICAVIT
C. A. ACIL.
Deo Matuno
pro salute et
bono generis
humani Impe.
rante Geta Augusta
Sub -- -- -- Legato
Augustali Propraetori posuit
ac dedicavit
Caius Aulus Acilius.
But I do not think it probable, upon reviewing them, that both the fragments
have been parts of the same stone.

We have here the local Deity Matunus, concerning whom I can learn nothing more
than his name.




This mount is entrenched round, the mote yet remaining of a great depth: to
the north, which is the weakest part, a breastwork is cast up. The bones of
animals, remains of sacrifice, have been discovered here, with urns, ashes of
the dead, and broken inscriptions.

Elsden was the estate of the Clennels in the reign of Edward the First; it
afterward came to the Greys and Howards; and now is part of the possessions of
his Grace the Duke of Northumberland. Near the church is an old tower, which is
occupied as the Rectory-house, on which remain the arms of Umfranvils, ancient
Lords of Harbottle, Otterburn, and a large district here.

On the front of this tower is an inscription, in the following form: R. D. de
read. Which may be read, Robertus or Rogerus Dom. de Read, and referred to
Umfranvil Lord of Pruddowe, who died about the year 1325.

The following inscription (found at Riechester, and now preserved in the
church at Elsden) with its reading, was communicated to me: GENIO EI SIGNIS COH
I. ^ ARDUL OR. E Q ^ T^CINI VALERI ANVS TRIB. P. Genio et signis Coh. primae
Vardulorum Equitum. Titus Licinius Valerianus. Trib. P.

Near to Elsden is a place called Berenes Knowl, where Mr Wallis says is a
British temple, the stones numerous, of various sizes, in a circular order. I
used great diligence to find this place, but in vain; neither was I able to
gain any intelligence from people in the neighborhood. Mr Collier, at my
instance, took great pains to discover the monument spoken of by Mr Wallis; but
without effect.


On the Tod-Law, a mount on the adjoining moor, Mr Wallis also says are three
stone columns, placed in a triangular order, 12 feet distant from each other,
and each column near 12 feet in diameter. From the Manuscripts of the late
Roger Gale, Esquire Extract of a Letter from the Rev. Mr Robert Patten to Roger
Gale, Esquire
Penrith, 30th January, 1730/1.
At two places hard by the causeway, I observed two Tumuli, one of them with
two circles of stones, and the other upon a raised square piece of ground. We
have several Tumuli which I did believe to be Danish, for I have seen in
Denmark some of the same fashion with these, and the like number of stones,
viz. 24, set in two circles; and what confirms my opinion is, that very near my
house is a large one, by the neighbors called Harnsley Hill; but in the
writings which the gentleman has to whom it belongs, it is written Harold's
Hill. So I presume some Dane or Saxon has been buried there.

Sir, yours, etc. ROBERT PATTEN.



These he presumed are sepulchral, or monuments of some memorable event. It was
the custom of the Danes, at the solemn investiture of their Kings, or men of
chief authority, to erect monuments of this nature; and to that people it is
most reasonable we should attribute such erections. Of this monument also it
was not in our power to gain any intelligence.


The remembrance of the battle of

OTTERBURN,
so famous in story, led us again toward the banks of Reed: the entrenchments
are still discernable, and the number of Tumuli Extract of a Letter from Mr J.
Horsley to Roger Gale, Esquire 13th December, 1729.
SIR,
I was obliged to be from home two or three days after the receipt of yours,
which has occasioned the delay, for a post or two, in my communicating to you a
discovery that has lately been made in the grounds of Otterburn, in this county.

There was a large Cairn of stones, computed to about 60 ton, which they had
occasion to lead off; when the stones were removed, they discovered at the
bottom, a large stone, rough and undressed, la^d upon the ground, in form of a
gravestone, with smaller stones wedged in between it and the ground, wherever
there were any interstices. When this was taken off, there appeared (...) the
ground a cavity in form of a grave, about two yards long, and four feet broad
at the top about a foot and a half deep was some very fine mould; next to that
some ashes said in fine white sand; the sand was above two feet thick; the
whole depth of the cavity or grave being near four feet. There were mixed with
ashes, what they took for small pieces of burnt bones, very black, but no
entire bones. There were several pieces of burnt wood, like charcoal. I have
not yet seen the place myself, but I have this account from an eyewitness, who
exam^ned every thing very carefully. I design to go thither myself in a few
days, and if there be any thing which you think proper for me to attend to more
particularly, I should be glad to know it.

Yours, etc. JOHN HORSLEY.



scattered over the adjoining ground, mark to future ages the slaughter made
there.

The disturbances in England in the time of King Richard II. induced the Scots
to invade the borders, in the 12th year of that reign, with about 3000 men,
under the command of Sir William Douglas, by some authors styled Earl Douglas.
They were attacked in their camp on the 5th of August. 1388, by a body of
English forces, commanded by the Earl of Northumberland, and his two sons,
Henry Percy and Ralph Percy, young men of martial spirit, at Otterburn.
R^^path's B^rder History* "An army almost thrice as numerous as that of the
Scots." -- I know not by what authority this is asserted.


The armies engaged by moon light, a season when battle would have redoubled
horrors, especially where the conflict was hand to hand; when each combatant
met his opponent in trial of skill and strength: this mode of fighting must
render the business and confusion of the conflict dreadful beyond description.
Douglas, ambitious of laurels, and desiring some distinguished achievement,
sought for young Henry Percy, who for his intrepidity and martial prowess was
surnamed Hotspur. He met him in the hottest of the battle, insolently braved
the young hero to engage, and Douglas fell beneath his valorous sword. The
rumor of their leader's overthrow ran through the Scottish lines; they were
intimidated, and began to fly; but at the instant the panic was becoming
general, and the English were advancing in hopes of victory, the Earl of Dunbar
came up with a large reinforcement, and the Scots rallied. Now overpowered by
numbers, and faint with the fatigues and bloodshed of the fight, the English
gave way, and the invaders were victorious: yet so powerfully, and with such
gallant resolution, did the English maintain the battle against superior force,
that the loss on each side was said to be nearly equal. The English left 1800
dead upon the field. Among the prisoners were Lord Percy and his brother, Sir
Robert Heron, Sir Robert Ogle, Sir John Lilburn, Sir John Colwell, and many
other valiant men of Northumberland.

A circumstance attended this day, as unfortunate to the Northumbrians, as
shameful to their allies: the Durham militia was approaching, but did not come
up in time to support the English, before they had left the field to the
victors: the Scottish leader not willing to hazard any more of his troops,
thought it expedient to use stratagem, and accordingly assailed the
reinforcement in a mode totally new, and happily prevalent: he caused all his
soldiers to blow the horns which were used to sound an alarm; the stilness of
the night, the echo from the hills, and the terrors which the overthrow of the
Northumbrians had impressed upon their minds, wrought so powerfully, that the
militia were seized with a panic, and put to flight without seeing an enemy,
vanquished solely by the tremendous idea of thousands approaching flushed with
success.

Replete with melancholy reflections, arising from such a scene and
retrospection, eight miles to Riechester must necessarily pass heavily; it is
the business of a sentimental writer to catch the momentary ideas and living
sentiments as they rise; the illustrious names renewed to memory, by the place
of Otterburn fight, the Percies, the Herons, Ogles, Lilburns, and many more,
busy on that famous night, brought upon my mind reflections on the honor of
pedigree. Our ideas are apt to class themselves into comparisons. Whilst I
ruminated on the subject of descent from Heroes and illustrious Personages, Men
who had acquired Fame, Honor, and Title, by virtuous deeds and a service of
propriety, I determined that the Pride of Pedigree was laudable, so long as the
descendant did not debase his blood by ignoble and impious actions. I admitted
it as a maxim, that such had a right to public place, pre-eminence, and
distinction. Then it was, I took (as it were) the other hand into
consideration; a review of the modes of the world; and thence proceeded to
compare my determined principles with characters well known to me. I remarked
many who claimed place and distinction, and stand up as the givers of modes,
and rulers of what shall be called propriety of manners; such a groop of
characters crowded upon me, (the mushrooms of a morning) all rushing with
ardour and avariciousness of mind to the goal of pre-eminence, Wretches sprung
from the filth of a corrupted age, that their mimick importance created in my
mind so ridiculous a picture, even amidst the wastes and wilds where I
traveled, and in defiance of all the deformities which nature spread around
me, I could not forbear laughter.

All this time were we climbing with infinite difficulty, and no small hazard,
to gain a sight of the cataract called Chattlehope Spout, which, when attained,
was a trifling recompense for our labor. The waterfall is 75 feet in height,
not immediately perpendicular, the stream being interrupted near the middle by
a projection of the rock, from whence sliding gradually some feet, it falls a
second time. The precipices are naked, and there are no picturesque beauties in
the whole scene. All around you are rude and barren heights.

The Roman Station

RIECHESTER,
or as Camden calls it, Bremenium, was the ne plus ultra of our wish in this
part of Northumberland. It was esteemed the strongest station the Romans had in
the North, and was the capital or chief fortress of the Otadini. C. Caepio
Charitenus and Lucius Caelius Optatus commanded here, the latter having a
Cohort of the Varduli from Hispania Citerior, the former a detachment of
Exploratores. Many Coins, Altars, and other Remains have been found at this
station, especially the Coins of Marcus Aurelius Antoninus. Ph. Tra. No. 474,
482, vol. 44. p. 344.
An Altar was found here, now in the possession of the Rev. Dr Sharp, inscribed
by a Cohort of Varduli to the Emperor Caracalla. This station is defended by a
wall of ashler-work, seven feet in thickness, with motes and treble rampires,
as outworks. Extract of a Letter from Mr Robert Cay, of Newcastle, to Roger
Gale, Esquire
Newcastle, 12th December, 1732.
In the Notitia we meet with Tribunus Cohortis I Hispaniorum Axeloduno: in the
Netherby inscription we have Tribunus Coh. I Acl. Hispanorum Eq. I think we
have not met with any former instances of the title Aelia ascribed to this
Cohort. Mr Horsley, page 95, conjectures, that the Cohoris Prima Hispanorum
Equit. might be part of the Ala Herculea; but I believe, Sir, if he had met
with this inscription, he would have thought otherwise. In the Notitia, as he
observes, p. 94, we do not meet with the expression Cohors Equitum, but as in
many parts of that book the place of the officer's residence seems chiefly to
be intended, I know not whether we ought always to suppose that the whole body
under his command was in the same place; therefore I am more surprised, that we
never meet with Tribunus Coh. Equitum. Among the stations per lineam V^^li,
there is none said to be commanded by a Praefectus Alae, which appears to have
been much larger than some of those where Tribunes of Cohorts are placed; and I
know no instance of a Commander of an Ala styled Tribunus. I would therefore
suppose, that an Equ^strian Cohort consisted of two Alae, though it might not
be very common to mention them as Cohorts; and perhaps the Ala Prima Herculea
and the Ala Vettonum might compose this Cohort.

Sir, yours, etc. ROBERT CAY.


An Answer to the preceding Letter by Mr Gale.
London, 28th December, 1732.
Mr Horsley's reason for supposing the Cohors Prima Hispanorum to have been
part of the Ala Herculea, is their being quartered nearly together; the first
at Elenborough, and the other at Old Carlisle, as appears by inscriptions found
at those places.

I believe this Cohort arrived in Britain with the Emperor Hadrian, and
continued there till the Romans quitted the island, and in a series of about
300 years, it must have made several marches and counter marches from one camp
to another. My reason for thinking it came hither with that Emperor, is from
its appellation Aelia, and its country Spain; the latter of which might prevail
with him, who was a Spaniard by birth, to dignify it with one of his own names;
and when he transported the Legio VI Victrix into Britain, he might bring this
Cohort among the Auxiliaries that were joined to it: this also inclines me to
think it was part of one of the Alae belonging to that Legion, which seems
always to have been employed in the North, and to have had its head quarters at
York.

The legionary Alae consisted of several Cohorts of foreign Auxiliaries, though
of how many is uncertain: sometimes we are told they were equal in numbers of
men to the Legion, and sometimes that they exceeded it: it is therefore
probable, that both the Alae of a Legion might contain ten Cohorts, the number
of those that constituted a Legion, when complete.

I cannot therefore agree, that the Cohors Prima Hispanorum was composed of two
Alae, the 1^. Herculea and the Ala Vettonum; since Alae were formed of Cohorts,
and not Cohorts of Alae.

Ala also imported a large independent body of horse, and of this sort seems to
have been the Ala Vettonum, and the Ala Prima Asturum, the Ala Sarmatarum, etc.
all which carry the the names of the countries they originally came from.

The Legio VI Victrix was in Britain when the Notitia Imperii was compiled, as
were all those Ala; it is not therefore unlikely, that the Ala I Herculea, and
the Ala Sabiniana were the wings properly appertaining to it, one so called
from the Emperor Maximianus Herculeus, the other retaining the name of the
Empress Sabina or Sabinia, either the wife of the Emperor Hadrian that brought
this Legion into Britain, or of the Emperor Gordian the Third, who honored the
other wing of it with his own name, which is most probable, because from the
name Sabina the appellative adjective Sabinia would be properly formed; and
from the name Sabinia, wh^ (...) Empress, as appears from her medals, the true
formation of the adjective thou ^^e Sa^^mara.

When the ^^titia, as it now stands, was wrote, the Legio Secunda Augusta was
withdrawn from (...) Wales, its long and ancient quarters, to Richburrough, in
K^nt, and the A^iane that composed the wings of it, were in all probability the
forces that garrisoned the stations upon that coast against the Saxons, as the
wings of the Vlth The horse of a Legion was in the A^ae, the body (...) so that
the wings were the properest to (...) the country (...) whi^^ the main body lay
in (...).
defended the northen borders against the Scots and ^^^ts, while the main body
of that Legion lay in its head quarters at York. The Britons, when the Romans
abandoned this island, and for many years before, were entirely friends with
them, united in the same interest and almost the same people, so that they had
no occasion to keep any troops upon the borders of Wales but rather to withdraw
them ad lineam Va^^i to defend their friends and confederates against the
Barbarians on that side; and to the (...) on the other, to protect them from
the depredations of those (...) for a^ that time they were no more. It is very
strange, I must own, that no (...), have been found, in any of these eastern
and southern station, and so many of them in the northern: I can impute it only
to the long residence of the Roman forces in the north, with many (...) peace
and ^ase, which gave them leisure to erect temple, altars and (...) glandeur
there, and to a short stay upon the Saxon coast, in coast, in continual a^
arms, that gave them time to think of nothing but the defense of themselves and
country: and all the remain of their ^fications and castles in th^se parts
speak them to have been of the lowest Empire

Upon this occasion give me leave to observe, that the Notitia Imperit has
given you the state of the Roman government and forces in Britain, not as they
really were, when that account of them is supposed: have been compiled, at the
latter end of Tho^s the Second's reign, about the year 445: but as they stood
in the year 401 or 402, when the aforesaid Legions were ^t (...) it is evident
they had been recalled before that time. When the Legis Secu^da ^g^ta left
(...) not so (...), but I think we may safely determine, that the Legio VI. V
forsook us, when St^ drew together all the forces of the Empire to his
assistance against Alari^ the (...), which was about the year 401. from the
following verses of the poet Gla^: Ve^ a^ extremis Legio praetenta Britannis,
Qur Sent dat fraena T^uci, ferro notatas
Pe^ eras res, picta moriente, figuras.
Which is such a defer^ of this Le^n, and its employment, that I think it puts
what I have conjectured upon its departure out of doubt. As we have no mention
at that time of the second Legion, nor afterward it was probably reca^^ed
before the sixth; so that what the N^titia gives us of the Romans in Britain,
seems to be copied from an account taken at a time when they had a flourishing
civil power, and a good army residing here, and not to relate to the latter end
of T^dosius the Second, a time of the utmost confusion and disorder. when they
were not able to defend their own (...), and their Ro^a Eterna against the
ravages of the Goth.

But to return: The Commanders of both sorts of alae were ^led Praefecti, the
same title as Commanders of Legions were honored with: and to be a Praefectus
Alae, more interest was made than to be a Praefectus Legionis, as being more
profitable, and sooner attained, by rising quarter t^t through the several
degrees of military promotion. But the proper title belonging to the Commander
of a Co^ort, seems to have been Tribanus, the Notitia Imperis constantly ^l^ng
them so, though that title is not always observed in the inscriptions, where we
find frequently (...). The true name was probably Tribunus, and Praesectus as a
title of a greater dignity, only a compliment to the officer, as we call all
our Lieutenants and Ensigns at this time Captains.

Cohors was properly a company of foot, Turma a troop of horse; the Commander
of the latter was rightly called Decurio, and frequently Praesectus, Cohors
Equitata Milliaria Centurias X. Coh. Eq. Quingenaria Centurias VI. Peditata
Mill. Centur. X, etc Vide Hyginum de Castramet. et schelii Commentaria in Io
Xo. These. Romans Antiq. Graevii.
like the Captain of a Cohort. Vegettus, a late author, and who lived a little
before the Notitia was compiled, tells us, that the first Cohort of a Legion
was called Milliaria, that it consisted of 1105 foot soldiers, and 132 horse;
that the other Cohorts had only 555 foot and 66 horse; that the Commander of
the first Cohort had the title of Tribunus, and that those of the other Cohorts
were styled either Tribuni or Praepositi at the Emperor's pleasure. Other
authors differ as to the number of men in a Cohort, and I never met with a
Praepositus Cohortis in any book else, or inscription: perhaps it was a late
distinction, and but just brought into fashion when Vegetius wrote.

However, in imitation of the first legionary Cohort, it is not improbable that
the first auxiliary Cohort consisted likewise of above 1000 men, and the rest
of more than 500 (the 4th and 7th, it is said, were above 600); whence they
were called Quingenariae, as the first was Milliarta* and I think the
inscription you sent is a strong proof of this conjecture, the note there being
the character of 1000 in number, and consequently the last words of it are to
be read -- Tribunus Cohort^s Primae, Aeliae Hispanorum Milliariae Equitatae,
and not Equestris or Equitum, as used by Pliny and other polite writers:
Equitata being the camp word, and not denoting a Cohort consisting entirely of
horse, but a Cohort formed partly of foot and partly of horse, as is evident
from Hyginas de castrametatione, who wrote expressly upon that subject, and in
the military style.

Sir, yours, etc. ROGER GALE.


Extract of a Letter from Sir John Clerk to R. Gale, Esquire
Edinburgh, 29th October, 1734.
I know very well that the first Cohort of a Legion used some times to be
called Milliaria, for so Rosinus and Vegetius, and before them Modestus had
taught me. I know it consisted both of horse and foot, but I thought it a
tautology to add after prima Cohors these letters. (...) EQ wherefore I
imagined that there was more intended (viz.) directly to signify that the whole
Cohors consisted of horse, in number 1000, or that there was belonging to the
Cohors 1000 horse, who were quartered at Netherby; but what was of greater
weight with me was, that I believed, that in the latter times of the Roman
Empire there were Cohorts entirely of horse Pliny, in the tenth book of his
Epistles, and I think the 107th Epistle, furnished me with a direct proof of
this, for he expressly mentions the Sexta Cohors Equestris. There was another
proof occurred to me, from the 25th chapter of Suetonius in Vita Claudii, where
Coho^s is mentioned inter Equestres Milites. In the main, I thought it would do
as well to read the letters ^ EQ. Mill Equitum, as to call the Cohort Prima
Milliaria. I pleased myself also with the fancy, that if the old Lipsius had
seen this altar, he had acquiesced in the above cited words of Suetonius, and
not have read them Semestres Militias. Some of your editions of that author
will direct you to a squabble amongst the Critics upon the reading of those
words, which in my apprehension this very altar at Netherby may decide: but be
the reading what it will, it pleases me to think that there were Spanish horse
amongst us in former times, which perhaps contributed not a little to that
breed of horses which is in those parts to this day. I believe the Jock^es will
not approve of this conjecture: we generally attribute our breed of galloways
to Spanish horses, though we carry their origin no farther back than the
Spanish invasion in 1588, and the ships which were cast away on our coasts; but
this is an episode I can easily pass by.

I have only now to add a conjecture of mine, as to the apparent streets in the
town of Netherby, (viz.) that they were stables for horses, and of this very
kind there are several in the station at Middleby: nothing was fitter than
horse to defend them against my old countrymen the Fugaces Caledonii.

I am, etc. J. CLERK.


Extract of a Letter from Mr John Horsley to Roger Gale, Esquire
11th April, 1729. SIR,
The^ have lately converted a part of the Station at R^chester, the ancient
Bremenium, into a garden, in ^gging which ^everal (...) and Inscriptions have
been found: there is one that (...). SILV^NO PANTH^^. and another very lately
thrown up, DEO HERCVLENT^. I would have had it ^li, but the letters are plain,
and there is no offering any violence to them. It is (...) a (...) altar, and
this is the whole of the inscription. If it be not some Topica. Detty, I know
not what to make of it.

I am, etc. JOHN HORSLEY.


Extract of a Letter from Mr John Horsley to Roger Gale, Esquire
13th June, 1729.
Since my last to you, another inscription has been found at our R^hester. The
stone and and letter, are coarse, and a part of the bottom broke off, but what
remains is very distinct, and I believe there has not been much, if any thing
more at first. It runs Di^ Man^hus Hermaco^a A^am^ Hon^rat^s Tr^nus I think
that ^l^no shows Hermacora to be designed for the ca^ve case, after the Greek
manner. This favors your opinion concerning Hercul^n^; but it is much more
favored and confirmed by what I neglected to acquaint you with in my ^a^, that
is, a figure (...) on the ^ice of the al^r.

There is an inter^ (...) ^e^e of a rud^ (...) in the Library at Edinburgh, to
the Emperor A^t^ (...) which according to Mr Gordon was erected by the Logi^
G^^a^. According to Mr ^rt (...), in Camde^ Britannia, it is quite another
inscription, though I have (...) proofs of its being the same stone as that
represented by him. Upon a very close, impart (...) repeated ^ew of the letters
in the original, I read it CO^^. CVGERNORVM. I am the more ^ured of this
reading, because I did not then remember the name of the C^g^^ and so was led
to this reading only by a careful inspection of the original Impera^ (...) A^^^
Haer^^^ ^ntonino A^^o l'^o Patri Patriae, Consult ter^^^ I (...) imp^te^ it.
T^t H^ L^ Cap ^n 16^ 18.
I had read the same in Tacitus again and again but yet it did not occur to me
at that time. (...) an ingen^us friend of that University suggested to me, that
the (...) of the Ba^a^ (...) C^g^ were oftener than once ^ntly mentioned by
Tacitus, which I then re^ l'^fted, and ^u^d to be true C^ were the people about
(...) s^e^ wrote (...) and Ca^i by Pli^y, lib IV C XVII.


There is an interupt (...) discovered at L^ter, in the cou^y of Durham, that
seems by the letters to read COH VARDIOR -- R -- EQ ^rs Va^d^run. Equita^. But
of the Vardis, The Va^ seem to be the (...) III. Ca 22 a people of Da^ma^, who
(...) them P^ (...) ^ta^a^ Bran^a^ Bran^^er^, and at P^astio, and the T^ (...)
R. GALE.
I must still ^^y, as I was at first ready to ^ay of the C^gernt,

Di^ quibus in terr^^.

I am, etc. JOHN HORSLEY.


From Mr Horsley to Roger Gale, Esquire
10th December, 1730.
I have often found you to be a true oracle upon other occasions, but now I
believe you will prove to be so, in an instance where I little expected it. I
remember in one of your letters, you were so kind as to foretell that I should
one time or other find out the true reading of an inscription discovered at
Lanchester, in the county of Durham. I confess I was never so much ^ed to ^pect
you to be a false prophet on any other occasion, and yet now I believe, that
contrary to my own expectation, you will be found a true one even in this. I have
been at the expense of bringing the altar to Morpeto, on which the inscription
is to which I refer; this has given me in opportunity of setting the one broken
piece of it on the other, and examining the whole Inscription with the greatest
nicety and care: by this means I have discovered the remains of a letter or two
which had escaped me before, and now I read it Jovi Optimo Maximo Vexil^at^
C^tio (perhaps Primae) Vardulorum Equitum (or Equestris) votum solvit
libentissime merito: this reading, which seems to lie pretty much out of the
way, I have found out by the help of another lucky discovery, I mean a stone
found not long ago at Riechester, which I have also got into my own possession;
a draught of which, and the fair and beautiful inscription upon it, I have sent
you enclosed, as also a copy of that at Lanchester.

I suppose S^^t at the end of the find line to be Socio, and to mean the same
as Comiti The three last lines I read Tribu^s Colortis Primae Vardulorum cum
Commilitonibus Crancis Votum Deo Templum a S^l^ extractum. The remains at the
end of the 6th line will suit an n as well as an m, which made me also think of
Contabernalibus, or some such thing. The Varduli Cranei, though this latter
name be usually wrote with a G at the beginning, are two neighboring people in
Spain. The form of the expression in the Lanchester inscription I suppose to be
parallel to the Biturix C^^s in one at York. I see no reason why Varduli Cranei
may not pass as current as Cubi Bitur^ges. which we have both in Pliny and the
aforesaid inscription. I think Templam or Temple and Sol^t, or some such words,
are most likely to be those which are wanting at the end of the two last lines.

I am, Sir, ^urs, etc. JOHN HORSLEY.


An Answer to the preceding Letter by Roger Gale, Esquire
SIR, 21st December, 1730.
A letter from you is always extremely acceptable, since it never fails of
bringing its entertainment along with it. I never pretended Ex Tripode loqui,
and if I should, my responses would have no more weight than those of the
oracles, always dubious, oftener false than true. I am much afraid, what you
charge me with in your last, will come out wrong, though your conjectures are
very ingenious. As you have communicated them to me, I doubt not but you will
give me leave freely to send you my thoughts upon them.

As for the O. M, they can have been nothing but the remains of Jovi Optimo
Maximo, and perhaps what follows is the remains of Vexillatio, though I am not
without my scruples as to that. In the first place, I do not remember I ever
met with such an inscription as Vexillatio Cohortis or Cohortium, though
frequently with Vexillatio Legionis, which I take to imply a detachment sent
off from the Legion under a Vexillum, where we meet with those Vexillationes
Leg. II. VI. XX. upon the wall in Scotland.

Secondly, Vexillatio Equitum is generally taken for Cohors Equitum, but as
there might be a detachment from a Cohors upon occasion, as well as from a
Legion, I will not insist upon that. Vardulorum is very plain upon this altar,
though a name hitherto unknown in Britain I wish the Cran^orum was as much out
of dispute for though the Or that follow Vardul are the initials of that word,
yet I cannot think they belong to Vardulorum, as you read them, because we find
but one nation of the Varduli in Spain, and consequently no occasion of the
additional Cranei to distinguish them from any of their neighbors that might
have the same appellation. Pomponius Mela expressly says, the Varduli Gens Una,
in France, were two nations of the Bituriges, the one therefore was called the
Bituriges Cubi, the other the Bituriges Vi^isci. As for the Cranei upon the
Riechester ^ne, I shall show you by and by, that it is quite another thing: to
this I am obliged to add, that I cannot find among my old Geographers, such a
people as the Cranei or Granei in Spain, or any where else; therefore should be
glad to know where you met with them.

In the Riechester Inscription, which is indeed very beautiful, the word Soc in
the first line is certainly pro^ecio Gruter. p XXII. 12. gives us an
inscription DIM et Soli Socio, which is read Deo In^to Mat^rae et Soli Socio;
the compliment is paid to the Emperor in yours, by giving him the Sua for his
companion, as that associates him with the God Mithras, and is he appears upon
the medals of Constantine the Great and others with the legend of S^li Invicto
Comit^. There is no further difficulty in it till we come to the sixth line,
where the Cohors Prima Vardu^^rum shows (...) beyond exception: the Cum Con I
read with the beginning of the seventh line, C^m Cons^, a word not very common,
but you have it in Julius Capi^^linus's Life of Gora^, ch^ 14 Sacrati Co^nes,
im etiam (...) Con^ecra^, etc. that is, ^jusdem Sacrament^ M^tar, Parti^^e,
than which nothing can be more apposite, and leaves no room for the Cranes The
re^t I take to have been V. DE. SVO. the fragment after the letter E seeming to
be rather the top of an S than the side of an O; besides which, the repetition
of Deo, the first word in the inscription, would have been an unnecessary
tautology, or as the letter, De suo are not enough to fill up the remainder of
the line, they may have been de sua imp^n^, or de sua pec. de sua impe^ta, or
de sua pecuma, both of which do frequently occur in inscriptions. Or it the
relics of the last letter are part of a C. it may have been DEC. PVBL Decreto
Publico, and what is lost in the last line EXTRVCTVM DE DIC. E^tructum De^t,
and nothing less than a Temple built, that had been vowed for the health and
safety of the Emperor.

I enquired the other day of Mr Ward after your Britannia Romana, and am glad
to hear it is in such forwardness, as you confirm it to be in your letter. I
sent him an engraving of the Ba^ head for you, very well performed by Mr
Virtue, of which I suppose he has given you an account.

I am, Sir, yours, etc. R. GALE.


Extract of a Letter from Mr Horsley to Roger Gale, Esquire
SIR, 1st January, 173^.
I confess your letter shocked my assurance, though I still hope my conjecture
will not be quite overthrown. The ^ra^ ^a^, or Granii, as I think it is
sometimes written, are a people not far from the V^ ^ed by Pliny and others.
These were the people I meant and thought of. The change fr^ ^ranei to Cranei
is very easy; the word Consecranei no where occurs in inscriptions, and ^ce of
its being used till after the time of this inscription; but I (...) this to beg
^ac^ (...) the delay till I return home, when I shall re-examine the Re^ (...)
I believe it has been built up in the wall of some Temple, and has brought to
my mind a passage in Horace, Lib 2. O^ 1^ l. 3^ -- Redd^re victimas
Edemque votitam mene^nto,
No^ humilem seriemus agnam.


I ask pardon for haste and confusion; and am, Sir, etc. JOHN HORSLEY.


Answer to the same by Mr Gale.
SIR, London, 16th January, 1730/1.
The ^a^ were a small people, situated at the mouth of the river Minius, now
called M^ in Spain, upon the great western ocean, at least 250 miles from the
confines of the Varduli, now the province of Cu^puscea, in the bottom of the
Bay of Biscay, in the very eastern parts of Spain, with several nations
interjacent; so that they cannot be said to be people not far distan one from
the other, and I never imagined they were your Cranei till the receipt of your
last letter. These Cranei never have as yet occurred in any inscription more
than my Consecrani^; but that is warranted by Julius Capitolinus, a good
author, and by a just and proper signification of the word concurring. I
believe you cannot produce any phrase in author or inscription* parallel to
Tribunus Cohortis I Vardulorum cum Commilitonibus Craneis suis, allowing even
Cranei to have been the name of a people, whereas the other reading is plain
and easy; and though Julius Capitolinus lived after the age of this inscription
several years, that is no proof that the word Consecran^i was not in use before
he wrote; it was a military expression and little used perhaps out of the camp.
I hope you will pardon the freedom that has been extorted from me, by a
conviction of my being in the right as to this criticism; and am,

Sir, etc. R. GALE.


Mr Horsley to Roger Gale, Esquire
SIR, Morpeth, 22d January, 17^^/^^.
My absence from home was longer than I designed, and since my return have been
prevented examining originals till this morning: this has occasioned a delay of
the fuller answer I intended and promised. I received the Riechester
inscription just before the press came to the other inscriptions belonging to
the same place, and having no great fondness for an appendix, I immediately
dispatched to London some short observations on it, in order to their being
printed, and inserted in their proper place; so that before I received your
first letter, it was too late to make any alteration there: however I must beg
leave to take notice of your conjecture, either in the preface or some other
proper place. Mr Ward intends a letter to me, by way of review of all the
observations, and there is a proper space left for that letter, in order to its
being inserted at the end of the observations on the second Book of the
Britannia Romana. This letter will be instead of an appendix, There is no
notice taken of this in Mr Ward's letter, but Mr Horsley in all probability
reprinted his observations on this inscription. See his Brit. Romans p. 241, 242.

R. G.
and any new discoveries and thoughts will. I believe, be there inserted. I
shall communicate yours to him on this occasion, unless you rather choose to
speak to him yourself: though I have not wholly abandoned my first conjecture,
yet I have a good opinion of yours, and no doubt, considering how natural it is
to have a partial regard for our own offspring, yours will have the preference
much more in the esteem of others.

I have carefully and impartially examined all the letters on the stone, and am
convinced that the last visible, though imperfect letter in the 6th line, has
been an N, which favors your opinion. I have with my compasses compared the
breadth of this letter, with that of all the M's and N's on the stone, and find
that it agrees pretty well with the stated or usual breadth of the N, but
always falls sensibly short of the breadth of the M. This ought to have been
regarded in the copy, though whether it be or not, with sufficient accuracy, is
more than I am sure of. The addition of SE at the end of the line, would bring
it to an equal length with most of the rest; nor have I in this review observed
any thing on the stone, which is in the least unfavourable to your opinion. On
the whole, I strongly incline to think you must be in the right, and that my
own conjecture must have the honor to be overthrown by so good a hand as your
own, and the Lanchester inscription reduced to its primitive state of confusion
and darkness.

The remains of the letter at the end of the last line but one, may be those of
a C, but are likest those of an O, the shape and position will by no means
allow it to be the top of an S; it is thus DEC, but more perfectly round than I
have here drawn it I have compared it carefully with the S. the C and the O in
the inscription, and find that it suits the last best, may do for the second,
but not at all for the first.

To save the seeming unnecessary repetition of the word Deo, I was at first
sight thinking of De^ones, and believe have mentioned that conjecture in my
observants; but how it may answer or please I know not. Not mentioned in the
printed observ^ -- R G.
The stone is only regular and dressed on the face, a^ no doubt has been
inserted in the wall of the Aedes Vo^i^a. ^o^ Ca^. ^occ^


I return you hearty thanks for your favor of the Bath head, and ^ll other
instances of your respect and friendship undeserved to,

Sir, yours, etc. JOHN HORSLEY.


Mr Horsley to Roger Gale, Esquire
SIR,
I was lately favored with a letter from Baron Clerk, who entirely approves of
your conjecture about the w^d ^an^. I would gladly have had the CR in the
Lanchester in^r or to have been the (...) letters in CONSECR. for Con^ran^rum,
but I doubt the orig^. will not ^w it.

I am yours, etc. JOHN HORSLEY.



In the front of a new-built house, about a quarter of a mile to the south of
the station, is a sculpture (discovered here) having a tree in the center, a
heart on one side, and a crescent on the other, of but indifferent workmanship.
The remains of an Hypocaust has lately been opened, and three pillars obtained
therefrom, which supported the upper floor. The altar before mentioned to be
preserved in Elsden church was found here.

This station takes its name of Bremenium, as is presumed, from being Castrum
in Rupe, which is the true description of its site, it being placed on the
brow of a steep and rocky hill, or rather, as Camden calls it, a rocky
mountain, commanding the pass of Reedsdale. On every hand the prospect is
horrible, except the narrow valley, watered by the Reed, which is looked down
upon from this rugged eminence. -- How little improvement this country has
experienced since the union, notwithstanding the great advances husbandry has
made northward, Be^des the several Roman Antiquities noticed in the text, in Mr
Horsley's Works the following are (...).

XCIV A (...) H^ ag^ Honoratus Tribu^. -- This stone was lately dug up at R^r,
the time (...) ar^ the letters of the inscription are rude and rough, it is a
sepul^al ^nument ere^ by (...) one ^noratus for one Her^rus, that had been
brought up (...) the ^ative case, to Permagora must be so too. There is no
appearance of an E^ at the end ^f the same name, though there is room enough
for it; and therefore this is pr^ the (...) after the Greek manner. ^a^s
^n^ratus Tri^ of the first Cohort of the (...) ^ned in an inscription found at
Gresters, near Walwick on the wa^. And the ^e Cohort was also at R^gram, as
appears from another inscription. The face (...) where the inscription ^s
appears of a red color, different from the rest of the stone It is s^ ^ke the
ef^est of fire, that I know not what else to ascribe it to. The back and sides
of the stones are so (...) and rugged, and in all respects of such a form, as
to make it evident, that it (...) thee as that the face of the stone only was
designed to be visible; and consequently a fire could not have the same effect
upon the other sides, which were hid in the w^.

XCIV B^ Deo Her^lents.

The learned Dr G^ co^ctures that Her^nt is the same as Herculi, the
termination ent^ being on ^a metap^mus in declaring the name Hercules after the
Greek manner, as in the words (...), etc. Something like this may be seen ^n
other ^pt as (...) for C^r^sae in Re^e^s Syntagma Inscrip. p. 909. This ingen^
co^e^ is also confirmed by the instance of Her^agoras in the preceding
inscription, and natura^y rem^nds us of the after erected to Hercules with the
Greek inscription upon it, now at (...) Mr Ward chooses to read this interuption
thus, Deo Herculi ^cius En^. The name Entia is ^med in Crater. The Club of
Her^ules is on one side of the altar, Cor^rage, R^, and R^rester, are all
stations upon the military way called Er^in street.

XCIV. C. This is deposited in the Library at Durham.

DEO INVICTO. SOLI SOC --
SACRVM ^O SALVTE ET --
INCOLVMITATE IMP. CAES --
M. AVRELI ANTONINI. PL^FFLIC.
AVG -- L. CAECIL^VS OPTAT
TRIB COH. I. VARDVL. CVM CoN --
CRANEIS. VOTVM DEO
A SOLO EXTRVCT.
Deo Invicto soli socio sacrum pro salute et incolumitate Imperatoris Caesaris
Marci Aurelii Antonini Pi^ selici Augusti Lucaus Caecilius Optatus Tribunus
Cohortis Primae Vardulorum cum consecrantis votum deo Templum^ solo extructum.

The stone with this ^r and curious inscription was dug up at Riechester. The
back part of it is rude and undressed; which manifestly shows it to have been
built up, in some wall; perhaps of a temple. On the face of the stone where the
inscription is cut, there appears in two or three places the plain marks of
fire; the same appearance which I observed on another of these stones found in
this place. The letters of the inscription are well cut, and all of them that
remain are still very fair and distinct; only a piece of stone is broken off at
one corner, which cannot yet be retrieved; and with it a small part of the
inscription is lost, the addition of Socio to In^cto Soli deserves a remark.
Soli Comitt is frequent on medals, and I imagine Soli socio to have much the
same meaning. The Antonine for whose safety this was vowed, must have been
either Commodus or Caracalla. Commodus was the first who assumed the conjoined
titles of Pius and F^li^, but then in inscriptions to him there is usually some
other distinguishing title; whereas the form of the names here is such, as is
usually ascribed to Caracalla. This suits well enough with the conjecture of
his being the Author of the Itinerary; and with the assigned Roman limits at
the peace of Severus and Caracalla; since it appears from hence, that
Riechester, the undoubted Bremenium, was possessed by the Romans in the reign
of Caracalla, and by the erecting this new Temple, that they had no
apprehensions of being soon dislodged from this station: though probably it was
then the boundary. The inscription was erected by Luctus Caecilius Optatus,
Tribune of the first Cohort of the Varduli. The great distance between the G
and the L in the fifth line, that is, between the last letter of the Emperor's
name, and the first of the Tribune's, is very remarkable. The Varduli were a
people of Hispania Citerior, situated not far from the west end of the
Pyrenaean Mountains. There are another people in Hispanta Citertor usually
named Grovi^ or sometimes Gronii. At the first sight of this inscription, I
concluded that Graneis must be the name of the same people, for C and G are
often interchanged; and Granei or Granii looked like the name Grovis or Gronii,
and as I apprehended bid fair to be truer than either. I therefore read cum
commilitonibus (or contubernalibus) Grane^s; but I now with pleasure resign
this conjecture, for a better of the learned and sagacious Mr Gale, which he
imparted to me. "In the Riechester Inscription (says he) which is indeed very
beautiful, the letters SOC in the first line are certainly for Socio. Gruter p.
xxii. gives us an inscription D. I. M. ET SOLI, SOCIO, which is read Deo
in^icto Mithrae et Soli Socio. In the Riechester inscription, the complement is
paid to the Emperor by given him the Sun for his companion, as this in Gruter
associates him with the God Mithras, and as he appears upon the medals of
Constantine and others with the legend Soli invicto Comiti, there is no further
difficulty till we come at the sixth line, where the Cohors Prima Varduloram,
shows itself beyond exception. The Cum Con, I read with the beginning of the
seventh line Cum Consecraneis. The word Consecranei Devoted to the same service
or engaged in the same cause.
is not very common, but we have in Julius Capit^nus, Gord. c. 14. Sacrati
comm^tone ^mo etiam Cors^cranei, i. e. ejusdem Sacramenti Militaris participes;
than which nothing can be more apposite. Since the receipt of this letter from
Mr Gale, I have re-examined the original; and am convinced that it has been an
N at the end of the sixth line, for the breadth of the letter, which may
certainly be determined from the visible tops of both the vertical strokes, is
exactly the same with the breadth of the other N's in this inscription, but
sensibly less than the breadth of any M in the whole. The imperfect letter at
the end of the seventh line, seems to have been an O, though the repetition of
the word Deo appears harsh and uncommon. If we could suppose it to have been a
C, Mr Gale would read DECR. PVB. for decreto Publico. As it is probable that
last line has concluded with the usual S. L. M. so unless we suppose Temp^ for
Templum (with which votum agrees) to have stood at the end of the seventh line,
there will be no room for it at all. Temples were frequently vowed as well as
Altars, and we have one remarkable instance more in this collection of a
Temple. Pro satute domni divinae. This inscription also gives us a certain
discovery of a new auxiliary Cohort in Britain: and either this, or an
Equestrian Cohort of the same people, seems to be mentioned in a Du^^^
inscription.

XCIV. (E) This is a small and monstrous rude figure of Silvanus, lately found
at the same place. The breasts are two rude circular lines, and the eyes two
such holes. The nose and mouth are expressed on the stone by three cross cuts,
he seems to have a Patera in his left hand, though figures in a sacrificing
posture generally hold it in the right.

XCVI. Silvano Pan^eo pro^ Ra^ni Tribuni et Laculae e^us Ey^chus libertus
Consulis Votum S^ likens Merit^.

This and the following inscription, together with several coins have been
lately dug up at Riechester. This altar was found near the north-west corner of
the fort, with the face downward. The first words in it are plainly Sivano
Pantheo. It is common now to give the name of Pantheus to the figure of any
God, who has the Symbols of other Gods joined with his own, and in some
inscriptions Panthe^ is spoken of a particular God. Thus we have in Gruter
Signum Panthei Testaments feri^, and Signum Pantheum sua Pecunia, D. D. As also
Panthe^ Aug. likewise Hereculi Mercurio et Silva^ ^rum et o^ Pantheo, and Dion
informs us, that Dr^illa, was called Parthea, from the variety of divine
honors that her brother Caligula ordered to be paid to her after her death. A
late ingenious friend conjectured, that the expression Silvano Pantheo might
denote the whole groupe of Silvan deities Faunique Satyrique et menticelae
Silvani
F^ conque deos umbosaque Silva feranque
Ru^ Ha^et.


The altar has been erected for the safety of Rufinus the Tribuni, and his wife
Lucilla by Ethych^ a freedman of the Consul. This Rufinus, no doubt, had at
that time the command of the garrison here: and ^s different both from the
Tribune mentioned in a forgoing inscription, and in that which follows.

A conjecture arises that Pantheos is compounded with the Latin name Pan, and
Theos (Greek De^; and this is in some degree supported by the Grecian
declensions used in the foregoing inscriptions.

XCVII. Pa^ Ae^ Fra^nu^ Tribanus.

This inscription resembles the centurial kind, and contains nothing material
in it, but the name of the Tribune Era^s It was found near the western rampart
of the station, not far from the spot where the foregoing altar was dug up.

Several of the coins found lately at this station were of Marcus Aurelius.
This confirms to us, that the Romans were about that time possessed of this and
the neighboring stations; and makes it more probable, that the Artonine
mentioned in an inscription at Risingham, might be Mar^us Aurelius: and that
Calparnius Agr^a his Legate, was the person whose names have been erased out of
the inscription found at E^sdon. It is the observation of the great Mr A^a^n,
"that one finds as many figures of the excellent Emperor Marcus Aurelius, as of
all the ^est together."


will appear by comparing the description given of it by Camden two centuries
ago, with its present state. There are hills hard by so boggy, and standing
with water on their summits, that no horsemen are able to ride through them.
And again, Mountainous desert and impossable, such as this tract is.

Camden preserves this Inscription: D. R. S.
DVPL N. EXPLOR
BREMEN. ARAM.
INSTITVERVNT
N. EIVS C CAEP
CHARITINO TRIB
V. S. L. M.
Deae Romae sacrum Duplares Numeri exploratorum Bremenii Aram instituerunt
Numini ejus Caio Caepione Charitino Tribuno votum solverunt libenter merito.

Mr Horsley's remarks on this altar are as follow. The original was removed to
Connington. The plain and distinct mention of Bremenium upon this large altar
does strongly argue Riechester to be the place. The implication and proper cut
of the letters, which is neglected in Camden, I have endeavored to supply from
the original. No body that I know of, has given a satisfactory explication of
the D. R. S. at the top: I think it plain that they are to be read Deae Romae
sacrum. That they made a Goddess of Rome, and erected altars and temples to
her, needs no proof to those who have any acquaintance with medals and other
Roman Antiquities. There is a curious altar at Elenborough, erected Genio Loci
Fortunae Reduci Romae Aeterne, etc. I once thought of Diis Romany sacrum: but
this suits not with Numini ejus in the body of the inscription; for which
reason the learned Dr Gales reading Deabus Rumabus Sacrum cannot be admitted.
The altar then is sacred to the Goddess Rome, erected by a Duplares of a
detachment of Exploratores or scouts at Bremenium, under the command of Caius
Caepio Charitinus the Tribune. Caepio is a consular name, and we read in the
Notitiae, of a Praefectus Numeri exploratorum Lavatris. Whether they were the
same with these, I will not undertake to determine. The Duplares were soldiers,
who had a double allowance of corn, of which a part of the Roman soldiers pay
consisted. The Exploratores were, like our scouts, sent out to discover the
enemy or their country. When they were in garrison, it is probable they were
generally placed, in the more advanced stations, or such as were most
conveniently situated for prospect and discovering the first approach of the
enemy; as also for guarding the passes against their inroads.

Camden adds, that Ptolomy speaking of Bremenium, places it in this very site,
and part of the country; and from thence Antonine begins his first journey in
Britain, as from the utmost limit of the Roman province at that time. When the
barbarous nations had broken through the wall of Antoninus Pius, and would in
consequence hurry over and lay waste all the country before them, the wall of
Hadrian laying neglected to the time of Severus, we may necessarily admit that
this station was regarded as the limit of the Empire, from whence the old
Itinerary, which bears the title of Antonine's, began, viz. a Limitis. The
construction given it, to imply a Vallo, is only a gloss put on it by the
transcriber.

Mr Collier communicated to me the drawing of the following Sculpture and
Inscription, lately found at this station, and now in the possession of the
Rev. Mr Jolly. It never was published. He informed me it was found near the
eastern entrance into the station, is about four feet nine inches in length,
and two feet three inches in breadth.



Mr Wallis says, there is nothing more, worthy of remark, by the alpine streams
of Reed and North Tyne. I wish I could have been as readily transported from
Riechester to Wark, as I transmit the reader on the feathers of the gray goose
wing: we did not pursue the Reed any further northward, though informed, that
near to Bridhope Crag, a little above Riechester, there are two large square
entrenchments, with two openings on every side, each defended by an outward
mole of an oblong form, at the distance of six yards from the aperture: the
description given of them, shows they are similar to the large entrenchment on
Stainmore, at Roy Cross, Vide Excursions to the Lakes in Westmoreland and
Cumberland, where a plate of that entrenchment is given.
which is attributed to the English under William the Conqueror, on the
defection of Cumberland and Northumberland, who were supported by the Scotch
Monarch.

NUNWICK,
the seat of Sir Lancelot Allgood, which appears so beautiful from Chipchase,
is equally pleasing upon a nearer approach: the house is modern, of a fair
freestone, sheltered from the west by a fine grove, and seated near the
confluence of Symondburn with the river Tyne; It was formerly the possession of
the Herons of Chipchase; was sold by Sir Harry Heron to Robert Allgood. Esquire
whose heiress married the present owner, a descendant of the Brandon White
House family.

Wallis.
from the eastern terrace a delightful prospect opens, commanding a fine view
of Chipchase on the one hand, and the variegated vale of Symondburn on the
other; the banks of the stream are romantic and wild, and the wastes which
terminate the prospect are at an agreeable distance.

Near Nunwick, some years ago, were the remains of a monument, by most writers
termed British, consisting of five natural stone pillars, placed in circular
order, near eight feet in height, and twenty feet in girt; the area which they
formed, was ninety feet in circumference. Whether the interstices were
heretofore filled up with stones of a smaller size, to compose a circle, which
on the advance of cultivation were removed, we have no evidence: Bishop Gibson
only speaks of them as in the state described. I have great doubt, whether this
was a temple or place of convocation of the Druids, or not: I am rather
inclined to believe, such as are composed of a small number of stones are
Danish monuments, and memorials of some public act of that people. Where the
circle is uniform, the column, to which it is conceived the victims were bound,
is perfect, or to be distinguished; and the recess, forming the Sanctus, or
place of the altar, is remaining, like those in Cumberland and Angl^sea: it is
not to be doubted the Druids were their constructors; that they were their
places of convocation; and as every public act of those Lawgivers was preceded
by holy rites and sacrifice, it may with propriety be said, they were places
formed for a mixed appropriation, for acts civil and religious.

SYMONDBURN
is placed on a fine eminence, but has little that is remarkable to detain the
traveller. Symondburn is remarkable for being the largest parish in the
diocese, extending northward from Ch^llerford Bridge to Liddesdale in Scotland,
a space of 32 measured miles: in which are only two chapels of ease, Bellingham
and Falstone.

The old Rectory-house was built by Mr Allgood, grandfather to Sir Lancelot;
the following inscription still remaining over the entrance, in memory of it,
much injured by the weather: Non tam sibi, quam successoribus suis,
Hoc aecificium extruxit: Major
Allgood, anno mirabili 1666.
Nunc mea, mox hujus, sed postea nescio cujus.


By the pulpit and window at the east end of the south aile, is the effigies in
stone of one of the ancient family of the Ridleys, the Rev. Mr Cuthbert Ridley,
Rector of this parish, in a supplicatory attitude, on his knees, venerable with
years; a ruff about his neck, the dress of that age. Near him are three of his
family, sculptured in stone likewise; one at the south corner of the window, in
the same attitude; his dress a straight-bodied coat, a sword, and a cloak
loosely cast over his shoulders, the head broken off; before him the following
inscription, under the bottom of the window: SENSUS VIVUS
RECORDOR MISERECORDIAM
DEI ERIPIENTIS EX HAC VITA
IN VITAM AETERNAM ALBANIUM
RIDLEY, FILIUM CUTHBERTI RIDLEY,
MISERI PECCATORIS ANNO DOM. 1625
Above this stone figure, is another of a child, on the south side of the
window, kneeling. The effig^s of one of somewhat riper age is in the bottom of
the window, recumbent, with this m^ inscription underneath: DEFECTUS MEMORIAE

On the north side of the chancel, is the burial-place of the family of
Allgood; above it a mural monument of marble, with the following inscription:
Near this place lies the body of the Revd. Mr Major Allgood, M. A. Rector of
this parish, eldest son of Lancelot Allgood, Esquire Escheator for this county of
Northumberland, lineally descended from John Allgood of Salherne in the county
of Devon Esquire who attended John Duke of Lancaster in his Expedition to Spain,
against the pretended King of Castile Anno 1386, the 9th of Richard 2d. He died
the 30th day of December 1696 aged 59. Also the Body of Mary, relict of the
above Major Allgood Daughter of the Revd. Mr John Pie Rector of Morpeth in this
county; she died the 28th day of Feb. 1712 aged 60, and left Issue 3 Sons, and
a Daughters viz Isaac Major. Lancelot, Mary and Margaret Also the body of Isaac
Allgood of Brandon White house, Esquire eldest son of Major Allgood And Mary his
wife aforesaid, Who died the 9th day of July 1725 aged 42 Also the body of
Lancelot second son of Lancelot Allgood Esquire who died the 6th day of September
1747 Aged two years and nine months.

On the south side of the chancel, within the communion rails, is a flat
funeral stone, to the memory of Giles Heron of Wark, in this parish, interred
1684, who by industry and extreme parc money acquired the sum of 800 l. which he
left by will, dated 23d September, 1679, for the relief of the poor of this
parish, the maintenance of a School master at Wark, and the binding cut the
poor children apprentices; his Trustees purchasing after his death the estate
of Tecket, adjoining to the Rectory Glebe, now let for 72 l. per annum.

Wallis.
The Rectory is one of the most valuable in the North, is presented to by the
Crown, and was formerly the possession of Lord Derwentwater. The church has
lately been repaired, and retains no other remarkable monuments than those
mentioned in the notes.

In March, 1735, as the workmen were pulling down the old kitchen of the
Rectory-house, a square stone was discovered, nine or ten inches each way, but
the inscription was obliterated at one end, occasioned, as one may suppose, by
the workmen's tools, either when they built or pulled down the kitchen. The
letters are three inches long. It may possibly be in the possession of Dr Scot,
the present Rector, as it was in that of Mr Wastell, the late Rector, in 1735.
Mr Horsley takes notice of VLPIVS and SABINVS, two Roman Lieutenants, sent
against the Britains, but says, he never heard of any inscriptions found
relating either of them.



In the Monasticon we are told, King Edward taking displeasure at Anthony Beck,
then Bishop of Durham, dismembered this church from that See. It was afterward
in the possession of the D'Arcys in the reign of King Edward III. John D'Arcy,
at his death, left it to Queen Philippa, who gave it to Windsor College.

Mr Wallis speaks of a remarkable Scull dug up within the walls of the church:
On the back part of it was the figure of a large scallop shell: at one of the
auditories, the figure of a torcular shell, like a screw. It is surprising no
Naturalist has attended to this wonderful phenomenon. Mr Wallis himself, I
should have apprehended, would not have left this great curiosity so slightly
treated of. He does not even say, whether these impressions were sculptured, or
adhesions of petrified matter. In either case, it would have gratified the
virtuoso to have had a perfect description. We read of that degree of
wantonness and inhumanity, that the sculls of enemies, at public festivals,
were used for drinking Cups. Was this ornamented with sculpture, it would lead
to an apprehension it was once employed in such unhallowed rites. If these were
petrifactions, it would still be more wonderful.

This introduces to my mind a hasty idea, of petrifactions being esteemed a
testimony of an universal deluge. It has been insisted upon by many learned
men, but the discoveries hitherto made in that branch are in no wise
convincing. Moses had his learning from the Egyptians; Mr Bryant has amply
displayed their knowledge of that great event: I dare not make strictures on
that learned work; but opinion is fond of liberty. All the petrifactions I have
seen in the various collections, do not prevail to fix my judgment in favor of
such testimony. In the first chapter of Genesis, we see the grand work of
creation classed in six progressive orders. In the figures of Eastern language,
it is given under a diurnal arrangement. By such expression, I presume, we are
not to be confined in our idea of the work, to those short periods: the works
of Providence are wonderful to the highest degree, in a course of nature; why
should we render them still more miraculous, and less credible, by holding to
the very letter of the book of Genesis, without giving a latitude to the
expression. So much of miracle, and so little of reason, in modern
dissertations, occasions much infidelity. We see plainly the work of the divine
Architect was progressive: let us presume each day means an age, in which, by a
natural and progressive course, "the fruit tree yielding fruit after its kind,
whose seed is in itself," might arrive to its maturity, from the original
stamina the great Creator ordained in the beginning. It was not till the third
era, that the dry land appeared; all before was deluged. Here is a period
then, in which all those substances which we find have left their testimony in
petrifaction, might rest upon the highest hills, when at the command of their
God, the mountains heaved themselves up from the bosom of the deep. The
shifting of vast sands, the falling of mighty precipices rent by earthquakes,
mining in various countries, and eruptions of volcanoes, have brought to light
those materials which are lodged very deep in the earth, and yet none of them
have produced any evidence of the destruction of the human race, by
petrifactions of parts peculiar to mankind, their implements or utensils, of
which gold would not decay, erections, or other memorials of their antediluvian
existence. To enter at large into this disquisition, would lead to a separate
work; it shall suffice at this time to say, that, if there were no other
testimonies existing than petrifactions, to prove this great event, we should
still depend upon implicit faith concerning it. To return:

The church of Symondburn has two dependant chapels, Bellingham and Falston:
the parish is between thirty and forty miles in length, extending to
Liddesdale, in Scotland. There is within this district, between Falston and the
extreme boundary, an extensive tract of country where, till within the last
century, conversion had scarce reached, or the benefits of religion and the
rites of the English church been promulged, except in the collection of tithes.

Symondburn Castle was demolished by the country people, in vain researches for
treasure: a small part was lately repaired, with two angular turrets, as an
ornamental object on the landscape.

We now took the road to Rothbury: the first object that attracted our
attention, after passing the seat of Mr Riddle, was a tower on a lofty
eminence, commanding an extensive prospect, appertaining to Mr Delaval's estate
of Bavington; the edifice ugly to a degree.

We approached

BAVINGTON,
the ancient Family-house of the Shaftoes, William Shaftoe 33 King Edward I.
William 47 King Edward III. William 16 King Richard II. Alexander 5 King Henry
V. William 5 King Edward IV. John 6 King Edward VI. William 19 King Charles I.
William 1 King George I.
Wallis.
now the seat of George Shaftoe Delaval, Esquire situate on a rising ground, and
commanding a southern prospect, in which a fine canal, with rising plantations,
are the chief ornaments: Nature has given but few beauties to the landscape.

CAPHEATON
was the next place we visited, the ancient possession of the Swinburns, Sir
Thomas Swinburn 6 King Henry IV. He, with Lord Berkley and Henry May, Esquire took
14 ships belonging the French, carrying provisions to Milford harbor, 1405.
Sir William Swinburn 12 King Henry VI. Sir John 4 King Edward IV. Sir John,
Member for Northumberland 1 Queen Mary. Sir Thomas 10 Queen Elizabeth. High
Sheriff 4 King Charles I. William Swinburn, Esquire 14 King Charles I. His estate
sequestered by Parliament. Sir John, created a Baronet 12 Charles II. Sir John,
married Mary the daughter of Anthony Englefield. Sir John, his son, died
unmarried, 1762. Sir Edward, his brother, present possessor.
Wallis.
and now the seat of Sir Edward Swinburn. This mansion was formerly of the
castle form, and Leland says, was a fair building, moted round. The present
house is built in the taste which prevailed in the time of the Charles's; the
pleasure grounds are laid out in an agreeable manner; the tufts of trees which
are scattered over the lands, give a singular beauty to the scene. Sir John,
the ancestor of the present Sir Edward, married the daughter of Sir Henry
Lawson, of Brough, in Yorkshire, and had by her thirty children, of whom
eighteen arrived at maturity. Wallis, page 535.


Many Roman antiquities have been discovered here, of which Mr Wallis gives a
particular account. 1. A sympullum, silver, 26 oz. (This was a cup used in
sacrifices.)

2. Bottoms of three others.

3. Handles of three, with beautiful figures in relief. Upon one the bust of an
Emperor: two smaller figures, one a Shepherd, holding a crook in his left hand,
with sheep by his side; the other a poor man, looking toward the Emperor in a
supplicating attitude, his body bending, and resting on a staff with both
hands; on his back, a burden. In the middle of the handle is a winged Mercury,
sitting, with a caduceus in his right hand, his left grasping a ball inclining
on the seat; a cock under him, crowing. At the bottom, Diana, in a loose robe,
a spear in her right hand; her left rested on her hip; a dog looking up to her.
Silenus, naked to the feet, holding a bunch of grapes in his right hand, and a
nymphaea or water lily in his left, with a canthera or jolly flagon by him,
swelling to the brim with the juice of the grape. On another handle, a lion, a
stag, and a wild boar: slain for sacrifice. On the third, a Priestess before
the altar sacrificing, holding incense in her right hand, and a thyrsus in the
left; above her head, the bust of an Emperor bearded.

4. Part of a handle, whereon is the figure of Mars in armor: a Flamin before
the altar of a temple, in a grove, sacrificing.

5. A figure of Hercules and Antaeus wrestling, finely executed, the lion's
skin and club laying by them.

6. A Neptune naked to the waist, in a reclining posture, holding a trident in
his right hand and an anchor in his left.

In the time of Agricola the Romans wore beards; not customary from the 454th
year of the city till the Emperor Hadrian.

Wallis.
He says they were found about a mile from the Roman causeway, and seem by the
workmanship to be as ancient as the time of Agricola.

Within view of Capheaton, are the cliffs of

HARNHAM.
This place takes its name from the Herman-street or military road. It was a
strong fortress, defended by nature on one hand with rocks of vast height, and
on the other by a morass: there was no approach to it but by a narrow pass, on
the north, defended by an iron gate, easily maintained. Part of the present
Mansion consists of the remains of the old Castle, and stands on the brink of a
vast precipice. This was the mansion of the Babingtons, (a family as ancient in
Britain as the conquest) and of Colonel Babington, in the reign of Charles II.
Governor of Berwick. His first wife, Catherine, She was the widow of Colonel
George Fenwick, of Brinkburn, and eldest daughter of Sir Arthur Hezelrigge, of
Nosely, in Leicestershire, Bart. by Dorothy Greenville, sister to Robert Lord
Brook.

On a pane of glass in the middle window of the house, is wrote with a diamond,
Philip Babington Sept. 5. 1668. K. Babington. Sep. 7. 1668
And on another pane, How vain is the help of man K. Babington Omnia vanitas
June 9th. 1670.

Wallis.
was under excommunication, for contempt of an ecclesiastical sentence; on
which account, she was not entitled to sepulture in consecrated ground. To
prepare for her interment, a cave was hewn in the rocks of Harnham, below the
foundations of the castle, where her remains now lay in a leaden coffin. -- It
is a disgrace to a polished and enlightened nation, that such a Court has
existence; but to a state professing the rights and religious tenets, and
enjoying the liberty of Britain, it is infamy! A Court where, in despite of
the right of trial by Juries, property is disposed by arbitrary sentence, and
where the grossest acts of inquisitorial Iniquity are daily practiced; such as
private examination of witnesses, and suppression of evidence: and yet this
scab upon the constitution remains uneradicated.

Sir John Babington, of the Harnham family, acquired the crest and motto of his
coat armor by a desperate service under King Henry IV. in France; on his own
petition, he was one of six young Knights sent on this duty; and on his leaving
the royal presence, he brandished his sword, and exclaimed, "Foy est tous." The
crest, a dragon's head; from the mouth the words Foy est tous proceeding. The
Pulleines of Carlton, in Yorkshire, intermarried with this family; and at
Carlton Hall is a pedigree beautifully illuminated.


BELSAY CASTLE,
the seat of Sir William Middleton, was next in view: it is built on an
eminence, part of the old castle remaining. This was part of the family
possessions in the time of King Edward II. The boast of pedigree and honorable
connections appertains to the Middletons; but it is not pertinent to my work,
as that of an Itinerant, to enter upon the field of the Herald, otherwise in
this family, and that of the Babingtons, there is sufficient matter to blazon
an hundred pages. Sir John de Middleton King Edward II.
He forfeited Belsay for being in league with the Scots.

Sir John, to whom the forfeited estates were restored King Henry V. Sir John
12 King Henry VI. Sir John, High Sheriff 1 King Edward IV.
Representative in Parliament for the county in the 12th year of the same reign.

Thomas 6 King Edward VI.
A Commissioner for Enclosures upon the Middle Marches

Robert 10 Queen Elizabeth. Thomas 19 King Charles I.
One of the Parliament's Commissioners for sequestering Lands in Northumberland.

Sir William Middleton, created Baronet 4 King Charles II. Sir John, High
Sheriff 10 Queen Anne. Sir William, Member for Northumberland in six
Parliaments. Sir John Lambart Middleton Sir William, the present possessor.
Wallis. The Lambarts with whom this family had alliance, were of an
illustrious race, and derived royal blood from King William I.

Mr Wallis, in his notes, gives several letters from King Henry VIII. to one of
this family on public duties, but none of them afford any light to history, or
import any special matter of consequence.




On our gaining the summit of the eminence, the country opened upon us
beautifully; we now looked down upon the rich vale where Wallington stands,
extending toward the south-east to a great distance, terminated by a view of
the sea. The country, before we gained this situation, was for some miles
unpleasant, little planted, and ill cultivated; but this prospect recompensed
all the fatigue the eye had endured in the sameness of the preceding passage.
On the left hand

LITTLE HARLE,
the seat of Gawen Aynsley, Esquire presented itself, surrounded with wood. This
was one of the Manors of the Barony of Prudhoe, and appertained to the
Fenwicks. 6 King Edward VI.
By the escheats of the 10th of Queen Elizabeth, it appears then to have become
the possession of the Aynsleys of Shaftoe. In the depth of the vale, we passed

KIRK HARLE,
the seat of Sir William Loraine, a pleasant retirement. It was one of the
Manors of the Barony of Bolbeck, and the possession of Sir Robert de Harle, in
the reign of Edward III. but soon after became the property of the family of
Loraines. From a little pamphlet printed at Newcastle, 1740, being "an account
of the Genealogy" of this family, it appears that Robert, the first of this
family in England, came over with William the Conqueror. For his services in
that expedition, and in the incursion of Malcolm King of Scotland, in the sixth
year of the reign of William Rufus, he was rewarded with several large estates
in Ufferton; East, Middle, and West Harrington, in the county of Durham; and
free fisheries in the river Were. He was a distinguished scholar, and was the
author of some learned works.

The descendants of Robert resided in the county of Durham, until the reign of
King Henry the Fifth, when William Lorrain, by marriage of Johanna, the eldest
daughter and one of the three coheiresses of William Del Strother, of Kirkharle
Tower, became possessed of the Manor and ancient Mansion House of Kirkharle;
from which time the family residence has constantly been at this place. From
William Lorraine, by Johanna his wife, descended Edward -- married Elizabeth
daughter of John Harding, Esquire of Hallinside, in the county of Durham, and died
in the reign of King Richard III. Robert his son -- married Margaret daughter
of Robert Bows, Esquire of the county of Durham. He was slain by the Moss
Troopers. William his son -- married Agnes daughter of Sir William Waters, Knt.
of the county of York. Thomas his son -- married Thomasin daughter of Thomas
Walter, of Whitwell, in the county of Durham, Gentleman. He died in the 15th
year of the reign of King James I. Thomas his son -- married the widow of
Thomas Bewick, Esquire of Close House, in Northumberland. He was a distinguished
scholar, being a great proficient in the Latin, Greek, and Hebrew tongues.
Thomas his son -- married Grace the daughter of Sir William Fenwick, Bart. of
Wallington, in the county of Northumberland. He was created a Baronet in the
26th year of the reign of King Charles II. and died in January 1717. Sir
William his son was educated to the Law in Lincoln's Inn, where he took his
degree of Barrister. He married to his first wife, Elizabeth daughter of Sir
John Laurence, Knt. of the city of London, Alderman, by whom he had no issue.
To his second wife, Anne daughter of Richard Smith, Esquire of Preston, in the
county of Bucks. Sir Charles his younger son succeeded to his title and
estates. He married Margaret the sister of Henry Lambton, Esquire of Lambton, in
the county of Durham. Sir William his son.



One of this house, Robert Loraine, was slain by the Moss Troopers, near his
own mansion; in memory of which a pillar was erected.

We advanced to

WALLINGTON,
the seat of the late Sir Walter Calverley Blackett, Bart. and now of Sir John
Trevelyan, his nephew and heir. This was one of the Manors of the Barony of
Bolbeck, and the ancient possession of the Greys. In the reign of Edward II. it
was held by one of that family called John, usually styled John de Wallington:
it afterward became the inheritance of the Strothers, by marriage of the
heiress of Robert de Wallington: from the Strothers it came to the Fenwicks, by
the marriage of John Fenwick, of Fenwick Tower, with Maria the third daughter
and one of the coheiresses of William Del Strother, and remained in that family
from the reign of King Henry IV. till Sir John Fenwick sold it to Sir William
Blackett in the reign of King William III. Sir John de Fenwick King Henry IV.
Sir John 12 King Henry VI. Sir Henry 28 King Henry VI. Sir John 16 King Henry
VIII. Sir William, High Sheriff of Northumberland 20 and 31 Q. Elizabeth. Sir
John, High Sheriff 17 King James I. Created a Baronet 9th of June 4 King
Charles I. 1628. Member of Parliament for the county of Northumberland 17 King
Charles I.
His son John was slain at the battle of Marston Moor.

Sir William 8 King Charles II.
Representative in Parliament for the county of Northumberland.

Sir John, executed on Tower Hill 8 King William III. 1696.



Wallington House is a handsome stone structure, but from the mode of
architecture, does not seem to take its date in this century. Before the south
front is a pretty pasture ground, inclining to the brook of Wansbeck: at the
east front is the grand approach, having a circular coach road, with a
beautiful green plot, parterres, and flowering shrubs: plantations and covered
walks close it to the north, and conceal the offices: the gardens seem well
disposed, on a warm inclination, and the whole makes a pleasing rural
appearance, without any intrusion of costly ornaments and labored works. In
the whole composition, there is a degree of taste mixed with a countenance of
rusticity, which characterizes an agreeable retirement. Nothing is so
displeasing to the eye, as temples, pagodas, columns, pyramids, Gothic
banquetting-houses, and modern ruins, jumbled into a few acres, with that
confusion and want of taste, which over-loaded opulence often disgorges round a
modern villa. True taste is attached to nature so intimately, that each
disposition by art must be made to heighten her beauties, not to distort her,
and over-burthen the scene with a progeny adopted from all the quarters of the
earth. A bad situation cannot be changed; nay it is not even improved by
gorgeous works: a load of edifices is only like finery on a deformed object --
but dispose the works of art in a just adaption to the situation, and in the
mode pointed out by nature, and they grow into elegance.

The nearer prospect from Wallington over the vale is rich; to the south-east
the view is extensive, though not much variegated: in a clear atmosphere the
sea is visible from thence, at the extreme of a level not less than twenty
miles in length.

In entering these demesnes, the benevolent character of the late owner
instantly occurred to my mind. What dreadful instruments are greatness, riches,
and power, in the hands of tyranny and malevolence; but what blessings do they
not pour forth from the good and wise. How detestable is authority under some
characters, which it would be invidious to name; but how lovely is power in the
possession of others. Such characteristicks have marked the life of this man,
as will immortalize his memory; and as he eminently possessed whilst living,
(so will Fame transmit to futurity his name and virtues accompanied with) THE
UNIVERSAL LOVE OF MANKIND. He died in the 70th year of his age, without issue.
The title is extinct. He represented the town of Newcastle in seven succeeding
parliaments, viz. 1734, 1741, 1747, 1754, 1761, 1768, and 1774, and served the
office of Mayor in 1735, 1748, 1756, 1764, and 1771: was the oldest Member of
the House of Commons.


The Inn beyond Wallington, on the Rothbury road at

CAMBO,
commands a fine view of the vale we had passed. The ascent for more than a
mile is gradual, and the road in a direct line from Wallington, so that the
hedge rows form a vista, terminated by the dome of the offices, which has an
agreeable effect. The prospect here is extensive and noble; some coalworks to
the right deform the nearer ground, but all beyond is of that happy
composition, which cultivation, mixing with natural woods and fanciful
plantations, give the landscape; object decreasing after object, and stretching
from the eye till mingled in the azure of the atmosphere, in which all the
horizon lay softened and blended.

Cambo The name derived from the camp or sort on the hill. -- Wallis.
was the seat of Sir Robert de Camhoe in the time of King Henry III.

The way from thence to Rothbury is very crooked, and by cross roads rendered
perplexed. About Wallington we saw some guide-posts, but in few other places in
the country, and several of those having been painted, were obliterated, and
only mocked our anxiety. Many bridges give easy passage over the brooks, but
their flanks are suffered to be walled up or closed, so that the traveller is
deprived of the necessary refreshment for his cattle. The carts were passing
unmarked, and their drivers insolent to a high degree.

We had a view of Rothbury Castle at the distance of some miles; the situation
appeared rugged and uncommon. On the side which then presented itself, we could
discern distinctly no more than the square tower and part of its flankings,
placed on a considerable eminence, of a rocky and barren aspect. By not taking
the proper road, we were led almost round this edifice, which we viewed with no
small degree of impatiency. When we came to look upon the northern front, our
curiosity was somewhat slackened, but nevertheless we passed down the road
about half a mile, and having climbed the fence, ascended the steep to the
building. The fatigue was but ill recompensed, for we found this object of our
anxious curiosity, no other than an ornamental structure, composed of a square
tower, flanked with a curvated wall, embattled, and pierced with loop-holes,
and each wing terminated with a bastion: the situation romantic, on the brink
of a broken precipice. The sides of this hill, to the west and south, present a
shaken and tremendous rocky steep, rent into vast impending columns and massive
tables; the stones of enormous bulk, in many places hang on each other in such
loose positions, as if ready to fall into the vale; forming caverns and
recesses, and rude heaps of rocks of a most wild and grotesque appearance. To
decorate (I presume) this noble scene, the awkward images of a goat and a
staring stag, delight the passing children. -- On resorting to my book of
notes, I find they carry the countenance of peevishness, but as they are just,
I will transcribe them. The southern front opens on a small plain, naturally of
a circular form, scattered over with huge heads of griffins, broken cornices,
and ensigns of Calverly (the lamb and flag of Grace) sculptured on white
freestone; in the midst of which stand two preposterous effigies,
representative of no known dress, personage, or people. And to give the coup de
grace to this composition, enormous ribs, jaw-bones, and members of a whale,
are fastened to the walls for decorations. We entered the tower, in which, by
way of tables, are three large rude unhewed stones, one in the center, and one
in each recess at the sides, benched with similar stones: pretty enough for the
reception of Thomas of Hick-a-thrift or Jack the Giant-killer.

We had from this plot one of the most extensive views in Northumberland.
Eastward we overlooked the vale which opened upon us at Wallington, on which
many gentlemen's seats were scattered, mingled with woody plots -- very remote
objects give little pleasure to the eye, except what it derives from the
diversity of coloring -- the sea formed the distant horizon. To the southward
we had a view of Cambo and the hills beyond Wallington, with Mr Delaval's
tower, the deformity of which might now be forgot, for the agreeable obelisk it
gave to the prospect from hence. The western view was more confined, but wholly
cultivated, and the north frowned in rocks, mountains, and barren heath. In
descending the hill, a curvated canal presented itself, margined with young
plantations, on whose border a tent was pitched. This was one of Sir Walter's
retreats. The family being there, we did not visit Rothly House.

We passed Codgey Crag, a stupendous cliff, crowned with another uncouth
ornament, in the style of the former.

It is remarkable in this passage to Rothbury, in many parts where we could
view a tract country for the distance of three or four miles, all consisting of
cultivated land, the farm-houses were so very distant, and the inhabitants few,
that for miles we did not perceive a human being in the whole circle. The
fields did not engage people in tillage, and the roads were almost without
passengers, so that a stranger at midday, might wander far from the way leading
to the place of his destination, before he could correct his mistake. Where
tillage is neglected, and large farms are thrown into grass, it must be the
case; the country is depopulated, the industrious labourer cannot procure
bread, and an engrossing farmer, in a state of indolence, grows opulent by his
herds, etc. at the loss to community, of those members of the commonwealth in
whom the strength of the nation consists, who are, by a deplorable necessity,
driven to emigrate; an event which will at once sap the state, and impoverish
the subject. Boys who would otherwise have been employed in husbandry, are
bound out to manufactories; our manufacturers are grown more numerous than
trade can maintain; the husbandman's labor is not wanted, his hands are
shifted to a different employ; and the hardy race of Britons are sunk into a
state of imbecility, and reduced to the languid and meagre shadows of men, who
hang upon the loom. The difficulty of recruiting the army and manning the navy
will every day increase -- the resources are taken away. Not one-fourth part of
the number of families are employed in husbandry in the north, there was forty
years ago. This was a nursery for the army and the fleet. The enlarging farms,
and reducing the tillage, is a capital error, which though slow in its
consequences, yet is as sure as fate. Substituting the horse for the ox in
husbandry, is a mistaken maxim, which for a temporary profit has crept in upon
us: the ox was advancing in value, and increasing the supply of the market as
he labored: the horse takes twice the maintenance, consuming a vast portion of
grain, and his price is sinking yearly into nothing. Not exposing the
necessaries of life in open market, is another matter that prejudices the poor,
by increasing prices; an artificial scarcity is thereby much easier to be
effected. I am bold to say, that if a law was made to oblige plowing by oxen,
and to enforce every article of the farmer to be brought to open market to be
sold within a limited time, we should experience much greater plenty. Of my
own knowledge, wheat, (when 6s. 6d. the Winchester bushel) in immense
quantities, has been kept up till spoiled, and made fit for nothing but hogs. I
cannot avoid adopting Mr Pennant's sentiments on a view of the like kind.
Speaking of his entry into Northumberland at Cornhill, he says, All this
country is open, destitute of trees, and almost even of hedges; for hedges are
in their infancy in these parts, as it is not above seven or eight years since
they have been introduced -- the land is fertile, swells into gentle risings,
and is rich in corn. It is miserably depopulated; a few great farm-houses and
hamlets appear rarely scattered over the vast tracts. There are few farms of
less value than 150l. a year. They are generally three, four, or five hundred;
and I heard of one possessed by a single family, that even reached twenty-five
hundred: in this was a single field of 3000 acres, and which took 600 bolls of
seed wheat, of six Winchester bushels each. A humor fatal to the commonwealth
prevails over many parts of the north, of flinging numbers of small tenements
into a large one, in order to save the expense of building; or perhaps to avoid
the multiplicity of receipts, lay a whole country into a sheep walk. These
devour poor men's houses, and expel the ancient inhabitants from their
fire-sides, to seek their bread in a strange land. I have heard of a character
(I forgot the spot it curses) that is too barbarous and infamous to be
overlooked; which has so little feeling, as to depopulate a village of 200
souls, and to level their houses to the ground; to destroy eight or ten
farm-houses on an estate of 1000l. a year, for the sake of turning almost the
whole into a sheep walk. -- There he lives, and there he may long live his own
tormentor! detesting, detested by all mankind. Wark and Learmouth, once
considerable places, are now scarcely inhabited. The last formerly a great
market town, is now reduced to a single farm-house. The inhabitants have long
since been dispersed, forced to exchange the wholesome, the vigorous, the
innocent lives of the rural oeconomists, for the sickly short-lived employs of
manufacturers in Birmingham and other great towns, where disease, and often
corrupted morals, cause double the consumption of people as would happen were
they permitted to enjoy their ancient seats. The want of laborers begins to be
sensibly felt. As a proof, they are retained by the year; and policy dictates
to their employers the affording them good wages: each has his cottage, a a
piece of land gratis, and a shilling a day in summer and ten-pence in winter. I
call this good pay, in a country which ought to be very cheap; if not, what are
the fine effects of the great improvements? The Spectator speaks much of the
deserts of the man that raises two ears of corn where one grew before. But who
will point out the man who has the soul to make his poor brethren feel the
happy effects of his art? I believe, that at present there are numbers who have
raised ten for one that were known a few years ago. It would be natural to
suppose that plenty would introduce cheapness; but till the providential plenty
of the present year, corn was exactly double the value of what it was 14 years
past. Yet the plenty of money has not been found doubled by the poor
manufacturer or labourer. The land owner in the north has taken full care of
himself. A farm of 75l. per annum 20 years ago, has been lately set for 365l.
Another of 230l. will be soon set for 1000l. per annum. An estate was bought in
1759 for 6800l. it consisted of 1560 acres, of which 750 have been sold for
8400l. and all these improvements result from the unprincipled and iniquitous
notion, of making the buyer of the produce pay not only to satisfy the demand
of the landlord, but to enable the farmer to make a princely fortune, and to
live with a luxury the shame of the times. They have lost the respectable
character of the Old English Yeomanry, by too close an imitation of the
extravagant follies of their betters.

The oxen of these parts are very fine; a pair has been sold for 65l. the
weight of one was 168 stone. The mountain sheep are sold for half a guinea a
piece, the lowland ewes for a guinea; the weathers for a guinea and a half; the
best wool from 16 to 18s. the stone of 23 pounds and a half.

We now approached

ROTHBURY,
the whole country in view, consisting of rocky steeps, lofty hills crowned
with heath, and others composed of nothing but naked stones: a mountainous and
rugged prospect, dreary and desolate. The breez which broke up the vale from
the north-west, afforded us the true effect, which under the descriptive phrase
of "howling in the wilderness," had heretofore conveyed to my mind an image
rather poetically extravagant than true: but here it was justly descriptive,
for as it passed over the naked steeps and rugged cliffs, its sound could not
be described by any other expression.

We descended into this desolate vale, down a very steep and stony road,
barrenness and rocks on every hand; but on passing a little projecting
eminence, were agreeably surprised by the opening of the hills, and it was not
long before we had a sight of Whitton Tower, and soon after Rothbury presented
itself, seated in the neck of a narrow cultivated glen; a situation perfectly
sequestered, and secure from storms: some pretty fields opening to the
south-west, where the valley is enlarged.

This is a small irregular town on the river Coquet, without any thing
remarkable but its situation: The pedestal of the font in the church at
Rothbury is worthy observation.

The stone is not exactly square; at the bottom, where it appears intended to
be fixed into some foundation stone, two opposite sides are 18 inches in
breadth, the other 14 inches; but where the sculpture begins, the edges of the
stone are taken off. The work, in bass relief, on the west side is about 26
inches long and 14 inches broad, and I presume represents our Lord sitting in
judgment. The principal figure has lost its head, but holds a scrol in the left
hand. On each side is the figure of an angel kneeling, and below them a crowd
of heads lifted up, some hands clasping books, others elevated, or laid upon
the breast. The other sides contain rich ornamental sculpture, of fancy figures
interwoven with foliage; such as are seen upon the obelisk in Bewcastle
churchyard, in Cumberland. From their similarity, some people have presumed
they were works of the same date.


it has a market on Thursdays, and three annual fairs on Whit-Monday, 21st
September, and Thursday preceding All-hallows day. This was the Barony of Roger
Fitz-Roger, Baron of Warkworth and Clavering, in the reign of King John, with
which he held a free forest, with all its appendages, except the goods of
felons, which at that time was so beneficial a perquisite, as to merit a
reservation in the royal grant. It remained in that family till the last Lord
Clavering granted it to the Crown in the reign of King Edward I. King Edward
III. gave it to Henry Lord Percy, and it is now part of the possessions of his
Grace the Duke of Northumberland.

We were led to view a natural curiosity, as it is termed, called the Thrumb,
which is almost a mile from the town -- a cut formed by nature in the rocks of
the river's channel, where the stream for about 160 yards is pent in such
narrow bounds that a man may leap over -- not at all curious, or worthy our
attention; little preferable to a mill-race. But here we had the misfortune to
meet with an impertinent drunken Innkeeper, whose over-officiousness and
loquacity led us out of the way.

Another remarkable circumstance befell us here; on obtaining change for a piece
of gold from a neighboring shop, the money was so lately and so unskilfully
prepared, that on turning it over, the quicksilver stood in globules upon it:
the metal was chiefly copper. -- We set forward for Wooler, having our minds
furnished with disagreeable ideas, which our fellow creatures too often excite.
Vices and frauds have access to the most sequestered vales; for such were first
inhabited by outlaws and robbers.

In the neighborhood of Rothbury, to the east, is a circular entrenchment,
called Old Rothbury, formed on an eminence, with a double trench and rampire of
earth: one of those strongholds to which the inhabitants were obliged to retire
on the incursions of the Scots. Used as guard-hills, on the establishment of a
night watch, before the union of the two kingdoms. Wallis.


About three miles up Coquet is

HEPPLE,
the Barony of Iva Tailbois in the reign of King Henry III. in whose family it
continued till the reign of King Edward III. when it became the possession of
the Ogles of Ogle Castle. It is now the estate of his Grace the Duke of
Portland.

To the north, about two miles, is

CARTINGTON,
an old tower, once the possession of the Ratcliffs, and after them of the
Widdringtons: now the estate of Mr Alcock of Newcastle.

Further up the Coquet is

HALY STONE,
where Paulinus is said to have converted and baptized many thousands of the
Saxons. A small priory for about eight Benedictine Nuns stood here, founded by
one of the Humfranvils of Harbottle Castle, by whom it was endowed. The villa
impropriation and advowson of Halyston.

Alice de Alneto gave thereto a croft in Etherston.

Roger Bertram the whole waste of Baldwinswood, with liberty of the mills of
Mitford, multure-free, and pasture on the commons of Newton and Throphill.
These gifts were confirmed in 1255 by King Henry III.

Corsonhope and Sintile were part of the possessions, with 40 acres of land at
Kestron.

The impropriation and advowson of Allerton also belonged thereto, where was an
hospital.

The advowson and impropriation of Carsonside, and

The advowson of Harbottle chapel.

Together with four houses in Newcastle.


Its revenues were increased by Roger Bertram, Baron of Mitford. The two
livings of Carsonside and Harbottle were consolodated by Richard Kelloe, Bishop
of Durham, by his deed dated Nono die Februarii Anno Domini 1311, at the desire
of Lord Richard Unfranvill, who entering into holy orders, had the cure
thereof. There are no remarkable remains of the priory: at the dissolution the
revenue of the house was valued at 11l. 5s. 6d. by Dugdale, and 15l. 10s. 8d.
by Speed.

HARBOTTLE CASTLE
lays about a mile to the westward: in the year 1314 it was demolished by the
Scots, but aftewards restored. This was part of the possessions of the
Unfranvills of Pruddowe. They held Harbottle by the service of keeping
Reedsdale free from thieves and wolves, under which they also held the Castle
and Manor of Otterburn, as appears by the Testa de Nevill. This service was
adjudged to be in Great Serjeantry, and in the 17th year of King Henry IV. upon
an Escheator's inquisition, it was found of the yearly value of 6l. 19s. 8d.
Roll. 1. Mich. 17 King Henry VI. Madox's Baron. Angl. p. 244.
On the attainder of Sir William Tailbois, After the battle of Hexham Levels.
to whom the inheritance of Unfranvills descended, this castle came to the
Crown, and now belongs Percival Clennel, Esquire It stands upon the banks of
Coquet, and in the time of King Edward I. was a formidable fortress, sustaining
a desperate attack from the whole body of Scots, on their incursion in the year
1296; who after laying before it two days, were obliged to raise the siege. It
was of some consequence in the reign of King Henry VIII. being the place of
retirement of Margaret She was daughter to King Henry VII. mother to King James
V. grandmother to Queen Mary, and great grandmother to King James the Sixth of
Scotland and First of England.
Queen Dowager of Scotland, his sister, on her marriage with the Earl of Angus.
Lady Mary Douglas, her daughter, was born here, 1518. This castle at present is
totally in ruins. -- We now returned to Rothbury, and took the road to
Whittingham.

Four miles of our way lay through as barren a country as I have yet seen: in
this tract there was neither human or brute animal to be observed: sheep or
goats, if such there were, hid themselves in the dells: which ever way the eye
was cast, mountains, bogs, rocks, and heath composed the prospect; the road was
rough and full of stones, the ground on each hand broken and grown with heath,
and the waters which ran in a thousand channels, were red with their metalick
quality. A lassitude and impatiency took possession of the mind, and we
traveled with displeasure; but happily for us the vale of

WHITTINGHAM
lay in our way, an extensive rich cultivated valley, where every object was
highly pleasing, after the sad contrast nature had cast in our passage: the
fields are well fenced with quicksets, the soil luxuriant, the crops of corn
standing in sheafs, were rich to the highest degree, the meadows finely
verdant, the houses well built and roofed with tyle, the roads open, the sheep
and cattle of a large breed, and every object wore the countenance of opulence.
On Inquiry, we were surprised to find 8s. an acre per annum was the average
price for land there: the husbandry we remarked was modern and improved. This
happy vale was near four miles wide, in the part we crossed it in our way to
Wooler.

Before we descended to Whittingham, we visited

CALLALEY,
the ancient house of the Claverings. Roger Fitz Roger, Baron of Warkworth and
Clavering 55 King Henry III. Roger de Clavering 34 King Edward I. Alan his
younger brother, a seventh son. William de Clavering 2 King Edward III. Sir
Robert 26 King Edward III. Sir John 17 King Richard II. Robert de Clavering 31
King Henry VI. John same reign. Robert 2 King Henry VII. John 10 King Henry
VIII. Robert 28 King Henry VIII. Robert 25 Queen Elizabeth.
James a third son was ancestor of Sir Thomas Clavering of Axwell Park.

John, High Sheriff 28 Queen Elizabeth. Sir John was a warm partizan for King
Charles I. and suffered imprisonment. His eldest son, Sir Robert, raised two
regiments in the royal cause at his own expense, one of foot, the other
dragoons. He rendered singular service at the battle of Athelstan Moor, and for
his bravery received Knighthood. He was Commander of the counties of
Northumberland and Durham, and vanquished the Scots who then distressed them,
taking Morpeth Castle and the Fort at South Shields by assault. He died of a
fever, in the 26th year of his age, in the life of his father. John Clavering,
third son, succeeded to the estate 22 King Charles I. Ralph Clavering.
Clavering. Ralph the present possessor.
Wallis.
In the reign of King Henry III. Gilbert de Callaley being seized of these
demesnes, granted them to Robert Fitz Roger, Baron of Warkworth and Clavering,
from whom it has descended to the present owner, Ralph Clavering, Esquire How long
it was the possession of the Callaleys is not known.

The house stands on the south side of the brook Callaley, in a low situation,
and retains part of the old structure. There is a pretty grove adjoining, in a
whimsical figure called the Star, being octagonal. Near to Callaley is a high
hill, called Castle Hill, with a circular intrenchment; one of those
exploratory mounts so frequently seen on the borders; from whence a very
extensive prospect is had of the vales of Coquet, Whittingham, and Glendale.

About two miles to the east of Whittingham road, near where we turned off to
Callaley, is

LEMINGTON,
the seat of the Fenwicks, Nicholas Fenwick, Representative in Parliament for
Newcastle many years. Robert the present owner, High Sheriff of Northumberland
1753.
Wallis.
a handsome modern house, commanding a fine view of the valley of Whittingham.
Around this mansion are those agreeable scenes dispersed which rising
plantations give. The present Mr Fenwick is a great promoter of that material
improvement, planting; for which he lately received an honorable premium.

Near Lemington, to the southward, lays

EDLINGHAM,
anciently the Castle of the family of Hastings, and of Sir Roger Hastings in
the reign of King Henry VIII. it afterward became the possession of the
Swinburns, John Swinburn of Nafferton Hall, Esquire Thomas Swinburn 10 Queen
Elizabeth. George Swinburn. He married Margaret daughter of -- Haggerston of
Haggerston, by whom he had two sons and three daughters.
Wallis.
and is now the property of Sir Edward Swinburn, Bart. This place retains no
singular marks of antiquity.

From the village of Whittingham, about a mile to the west, is

ESLINGTON,
the seat of Henry Lord Ravensworth, Baron of Ravensworth in the county of
Durham. It was formerly the possession of Eslingtons, and of Allan de Eslington
in the time of King Henry III. it passed to the Hasleriggs, and after them to
the Collingwoods, in whose family it continued from the reign of King Henry
VIII. to that of King George I. Sir John Collingwood, High Sheriff of
Northumberland 36 King Henry VIII. Sir Robert, High Sheriff 5 King Edward VII.
Sir Cuthbert, High Sheriff 10 and 22 Q. Elizabeth. Robert Collingwood 14 King
Charles I. George 26 King Charles II. George 1 King George I.
Wallis.


It is a modern and elegant house, but placed in a low situation on the banks
of the Aln. A pretty lawn hangs upon the brink of the river which forms a fine
canal, the opposite risings are ornamented with a shrubbery.

From the walk above the plantations, there is a most excellent prospect of
cultivated scenes, finely terminated: the vale of Whittingham, with all its
rural richness, is extended in front, surmounted by the grove of Callaley, and
its conic mount called Castle Hill: to the eastward, Lemington with its rising
plantations, Bolton Park, and Broom Park are in view: to the north, Glanton,
Titlington, and the woods of Shawdon; the whole forming an extensive circus,
shut in on every side by heathy mountains and rocky steeps, disposed at an
agreeable distance, and contrasting in a beautiful manner with the nearer
objects.

LITTLE RYLE and UNTHANK,
estates of the Collingwoods, lay within the distance of a mile, the
Mansion House at Ryle now totally in ruins. To the west is

BITTLESDON,
the ancient seat of the Selbys, and of Sir Walter Selbye in the reign of King
Edward III. who lost his head for maintaining with great bravery the Castle of
Lidell against David King of Scotland, who besieged it with an immense army.
This army is said to have consisted of 40,000 men, a considerable part of it
formed of militia, from whose inexperience they obtained the name of Hoblers.
It is now the Mansion of Thomas Selby, Esquire has a romantic situation, and
commands a view of the Coquet river. At

BOLTON,
about two miles from Whittingham, was an Hospital, founded by Robert de Ross,
who was Baron of Wark, before the year 1225, for a Master, three Chaplains, 13
Lepers, and other lay brethren, and was dedicated to St Thomas the Martyr or
the Holy Trinity. It was subordinate to the abbey of Rival, It was endowed with
the lordship, impropriation and advowson of Bolton, with a waste of 140 acres;
a mill and a tenement at Mindrum; lands at Pauston and Kilham; the villa,
manor, impropriation and advowson of Straunston, and the two Paustons, near
Grantham, in Lincolnshire; lands at Elwell and Swanesland, in Yorkshire, with
pasture for 300 sheep near Humber; a corn mill and tenement at Middleton, and
lands at Garton, Yorkshire.

The chief ordonance was, the Master, Chaplains, and Brethren were to keep a
good table, dress neatly, and after providing necessaries out of their revenue,
to dispose of the rest in relief of poor and helpless strangers.

Wallis.
and the priory of Kirkham, in Yorkshire.

Soon after the dissolution this Hospital became the property of the
Collingwoods of Eslington; it was afterward the possession of the family of
Browns, William Brown, Esquire High Sheriff of Northumberland 1702. Nicholas, High
Sheriff 1748.
Wallis.
and is now the estate of Matthew Forster, Esquire

In Hollingshead's Chronicle we find this place remarkable for a Congress on
the 5th of September, 5 King Henry VIII. before the battle of Branxton; where
were present, Thomas Howard Earl of Surry, Lords Clifford, Coniers, Ogle,
Scroope, and Lumley, Sir William Percy, Lionel Percy, Sir George Darcy, Sir
William Bulmer of Brancepeth Castle, in the county of Durham, and Richard
Tempest, Esquire with their attendants and 26,000 troops.

Not far from Bolton is Glanton Pike, a mount of a conic form, formerly a
beacon hill, commanding an extensive prospect.

Near this place several stone chests have been discovered, three feet in
length and two feet in breadth, with urns of ordinary pottery, containing
ashes, charcoal, and remains of scorched human bones; and not far distant was
lately found a Celt. I need not enlarge upon the account given of this
instrument by Mr Wallis, to afford the reader a competent idea of it: Few
instruments have more exercised the thoughts of Antiquaries than this; some
contending for its being a weapon of war. R^ M^ A^ (...). Plot^ Staff ^d^l^re,
p. 4^3.
Mr Hearre fancies it to be a Roman chife^ used in making their ^ggers, and
that it was preferred to iron, from the reputed sacredness of the metal of
which it was made. From there being no mention of it by ^na^, Monsieur de
Chausse, or by Spon, and no vestiges of it among the Roman arms on the ^an or
Anti^ne p^, or among the ruins of Herculaneum, the ingenious Cornish A^y, Mr
Bo^e, is in^ed to think it not of Transmarine origin, but the work of (...)
Romans, or art^t^ (...) ^ht by them, for an offensive missive weapon. According
to the late (...) Dr S^ C^sius, vol. 3. p. 163.
it was used by the Druid priesthood in their sacra, (...) ^net (...) to the
end of a stuff, with which they cut the misletoe for Yuletide, our (...); and
(...) as (...) their festival of the au^nnal equinox equinox. Wallis.
These sepultures are of the remotest antiquity.

At the village of

EGLINGHAM
is a Seat of a branch of the Ogle family, Luke C^ F^ 10 Queen Elizabeth. H^
(...) of the Se^ (...) of Lands in Northumberland for Parliament, 19 King
(...). He was Representative for this county in Parliament, 5 King C. (...) H^n
(...) of this county 6 Queen Anne, 1707. (...), High Sheriff 10 George II.
Wallis.
now possessed by Ralph Ogle, Esquire in which neighborhood lays

BEANLY,
formerly the Barony of the Earls of Dunbar. Patrick Earl of Dunbar lost it by
bearing arms in aid of the Scots against King Edward III. that King gave it to
Henry Lord Percy, and it is now part of the possessions of his Grace the Duke
of Northumberland. On Beanly Moor is a large circular intrenchment.

We passed Percy's Cross, erected to the memory of Sir Ralph Percy, who was
slain there by Lord Montacute, A. D. 1463, before the battle of Hexham Levels.
Lord Hungerford and the other leaders fled at the first onset; he with the
spirit of a Percy, maintained his ground, and died fighting bravely for Henry
VI. whom he espoused: his dying words were, I have saved the bird in my breast,
meaning his faith to his party. On the pillar are the arms of Percy and Lucy.

To the west of the road is

RODHAM,
possessed by the family of that name for many ages. We find them in the
escheats of 49 King Henry III. Wiliam de Rodham 49 King Henry III. William,
married the daughter and heiress of Thomas D'Esplee 30 King Edward III. Sir
John, slain at the battle of Towton 1 King Edward IV. John 6 King Edward VI.
Robert 10 Queen Elizabeth. John King Charles I. -- Rodham. Edward. Robert, a
Captain in the royal navy, the present possessor.
Wallis.
The Mansion House is modern.

On Rosedean Edge, in this neighborhood, is a large square intrenchment, from
whence, at the distance of three miles, you view Bewick Hill, a semicircular
intrenchment, with a double Fosse and Vallum, defended to the west by a steep
precipice. The entrance on the south is formed by a hollow way, defended by
large stones placed with their edges in the earth, so as to make a strong
breast-work.

A little to the north of Hedgehope, near the Three-stone Burn, is a Druidical
Monument, now consisting of ten large stones, in a circular form, from east to
west 38 yards in diameter, and 33 yards from north to south. Several of the
stones are thrown down, and some are so sunk in the earth, that the original
number cannot be ascertained. There are three larger than the rest, which I
presume gave the present name to the burn near which this monument stands.

In this neighborhood is a Cataract, called

LINHOPE SPOUT,
falling 56 perpendicular feet, which passing over several pointed rocks, makes
a fine white sheet of foam. The rock from which the stream precipitates is
naked, and has none of those picturesque beauties which grace the water-fall
at Hareshaw Linn, near Bellingham.

On a hill a mile west of Alnham, is a semicircular incampment, the points of
the crescent facing the east, seem to have formed the entrance. It is defended
by two high outward rampires and a deep fosse, and an inner circle of stones,
which appear uncemented. The interior area, about 100 yards diameter, shows
many remains of buildings.

At the village of

ILDERTON,
on the west of the road, is the ancient Seat of the family of Ildertons: We
find them possessors of this place in the reign of King Edward I. as appears by
the escheats of that time. The present owner, Thomas Ilderton, Esquire Henry de
Ilderton 1 King Edward I. Sir Thomas de Ilderton, High Sheriff 50 King Edward
III. Sir Thomas, High Sheriff 21 King Henry VII. Thomas 6 King Edward VI. John
King Charles I. Thomas father of the present possessor.
Wallis.


Near the 28th mile stone, a road leads off to

LILBURN,
the ancient possession of the Lilburns; John Lilburn 18 King Edward II. Sir
John Lilburn King Edward III. He was twice a prisoner to the Scots, at the
battle of Carham and the battle of Otterburn. Sir Thomas, Member of Parliament
for Northumberland. 12 King Henry VI.
Wallis.
after them it became the estate of the Clennels, and is now one of the seats
of Henry Collingwood of Cornhill, Esquire The ancient Tower and Mansion of the
Lilburns is in ruins.

CHILLINGHAM CASTLE
in the next place engaged our attention, the Seat of the Earl of Tankerville.
This was the ancient Seat and Manor of the heroic race of Greys of Wark; one of
whom lays entombed in the church, under an elegant monument, ornamented richly,
and having the recumbent effigies of a Knight and his Lady.

The Castle, situate on an eminence, is of the order of building used in the
reign of Queen Elizabeth: it has an open area in the center, from whence you
ascend by many steps into a ballustrade, ornamented with the effigies of
British warriors armed, cut in stone. The apartments are awkward and small, and
the communications irregular. Here are several good portraits, a full length of
Lord Chancellor Bacon, another of Lord Treasurer Burleigh; a gaudy painting of
Buckingham, in a white satin gilded vest, gold and white striped breeches,
effeminate and fantastical; a good portrait of King Charles; a picture of James
II. of the most unhappy countenance.

In one of the apartments Mr Wallis says is a marble chimney-piece; in sawing
which from the block, a live toad was discovered therein. The nidus where the
animal lodged, as it was disagreeable to the eye, by order of the late Earl,
was filled with cement. We enquired after this curiosity, but the housekeeper
knew nothing of it. We saw a painting of this phenomenon, subscribed to which
were the Latin stanzas given in the notes. Heus Stagyrita!
Tuo si velis quod mirabilius Euripo
Huc ve^to.
F^ant, re^art^e Maria, et sit Lunaticus
Qui c^num ipeliat ^re.
En (...) q^d, quod non portat Africa,
Nec f^o is, N^lus aren's
Ignem, flammamque puram,
Era tamen vitali cassam!
Coeco recessa sciff, quod vides sa^i
Obit^s lucem Lithote ni dedere manus
Vivo Bafom.

The toad, if as large as represented in the painting, was wonderful indeed,
for size as well as its existence, being near as big as a hat crown. It is not
possible to look upon this object without giving passage to some reflections of
the following order: -- How wonderful are all the works of Providence; but how
incomprehensible is the existence of this animal! -- shut up in the bosom of a
mountain, cased in a rock of marble, perhaps an hundred feet from the surface;
living without air, or such only as should pervade the veins of this stone;
existing without other diet, than the dews which might pass through the texture
of marble; deprived of animal consolations, without light, without liberty,
without an associate of its kind. In the Newspapers of 1^^0, I recollect to
have read the following paragraph: A letter from Su^er and says, a few days
ago, in a coal-mine near this place, a large Toad was found a (...) a solid
coal, near ^^0 feet under ground: on being exposed to the air it instantly died.
It deposited here, when the matter which enclosed it was soft, and before it
gained its consistency as marble, how many ages ought we to number in its life;
for multitudes of years must have passed, to reduce any soft substance, in a
course of nature, to the state of this stone. One may ask, why did it not
perish in the universal wreck of animal existence? and at what age of the world
were these mountains of marble first formed? The inquiry leads to a maze of
perplexity; like the ingenious Mr Brydon's inspection of the stratas of Etnaean
Lava, all adopted chronology sinks in the view; and years are extended on the
age of creation beyond every thing but Chinese calculation.

In Chillingham Park are still preserved a breed of wild cattle, called the
White Scottish Bison; it is said they cannot be tamed, having so remarkable a
fierceness in their nature. Mr Penant, in his Tour in Scotland and Voyage to
the Hebrides, p. 109, under the title Drumlanrig, gives the following
description of them: "In my walks about the park, see the white breed of wild
cattle, derived from the native race of the country, and still retain the
primaeval savageness and ferocity of their ancestors; were more shy than any
deer; ran away on the appearance of any of the human species, and even set off
at full gallop on the least noise; so that I was under the necessity of going
very softly under the shelter of trees or bushes, to get a near view of them:
during summer they keep apart from all other cattle, but in severe weather
hunger will compel them to visit the outhouses in search of food. The keepers
are obliged to shoot them, if any are wanted: if the beast is not killed on the
spot, it runs at the person who gave the wound, and who is forced, in order to
save himself, to fly for safety to the intervention of some tree.

"These cattle are of a middle size, have very long legs, and the cows are fine
horned: the orbits of the eyes and the tips of the noses are black; but the
bulls have lost the manes attributed to them by Boethius."

Near Chillingham are two circular intrenchments; and at New Town, a mile to
the westward of Chillingham, is a stone cross twelve feet high, called the
Hurl Stone; of which I could procure no account.

A little northward from Chillingham is the village of

FOWBURY,
the possession of the Fowburys in the reign of King Edward I. afterward of
the family of the Strothers, and now of Sir Francis Blake of Twizell. A mile
from thence is

HORTON CASTLE,
the estate of the Greys of Howick, formerly the Seat of a younger branch of
the Greys of Heton. Thomas Gray 12 King Henry VI. Sir Ralph Gray, High Sheriff
12 King Henry VII. Sir Thomas Gray, Member of Parliament for Northumberland 1
Queen Mary. High Sheriff 6 King Edward VI. Sir Ralph, High Sheriff 9 King James
I. Nevil Gray, Esquire 1 King George I.
Wallis.


This is a deplorable part of the country for a stranger to be benighted in;
the heavy vapors which frequently envelope the hills the whole day, as
frequently attend the advance of night into the vale, as it happened to us, and
brings on a darkness truly to be felt; whilst there there is no house,
inhabitant, or passenger, for miles, to direct your way.

We were thankful when we gained sight of the Inn at Wooler Haugh; the
courtyard, which we descended into from the road, was crowded indeed with
wagons and carriages, and the lights in the stables showed there were several
guests in the house, but of what quality and denomination, we could not divine.
When we alighted, the hostler looked to be in some confusion; but we did not
devise the reason, being willing not to premise any thing to our disadvantage
at that time of night, in the rain, and in a country not known to any of us. We
were met by a jolly hostess at the door, who desired us, with all the courtesy
of a civil publican, to walk in. We were introduced to the kitchen, and
required to air our clothes, till the people got lights and prepared a room. It
was now time to consider the scene; the kitchen smelled rank of cooking, for
there was as much bustle, as if they were preparing a hecatomb: the room was
populous to a degree, for the mistress and two jolly nymphs her daughters
stickled in the cookery, whilst there went backward and forward, in and out,
hostlers, livery servants, carriers, and savages of various denominations, in
the utmost confusion; carrying, seeking, fetching, or calling for innumerable
matters, like the confusion of Babel, in the greatest agitation and emergency.
When we had leisure to think, we were at a loss to conceive what had occasioned
this hurricane, in which we had so awkwardly involved ourselves, at this little
house under a hill, in the wilds of Wooler; but outward objects embarrassed all
thinking to that degree, that our minds remained overwhelmed in what the eye
communicated, or what distracted the ear; and like fellows that were
fascinated, we forbore to make our escape. The table was covered with mangled
joints of victuals; above us, before us, on this hand and on that, was the
noise of tumultuous companies, creating that discordance of sounds; which
distracts an Inn at a fair; -- hallowing, laughing, ringing of bells, beating
on tables, menaces, oaths, female titterations, and music were in the
composition. My companion in a whisper says, "Where the devil have we got to?"
I would have told him, if it had been in my power: I found myself totally
embarrassed, till at length this horrid discordance rouzed me, and on
expressing uneasiness at not being shown to our apartment, we were told the
room was clearing of its present possessors, who were going to bed. Startled at
such intelligence, we began to doubt what would be our accommodations, and that
we might have occasion to displace the same race of visitants a second time,
before we could possess any beds: in defiance of the weather, a night as dark
as Erebus, and a road unknown, we thought it more prudent to set forward for
Wooler town, distant near two miles; and accordingly left this place to the
sportsmen who occupied it on their moor shooting parties, and to the carriers
and horrid wretches who barricadoed it without.

At the Black Bull Inn, in Wooler, we ended the anxieties of the evening, in
comfortable lodgings, and every accommodation a traveller could hope for.

WOOLER
is a considerable town, holding a weekly market on Thursday, and two annual
fairs on the 26th of April and 6th of October: Mr Handyside who had a premium
of 10l. 10s. from the Society for the encouragement of Arts, for the second
best painting in Enamel, exhibited in March 1764, was a native of this town.

Wallis.
it was the ancient Barony of the Muschamps, as appears by the escheats of King
Henry III. afterward it came to the Greys of Wark, and is now the property of
the Earl of Tankerville. On a circular mount near the town, are the remains of
a tower, apparently as ancient as the time of the Muschamps. By the escheats of
the reign of King Richard II. it appears there was an Hospital here dedicated
to Mary Magdalen. In the neighborhood of Wooler are several intrenchments and
kairns; one at a place called Cattle Well, which has the name of Maiden Castle,
and another, a very considerable one, at Trodden Gares.

Wooler is situate to the east of Cheviots, in an ill cultivated country, under
the influence of vast mountains, from whence it is subject to impetuous rains.
It is a place of great resort in the summer months, for invalids to drink goats
milk or whey. The church is placed on a fine eminence, and having been lately
rebuilt, is commodious. It is said the mother church was at Fenton, on the east
side of the river Till, now totally in ruins.

Our amusement in the succeeding morning was among such hills, as have seldom
been thought accessable by parties of pleasure. By Humbledon Burn, on an easy
inclination, is an intrenchment called Green Castle; and on Humbledon Hugh,
about a mile to the northwest of Wooler, is a circular intrenchment, with a
large kairn. The side of the hill is cut in various terraces, rising above each
other. This seems to have been calculated for a temporary fort, and the mode
generally practiced in ancient times in this part of the country. Many of those
terraces are formed with great exactness, about 20 feet in breadth. In some
places there are three of those flights or terraces; in others I observed five,
placed in regular gradations, one above the other. These were outworks of an
important nature, to defend a body of Chiefs, or a valuable booty, which
occupied the crown of a hill. The original mode I presume was Danish, though
those works are properly attributed to the Scotch and English before the battle
in 1402. The summit of a hill being levelled, I conceive received the officers
of highest rank and the most valuable effects of the camp; to which the
platforms rising above each other, and encircling the hill, when filled with
troops would make a powerful defense.

In the plain beneath is a stone pillar, denoting the ground where 10,000 of
the Scots, under Earl Douglas, in the reign of King Henry IV. on Holy-rood-day,
1402, had a great overthrow, by Henry Lord Percy and George Earl of March.
Douglas's forces had possessed the eminence, but his passage into Scotland
being intercepted by Earl Percy, he was obliged to engage on this plain: the
battle was so bloody, that the lands gained the name of Redriggs, from the
slaughter with which they were stained. According to Hollingshead, among the
prisoners were the Earls of Fife, Murray, Angus, Athol, Orkney, and Monteath,
the Lords Montgomery and Erskine, and about 80 Knights. Douglas received five
wounds and lost an eye. Being hotly pursued, in the flight 500 Scots were
drowned in Tweed, the most of their army on this fatal day dying or being
prisoners.

The disposition of the English, was chiefly on an opposite mount to that
occupied by the Scotch, except their archers, who were arranged on the plain.
The Scots were so galled by the flights of arrows, to which we may presume they
were extremely exposed, if marshalled on those terraces before described, that
they grew impatient of restraint, and with their whole force descended into the
plain, to come to closer battle. The English also advanced, their archers
retiring in well compacted bodies, to admit the other troops into the line, at
the same time discharging such flights of arrows, as no armor could resist,
and thereby the Scots were soon broken and thrown into confusion. Sir John
Swinton and Adam Gordon several times rallied flying parties, and renewed the
battle with the greatest bravery, till they fell among the slain. Historians
mention no person of note on the side of the English who was slain that day,
the victory being entirely the work of the archers, the other troops being said
not to have engaged.

We arrived at

YEVERING,
now a mean village, and little regarded by travelers, though once a place of
royal residence.

Near this place the Scots were defeated on Magdalen-day, in the third year of
the reign of King Henry V. 1415, by Sir Robert Humfrevil, then Commander of
Roxburgh Castle, and the Earl of Westmoreland, then Lord Warden of the Marches.
The place of this action is denoted by a rude stone pillar 14 feet high.
Harding says, that Sir Robert Umfranville, who had at that time the keeping of
Roxburgh Castle, fought at Geterying this year with the Scots on Madelyn day,
22d July. Umfranville had but seven score spears and 300 bows, with which force
he discomfited 4000 Scots, and chaced them 12 miles into their own land. He
took 360 prisoners, and slew 60.

Hard. c. 212.


In Bid we have the following passage: "Paulinus coming with the King and
Queen into a manor or house of the King's, called Ad-Gebrin, at this day
Yevering, abode with them 36 days, employed wholly in catechizing and
baptising: during which time he did nothing from morning, but instruct the
people resorting to him in the saving word of Christ; and being thus
instructed, he baptized them to the forgiveness of their sins, in the river of
Glen, which was hard by. This house was in the time of the succeeding Kings
neglected, and another made for it, in a place called Melnim, now Melfold."

Thus it appears this was a Manor of the Saxon Kings, and was the residence of
King Edwin and his Queen Ethelburga, after his conversion by Paulinus. This
Edwin was afterward slain by Penda and Cedwall, two Tributaries: Ethelburga
escaped to her brother, Eadbald King of Kent, by whom Paulinus was made Bishop
of Rochester. There are not the least remains of any considerable structure
here, or any thing to denote that a royal palace once existed on the spot.

The ancient name of Ad-Gebrin, through the assistance of Mr Bryant's
etymologies, also leads me to determine this was a royal residence, and had one
of those high places consecrated to the worship of the Sun. Ad being in use for
a supreme title, with which both Deities and Kings were honored, among all the
eastern nations Ad was a peculiar title, and was originally conferred upon the
Sun; and if we may credit Macrobius, it signified one, and was so interpreted
by the Assyrians. In short, Ad and Ada signified first (...), and in a more lax
sense, a Prince or Ruler. 1 Kings xi. 14. Genesis xxxvi. 35. 1 Kings xx. 1.
Nicolaus Damase apud Josephum Antiq. L. 7. c. 5. 2 Samuel viii. 3.
From thence, and the evidence of Bid, it is clear the Saxon Kings resided at
this place during some part of the Heptarchy.

A research into antiquity naturally produces this effect, that we obtain
testimonies of the derivation of our customs, and an early visitation by
eastern nations; which latter circumstance has rather been treated by authors
as a fabulous matter, or so obscured by tradition, that it was little credited.

In Mr Bryant's introductory preface, he says, It has been observed by many of
the learned, that some particular family betook themselves very early to
different parts of the world; in all which, they introduced their rights and
religion, together with the customs of their country. They represent them as
very knowing and enterprizing; and with good reason. They were the first who
ventured upon the seas and took long voyages. They showed their superiority and
address in the numberless expeditions which they made, and the difficulties
which they surmounted. Many have thought that they were colonies from Egypt or
from Phoenicia; having a regard only to the settlements which they made in the
west. But I shall show hereafter, that colonies of the same people are to be
found in the most extreme parts of the east; where we may observe the same
rites and ceremonies, and the same traditional histories, as are to be met with
in their other settlements. The country called Phoenicia could not have
sufficed for the effecting all that is attributed to these mighty adventurers.
It is necessary for me to acquaint the reader, that the wonderful people to
whom I allude, were the the descendants of Chus, and called Cuthites and
Cuseans. They stood their ground at the general migration of families; but were
at last scattered over the face of the earth. They were the first apostates
from the truth: yet great in worldly wisdom. They introduced where ever they
came many useful arts, and were looked up to as a superior order of beings:
hence they were styled Heroes, Demons, Heliadae, Macarians. They were joined
in their expeditions by other nations, especially by the colateral branches of
their family, the Mizraim, Caphtorim, and the sons of Canaan. These were all of
the line of Ham, who was held by his posterity in the highest veneration. They
called him Amon, and having in process of time raised him to a divinity, they
worshipped him as the Sun: and from this worship they were styled Amonians.
This therefore will be the title, by which I shall choose to distinguish the
people of whom I treat, when I speak of them collectively; for under this
denomination are included all of this family, whether they were Egyptians or
Syrians, of Phoenicia or of Canaan. To this I will add, what a celebrated
French author (treating of the rise and progress of arts and sciences) says,
touching the migrations of these Easterns, to attempt at least a colorable
proposition, touching the time Britain received those visitants, if not a
conclusive one. When we speak of the Phoenicians, we must distinguish the times
with accuracy. These people possessed originally a large extent of countries,
comprised under the name of the land of Canaan. They lost the greatest part of
it, by the conquests of the Israelites under Joshua. The lands which fell in
division to the tribe of Asher, extended to Sidon; that city notwithstanding
was not subdued. If the conquests of Joshua took from the Phaenicians a great
part of their dominion, they were well paid by the consequences of that event.
In effect the greatest part of the ancient inhabitants of Palestine, seeing
themselves threatened with entire destruction, had recourse to flight to save
themselves. Sidon offered them an asylum. By this eruption of the Hebrew
people, the Sidonians were enabled to send colonies where ever they thought
proper. Sidon lent them ships, and made good use of these new inhabitants, to
extend their trade and form settlements. From hence that great number of
colonies, which went from Phoenicia, to spread themselves in all the countries
of Africa and Europe. We may date this event, about the year of the world 2553,
and 1451 years before Christ. Spain was not the only country beyond the pillars
of Hercules, which the Phaenicians penetrated. Being familiarized with the
navigation of the ocean, they extended themselves to the left of the Straits of
Cadiz, as well as to the right. Strabo assures us, that these people had gone
over a part of the western coast of Africa, a little time after the war of
Troy. We might perhaps determine their passage into England, by a reflection
which the reading of the writers of antiquity furnishes us with: they are
persuaded that all the Tin that was consumed in the known world came from the
Isles of Cassitorides; and there is no doubt those Isles were the Sorlingues
and a part of Cornwall. We see by the books of Moses, that in his time Tin was
known in Palestine. Homer teaches us also that they made use of this metal in
the heroic ages. It should follow then, that the Phaenicians had traded in
Britain in very remote antiquity. -- After giving the reader these opinions of
two authors highly distinguished in the literary world, I must proceed to the
application.

Near Yevering is a place known by the name of Yevering Bell, a lofty mountain,
one of the north-west Cheviots, of an oblong figure, arising to a cone. The
name is supposed, by the inhabitants of the country, to be derived from the
figure of the hill; and consequently as applicable to any other of like form as
this, of which there are many among the Cheviots. We ascended the mountain from
Yevering, by winding round its side to the south and east, the only means of
climbing to the top, which was not attained without great labor, from the
steepness of the ascent, the height of the Bell being upwards 2000
perpendicular feet, taken from the plain at Yevering. The summit of the
mountain is almost level, encinctured with the remains of a wall, placed on the
brink of the steep, which when entire was of considerable strength, as appears
from the materials. The wall has been built without mortar, of large flat
stones, with which the country abounds. This wall forms and incloses an area of
1000 paces in circumference; the entrance is on the south side. The breadth of
the ruins of the wall on a medium is eight yards; and by the stones on the
surface, it may be computed that there are about four fothers of stones to the
yard. It astonishes the spectator, on viewing these remains, when he computes
that 4000 fothers of stones, at least, were employed in this erection, and
those borne by human hands, to a place totally inaccessable by carriages or
cattle bearing burdens. It may be alleged indeed, that in a plot of ground
1000 paces in circumference many stones might be won; but the crown of the hill
does in no wise encourage such a conjecture; the ground wearing altogether a
natural countenance, no rocks or quarries appearing within the area to furnish
such a vast quantity of stone, and where the turf is broken, a small gravel
appears. The eastern end of the area rises some few feet from the level of the
plain. Taking our course by the wall before described, at a point almost due
east, a broad way appeared, three paces wide in a straight direction, as if
formed by an even pavement, extending about 30 yards in ascent toward the
crown of the hill. We found this eminence surrounded by the remains of another
wall, but consisting of fewer materials, in an exact circle, 180 paces in
circumference, with a ditch within. Near the center of this inner area, rather
inclining to the east, is a kairn of stones, of no very great height, arising
about 10 paces in an easy ascent from the level of the inner wall. The center
of the kairn is hollow like a basin, six paces from brim to brim. After
removing the turf and soil for a little depth, we found the stones reduced to a
sort of calx, and every where retaining a strong impression of fire. The view
from this mountain is very extensive, it affords a prospect of near 20 miles
northward into Scotland, and over Northumberland many miles to the southeast;
an opening of the mountains on that side, and an extensive plain to the
northward, giving it that great command of prospect. As a beacon hill it was
fortunately placed; as a place of heathenish worship, it was conspicuous from
many points of view, where the sacrificial rites might be discovered, and
thereby the people called to worship. On the northern side of the mountain, are
the remains of a forest or extensive grove of oaks; a circumstance, not to be
found, or at least not discovered by us, on any of the hills within view from
the summit of Yevering Bell. On many parts of the sides of the hill are the
remains of circular buildings, but now so totally ruined, and the stones so
scattered, that their former consequence or use are not to be discovered,
little more than the form of the foundations remaining. Several of them I took
to be no other than folds for enclosing a number of sheep or cattle, the ruins
not containing materials sufficient for any large erection. Mr Wallis a account
of this remarkable place, is loose and unsatisfactory. About two hundred yards
west from this Column, is a high hill called Yevering Bell, from its bell-like
shape; the top of an oblong figure; a Kairn on the east side, with a circular
Trench; many circular foundations of buildings upon the sides or slopes of
both; the whole encompassed with a Wall of Whinstone of a great breadth and
length, fallen down by age and tempests; the work seemingly of the Pagan Danes,
for their Priestoood and Nobles to assemble on, for legislation, for devotion,
and sepulture.
The works on this mount appear to me of very remote antiquity, and in
attempting to explain their nature, I will consider them singly, and furnish
the reader with all the lights I have collected; as I presume they are so
singular as to attract the attention of travelers who may hereafter traverse
this country in search of antiquities. In the first place, we will consider
this object in the manner it would naturally call for a stranger's attention.
It cannot be conceived, from the loftiness of the mountain, the extreme
difficulty of access, the coldness of that high region, and the inclemency of
weather it is naturally subject to, to have been used as a place of strength:
from these natural causes also, it is not probable it should be used as a place
for securing cattle and flocks against the incursions of an enemy: it may
reasonably, from its very nature, be admitted to be used for religious offices.
If used as a beacon only, then whence the necessity of these circumvallations?
It has been conceived by some, Mr Wallis in his Antiquities of Northumberland.
that it was possessed by the Danes, and that these works appertained to that
people, who here held their civil and religious conventions. Kairns, placed on
such immense eminences, if marks of sepulture, must denote the place of
interment of remarkable personages, and those too who did not die by the sword;
for the universal custom of the ancient inhabitants of this land, who raised a
tumulus over the dead, appears to have been that of interring them where they
were slain. The circular buildings, if appropriations to the administration of
justice, must have been adapted to several and separate ministers; a thing
scarcely probable. If to the ministering of religious rites, or to sepulture,
then indeed the inconsistency ceases. The interior circumvallation appears
calculated for the exclusion of the vulgar, from the principal scene of
religious rites, where the priests and chief personages only ministered. The
wall which forms the grand enclosure of the whole crown of the mountain,
includes 16 acres and a half, or very near it, and would contain a prodigious
number of people.

In this wild and mountainous country, the names and marks of antiquity have
escaped those changes which naturally follow cultivation; and it is in such
parts we are to search for the evidences of the most remote antiquity existing
in this kingdom. It is certain the Druids, though they built temples and paid
their adoration toward the Sun, always retained such distinction in their
worship, that they looked up to the great Luminary as the Throne, or as the
symbol and archetype only of the Divinity; which they confessed, created and
governed the universe, and was the sole spirit of existence. It will not
follow, that this purity was retained by all the inhabitants of the same land,
or the same mode of worship gained an universal acceptance among them; many
appointed for themselves places for private adoration, and these eminences were
most assuredly the chosen spots for devotees, who paying their worship to the
Sun, might loss the symbolical character, and confounded with ignorance and
superstition, forget the archetype for the object. The name of Bell authorizes
me to presume this place was sacred to the Sun, it being derived from the
Chaldean language, and signifying the Sun. Mr Bryant says, many worshipped upon
hills, and on the tops of high mountains, imagining that they thereby obtained
a nearer communication with heaven. This practice in early times was almost
universal, and every mountain was esteemed holy. The people who retired to
eminences, fancied that they were brought into the vicinity of the powers of
the air, and the Deity who resided in the higher regions. But the chief
excellence for which they were frequented, was the Omphi, the Vox divina, being
esteemed a particular revelation from heaven. In short, they looked upon them
as the peculiar places, where God delivered his oracles. The word Omphi,
signifying the Oracle of Ham, who, according to the Egygtian theology, was the
same as the Sun or Osiris, he was likewise revered as the chief Deity of the
Chaldeans, and by most of the nations of the East: -- Having thus shown the
choice made by the Ancients of high places, for their adoration, I will next
consider the name of this place, according to the etymologies laid down by Mr
Bryant.

Bell, Bal, or Baal, is a Babylonish title, appropriated to the Sun; and made
use of by the Amonians in other countries: particularly in Syria and Canaan. It
signified (...) or Lord, and is often found compounded with other terms; as
Bel-Hamon, and also Bel-Shamaim, the great Lord of the heavens. This was a
title given by the Syrians to the Sun. By Gib is meant an hill. Gibeon was the
hill of the Sun. Nadab the son of Jereboam was slain at Gib-Ethon of the
Philistines. 1 Kings xv. 27.
So that Bel-Gebrin is no forced reduction of the present name of Yevering Bell,
or according to the more ancient name, Bel-ad-Gebron; and denominates the mount
of the Sun.

As to the kairn, which I mentioned to be situate on the eastern point of the
area, on the crown of the mount, which is a conical pile, terminating obtusely,
and basoned as before described, I presume its name to be derived from Keren,
which (according to Mr Bryant) signifies in its original sense a Horn; but it
was a title of the Sun himself: for Apollo was named Carneus; which was no
other than Cereneus, the supreme Deity, the Lord of Light. The Priest of
Cybele, in Phrygia, was styled Carnas, which was a title of the Deity whom he
served. Whence it is deducible, that our kairn on the summit of this mount, was
the place of the altar, where religious rites were performed in the fire
worship. And the like may be conceived of all those conical mounts called
kairns, they being a corruption of " Kir-on, the place of the Sun." In forming
these kairns, as well the present one as others we visited in this
neighborhood, and one in particular on the crown of one of the highest
mountains above Newton, called Newton West Tor, the stones must have been
carried up by a multitude of hands, with immense labor. Suppose by the
dimensions of one of these kairns, which measured near 40 paces in
circumference, that there was contained therein 300 carriage loads of pebbles;
we will find the computation of labor and hands to be immense, for the
construction thereof, when all the materials must be borne two miles of steep
ascent to this amazing accumulation. I was induced to believe I should discover
some hearth stone or altar on the crown of some of the kairns, but was
disappointed. Perhaps time and the abhorrence which grew up with Conversion
against the rites of the heathen, had removed the superstructure, if any such
there had been. There was not one of the kairns I visited had the regular
hollow basin, but that on the Bell, which was exactly circular, but composed of
stones of a small size, as far as I searched. On my view, I was immediately
persuaded that all these accumulations called kairns, situated on mountains and
high places, had not proceeded from a passion of honoring the dead, but were
formed by zealots, who attending their worship, carried with them progressively
a burden, to add to the grandeur, loftiness, and immensity of the sacred
place, where they paid their adoration. The kairn on Yevering is to the east,
an object regarded in the structures of the ancient Britons, in the remotest
antiquity, and by the Easterns, in erections of the like use. These places have
retained their ancient forms, and their first names uncorrupted, by reason of
the mountainous nature of the country. Where cultivation cannot advance, things
of this sort must rest for ages unchanged: it has been the case here. Besides,
the inhabitants are few, and those subsisting on the extreme verge of poverty,
hourly employed in procuring a scanty subsistence. Add to this the
depopulations which war for many ages occasioned, would prevent those
alterations which take place in times of peace. Mr Bryant says, The people of
Cappadocia and Pontus observed the like method of worship: and of all
sacrifices whatever, exhibited upon high places, none perhaps ever equalled in
magnificence, that which was offered by Mithridates, upon his war with the
Romans. He followed the Persic modes of worship, as well as the mixed rites of
the Chaldeans and Syrians. Hence he chose one of the highest mountains in his
dominions; upon the top of which he reared an immense pile, equal in size to
the summit on which it stood; and there he sacrificed to the God of Armies. The
pile was raised by his vassal Princes: and the offerings, besides those
customary, were wine, honey, oil, and every species of aromatics. The fire is
said to have been perceived at the distance of near a thousand stadia. So much
must suffice, on this point, and in this place, from innumerable instances
produced by this learned author.

My next enquiry will be, touching the circumvallation which appears on
Yevering Bell; to show that this was a practice with the Ancients, on their
consecrated hills. Mr Bryant says, The Helladians and the Persians were of the
same family: hence we find many similar rites subsisting among the two nations.
The latter adhered to the purer Zabaism, which they maintained a long time.
They erected the same sacred Tupha (or Tumulus) as the Grecians: and we may be
assured of the original purpose for which these hills were raised, from the use
to which they put them. They were dedicated to the great Fountain of Light,
called by the Persians, Anait; and were set apart as puratheia, for the
celebration of the rites of fire. This people, after they had defeated the
Sacae in Cappadocia, raised an immense Comah, in memorial of their victory.
Strabo, Lib. 1. p. 779.
who describes it very minutely, tells us, that they chose a convenient spot,
where they reared a Petra, or high place, by heaping up a vast mound of earth.
This they fashioned to a conical figure, and then surrounded it with a wall of
stone. In this manner they founded a temple, in honor of Anait. I have
mentioned that the Egyptians had hills of this nature, and from them the custom
was transmitted to Greece.

The circular buildings mentioned to appear on the sides of the mount, will be
the last objects which require my attention, before I draw my general
conclusion. I confess they did not appear to me so remarkable as to require
taking any admeasurement; but they are spoken of by Mr Wallis, as being very
singular, and as I did not traverse all the sides of the mountain, perhaps
those of greater consequence escaped my observation; but conceiving that they
may be marks of antiquity, among other matters, I will trespass upon the reader
with descriptions of those circular buildings in the northern parts of this
island, which have been visited by learned travelers; and perhaps some future
visitor of the Cheviots may be induced to make a narrower search, and more
correct investigation. But before I proceed thereto, I will consider some
others of Mr Bryant's opinions, which relate generally to my subject of
Yevering Bell, and particularly to the circular remains.

Mr Bryant informs, that these mounts were not only in Greece, but in Egypt,
Syria, and most parts of the world. They were generally formed by art, being
composed of earth raised very high; which was sloped gradually, and with great
exactness: and the top of all was crowned with a fair tower. The situation of
these buildings made them be looked upon as places of great safety: and the
reverence in which they were held, added to the security. On these accounts
they were the repositories of much wealth and treasure: in times of peril they
were crowded with things of value. In Assyria was a temple named Azara, which
the Parthian plundered, and is said to have carried off ten thousand talents.
To such as these Solomon alludes, when he makes his beloved say, 'I am a wall,
and my breasts like towers.' Though the word Cumah or Comah, be generally
rendered a wall; yet I should think, that in this place it signified the
ground, which the wall surrounded: an enclosure sacred to Cham, the Sun, who
was particularly worshipped in such places. Another passage in Solomon: 'We
have a little sister, and she has no breasts. If she be a Comah, we will build
upon her a palace of silver.' What is then termed a wall, was a Comah or high
place, which had been of old erected to the Sun, by the Jebusites. The ground
set apart for such use was generally oval; and toward one extremity of the
long diameter, as it were in the focus, were these mounds and towers erected.
For there were many of these towers, where they taught astronomy, music, and
other sciences. These places were likewise courts of judicature, where justice
was administered.

In Mr Pennant's Voyage to the Hebrides, we have the following accounts of
erections of this kind, near Inverness. Visit the celebrated edifices
attributed to the Danes: the first is placed about two miles from the mouth of
the valley of Glen Elg. The more entire side appears of a most elegant taper
form: the present height is thirty feet six inches; but in 1722, some Goth
purloined from the top seven feet and a half, under pretense of applying the
materials to certain public buildings. By the appearance of some ruins that now
lie at the base, and which have fallen off since that time, I believe three
feet more may be added to the height, which will make the whole about forty-one
feet.

The whole is built with dry walls, but the courses most beautifully disposed.
On one side is a breach of at least one quarter of the circumference. The
diameter within is thirty-three feet and a half, taken at the distance of ten
feet from the bottom: the wall in that part is seven feet four inches thick,
but is formed thinner and thinner till it reaches the top, whose breadth I
forgot to cause to be measured. The inside wall is quite perpendicular, so that
the inner diameter must have been equal from top to bottom: but the exterior
wall slopes, increasing in thickness till it reaches the ground.

In the thickness of the wall were two galleries, one at the lower part; about
six feet two inches high, and two feet five wide at the bottom, narrowing to
the top, flagged and also covered over with great flat stones. This gallery ran
quite round, and that horizontally, but was divided into apartments: in one
place with six flags placed equidistant from each other, and were accessible
above by means of a hole from another gallery. Into the lower were two
entrances, (before the ruin of the other side there had been two others) above
each of these entrances were a row of holes, running up to the top, divided by
flags, appearing like shelves: near the top was a circle of projecting stones,
which probably were intended to hold the beams that formed the roof: above is
another hole like the former. None of these openings pass through, for there is
not the least appearance of window or opening on the outside wall. All these
holes are square; are too small to admit the human body, so were probably
designed to lodge arms, and different other matters, secure from wet or harm.

Over the first gallery was another, divided from it only by flags. This also
went round, but was free from any separation; the height was five feet six;
only twenty inches wide at bottom. This was also covered with flags at top.

At a distance above, in the broken sides of the wall, was another hole, but it
seemed too small for a gallery. The ascent was not safe, so could not venture
up. The height was taken by a little boy who scrambled to the top.

The entrance was a square hole on the west side: before it were the remains of
some building, with a narrow opening that led to the door. Almost contiguous to
this entrance or portico, was a small circle formed of rude stones, which was
called the foundation of the Druids houses. It probably was formed for some
religious purpose. I was told there were many others of this kind scattered
over the valley.

At less than a quarter of a mile distant from this, stands the second tower on
a little flat on the side of the hill. The form is similar, but the number of
galleries differs: here are three; the lowest goes entirely round; but at the
east end is an aperture now of small depth, but once of such extent, that the
goats which sheltered in it were often lost: on that account the entrance was
filled with stones. This is six feet high, four feet two inches broad, and
flagged above and below.

A second gallery was of the same height, but the breadth of the floor only
three feet five.

The third gallery was of such difficult access, that I did not attempt to get
up: it was so narrow and so low, that it was with difficulty, that the child
who climbed to it could creep through.

The present height of this tower is only twenty-four feet five inches, the
diameter thirty: the thickness of the lower part of the wall, twelve feet four.

I could not perceive any traces of the winding stairs mentioned by Mr Gordon:
but these buildings have suffered greatly since that gentleman saw them: I have
no doubt of his accuracy.

These were in all probability places of defense, but it is difficult to say
any thing on the subject of their origin, or by what nation they were erected.
They are called here, Caisteal Teilbali, or the Castle of Teilba, built by a
mother for her four sons, as tradition, delivered in this translation of four
Erse lines, informs: "My four sons a fair clan
"I left in the straith of one Glen.
"My Malcomb my lovely Conil
"My Telve my Troddan.
There had been two others, now totally demolished, and each named after her
children. Mr Gordon mentions others of this kind, one of which is called the
Dune of Dornadilla, from an imaginary Prince, who reigned 260 years before the
christian era. -- By a paragraph some time ago in Lloyd's Evening Post, and
from a note given by Mr Pennant, which he says he had from the Edinburgh
Magazine, this place is described; part of which I will transcribe, as
pertinent to my present object.

The entrance is a very low and narrow door, to pass through which one is
obliged to stoop much: but perhaps the ground may have been raised since the
first erection. When one is got in and placed in the center, it is open over
head. All round the sides of the walls are ranged stone shelves, one above
another, like the shelves in a circular beaufet, reaching from near the bottom
to the top. There is some remains of an awkward staircase. Some years since I
happened, at an auction of books in London, to look into a French book
containing Gaulish Antiquities, and there I saw a print of the remains of a
Druidic temple in France, which greatly resembles the tower I am speaking of,
having like shelves in it. And reading a late pamphlet on the antiquity of the
Irish language, I think I can partly trace the origin of the name Dornadilla.
-- Dorn means a round stone; so that Abdorn would mean the round stone of the
priests; na is of, and Di is God; ulla means a place of devotion: so that
Dor-na-di-ulla will signify the round stone place of the worship of God; or
perhaps it might allude to some round stone preserved within, as a sacred
emblem of Divinity.

From the whole of these quotations I would determine, that by the name of
Yevering Bell, or Bel-ad-Gebrin, is implied a sacred mount consecrated to the
adoration of the Sun, and used in fire worship. Of this the kairn is a
corroborating proof. The circumvallation shows, by its similarity to those
spoken of, that the persons who used this mount for their religious rites,
derived those rites from the same source as those quoted, and fixes the
antiquity of Yevering Bell to very remote ages. It is a point not to be
doubted, that Yevering for some time was the residence of the Saxon Kings in
the Heptarchy. If we should carry the antiquity of Yevering Bell no further, we
will find its appropriation then to religious offices, as probable as in a more
distant antiquity. The Saxons brought with them many Eastern customs: they
worshipped the Sun, had their high places, and rites of fire worship and
sacrifice. As to my own judgment, I should be inclined to fix the antiquity of
this place to their era. The Druid tribes have left us such imperfect evidence
of their customs, that it is impossible to fix any thing positively there. It
is even most probable this was of Saxon origin, from its vicinity to the royal
residence, and the greatness of the work. The circular buildings have never
been fixed to any particular people: their constructors still remain
undiscovered. The circles of ruins on the sides of Yevering Bell, may have been
similar to those visited by Mr Pennant; it is probable these circular erections
were the towers of the priests, who there taught the principles of their
religion and the elements of natural philosophy; and that there they stored up
the treasures of the country in times of public danger, which from the
veneration paid by all people to those sacred places were inviolable. Besides,
they were well calculated for defense, upon assault. The circles formed by rude
and unhewn stones, found in many parts of the North, have been regarded by all
Antiquaries as places of public convocation, where justice was dispensed. The
number of stones might denote the tribes or districts under the care of each
Druid, as the Israelites numbered their tribes by such columns at the passage
of Jordan.

At a little distance from the Bell, to the southward is a large kairn of
stones, called Tom Tallon's Grave: but who this personage was, no history
informs us.

Some mountains near Yevering, have the names of Newton East and West Tor. On
one of them is a kairn of stones, also on the western point of Cheviot, and on
a mount called Whitlau, all in view of each other. These Tors are said by
several authors, to be held by the Saxons sacred to Jupiter. Mr Bryant's
remarks are, Tor is an hill or tower. They were called by the Amonians, who
first erected them, Tar and Tor; the same as the (...) of the Chaldeans, which
signified both a hill and tower. The words Tar, Tor, and Tarit, show that they
implied temples, and dedications to the Sun. -- He instances many facts to
prove this position, among which are, Tor-on, a place in Macedonia, literally
signifying the tower of the Sun. Also Tir-it, of the same signification, and
Tor-ambi, the oracular tower of Ham. -- He has in another place this sentence,
I will therefore say so much in furtherance of the British Antiquarian, as to
inform him, that names of places, especially of hills, promontories, and
rivers, are of long duration, and suffer little change. The same may be said of
every thing which was esteemed at all sacred; such as temples, towers, and high
mounds of earth, which in early times were used for altars. -- And in another
place, There was another name current among the Amonians, by which they called
their (...) or high places. This was Taph, which at times was rendered Tuph,
Toph, and Taphos. The Amonians, when they settled in Greece, raised many Tupha
in different parts; but as it was usual in ancient times, to bury persons of
distinction under heaps of earth formed in this fashion, these Tapha came to
signify tombs; and almost all the sacred mounds built for religious purposes,
were looked upon as monuments of deceased heroes; of which he gives many
instances.

I have dwelt too long on this subject, though an interesting one to those who
may hereafter visit these places.

I must not quit this country without remarking, that as we advanced toward
the boundary of the kingdoms, the hills were clothed with a singular verdure,
affording fine sheep walks; and the flocks and herds were numerous. The
cottages of the lower class of people are deplorable, composed of upright
timbers fixed in the ground, the interstices wattled and plaistered with mud:
the roofs, some thatched, and others covered with turf; one little piece of
glass to admit the beams of day; and a hearth stone on the ground, for the peat
and turf fire. Within, there was exhibited a scene, to touch the feelings of
the heart: description sickens on the subject, and a tear of pity blots out the
moving line, which strives to depict. I wished for some of the discontented
great ones, who, palled with luxury, despise their palaces, to change the scene
for a little, just time sufficient to gain conviction, that the cottager and
crowned head are both of one specie of animals, and of one race. The damp
earth, the naked rafters, the breeze-disturbed embers, and distracted smoke
that issues from the hearth, moved by contrary blasts, breaking through a
thousand crannies; the midday gloom, the wretched couch, the wooden utensils
that scarce retain the name of convenience, the domestic beast that stalls with
its master, the disconsolate poultry that mourn on the rafters, form a group of
objects for a great man's contemplation.

The inhabitants are of abject countenance, and miserably clothed, seeming to
confess the lowest degree of poverty. The employment of the men is in the
field; most of them are shepherds or herdsmen. The corn land, which is very
little in quantity compared with the meadows and grazing grounds, lays mingled
with the other over the open faces of the vales, without any fences; to protect
which, many an indolent herdsman stands for hours wrapped up in his played,
hanging over a staff, half animated; or otherwise laying prostrate upon the
ground. During the time he is engaged in this duty, if he had a spade put in
his hand, and was broke into the rules of industry, he might be most usefully
employed: he could fence the ground which he tends, in the time he spends in
herding it: but evil customs, when they correspond with habitual indolence, are
as hard to be eradicated, as to move a mountain -- a long series of
applications and labor, and the redoubled effects of example and experience,
must effect it. In consequence of this stupid custom, the farmer is necessarily
obliged to keep a multitude of servants. Their wages are paid in the products
of the land -- grain, wool, maintenance of sheep and cattle; very few money
payments being used.

From the openness of the country, the traveller is consequently perplexed with
cross roads, where not a guide-post has been known since the creation: to
remedy this evil, intelligence must be gained from one of these herds; and it
is remarkable, that there is a ferocity and uncultivated fullenness of mind in
those two-legged animals, which scarce confesses civilization enough to direct
a stranger on his way. When you obtain instructions, it is in a manner as he
would chase a beast from trespass. I cannot forbear comparing the countenance
of the lower class of English, in the northern counties, with that of the
Scotch -- I do not draw my remarks solely from my present tour, but through
observations made in many little pleasure jaunts in Scotland -- Though you
perceive the most abject poverty in the lowest rank of the Scotch people, yet
even under those weeds of distress, there is seen a singular openness and
benevolence of countenance. By some it may be objected, that this arises from
their servility, and these are no other than feigned looks of submission. Arise
from what it will, such countenance carries more of the character of humanity,
than the proud sternness, and brutal insolence, which mark those who boast a
savage liberty. But it is to be observed, that servility stamps the countenance
with abject timidity, which is not written on the Scotch features -- a generous
nature, and the liberality of a mind enlarged with education, are rather the
givers of such openness and benevolence of look. Almost every Scotch village is
blessed with a free school. You will find shepherds on the Scotch hills,
familiar with the poets and historians of Rome and Greece: such familiarity
introduces an adoption of principles and sentiments; and from thence we see in
these poor people, the maxims of mind which graced the illustrious names of
old. Can we wonder then at the desparity there appears in the lower class of
the two nations? -- But there is another source from whence a part of this
complaisancy and hospitality of the lower Scotch may be deduced: they are
strict in their religious principles; they are punctual attendants on public
worship; they hold with great sacredness their observance of the Sabbath day;
most of their pastors are not only rigid in their example, but arduous in their
duty and administration: amongst the people there is a just sense conceived,
even in the lowest minds, of man's duty to his God. The reverse is so
conspicuous in the English, that the comparison is scarce required. So far from
perceiving a religious principle in the lower classes, some of them have not
even been informed of their Redeemer; thousands have never entered a place of
worship; the Sabbath is distinguished only as a day of idleness, in which
gaming and drinking are pursued; many of the teachers of the gospel, with an
indolence and aversion apparent in their whole carriage, perform as a stale and
stupid task the offices of the church. Men are influenced by example; evil
example contaminates the most where the minds are most illiterate; weak men
take many of their vices by adoption: if it were not for our new sectaries, our
rambling preachers, the name of God would not be promulged to one-tenth part of
England's inhabitants. It is true they teach his laws, as the laws of the God
of terrors: it is better they should administer to him with the horrors of
hell, than there be no ministry. We have reformed the church, till we have
expelled the spirit of prayer: we have refined the pulpit, till nothing but the
grace of declamation remains: and our church manners are polished into that
exquisite insipidity, that if it were not for tithes, the major part of the
parish would forget the holy men of God.

KIRK NEWTON
lay next in our way, a small village, one of the Manors of the Barony of Wark,
the ancient residence of the Strothers, Sir Henry Strother King Edward II.
William Strother King Edward VI. Mark Strother, High Sheriff 1 King George I.
Wallis.
now the property of John Strother Ker, Esquire

Opposite to Kirk Newton is

The CASTLE of COPELAND,
now the possession of the Rev. Dr Newton Ogle. It was the ancient residence of
the Wallaces, Edward Wallace King Edward II. William Queen Elizabeth. George 17
King James I.
Wallis.
and was possessed by Edward Wallace in the reign of King Edward II. in whose
family it continued till of late years.

Within a little distance of Copeland, three remarkable battles were fought:
the one on the plains of Milfield, where a body of the Scotch were defeated
before the battle of Branxton by Sir William Bulmer of Brancepeth, who
commanded the forces of the Bishopric of Durham. The Scots lay in ambush among
the broom which then covered the plain.

Milfield, now a little village, was the residence of the Saxon Kings of
Bernicia, after the death of Edwin.

Another battle was fought at a place called Haltwell Sweire, where Sir Henry
Percy, brother to the sixth Earl of Northumberland, was defeated in the fifth
year of the reign of Queen Mary, 1558, by a troop of the Scots under the
command of the Earl of Bothwell, consisting of 1000 horse. Percy's cavalry were
thrown into confusion by a discharge of fire arms, to which they were not well
trained.

The third battle was at Broomridge, The place of this battle is treated with
great uncertainty by many authors: the name used by Fordun is Brunauburgh;
Camden, from its similarity, fixes it at Broomrigs. The many lines,
breastworks, and intrenchments, testify that this was the place of some great
action.
where a confusion of lines and intrenchments are yet to be seen. Here
Athelstan engaged the united forces of Constantine King of Scotland, Eugenius
Oweine or Ewaine King of Cumberland, and Anlap the Dane, in the year 928, and
gained a complete victory, though with the loss of Elwin and Athalstan, his
kinsmen, men of great valor. Constantine escaped into Scotland, Anlaf took
refuge in Dublin, but what became of Ewaine is not mentioned. It is presumed
this Ewaine is interred in Penrith churchyard; his sepulcher denoted by a very
singular monument there. This victory was greatly celebrated by Henry of
Huntington, William of Malmsbury, and Ingulph.

Mailross being the seminary from whence sprang the first Bishop of the Sea of
Lindisfarn, which constitutes so material a part of the church antiquities of
this county; and as the great patron, saint, the holy St Cuthbert, was educated
there, and from thence brought to Lindisfarn, it seemed of consequence, that I
should view the seat, from whence issued so much to exercise my attention, in
the remaining part of the tour, I had thus far prosecuted. I determined to
visit Mailross, and passed the village of Paston, formerly belonging to the
family of Selbys. On an adjoining hill, called the Harelaw, (the name implying
the station of an army) is a circular intrenchment with a double rampire and
fosse. From thence there is a fine prospect of the vale, where it gave us great
pleasure to observe the new modes of husbandry taking place -- turnips
cultivated in drill sowing, with horse and hand hoeing practiced. There is a
very great want of fences in this part of the country: habit and custom are
only to be subdued by time and example.

After passing some few miles beyond the boundary of the kingdoms, and gaining
an eminence above Tweeddale, we had a view of Kelso, and the rich extensive
vale which borders the river. Having traveled near 18 miles in the rude and
mountainous country from Wooler, where we seldom had in sight a cultivated
valley or fertile tract of any consequence, except at Paston, or the plain of
Milfield, but all the mighty scene was filled with stupendous mountains, on
whose summits rested an incessant gloom and driving rain; and after climbing
those lofty steeps, in search of evidences of antiquity, and traversing
boundless wastes, the present prospect gave us unusual pleasure. The vale
before us abounded in corn, and the extended scene possessed all the variety
that nature exhibits; the distant grounds were lifted up in a wild arrangement
of mountains. By the margin of the river, the yellow fields were so mixed with
the meads, as to resemble flowers of gold, wrought on the green robe of happy
Tweed. Few fences subdivide the vale: but here and there fine woods are
scattered; before us lay the delightful town of Kelso; on the left hand, a
cultivated country, through which the Tweed flows in meanders; on whose banks
Sir John Douglas's, and the palace of the Duke of Roxburgh, with their
extensive woodlands, are beautifully disposed. The Helton Mountains, three fine
conic eminences, form obelisks at the distance of 15 miles up the vale; over
which, and on each side, mountains behind mountains are seen, not united, but
distinctly surging from little valleys, which open around their bases, then
glowing with streams of yellow light. This hue was delicately mellowed by the
azure tinge of the hills, which formed the horizon. The same mountainous ground
was in the distant prospect in front; only differing in this, that the eye
penetrated the cultivated vales, at the feet of the hills, which stand at a
much greater distance from each other, and did not appear thrown together as in
the longer line of perspective. To the right we viewed the seat of Dr Johnston,
embowered in thick woods. Down the river the vale is more contracted, and less
distant prospect was taken in: the town of Coldstream was distinctly viewed,
with a multitude of inferior villages; above which, the seat of Lord Hume, with
the rising plantations around KELSOE ABBEY
it, fill the inclining ground. I never beheld a richer valley than we looked
upon here: the crops of corn were surprizingly great; the whole being reaped,
stood in sheafs: the meadows were luxuriant, and every object wore the happy
aspect of opulence.

We constantly regretted the want of fences in this tour; they would give a
great grace to the banks of Tweed, by intersecting the rich scene. The
advantage they would be of to the country is obvious; they would check the
severities of winter, and resist that raking blast, which, when unopposed,
shears the extensive grounds wherever it passes in the spring of the year;
consequently they would forward the progress of summer.

We descended to the town of

KELSO,
which lays on the northern banks of Tweed; and to which we had access by a
fine stone bridge of six arches.

From the southern banks of the river, the town with its invirons has the most
picturesque appearance: where I stood to observe its beauties, I had the bridge
on my right; an excellent though plain structure of modern work, stretching
across a fine river of transparent water, gently curling over a pebbly channel.
On the opposite shore, which is banked in, stands the modern and elegant
Mansion of Mrs Dixon, a widow Lady; a square hewn-stone structure, placed in
the midst of a garden, opening to the river; ornamented with a small Gothic
temple, a greenhouse and stove; with statues disposed on the grass plots, which
were intersected with gravel walks and flower knots. Over this modern and
fashionable scene, an august pile, in all the solemnity of ruin, frowns
majestically -- an old abbey stands near this mansion, a lofty structure, built
in the heaviest of the Gothic order -- two round towers of the south limb of
the cross, surmounted by a part of the center tower, formed the aspect on which
we looked: the windows are small, and the whole edifice gloomy.

It is strange what dissimilar ideas sometimes strike the imagination: as I
gazed upon this scene, I said to myself, Thus Charactacus, in the great reverse
of his fortune, looked with contempt on the pageantry and pomp of his Roman
conquerors: There could not be a finer contrast than in these two structures.
The town of Kelso crowded the back ground of our prospect. To the left the view
opened upon the vale, terminated by the noble woods which adjoin the seat of
the Duke of Roxburgh: to the right, through the arches of the bridge, were seen
fine perpendicular rocks, crowned with stately trees on the river's brink.

We entered Kelso, which is clean and well built: Mr Pennant says it is much
after the manner of a Flemish town. It has a spacious square marketplace,
with a townhouse piazza'd beneath, for the convenience of the market; the
number of inhabitants about 3000; the weekly market considerable, vast
quantities of corn being sold here, though chiefly by sample. The Inn was
elegant, the people obliging, and the attendants particularly alert and
condescending.

Kelso is a borough of the Duke of Roxburgh, and is governed by his Bailiff. It
is not remarkable for any great manufactory or trade, but appears to be the
place of residence of many people of easy fortune. Some part of the great
stocks of wool furnished by this country, is manufactured here into cloths
called plains, but dressed in England. There is also a manufacture of white
leather for the Edinburgh market.

The monastery here was founded by King David. During his brother Alexander's
reign, he had brought over from Tyrone, in France, certain Monks of a reformed
order, founded by Bernard d'Abbeville, a man of high reputation for sanctity
and severity of life; these he settled first at Selkirk with an ample revenue:
afterward making Roxburgh his residence, he removed his favorite Monks
thither; and when he came to the Crown, built for them the abbey and monastery
of Kelso, and fixed them there on the 2d of May, 1128, having dedicated the
church to the Virgin Mary and St John the Evangelist. Bernard the founder of
this order, was a disciple of Robert d'Arbrisser, founder of the order of
Fontevraud, which by a constitution almost peculiar to itself, consisted of
both Monks and Nuns, and had an Abbess to govern the society. Bernard founded
the monastery of Tyrone in the year 1109, from which place his disciples
derived their name. The habit of the Tyronensian Monks, was a light gray, but
was afterward changed to black. Fordun positively says, these Monks settled at
Selkirk in 1109; but Symeon of Durham, that they were not placed there till
1113, and remained fifteen years. According to Fordun, the succession of Abbots
was as follows: Ralph, one of the Monks brought over from France, was the first
Abbot, but on the death of Bernard, returned to succeed him in the Abbacy of
Tyrone; William succeeded to Selkirk, and on the death of Ralph, also returned
to Tyrone, as successor to that Abbacy; Herbert succeeded William, and was the
first Abbot of Kelso. It is presumed that David, who was a lover of the fine
arts, as well as a patron of every national improvement, had in view, on his
importing this colony from France, not only the advancement of religion, but
also that of arts and sciences, of which his subjects were in great need of
cultivation, their only occupations, from the remotest ages, having been the
duty of shepherds and the service of the sword. In the History of the Monastic
Orders, we find, that Bernard the founder of the Tyronensians would have all
sorts of handicrafts practiced in his monastery, as well to prevent the growth
of idleness, which he esteemed the mother of vice, as to procure necessaries
for the support of life. Accordingly in this body were painters, carvers,
joiners, smiths, masons, vine-dressers, and husbandmen, who were under the
command of an Elder: and what they earned was put into a common stock, for the
maintenance of the house. Kelso afterward sent forth colonies to the
foundations of Lismahago, Kilwinning, Aberbrothick, and Lindores.

This abbey was demolished in 1569, Leslie, lib. 10. p. 527. Monasteria
Dunfernlingense, Melrosense, Kelsorum, miseris modis sectarii vestabant.
in consequence of that enthusiastic reformation, which in its violence was a
greater disgrace to religion, than all the errors it was intended to subvert.
Reformation has hitherto always appeared in the form of a zealot full of
fanatic fury; with violence subduing, but through madness creating almost as
many mischiefs in its oversights, as it overthrew errors in its pursuit.
Religion has received a greater shock by the present struggle to repress some
formularies, and save some scruples, than it ever did by the growth of
superstition. She now bleeds inwardly; thinking men are driven into confusion,
and the unthinking turn infidels: -- these are the glorious works of modern
fanaticism.

The abbey of Kelso was built in the form of a Greek cross: the nave and quire
are totally demolished; the north and south ailes remain standing, being each
about 20 paces in length. The walls are ornamented with false round arches,
intersecting each other: the remains of the eastern end show a part of a fine
open gallery. Two sides of the center tower are standing, now near 70 feet
high, but have been much more lofty: it is galleried within, the pillars are
clustered, the arches circular, with few members, and without any great
ornament. The north and south ends have an uniformity, bearing each two round
towers, the centers rising sharp to the roof: the north door way is formed by a
circular arch, with various members falling behind each other, supported on
pilasters; the windows and work above, very plain. Three bells now hang in the
uppermost windows, this part of the nave having lately been used for divine
service. We did but just look into it; all pomp was utterly eradicated, and
every degree of pageantry defaced. The windows of this abbey are of circular
arches, and remarkably small, the whole mode of architecture singular, and
unlike any structure I remember to have seen in England: the walls are thick,
and every where ponderous. There is a Gothic gloominess throughout the whole,
that carries the appearance of a prison, rather than a house of prayer; and yet
these ruins have a countenance of sullen solemnity, which mingling with the
beautiful scene around, has a grand effect.

The revenues of this religious house amounted to 2000l. per annum Scots, and
arose in money payments: the Abbot was allowed to wear a mitre and pontifical
robes, to be exempt from episcopal jurisdiction, and permitted to be present in
all general councils. It was at first under the Bishopric of St Andrews, but
afterward made a member of the Sea of Glasgow: it had several immunities, and
the Abbot and Monks had liberty to receive ordination, and the other sacraments
of the church, from any Bishop they pleased in Scotia or Cumbria. By Innes's
Critical Essay, this Camb^ia is construed to be the Sea of Glasgow, for reasons
too tedious to insert here.
King Malcolm, in 1159, granted a confirmatory charter to this abbey, the
witnesses to which are remarkable.

"The three Bishops of Glascow, Murray, and Dunkeld; William and David the
King's brothers, and Ada his mother; the Abbots of Dunfermling, Jedwood,
Newbottle, and Sterling; Walter the Chancellor; the Prior and Archdeacon of St
Andrews; the Archdeacon of Loadonia for Herbert the Chamberlain; Nicholas,
Clerk; Richard the Chaplain; Godred King of the Isles; Earls Gospatrick,
Fertech, Duncan, and Gellebride, Earl of Angus, Uctred son of Fergus, Gilbert
de Unframville, William de Summerville, Richard de Moreville, Ranulph de Sulas,
David Olifard, Richard Cuming, Robert Avenal, William de Moreville, William
Finemund, Walter Corbet, Asket de Ridala, Henry de Perci, Liolph, son of
Maccus, Orm son of Hialaph." -- Anderson's Diplom.

The inhabitants of Kelso have made a good change in their place of worship, a
new church being built in great simplicity of architecture, of an octagonal
form, 82 feet in diameter, ornamented with a glazed cupola or lanthorn in the
center, supported by a circle of pillars; the whole commodious, cleanly, and
decent.

The lands adjoining upon Kelso are very fine; the prospects delightful. From
the Chalkheugh you look upon the confluence of the rivers Tiviot and Tweed,
commanding a view of the borders of each river for a considerable distance
above: the landscape is filled by the remains of the Castle of Roxburgh, the
elegant Seat of Sir John Douglas, with Fleurus on the offscape: these objects
mingle with much wood and fine meads. From an eminence called Pinnacle Hill,
you command a long course of the Tweed, whose silver stream glides through a
highly cultivated country. Turnips and cabbages for the use of cattle cover
many large tracts, and pototoes appear in vast fields. Much wheat is raised in
the neighborhood, part of which is sent up the Firth of Forth, and part into
England.

Pennant's Tour in Scotland, part II.
The sheep are of an improved breed, and bear good fleeces, carrying a price of
20s. per stone, 24lb. The Aberdeen manufacture of Stockings, or that of
Linlithgow, takes the finest; the rest is chiefly sold into Yorkshire, except
what supplies the small manufactory of Kelso.

I am partial to the sentiments of the celebrated traveller Mr Pennant; my
adopting them is a confession of vanity, as it acknowledges a coincidence of
mind: the reader will find them here, I doubt not, of a price sufficient to
purchase my pardon.

I cannot leave Kelso, without regretting my not arriving there in time to see
the races, which had been the preceding week. These are founded not on the
sordid principles of gaming, or dissipation, or fraud, but on the beautiful
basis of benevolence, and with the amiable view of conciliating the affections
of two nations, where the good and the bad, common to every place, are only
divided by a rill scarcely to be distinguished: but prejudice for a time could
find no merit but within its own narrow bourn. Some enlarged minds however,
determined to break the fascination of erroneous opinion, to mix with their
fellow subjects, and to instruct both the great vulgar and the small, that the
northern and southern bounders of the Tweed, created in their inhabitants but a
mere difference, without a distinction, and that virtue and good sense were
equally common to both. At these races the Stewards are selected from each
nation: a Percy and a Douglas may now be seen hand in hand; the example of
charity spreads, and may it spread with all its sweet influences, to the
remotest corner of our island.

What pleasing times, to those that may be brought in contrast! when every
house was made defensible, and each owner garrisoned against his neighbor;
when revenge at one time dictated an inroad, and necessity at another; when the
mistress of a castle has presented her sons with their spurs, to remind them
that their larder was empty, and that by a forray they must supply it at the
expense of the borderers; when every evening the sheep were taken from the
hills, and the cattle from their pasture, to be secured in the lower floor from
robbers prowling like wolves of prey, and the disappointed thief found all in
safety, from the fears of the cautious owner. The following simple lines give a
true picture of the times: "Then Johnie Armstrong to Willie began say,
"Billie a riding then will we:
"England and us have been long at feud,
"Perhaps we may hit on some booty.
"Then they are come on to Hutton-ha,
"They rade that proper place about;
"But the Lord he was the wiser man,
"For he had left nae geir without.
These were the exploits of petty Robbers: but when Princes dictated an inroad,
the consequences bore a proportion to their rank. An Armstrong might drive away
a few sheep, but when an Henry directs an invasion, 192 towns, towers, steads,
barnekyns, churches, and bastelhouses are burnt, 403 Scots slain, 816 taken
prisoners, 10316 cattle, 12492 sheep, 1296 nags and geldings, 200 goats, 200
bolls of corn, and insight gear without measure carried off. Such were the
successes during four months of the year 1544.

In Kelso abbey many illustrious persons were interred, among the first of whom
was the son of King David the founder.

Here Henry III. of England with his Queen, met with Alexander III. of Scotland
and his Queen, when great cordiality and friendship was experienced between the
nobles of both realms who attended their Sovereigns.

In the reign of King Henry IV. of England, and King Robert III. of Scotland,
A. D. 1401, a truce was concluded here, which was of considerable duration, by
the Commissioners of both realms.

In 1460, King James III. of Scotland was crowned at Kelso, when the nobles
paid their homage and swore fealty to the new Sovereign.

In 1522, the English in a sudden incursion pillaged and burnt Kelso, but were
soon repelled by the forces of Mers and Tiviotdale. This spoil is attributed to
Lord Dacres; and some authors say he burnt 80 villages in that expedition, and
overthrew 18 stone built towers, with all their bulwarks.

In the reign of King Henry VIII. A. D. 1542, the Duke of Norfolk advancing to
the Scotch borders, burnt and levelled with the ground 28 places of
considerable note in Scotland; among which was Kelso, with its abbey.

In 1544, Sir Ralph Eure carried fire and sword to the banks of Tweed, and
destroyed the tenements in Kelso which had been re-edified since the former
devastation.

The detail of mutual cruelties and savage spoil is horrible -- they were a
disgrace to human nature.

There was a convent of Red Friars at the mouth of Tiviot, near Kelso; but who
was its founder, or what was its revenue, is not known. Spotswood's History of
the Church of Scotland.


As I have had occasion to speak of the Scotch church, and as church tyranny
south of the Tweed is exclaimed against with violence and indignation, it may
not be disagreeable to the reader, to see how our neighbors the Scotch are in
that matter, amidst all their boasted puritanism. In my notes I shall give a
short state of facts, which came to a solemn hearing before the Presbytery,
this present year. The case arose between a Dr John Wotherspoon and some
gentlemen of the town of Paisley. These gentlemen had passed a few hours
together in a private room over a social glass. It happened that this was the
day preceding the celebration of the sacrament, which gave a handle to the
Doctor to take offense. He accordingly called them before his Kirk Session; but
in place of libelling them for drunkenness, he accused them of some scandalous
indecencies, approaching even to prophanity; and while this action was pendent,
and before any proof was heard, and even before some of the gentlemen accused
had appeared before the Session, he thought proper to mount his pulpit, and
issue forth, in the shape of a sermon, a most dreadful f^l^ination; in which he
adjured his bearers by the most solemn ties, to have no communication or
fellowship with such, pointed them out as objects of popular resentment, and
concluded with the Apostle's advice to his followers: Have no fellowship with
the unfruitful works of darkness, but rather reprove them. He next proceeded to
make proofs before the Sessions, which did not at all appear to support the
accusation. However a majority of the Session concurred in a sentence, ordering
the gentlemen to appear before the face of the congregation, to receive his
public rebuke, and referred to the Presbytery what public censure should be
inflicted. The gentlemen did not choose ^o submit to this public discipline,
especially from their violent persecutor, but appealed to the Presbytery who
after full hearing and great deliberation, unanimously reversed the sentence,
ordering the gentlemen to be dismissed with a rebuke from the bar; on which
they declared their sorrow for having met on that particular day, if it gave
offense. Dr Wotherspoon ill brooking the moderation of the Presbytery,
instantly threatened, if the Presbytery did not affirm the sentence of his
Session, and also inflict a more severe censure, to print his sermon, prefix
the gentlemen's names to it, and either bring them to the submission he wished,
or brand their names with infamy and disgrace through the British dominions.
And immediately after the Presbytery's sentence, he did publish his sermon with
a narrative prefixed, accusing the gentlemen by name, of all the crimes he had
laid to their charge; but of which the Presbytery had unanimously acquitted
them; and it was advertised to be sold in every corner of Scotland, where any
of the gentlemen had any connections, Paisley, Glasgow, Edinburgh, Sterling,
etc. The Doctor also entered an appeal to the General Assembly, which he
afterward thought proper to withdraw. The gentlemen brought their action
before the Court of Session, complaining very loud of the injuries they had
suffered, and which they said had been attended with very bad consequences to
them. The Court expressed the highest indignation against Dr Wotherspoon's
conduct, gave 150l. damages, with costs to a considerable amount. Behold a
Scotch Cardinal Woolsey -- are such ministers a benefit to true religion; the
religion of the mind that dwells with peace!


We now pursued our journey, crossed the river Tiviot at the Mill Ford, and
traveled up the southern banks of Tweed to Mailross, the three Helton
Mountains being our point of direction; Mailross laying behind them, and they a
landmark constantly in view.

We passed Sir John Douglas's on our left, an elegant little mansion of hewn
stone; the walks and pleasure grounds around it, neat to a degree of exactness;
the lands rich, and the woods disposed at a proper distance. On the opposite
side of Tweed, the Palace of the Duke of Roxburgh presented its extensive
front, flanked with immense woods. For three miles, the banks of the river as
we passed were clothed with a fine forest. In some places, the road leading
along the summit of lofty cliffs, from whence we looked down upon the river and
opposite rocks, whose brows were crowned with noble trees.

We arrived at

ROXBURGH CASTLE,
at present consisting of little more than a lofty eminence, of an oblong
figure, elevated above the plain about 40 perpendicular feet; chiefly natural:
on the brink of which are the remains of a wall, the outward defense of the
ancient castle; the interior part is now planted with trees. This mount is
defended at the foot on the north and west sides, by a deep moat and outward
rampire of earth, a fine plain intervening between these outworks of the castle
and the river. The dimensions within the walls, where the interior fortress
stood, we could not obtain for the trees and thickets. The western point is
guarded by an outwork and mound of earth, which is severed from the chief part
of the castle by a moat, but included in the outward works the fosse and rampire
before described. The fosse or moat was supplied with water by a dam which
crossed the river Tiviot in an oblique direction, the remains of which still
appear. The south and east sides are defended by an inaccessible precipice; at
whose foot the river runs with a rapid current.

Camden says, this castle was anciently called Marchidun, from its standing on
the Marches; and for natural situation and towered fortifications, was in times
past exceeding strong. The fortress having been surprised by the English, James
II. of Scotland, whilst he laid siege to it with a vast army to recover it, was
slain by the bursting of a large piece of ordnance. As for the castle, it was
surrendered, and then raised. It is now in a manner quite vanished, and its
ancient grandeur totally defaced.

Mr Pennant says, the first mention I find of it is in 1132, when a treaty was
concluded here on the part of King Stephen, by Thurstan Archbishop of York,
between him and King David I. -- But in Symeon Dunelm, we are informed, that
John Cardinal of Crima, Legate Pervenit apud flavium Tu^dam qui Northumbriam
and Loidam determinat, in loco qui Rocheburch vocatur. It is told, to the
eternal disgrace of this Legate, that in a Council at London, having declaimed
bitterly against the sin of a Priest, who had risen from the side of an Harlot
to consecrate the Host; he was found himself the following night in bed with an
Harlot.
of Pope Honorius, came to the Scottish King at Roxburgh, in the year 1125, to
determine the controversy touching the Primacy of York over the Scottish
church. In 1126, King David returning from the Court of England, was attended
to Roxburgh by Thurstan Archbishop of York, Ralph Bishop of Durham, and Algar
Prior of St Cuthbert's convent in Durham. Smith's Appendage to Bid, p. 764.


King David I. made this the place of his residence, during the reign of his
brother Alexander. Hither he brought his favorite Monks of Tyrone, from
Selkirk, before he placed them at Kelso, and built the abbey there. He added to
the strength of the place, increased its fortifications, and made it one of the
chief bulwarks of his kingdom.

Malcolm Macbeth, who pretended to be the son of Earl Angus, and was in arms
against his Sovereign King David in 1234, was imprisoned in the Tower of
Roxburgh.

By the Chronicle of Mailross it appears, that the church of St James, at
Roxburgh, was dedicated the 17th of April, 1234.

King David was the great patron of every national improvement: he observed the
example of Lewis le Gros, in civil and commercial establishments, and granted
many charters of incorporation to his cities and burghs. The burgh laws he
caused to be framed from the remarks made by learned men, sent by him for the
purpose into foreign states, to reap the spirit and efficacy of each
constitution. It is probable that Roxburgh was one of the first of those
communities in Scotland; for in an ancient manuscript copy of the burgh laws,
of which David was the undoubted author, the title prefixed declares them to be
the laws and customs of the four burghs, viz. Berwick, Roxburgh, Edinburgh, and
Sterling. A further evidence that these were the first royal burghs, is in the
court kept by the King's Chamberlain, where his office appears to give him
jurisdiction over all the King's burghs; the court being called the court of
the four burghs, and consisted of Delegates from the burghs above mentioned,
three or four from each burgh, who by virtue of the Chamberlain's summons,
assembled annually at Haddington, where all appeals from the peculiar courts of
each single burgh were heard and finally determined.

The confirmatory charter of King Malcolm to Kelso, dated 1159, was given at
Roxburgh. It appears by this charter, that the King made Roxburgh his
residence, as he frequently attended divine service at the church at Kelso; for
he confirms to that church all the offerings made by himself and his
attendants, whenever on solemnities or other days he heard the service of God
in that church. The populousness of Roxburgh and the country in the
neighborhood, may be inferred from the mention of churches in that place,
granted to the Kelso convent, as freely as they had been held by Acceline the
Archdeacon, and which churches seem distinct from the then lately erected
church of St James. The same appears from the grant of 20 chalders, partly corn
and partly meal, (inter farinam and frumentum) to be paid out of the Roxburgh
mills, which probably was the estimate of the amount of the seventh part of the
mills granted in David's charter to the abbey of Selkirk. Mention is also made
of a new town of Roxburgh.

In 1197, the rebellious Harold Earl of Caithness was confined in Roxburgh.
This perfidious Earl having delivered Torphin his son as an hostage for his
future fidelity, by his repeated treasons, occasioned him to become a sacrifice
to the resentment of his King, who in his wrath being devoid of humanity, gave
the innocent youth up to the most dreadful tortures and excruciating death. His
eyes were bored out, and his genitals torn off.


In 1209, William the Lion assembled a great army at Roxburgh to oppose King
John, who had approached the borders, and lay at Norham; but hostilities were
prevented by a timely convention and a truce.

In 1215, King John, incensed against the northern Barons for their doing
homage to King Alexander II. at Felton, marched northward in the middle of
winter, and laid the country waste with fire and sword, exercising the greatest
cruelties on the distracted inhabitants. He burnt the towns of Milford,
Morpeth, Alnwick, Wark, and Roxburgh, in this horrid expedition.

In 1239, Roxburgh appears to have been restored; for here King Alexander II.
celebrated his marriage, on the 4th of March in that year, with the daughter of
Ingelram de Conci, and on the 4th of September, 1241, the Queen brought forth a
son here, Alexander, who succeeded to the Crown of Scotland.

In 1255, Roxburgh was the place of refuge for King Alexander III. and his
young Queen, who had been prohibited consummation of their marriage by the
guardians of the kingdom: of which complaint had been sent to King Henry III.
her father, wherein she set forth the hardships she underwent from the
guardians, who held her in strict confinement, refused her the attendants and
maids she chose, and debarred her from the embraces of her husband. The Earl of
Gloucester, with others sent by King Henry, assisted by the Earl of Dunbar and
his adherents, surprised the Castle of Edinburgh, and taking possession of the
persons of the King and Queen, conveyed them under a strong guard to Roxburgh,
where the Queen's distresses were relieved, although her royal spouse was then
only 14 years of age.

Prince Edward, son to Henry III. when on an expedition against the northern
rebels who were in combination with John de Vescy, after his forfeiture of
Alnwick, proceeded to Roxburgh in the year 1266, where he was received with the
greatest demonstrations of joy by the King and Queen of Scotland, attended on
that occasion by a numerous body of the Scotch nobility.

The marriage of Alexander Prince of Scotland to the daughter of the Earl of
Flanders, was celebrated here on the 9th of April, 1283, the nuptial feast
being continued for 15 days with the greatest magnificence.

King Edward I. in 1296, reduced the Castle of Roxburgh, where he continued
several days with his army; during which time he was reinforced with 15,000
fresh troops from Wales.

In the succeeding year Edward having mustered his forces at Newcastle, with an
army of 2000 heavy armed horse, 1200 light horse, and 100,000 foot, proceeded
to the Scotch border. The Scotch army, which for a considerable time had laid
before Roxburgh, in hopes of restoring to his liberty the Bishop of Glasgow,
who was prisoner there, hearing of so great an army advancing, raised the
siege. The relief brought by the English to the garrison of Roxburgh Castle was
highly seasonable, for they were already reduced to great hardships; and the
inhabitants of the town, from the circumvallation formed by the Scotch, were
brought to great distress for want of provisions.

On Shrove Tuesday, in the year 1313, the garrison of Roxburgh indulging
themselves on that festival in an impolitick security, were given up to riot
and dissipation, when they were surprised by Sir James Douglas, with a resolute
band, who having approached in disguise, mounted the walls by ladders of ropes.
The name of Douglas echoed through the place, and roused the English from their
festivity and drunkenness, many of them falling under the sword of the
assailants. The Governor retired into the great tower with a few of his men,
where after two days resistance, having received a wound in his face by an
arrow, he surrendered the fortress. King Robert Bruce, on receiving
intelligence of this exploit, sent his brother Edward to demolish the
fortifications, which he effected with great labor.

King Edward III. in 1334, having come to Newcastle in quality of Supreme of
Scotland, received the homage of Edward Baliol in a public and solemn manner:
at which time Baliol, as a recompense for the expenses King Edward had
sustained in recovering and restoring to him his inheritance, by letters patent
alienated to him, amongst other things, the town, castle, and county of
Roxburgh, to be annexed to and incorporated with the Crown of England for ever.

In 1341, we find Roxburgh again in the possession of the Scotch, hav-been
recovered by Sir Alexander Ramsay for King David Bruce.

King Edward III. in 1356, received from Baliol a formal surrender of his right
to the Crown of Scotland. This he performed by the ceremony of delivering his
Crown, with some of the soil of Scotland, at Roxburgh, where Edward resided
some days. This King twice celebrated his birthday in this castle.

In 1372, George Dunbar Earl of March, accompanied by his brother the Earl of
Murray, with a large body of their dependants, entered Roxburgh at the time of
the annual fair, and in revenge of the death of one of their followers, who was
slain the preceding year in an affray, slew all the English they found in the
town, plundered it of the great quantities of merchandise and goods which were
collected there on the above occasion, and reduced the town to ashes.

King James II. of Scotland, availing himself of a neglect in the English of
attending a proposed convention for continuing the truce in 1460, raised an
army with great expedition, with which he advanced against Roxburgh. At the
first assault he took the town, and levelled it to the ground. A regular siege
was laid to the castle. Here the Scotch King was joined by great
reinforcements, among which was the Earl of Huntley with his followers. The
King, for former services, desirous of honoring Huntley, showed him every mark
of esteem and royal favor; he conducted him to the trenches, to observe the
discharge of his artillery, one of which was remarkable for its size, and had
the name of the Lion. The King took delight in attending these operations, in
which he showed a distinguished intrepidity, but in the end lost his life
thereby, one of his pieces of ordnance in this siege, to which he had
approached too near, burst in discharging, whereby the Earl of Angus, who stood
near the King, was much wounded, at the instant that a splinter broke the
King's thigh and struck him dead. This is the tragical circumstance before
quoted from Camden. The Queen with her eldest son, then a boy about seven years
of age, is said to have been in the camp at the time of this dreadful
catastrophe. She sustained the shock with heroic firmness, exhorted the Chiefs
to desist from unavailing lamentations, and to testify their reverence for
their King's memory, by carrying on the siege with redoubled vigor. Her
exhortations had the desired effect, the besiegers exerted their utmost
efforts. The garrison finding themselves reduced to extremities, surrendered
the fortress; and, as Redpath in his Border History says, that the place which
the English had held for more than 100 years, might thenceforth cease to be a
center of rapine and violence, or a cause of future strife between the nations,
the victors reduced it to a heap of ruins.

We do not find that the fortress was restored, or that any repairs were made
to it to render it tenable until 1547, when the English army led by the
Protector, passing the Tweed after the battle of Musselbrough, encamped on the
plain over against Kelso, between the ruins of the ancient Castle of Roxburgh
and the confluence of Tweed and Tiviot. The Protector observing the strong and
convenient situation of this ruined fortress, determined to make it tenable.
The breaches in part of the ancient walls were filled with bankings of turf, he
having reduced the fortress in size, by casting up deep trenches on the east
and west ends within, and fortified them with a wall. Patten's account of these
repairs is in the following terms: That one great ditch of 20 feet broad, with
depth accordingly, and a wall of like breadth, depth, and height, should be
made cross within the castle, from the one side wall to the other, and 40 foot
from the west end; and that a like trench and wall should also be cast
a-traverse within, about a coit's cast from the east end; and hereto that the
castle walls on either side, where need was, should be mended with turf, and
made with loopholes, as well for shooting directly forwards as for flanking at
hand. So intent was the Protector on this work, that he labored at it with his
own hands two hours every day whilst it was going on, and his example was
followed by most of the principal men of his army. The place was made
defensible in six days, and there was left in it a garrison of 300 soldiers and
200 pioneers, under Sir Ralph Bulmer.

Mr Pennant says, a large holly, surrounded by a wall, marks the spot where
James II. fell; but it was not noted to me when I visited the place.

Near to the site of Roxburgh are the confused foundations of buildings and
one gate-way of excellent workmanship, which denote the place where stood a
house of Franciscans.

It is not possible to tread this ground without the most serious reflections:
the vicissitudes of human life, here so remarkably experienced, furnish the
traveller with a crowd of ideas, producing melancholy determinations. Here,
where this turf, now painted with flowers, is browsed by the flocks, once stood
a town flourishing in trade; where festivity and mirth often engaged the
wealthy inhabitants; where the royal presence was encircled with the nobility
of the land; where the splendor of a court was displayed; where the royal
nuptials and the birth of Princes made a kingdom joyful; where peace brought
her olives to crown felicity: -- and in reverse of circumstances, where these
cattle graze, armed troops have held their deadly conflicts, the soil has drank
in the blood of heroes and nobles; even royalty has bled upon these plains; the
shoots of victory or the cries of distress have often distracted these now
peaceful echoes which make responses to the bleating sheep; cannon have rent
the confused atmosphere, and the clangour of marshal instruments has filled
the gale, which now breathes music in the murmuring groves; revenge, rapine,
and innumerable crimes have cursed the ground I tread with every human sin.
Avenging Providence at length has razed the walls, conscious of such iniquity;
the haughty towers are levelled with the earth, the ploughshare has gone over
the paths of wicked ages, and all but the name of Roxburgh is clean done out.

As Roxburgh fell, so have empires fallen; and though it is a reflection which
brings with it the acutest sorrow, yet it must be admitted, that when the
accomplishment of time is come, other empires must sink into oblivion. Power
and magnificence are periodical, we know not which will be the next that yields
in the succession. Heaven grant that Britain by her virtues may merit the
divine protection, and that her empire may survive to the latest ages full of
honor.

It is very remarkable, that not the least traces remain to mark the place
where so large a town once stood; a place so eminent, and of so great resort
for trade, the residence of Kings, and the seat of such conventions.

The adjoining territory from the old castle and town is called the Sheriffdom
of Roxburgh, of which the Douglas's are Hereditary Sheriffs, and usually
denominated Sheriffs of Tiviotdale.

Our road on the banks of Tweed led through a cultivated country, but ill
fenced, and the modes of husbandry gradually growing worse as we proceeded. We
passed the house of Colonel Mac Dougle, situate on the north banks of Tweed; a
handsome Mansion, on the brink of a steep descent; in the front a terrace, and
grass slopes laid out with taste, and well kept; the house sheltered by
plantations to the north and west.

Further up the river the house of Mr Scot is seen; a pretty square building,
surrounded with trees. On that side of the river which we passed, stood a large
exploratory mount, which seemed to have been originally encircled by three or
four several bankings or terraces, ascending above each other. The crown is now
planted with young trees, and forms a pretty object from the gentlemen's seats
on the opposite side of Tweed.

Within some little distance, further up the river, we viewed a circular fort,
which, as it remains the most entire of any we saw on this tour, and will give
a full idea of those which we passed, similar in form, though less perfect, I
have given a kind of bird-eye view of it.



This camp, or rather fort, has been formed from a natural eminence; the crown
is exactly circular, and level with a rampire of earth on the verge, having an
aperture or entrance toward the east, of the width of 12 paces: the rampire
rises about six perpendicular feet from the level of the interior plain, from
the foot of which rampire the plain is near 62 paces diameter. I paced the top
of this rampire, and found the whole circle to be near 200 paces. In the
interior plain, not exactly in the center, but inclining to the south-west, is
the foundation of a stone wall, forming a square of equal sides, 14 paces each.
This probably was the apartment of the General or other officers, or a
storehouse for arms and valuable effects. The height from the top of the upper
rampire to the next level, is nearly 18 perpendicular feet, and as steep as
soil or turf can possibly be supposed to lay. The level here, for it can scarce
be termed a fosse, the rampire on its edge only forming a breastwork, is nine
paces wide. This second rampire only makes a part of a circle, its points
terminating on the brink of a very high precipice overhanging the river: the
top of this rampire extends 140 paces. The height from the top of the second
rampire to the next level, is about 15 perpendicular feet, of as steep an
ascent as the former. This level or fosse is only six paces wide, the lowest or
third rampire only forming a breastwork to the interior level; but from the
common plain is six feet in height, composed of stones without any mortar; its
points also terminate on the edge of the precipice, and its top measures 140
paces: so that the whole mount appears about 34 perpendicular feet high. The
form of this fortification renders it probable, that the chief persons of the
army who lay here, with their valuables, were placed on the crown of the
eminence, and that the lower trenches were occupied by the troops, according to
the nature of their arms; the heavy-armed soldiers in the lower intrenchment;
those armed with missile weapons on the second and third levels: by which
position, on an attack, the garrison could fight as from a theater, stage above
stage, and when forced from the lower trenches, could still retreat to a
station of superiority. These are improperly called camps: they seem not
calculated for encampment, but as forts for a secure resort.

I presume this fortification was originally Danish, but to what part of the
dark history of those times it may belong, I am totally ignorant.

When we had arrived within about four miles of Mailross, we had a prospect of
the ruins of

DRYBURGH ABBEY,


seated on a promontory on the banks of Tweed, under a lofty hill which defends
it from the north. We did not approach nearer to it than the opposite shore,
from whence it made a good appearance, emerging from a thick wood. The
principal part now standing is supported by fine clustered pillars. Mr Pennant,
who crossed the ferry to view it, says, On the northern side (of Tweed) in the
deep gloom of a wood, are the remains of the Abbey of Dryburgh, founded by Hugh
Morvill, Constable of Scotland in the time of King David I. and Beatrix de
Campo Bello his wife. There are scarce any relics of the church, but much of
the convent, the refectory supported by two pillars, several vaults and other
offices, part of the cloister walls, and a fine radiated window of stone-work.
These remains are not inelegant, but unadorned. This was inhabited by
Praemonstratentian Monks; who styled the Irish Abbeys of Druin le Crox and
Woodburn their daughters. At the reformation King James VI. bestowed Dryburgh
on Henry Erskine, second son of the Earl of Mar, whose house, as Commendator,
is still inhabited.

In the reign of Edward II. 1322, the English, on their return from an
incursion, in which they had penetrated the country as far as Edinburgh, burnt
Dryburgh, having first pillaged it of its wealth.

The country as we approached Mailross showed a gradual decrease of proper
husbandry, as well as an inferior quality of soil. We arrived at the town of

MAILROSS,
seated in a deep valley, in which the abbey was concealed from the eye till we
were just upon it; but when through the trees we gained a view of its east
window, the elegance of the structure astonished us.

We hastened to the Inn, and with all the impatience of curiosity approached
the sacred pile on the southern side. The view from the entrance into the
churchyard is noble. This church is in the form of a cross; the south end of
the transept presented itself in front; the arching of the door-way is composed
of a semicircle, with various members, of the most delicate work, falling
behind each other, supported on light and well-proportioned pilasters; on each
side is a projection of rich tabernacle-work. The corners of this end of the
structure are composed of angular buttresses, terminated by spires of
tabernacle-work. These buttresses are pierced with niches for statues, the
pedestals and canopies of which are of the lightest Gothic order, and
ornamented with garlands of flowers in pierced-work. From the Manuscripts of
the late Roger Gale, Esquire The following account was communicated to Roger Gale,
Esquire by Mr Francis Drake of York.
Norham, 14th July, 1742. SIR,
I could heartily wish that some judicious brother of your Antiquarian Society
was but to see a Gothic rarity that is in this neighborhood, (viz.) the
beauteous ruins of the Abbey of Mailross, which I shall take upon me to say,
has been the most exquisite structure of its kind in either kingdom: I wont say
but other abbeys have been larger, such as St Albans, and some conventual
churches more august, as Beverley; but this of Mailross is extravagantly rich
in its imagery, niches, and all sorts of carving by the best hands that Europe
could produce at that time; nay there is such a profusion of nice chisel-work
in foliage and flowers at the very top of the steeple, that it cannot be seen
from the ground without the help of a glass. The capital of every pillar that
supports the arches of the church and the doors, are all hollowed with a small
tool, being wreathed-work of all sorts of flowers, such as you have at the
entrance of your chapter house at York. Every brother has had a stall in the
cloister (now much demolished) which have been variously adorned with the
leaves of fern, oak, palm, holly, or some other kind of trees.

The building from the steeple to the east end is entire in the walls, but the
roof (which has been of stone and carved) is much decayed.

The quire is but small, but has a noble east window, the glass all out;
therein lies a marble stone without any inscription, half a hexagon, tapering
smaller at the foot, of a bright green color, and powdered full of white
feathers.

The whole structure is in the form of a St John of Jerusalem's cross, the
north and south ailes pretty complete; at the north side of which is a
staircase that has led into the Prior's house.

From the steeple, westward, remain six arches of the nave, in which is the
present kirk, that takes up about three of them; but how much further the
ancient church has extended, I believe will be hard to know.

In every arch of the nave, both north and south, has run a cross wall into the
two side ailes, making so many sacella each, with an altar and holy water pot.

The windows are of an equal dimension, but variously figured and carved.

The cloister has been on the north side of the church, which opened into a
garden, that led to the Tweed, that is there of a good breadth, and there was
another garden on the opposite side of the river. Our neighbors are not
wanting in the faculty of amplifying, but this thing does really exceed all
their exaggerations of praise. By this you will sneer, and say I have lived too
long here, and am become as vain as they; however, I stand to my assertion.

There is printed an upright of this abbey, that is ill done. I could wish
there was not only an exact whole plate, but also a view of the east end, with
a distinct draught of the doors, columns, capitals, and some of the finest
images, which are so well finished to the life, that Dr King of Oxford, who has
been lately to see it, wished they were taken down and preserved from the
weather: the whole building is of a fine stone.

I could wish also, there was an exact Ichnography drawn of the whole. The
Minister is a good sensible man, a lover of this kind of antiquity, and is
daily studying the walls of this church. He showed me some of the glass of the
windows, which is of an uncommon thickness, not stained through, but painted
upon.

If by this mean effort, your society could be prevailed upon to take this
structure into their consideration (I know not how far the Scotch gentlemen are
engaged in their Monasticon Scoticum) I have gained my end, especially if you
will vouchsafe me the favor of an answer to this, who am, dear cousin,

Yours affectionately, F. DRAKE.
P. S. You know our St Cuthbert was educated at this abbey. Over a door is a
date of the work, and the name of the Architect. Mr Browne-Willis has had an
account of this abbey sent him.





Above the south gate are several MELROSS ABBEY
niches for statues, decreasing in height as the arch rises, in which some
mutilated effigies remain, many in standing positions, others sitting, said to
represent the Apostles, but by their apparel I conceived they were
representations of the patrons of the church. In the center are the arms of
Scotland, a Lion rampant in reverse, with a double tressure; above which is the
effigy of John the Baptist, to the waist, suspended on a cloud, casting his
looks upward, and bearing on his bosom a fillet, inscribed "Ecce filius Dei."
This is of very delicate sculpture, and in good preservation. On the buttress
east of the door, is the effigy of a Monk, suspended in the like manner,
supporting on his shoulders the pedestal of the nich above in his hands a
fillet is extended, on which is inscribed "Passus e. q. ipe voluit." Read,
"Passus est quia ipse voluit."
On the western buttress is the like effigy, bearing a fillet, inscribed "Cu.
venit Jesi seq. cessabit umbra." -- "Cum venit Jesus, sequitur, cessabit umbra."
These two sculptures are of excellent workmanship. To the westward of this
last effigy, is the figure of a cripple, on the shoulders of one that is blind,
well executed; under which you read "Uncte Dei." Above the south door is an
elegant window, divided by four principal bars or mullions, terminating in a
pointed arch; the tracery light, and collected at the summit into a wheel; the
stone-work of the whole window yet remaining perfect. This window is 24 feet in
height within the arch, and 16 in breadth; the mouldings of the arch contain
many members, graced with a filleting of foliage; the outward member runs into
a point of pinnacle-work, and encloses a nich highly ornamented, which it is
said contained the figure of our Lord. There are eight niches which sink
gradually on the sides of the arch, formerly appropriated to receive the
statues of the Apostles. The whole south end rises to a point to form the roof,
garnished with an upper moulding, which is ornamented with a fillet of
excellent rose-work: the center is terminated by a square tower.

It will suffice to remark in this place, that the pedestals for statues in
general, are composed of five members of cornice, supported by palm boughs, or
some other rich wrought foliage, and terminating at the foot in a point with a
triple roll. The caps or canopies of the niches are composed of delicate
tabernacle-work, the spires ornamented with mouldings and a fillet of
rose-work, and the suspended skirts graced with flowers: the interior of the
canopy is of ribbed-work, terminating in a suspended knot in the center. This
description will do to carry the reader's idea to every particular nich,
without my running into the tediousness of repetition.

At the junction of the south and west members of the cross, a hexagon tower
arises, terminating in a pinnacle roofed with stone, highly ornamented: from
thence the aile is extended so as to receive three large windows, whose arches
are pointed, each divided by three upright bars or mullions, the tracery
various and light; some in wheels, and others in the windings of foliage. These
windows are separated by buttresses ornamented with niches. Here are sculptured
the arms of several of the Abbots, and that also of the Abbacy "a Mail and
rose." These buttresses support pinnacles of the finest tabernacle-work. From
the feet of these last pinnacles, are extended bows or open arches, composed of
the quarter division of a circle, abutting to the bottoms of another race of
buttresses which arise on the side wall of the nave; each of these last
buttresses also supporting an elegant pinnacle of tabernacle-work, are
ornamented with niches, in two of which statues remain; one of St Andrew, the
other of the Holy Virgin: the side ailes are slated, but the nave is covered
with an arched roof of hewn stone. From the west end of the church is continued
a row of buildings, containing five windows, divided by the like buttresses,
the tracery of two of the windows remaining, the rest open. Each of these
windows appertained to a separate chapel, appropriated and dedicated to
distinct personages and services; the places of the altars, and the fonts or
holy water basins still remaining. At the western extremity of this structure,
on the last buttress, are the arms of Scotland, supported by Unicorns collared
and chained; the motto above broken, the letters EGIS only remaining. On one
side is the letter I, on the other Q, and a date 1505, which was the second
year of the marriage of King James IV. a marriage concerted at this abbey,
between the King in person, and Richard Fox, then Bishop of Durham.

In 1649, the fury of reformation still existing, the elegant statues which
ornamented this place were most sacrilegiously demolished. A tradition prevails
here, that one of the persons so employed, on striking at the babe in the
Virgin's arms, received a contusion, which disabled him for ever from such
useless occupation, and struck such a panic on his associates, that they fled
and left the mischievous business unperfected.

In Spotswood's History of the Church of Scotland, Page 175.
we find these works of fanatical fury thus mentioned: An act was passed for
demolishing cloisters and abbey churches, such as were not as yet pulled down;
the execution whereof was for the west parts committed to the Earls of Arrane,
Argile, and Glencarn, for the north to Lord James, and for the in-countries to
some Barons that were held most zealous.

Thereupon issued a pitiful vastation of churches and church buildings
throughout all the parts of the realm; for every one made bold to put to their
hands, the meaner sort imitating the ensample of the greater and those who were
in authority. No difference was made, but all the churches either defaced or
pulled to the ground. The holy vessels, and whatsoever else men could make gain
of, as timber, lead, and bells were put to sale. The very sepulchers of the
dead were not spared. The registers of the church and bibliothekes cast into
the fire. I award all was ruined, and what escaped in the time of the first
tumult, did now undergo the common calamity; which was so much the worse, that
the violences committed at this time were colored with the warrant of public
authority. Some ill-advised preachers did likewise animate people, in these
their barbarous proceedings, crying out, " that the places where idols had been
worshipped ought by the law of God to be destroyed, and that the sparing of
them was the reserving of things execrable: as if the commandment given to
Israel, for destroying the place where the Canaanites did worship their false
Gods, had been a warrant for them to do the like. The report also went, that
John Knox, whose sayings were by many esteemed as oracles, should in one of his
sermons say, that the sure way to banish the Rooks was to pull down their
nests: which words (if any such did escape him) were to be understood of the
cloisters of Monks and Friars only, according to the act passed in the council.
But popular fury once armed can keep no measure, nor do any thing with advice
and judgment.

The east end of the church is composed of the choir, with a small aile on each
side, which appear to have been open to the high altar. This part is lighted by
three windows toward the east, and two side windows in the aile: the center
window is divided by four upright bars or mullions, the traceries are of
various figures, but chiefly crosses, which support a large complicated cross
that forms the center; the arching is pointed, and part of the tracery here is
broken: the side lights are near as high as the center, but very narrow,
divided by three upright bars or mullions: the mouldings of the window arches
are small and delicate, yet ornamented with a fillet of foliage. On each side
of the great window are niches for statues; and at the top there appear the
effigies of an old man sitting, with a globe in his left hand rested on his
knee, with a young man on his right: over their heads an open crown is
suspended. These figures, I presume, represent the divine personages. The
buttresses at this end terminate in pinnacles of tabernacle-work: the mouldings
and sculptures are elegantly wrought.

The north end of the cross aile of this abbey is not much ornamented without,
it having adjoined to the cloister and other buildings. The door which leads to
the site of the cloister (the building being demolished) is a semicircular
arch of many members; the fillet of foliage and flowers, is of the highest
finishing that can be conceived to be executed in freestone; the same being
pierced, the flowers and leaves separated from the stone behind, and suspended
in a twisted garland. In the mouldings, pinnacle-work, and foliage of the seats
which remain of the cloister, I may be bold to say, there is as great
excellence to be found, as in any stone-work in Europe, for lightness, ease,
and disposition. Nature is studied through the whole, and the flowers and
plants are represented as accurately as under the pencil. In this fabric there
are the finest lessons, and the greatest variety of Gothic ornaments, that the
island affords, take all the religious structures together.

The west side of the center tower is yet standing: it appears to have
supported a spire; a loss to the dignity and beauty of the present remains, to
be regretted by every visitant: the balcony-work is beautiful, being formed of
open rose-work: the present height of the tower wall is 75 feet.

The length of this edifice from east to west is 258 feet, the cross aile 137
feet, and the whole contents of its Ichnography 943 feet.

We entered at the south door, and no expression can convey an idea of the
solemn magnificence which struck the eye: the roof of the north and south ends
of the transept remains, supported by intersecting groins, in various
directions, of the lightest order; the joinings ornamented with knots, some
sculptured with figures, and others of pierced-work in flowers and foliage; the
arching of the interstices constructed of thin stones, closely jointed; over
the choir, part of the roof of like workmanship still remains. The side ailes
are formed by light clustered pillars, richly capitalled, with garlands of
flowers and foliage disposed delicately in the mouldings; in some the figures
of animals are interspersed. The pillars which supported the tower toward the
east are gone, so that three sides of it are down, leaving a chasm, through
which you look up toward the remaining quarter.

The north aile is lighted by a circular window, representing a crown of
thorns, which makes an uncommon appearance. Here are the effigies of Peter and
Paul, one on each side the tower, but of inferior sculpture.

It is said Alexander II. King of Scotland, lays buried at the high altar, and
that an inscription denoted his tomb; Ecclesiae clypeus, pax plebis, dux
miserorum,
Rex rectus, rigidus, sapiens, consultus, honestus;
Rex pius, rex fortis, rex optimus, rex opulentus,
Nominis istius ipse secundus erat.
Annis ter denis and quinis rex fuit ipse,
Insula quae carneri dicitur hunc rapuit.
Spiritus alta petit, caelestibus associatus,
Sed Melrossensis ossa sepulta tenet.

but no such inscription is now to be found. There is a marble tomb, the form
of a coffin, on the south side of the high altar; but it bears no inscription,
and is supposed to be that of Waldevus the second Abbot, who was canonized. The
Chronicle of Mailross contains this anecdote: That Ingerim Bishop of Glasgow
and four Abbots came to Mailross to open the grave, after 12 years interment,
when they found the body of Waldevus uncorrupted: on which, with religious
rapsody, they exclaimed, Vere hic homo Dei est. They afterward placed a marble
monument over the remains.

Many of the noble line of Douglas lay here; among whom is James the son of
William Earl of Douglas, who was slain at the battle of Otterburn, and interred
with all military honors. Lord Liddisdale, who was styled the flower of
chivalry, He fell a victim to the jealousy of William the first Earl of
Douglas, and was assassinated. His eulogy, in the life of the Douglasses, p.
78, styles him terrible and fearful in arms; meek, mild, and gentle in peace;
the scourge of England, and sure buckler and wall of Scotland, whom neither
hard success could make slack, nor prosperous slothful.
de Valoniis, Vauxs, Somervils, Balfours, and many other men of note, lay in
the chapter house.

Upon the wall on the left, as you enter the south aile, two inscriptions
strike the eye, cut in the old English letter; over one of which a compass is
extended. They are as follow: I.
So gayes the compass even about,
So truth and laute do but doubt,
Behald to the end -- John Murdo.
II.
John Murdo sum tym callit was I,
And born in Parysse certainly,
And had in kepying all masom werk
Of Santandroys, St Andrews.
the hye kyrk
Of Glasgu, Melros, and Paslay,
Of Nyddysdayl and of Galway,
Pray to God and Mari both,
And sweet St John keey this haly kirk from skaith.


Whilst my companion was drawing his view, I wandered in this hallowed spot
till decline of day; the evening advanced with an unusual solemnity; the
clouds, which were struck with crimson, reflected the beams of the setting sun
into the interior parts of the building, and made the whole glow with a purple
ray: the idea struck me, that celestial ministers, apparelled suitable to the
weakness of the human eye, accompanied me to walk the ruined aile; the thought
was sufficient to inspire a contemplative traveller with meditations as serious
as the human mind is susceptible of. To add to this disposition, the wind blew
a brisk gale, and gave a mournful melody; every object was solemn, and every
thought devout; who could forbear exclaiming, Thy ministers incessantly
accompany us, they involve us as with this ray of light, they penetrate the
eye, and read the images of the mind before they have utterance; they bear
witness of our frailties, and rejoice in our virtues; perhaps by so exquisite a
touch that human sense cannot distinguish it, they carry on their operations by
those propensities for which we are unable to account, and influence our
resolves, and struggle with our proneness to evil, that we may not deviate from
thy laws. "Millions of spiritual creatures walk the earth
"Unseen, both when we wake, and when we sleep.
" -- How often from the steep
"Of echoing hill or thicket have we heard
"Celestial voices to the midnight air
"Sole -- or responsive each to other's note
"Singing their great Creator? Often in bands
"While they keep watch or nightly rounding walk
"With heavenly touch of instrumental sounds
"In full harmonic number joined, their songs
"Divide the night, and lift our thoughts to heaven."
These sad remains of human glory! how are their beauties defaced! thus pass
away the mighty things of the earth! To the eye of him to whom ten thousand
years are as one day, what vanity is the magnificence of men; here, forgotten
of the world, lay in the dust princes and nobles, whose titles, authority, and
power, are vanished as the baseless fabric of a vision. If spirits visit their
terrestrial abodes, for it is not the will of our father which is in heaven
that one of these should perish, here perhaps wander heroes, who languish over
their unexpiated crimes; men of religious orders, who mourn the depravity of
the human race, and the desolation of their temple, where once all human energy
was breathed in prayer. If spirits visit their terrestrial walks, and leave for
a time that ineffable beatitude proclaimed to us, that in heaven their angels
do always behold the face of our father which is in heaven -- perhaps -- alas,
it is too true! I lost a friend! perhaps his expanded essence fills this ray,
that penetrates the gloom, rejoices in the thoughts which rise upon my mind,
conveys my prayer to the divine propitiatory, prompts each virtuous fervor,
and subverts all rising impropriety: perhaps, with that pure affection which he
possessed when living on earth, he looks upon my countenance, commiserates the
darkness of my faculties, that here are laboring for pleasure or for knowledge!

My eyes grew full of tears, my heart heaved in tumult, my hands were grasped
through energy of thought, and I stood as a statue, when the approaching foot
of my companion roused me, preserving my mind from a growing extravagance of
imagination, which was already replete with the most affecting images.

In the morning, at sunrise, we again returned to these splendid ruins, which
had even occupied the visions of our sleep; we yet had to take a survey of the
nave of the church, which is now used for worship. On opening the door, it is
not to be expressed, the disagreeable scene which presented itself; this place
is filled with stalls, in the disposition of which, irregularity alone seems to
have been studied: some are raised on upright beams, as scaffolds, tier above
tier; others supported against the walls and pillars: no two are alike in form,
height, or magnitude; the same confusion of little and great, high and low,
covers the floor with pews: the lights are so obstructed, that the place is as
dark as a vault; the floor is nothing but the damp earth; nastiness and
irregularity possess the whole scene. The fine workmanship of the pillars,
whose capitals, for flowers and foliage, exceed all the rest of the building,
the ribs of the arches, and the ornaments of their intersections, are scarce to
be seen in the horrid gloom which possesses the place.

What idea, concomitant to religion, can dictate filthiness and confusion in a
house of worship, I know not: by magnificence and splendor the eye may be
diverted; but in that elegant simplicity, in which cleanness and plainness are
associates, the mind abstracted from attention to worldly things, will be
yielded to uninterrupted devotion. All reformation has been attended with
extravagance; bigotry grows up into passion, and from one extreme the zealot
rushes into another. When the pomp of Romish worship was to be corrected, the
Scotch sunk into the deepest reverse. Many of the old churches in Scotland,
which I have seen, are filthy and foul; one of the allotments of the Cathedral
of St Andrews, in the city of Glasgow, appropriated to parochial duty, is even
in the burial vaults, in the foundation of the structure, without light, but
what issues through little loop-holes near to the pulpit, where the minister
sits to teach his parishioners, who are lodged in outer darkness; but for
uncleanness and irregularity this place exceeds them all. I have had dreams of
confusion in my youth, but never formed even a diseased idea like this. It
looks like the house of lunatics, it is unparallelled, and defies all language
to give it a description; superior to every thing but the incongruities of a
Bedlamite's disordered fancy.

But to more moderate matters: Here are several tombs of eminent personages; on
the north wall is inscribed, under a coat armor, Here lies the race of the
house of Zair. Many altars, basins for holy water, and other remains of
separate chapels appear in the ailes, among which are those of St Mary and St
Waldave.

The sentiments which arose to me, whilst I walked or rather staggered about in
this strange scene, were much to this effect: I premised that true Religion
consisted of that devout fervor of mind, which gives its ideas to the
Divinity, full of gratitude for his benevolence and long-sufferings, full of
admiration of that majesty and mightiness which are displayed through all his
works; and from a true consciousness of man's demerits and the imperfections of
his judgment, full of patience, humility, and resignation. When a man who is
possessed of such disposition of mind puts up a prayer, it is only for mercy
and protection. In whatever class of religious men we find these premised
principles best preserved, we may determine with justice, that there the true
devotee is distinguished. Modes of religion are its corruption; the
acceptations of a country, or the prescriptions of a peculiar set of men, may
be salutary to the community in general, but in no wise conducive to the
devotion of the individual. Religion has its essence from the liberty of the
mind; formularies, maxims, modes, or dictions, are disguises which in the robe
confound the spirit; are fetters that bind down the fervor of the mind. If the
truly devout heart breathe out, "Lord have mercy on me a sinner," there is more
religion in that short sentence so uttered, than in ten thousand Ave Marys, a
million of liturgies, and the frippery of establishment. Charity is as
unbounded as the regions of heaven, and beset with as many gems as the galaxy.
Charity says, the truly religious of every age, nation, custom, profession, and
mode, are acceptable to the Divinity; for it is not the mode, but the spirit
that approaches the regions of life. When I tread the walk of antiquity, I
venerate the pious works of the heathen: the servant of the Deity is to be
revered, let his service differ never so wide from the establishment of which I
am a member: it is the essence of the act, that I sever from the defilements of
custom: we judge, and may be judged; we think we are right; so did the
Ancients: the Druid, the Amonian, in his acts of piety, is to be regarded
without the errors of his sunshine services; he worshipped the Deity, under the
symbol of the sun; an object in nature the most reasonably adopted as the image
of the Creator, or as the throne of his majesty.

The Roman scattering salt and meal on the crackling coals, and making his
libations to the Divinity under the type of some of his attributes, is also
worthy of our reverence: the errors his modes admitted, through charity are
exempt from judgment, and his real piety is estimated, divested of defilements
which were contracted from the errors of the age.

The Jewish pomp and ceremony, the tumultuous and noisy sacrifice, the greasy
services, and blood-bespattered altars, are all forgotten, when we trace the
religion of the mind, and the piety of the devotee.

The magnificent rites of modern Rome loose their pageantry, and sink upon our
estimate, when we compare them to the cell of humiliation; where piety, leaving
the eye of men, retires to solitudes, and the Recluse confessing the frailties
of nature, with purity of soul avows all the religious confidence of faith; we
at once turn from the echoing dome, and the acclamations of a choir of eunuchs,
to seek this holy devotee, the man who communes secretly with his own soul; who
puts off the formulary, and presents, in his solitary cell, a genuine
confession and the spirit of prayer before his God, whose presence is universal.

The Reformist, protesting against the errors of others, like the scriptural
image of imperfection, plucks not the beam from his own eye; though less
pompous in his service, yet he remains as ceremonious; Our reformed church of
England has retained too much of the Popish spirit and custom, which tends to
the destruction of rational piety and true christian worship. Monthly Review,
Sept. 1777, page 190.
all attitudes are admitted to his devotion by intervals, except the original
one, the eastern attitude, that prostration which expresses the utmost
humiliation; his liturgy is filled with repetition, whilst there is surely no
want of subject for supplication. When many supposed Mediators were to be
addressed, repetition was attended with some reason: these are taken away, but
the reiteration continues. When the reformist breathes the sighing of a
contrite heart, he gains with the devotee of every denomination an acceptance
which depends not upon modes.

The Presbyterian avoids much form, but admits much slovenliness, much
indolence, and more negligence; yet the inward spirit, which would have been
devout in any other class of religious, is the same worthy devotee in this
apparel.

The silent Quaker sits meditative; his mind, unoccupied by fashion or form, is
open to nature's dictates in all their simplicity; he perceives the glow of
devotion, the moving spirit warms his soul, and the heart conceives what the
Divinity accepts, though unuttered by the lips. The Fanatic would in the utmost
agitation be in action, the Bramin be in torture, but this Religious brings
offerings of peace; his God is the God of tranquillity. It is the service of
the spirit is acceptable; the offices of the body are appropriated to
corruption, to fashion, and the follies of the world.

The canting Hypocrite, who goes about announcing wretchedness, and breathing
anathemas on mankind, is to be treated with pity and an apothecary.

Religion is replete with pleasures, and not burdened with terrors; she
brings forth the most placid hope, and her hope is accompanied with
inexhaustible images of joy. Pope's distich, as to modes of faith, is
infallibly true: "His sure is best whose life is in the right." Religion is in
the manners, and not in modes of prayer.

But to return to my subject: -- In one of the ailes of this part of the
church, is an inscription cut in a fair letter, but of what import I cannot
discover: NUNAM: KATINE
THOME: PAULI: GUTHB.
TE: S: PETR: K. ETIGIN:


The ancient monastery of Mailross is said to have stood originally a mile from
the present ruins, but by whom founded is uncertain. -- One house marks the
place, on a lofty promontory, peninsulated by the Tweed: a most beautiful
scene; the banks lofty and wooded, varied with perpendicular rocks, jutting
like buttresses from top to bottom. This was the site of the ancient abbey of
Culdees, mentioned by Bid to have existed in 664, in the reign of the Saxon
Oswy. This place was as celebrated for the austerities of Diricthelmus,
Dryethelme had a cell assigned him in the most retired part of the convent,
that he might be less disturbed in his continual devotions. And the place
itself being situated on the bank of the river, he used often, for the sake of
mortifying his body, to go down into it, and plunge in the stream. There he
continued praying and singing psalms as long as he could, the water sometimes
coming up to his loins, and sometimes as far as his neck: and when he came out
from it he never thought of casting off his wet and cold garments, but wore
them till they grew dry and warm on his body. In the winter, when encompassed
with crusts of ice, he continued this mortification, sometimes breaking the ice
to make room for his standing or dipping. Bid, lib. 5. c. 12.
as ever Finchal was for those of St Godric. The first was restored to life
after being dead for an entire night. During that space he passed through
purgatory and hell, had the beatific vision, and got very near to the confines
of heaven. His angelic guide gave him an useful lesson on the efficacy of
prayer, alms, fasting, and particularly masses of holy men, infallible means to
relieve the souls of friends and relations from the place of torment. Pennant.


The Scotch who are ambitious of antiquity, attribute it to Columbus; some more
moderate, say its original patron was Aidan. Bid says it was seated on the
banks of Tweed; that the churches at that time were built of oak, thatched with
reeds; and that the religious of this house maintained themselves a long time
against the canons and ordinances of the Romish councils. On a peninsula formed
by the river, you are shown the site of old Mailross, with the foundations of
the wall, the porter's lodge, the chapel know, and many other places
appertaining to that house; together with the remains of a bridge over Tweed.
Nennius, who lived as some authors assert in 620, but according to others in
853, speaks of this monastery as a place of great note; and probably it was
destroyed by the Danes when they ravaged this country. Bid gives the names of
some Abbots here; Eata the first: he was succeeded by Boisil, who according to
Dempster died in 643: St Cuthbert succeeded Boisil, but afterward quitted this
monastery, and went to Lindisfarne: he was succeeded by Etholwold. This is all
I can collect of old Mailross. The house of which these celebrated ruins are
the remains, was founded by David King of Scotland in the year 1136: it was
endowed with large revenues and many immunities, as appears by the charters
granted to the Abbot and Convent by the Kings of Scotland. In a manuscript said
to be deposited in the Colbertine Library, giving an account of the several
religious houses founded by King David, it is mentioned, Sed Melrossensum
praecipue inter omnes ecclesias and fideliter defensabat and dulciter diligebat
and suis opibus exornabat. Mr Hay says it is recorded in the book of taxes of
the Apostolic Chamber, that King David bestowed thereon 1880 florins. The
original charter of foundation was confirmed by his son Prince Henry, and
intimates that he gave to this abbey the whole lands of Mailross, Eldun of
Dernewie, Galtownside, Galtownside Haugh, and Galtownside Wood, and many
privileges in the forests of Selkirk and Traquair; particularly betwixt Galla
and Leeder. The charter also expresses, that these lands had been perambulated
by the King in person, accompanied by Prince Henry, with Richard the first
Abbot. The date of this charter is the second year after Stephen of Boloign,
King of England, was taken prisoner, which must be in the year 1143. The
witnesses are Hogo de Moreville, William de Somerville, Gervasus Riddel, etc.

The date of the foundation appears in this monkish distich: "Anno Milleno
centeno terquoque deno
"Et sexto Christi, Melrose fundita fuisti."
By the foundation charter the dedication appears to be Deo and sanctae Mariae
de Mailross and Monachis ibidem deo servientibus de Riavallis, etc. of the
Cistercian order; yet the church was not dedicated till the year 1146.

Richard the first Abbot was installed in the year 1136, the year of
foundation: he was succeeded by Walterus or Waldevus, a son of King David, who
was afterward elected Bishop of St Andrews, but refused Episcopacy. To him
many miracles were attributed; to relate one will suffice: -- In a great
famine, about 4000 poor people came to the convent of Mailross for relief, whom
Waldeve the Abbot pitying, he went with his cellarer or butler Tyna to his
grange at Heldwii, and then to Gattonside, and having put in the staff which he
carried in his hand among the corn, it was increased through the sign of the
cross, both for the supply of the convent and all these numerous poor. He
received canonization, and many rich offerings were made at his tomb.

Joceline, a man of great learning, was Abbot here; he was afterward made
Bishop of Glasgow, but chose Mailross for the place of his interment. One
Laurentius was a succeeding Abbot; also Ranulph, in 1194, who by the Legate of
Pope Innocent III. was made Bishop of Down, in Ireland.

We find this monastery, like all others, very busy and warm in secular
matters. The pious Legate was at Mailross to determine a dispute between this
Abbey and Calehow, and to his dishonor, it is said, he took the fee of office,
and left the case undetermined: and in 1268 the Abbot and a great many of the
society and dependents of this monastery, were excommunicated by a Council held
at Perth, for an affray with the men of Wedale, in which a Clergyman was slain,
and many persons wounded.

In 1206, William the 9th Abbot of Mailross died. This was the 48th year after
the death of St Waldeve. William was equally esteemed for his sanctity, and on
his death it was resolved that their bodies should be laid together. As the
workmen were preparing William's grave, brother Robert, who was a Mason, A Lay
Brother.
by the incitement of some of his associates, but not without reluctance and
much religious horror, raised the cover of Waldeve's tomb, when there issued a
fragrance, as if the grave had been filled with spices. Being in the gloom of
the evening, he brought a candle to the aperture; all who were present beheld
the sacred body entire, and all the vestments as fresh and beautiful as when
first put on. There were six Monks and as many Lay-brothers, who had the
happiness of gratifying their pious though presumptuous curiosity. Fordun, l.
8. c. 66.


In the year 1240, the bones of the Abbots of Mailross, that lay in the
entrance of the chapter house, were taken up, and more decently buried in the
eastern part of the same chapter house, all excepting the bones of St Waldeve,
whose sepulcher was opened, and his body found at last crumbled into dust.
Those who were present carried off some of the small bones, leaving the rest to
repose in peace. One of the company was William son to the Earl of Dunbar, and
nephew to the King, a Knight of great fame. He begged and obtained a tooth of
the saint, by which he is said to have wrought many cures.

In 1296, one Patrick, then Abbot, swore fealty to King Edward I.

Robert of Kindalach, a Monk and Abbot of Dunfermline, and Chancellor of
Scotland, was Abbot here. Also

John Foggo, Confessor to King James I. of Scotland, and

Andrew Hunter, Lord High Treasurer and Confessor to King James II. of Scotland.

Duroys and Foggos appear in the same list, and also James Stuart, eldest
natural son to King James I. he was Abbot of Kelso and also of Mailross, and
died about the year 1559. After him Cardinal de Guise was nominated, but never
installed.

This monastery suffered many injuries in the wars between Scotland and
England. In the year 1322, it was pillaged by the troops of King Edward II.
whose inglorious expedition was marked with disgrace, by the burning this and
Dryburgh Abbey, and murdering a company of Monks. King Robert Bruce, for its
restoration, gave, in the year 1326, 2000l. sterling, with many forfeited
estates. King Richard II. again burnt this monastery, and in the reign of King
Henry VIII. it was pillaged and laid waste. Sir Ralph Ivers and Sir Bryan
Layton having obtained a grant of Merse and Tiviotdale, on their coming to take
possession, were opposed by Archibald the 7th Earl of Angus, at Ancrum Moor,
and suffered a shameful defeat. The ground where this battle was fought is
called Lilliards Edge, from the singular valor of a woman who was on the side
of the Scotch. Over her place of interment was erected a monument, with this
inscription: Fair maiden Lilliard lies under this stane,
Little was her stature, but great her fame;
On the English lads she laid many thumps,
And when her legs were off she fought upon her stumps.


Mailross was a mother church to all of the Cistercian order in Scotland. The
Monks wrote a chronicle of this house, beginning at 735, and continued down to
1270. It had many endowments besides those of King David, particularly by King
Alexander II. the family of Stuarts, and others. In the year 1561, the revenue
appeared, by the account then taken, to be as follows: In Money -- 1758l. per
annum. Wheat -- 14 chalders, 9 bolls. Bear -- 56 chalders, 5 bolls. Meal -- 78
chalders, 13 bolls, 1 firlot. Aittes -- 44 chalders, 10 bolls. Capons -- 84.
Poultry -- 620. Butter -- 105 stone. Salt -- 8 chalders paid out of Preston
Pans. Peats -- 340 loads. Carriages 500.


Mr Hay, in his Scotia Sacra, gives the following account: In charta
visitationis 1542, invenio Monachos ibi fuisse 100; anno 1520, 80; anno 1540,
70 and 60 conversos, quibus dabantur modia frumenti annuatim 60, cervisiae
dolia 300, ad missarum solemnia vini dolia 18, ad hospites suspiciendos dolia
vini 20, cervisiae 40 frumenti modia 30, infirmis nutriendis 4000lb. Turon,
tonsori lib. 400. Pono monasterium omnium erat in Scotia pulcherimum and
opulentissimum.

After the reformation, the abbey of Mailross was granted by Queen Mary to
James Earl of Bothwell, who forfeited the same. It then came to the family of
Douglas, one of whom was created Earl of Mortan, under whose hands all the
evidences of this abbey's possessions were preserved, and are now in the
custody of that family. A grant was made of it to John Ramsay by King James VI.
and confirmed by parliament, as a reward for preserving the King against a
traitorous attempt by Lord Gowry. He was created Lord Haddington, and
afterward made a peer of England, by the title of Earl of Holdernesse. It came
afterward to Sir Thomas Hamilton, who was created Earl of Mailross in 1619,
and assumed on that occasion three roses in his coat armor: he afterward took
the title of Haddington. The abbey with its demesnes were lately purchased by
the family of Buccleugh.

Many large buildings have stood within the walls of the monastery, whose
remains yet appear.

In returning from Mailross, we passed

NEWSTEAD,
a little village at the distance of about a mile from the abbey, noted for a
lodge of Free Masons, whose antiquity is believed to be cotemporary with the
monastery at least; but some presume to trace it to a much greater distance,
from its vicinity to the Helton Mountains, which entertained a Druid tribe,
whose traces are evident to this day. Here are the foundations and remains of a
house belonging to the Knights Templars, called Red Abbey Stead.

The name of a peculiar spot on the middle Helton Mountain, with a traditional
account that it was sacred to Jupiter, and was a possession of the Druids,
induced us to visit these lofty hills. We advanced to the summit of the center
hill, a rise of about a mile and half: the place called Abor-jo, of which there
is such tradition, engaged us some time; our guide said, that in former times
it was girt with a grove of oaks, and fenced with a trench and vallum of earth.
The vestiges of the trench remain, but the grove is no more. Abor was a name
given by the Amonians to the great luminary, and signifies the parent of light.
In Mr Bryant's work we have the following definition: -- This luminary was also
called Abor, the parent of light, and his temple Cho-abor. Of this name both a
city and river were to be found in Gauzaintis, as well as in Susiaria and other
parts. -- Abor-jo is an easy corruption of Abor-cho, being a mere transposition
of the titles.

On the top of the north-east mountain are the traces of a large encampment. Mr
Pennant says, on one of these hills is a Roman camp, and that he had been
informed of others, with military ways to be traced in various places. I am apt
to conjecture Mr Pennant took this account from a little pamphlet sold at
Mailross, describing that place and its environs, and did not visit it himself.
The place has not the form or appearance of a Roman camp; it has been an
occasional fortification, not a permanent one: the climate and exposure of the
situation will not allow a conjecture that it was designed for a continued
strong-hold. The breastworks are of earth, defended by moles at irregular
distances, a mode not practiced by the Romans. In the beginning of Ethelwold's
reign, Oswin, who claimed the crown as his right of inheritance, levied forces
to recover it. This was the scene of a decisive engagement; Oswin having
fortified himself strongly, at length determined to put his claim to the issue
of battle: the fight continued for three successive days, beginning on the 6th
of August, 761; but the event was fatal to Oswin and his adherents, Oswin dying
in the field. It is most probable these fortifications were of the above date,
when the disposition of the crown of Northumberland was determined by the event
I have mentioned.

King Alexander III. levied a great army in 1258, which rendezvoused at
Mailross, where the King continued some time. There is scarce an eminence on
these borders, but what bears the marks of warfare. From the north-east
eminence there is a most extensive and beautiful prospect, commanding all the
vale of Tweed down to Berwick, a fine though distant view of Tiviotdale; the
northern and western views are rugged and mountainous.

After repassing Kelso, we arrived at

COLDSTREAM,
having kept the northern side of Tweed. The views on this ride were open and
beautiful: we passed the seat of Dr Johnston, finely covered with wood; also
the seat of Lord Hume, around which extensive plantations of young firs are
arising, and already have an excellent effect upon the landscape. The elegant
house of Mr Majoribanks, by Coldstream, loses half its beauty in want of wood.

End of the First Part.
APPENDIX. Anno decimo quarto Elizabethae cap. 13. An Act for annexing Exam and
Examshire to the County of Northumberland.
WHereas for the space of diverse years last past, the Queen her Highness and
her most dearly and beloved father King Henry the Eighth, King Edward the Sixth
her Highness's brother, Queen Mary her sister, as in right of the Imperial
Crown of this realm of England by reason of an exchange had and passed between
the said late King Henry the Eighth and the late Reverend Father Robert
Archbishop of York, in the eighth year of the most noble reign of the said late
King Henry, have been, and her Majesty yet is seized of and in the franchise
and liberty of Exam and Examshire, lying within the body and middle of the
county of Northumberland, which said liberty and territories, when it was in
the hands of the said Archbishop, was commonly termed and called a county
palatine, where in right or proof there was none such; yet by reason of that
error ever since and yet there has been and are diverse opinions, besides some
question and doubt, whether the liberty and territory of Exam and Examshire
should and ought to be part of the said county of Northumberland or otherwise
exempted, and whether the dwellers and inhabitants there should and ought to be
justifiable and answer to justice as others of the said county of
Northumberland are and ought or not, and the like question and doubt yet is and
remains; by reason whereof not only pleas of the crown and suits betwixt
party and party suffer continues, stays, letts, and also have no end of trial;
and besides the most and greatest offenders to the crown and their country have
and daily run thither, as to a Sanctuary, upon hope and trust of refuge
thereby, to the great comfort and encouragement of many the vilest and worst
subjects and offenders in all the north parts, and to the great offense of the
Almighty and most manifest hinderance of good execution of law and justice: --
In and for the due remedy and redress of such great enormities and apparent
mischiefs, may it please the Queen her Majesty, That by her Highness, the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in this high court of Parliament
assembled, it may be enacted, manifested, and declared by the authority of the
same, the said territories, franchises, and liberties of Exam and Examshire,
with the liberty of the same, may be, is, and shall be from henceforth taken to
be within and part, parcel, and member of the said county of Northumberland;
and that as well all suits of the crown as also all suits betwixt party and
party, may proceed and have their due trial within the said county of
Northumberland by and before the Sheriffs and Coroners of the said shire, and
also before the Justices of the Peace, Justices of Gaol Delivery, Justices of
Assize, Nisi Prius, Oyer and Terminer, and other officers, and each and every
of them as the case shall require, and take effect as any of the like have been
or ought to be, which have happened or shall hereafter happen within the said
county of Northumberland; and that from henceforth the Sheriff and other
officers of the county of Northumberland for the time being may have full power
and authority to execute his and their office, and all process to him and them
directed within Exam or Examshire, and the liberties of the same, in as large
and ample manner as he or they may, should, or ought to do within any other
part of the said county of Northumberland, (any grant, privilege, custom,
usage, liberty, or any thing else whatsoever heretofore made, claimed, used,
had, put in use or execution, or enjoyed, to the contrary notwithstanding)
saving to the Bailiff of the liberty, or other officer of the said town of Exam
and Examshire, or the liberties thereof, all such liberties and privileges for
executing of process, return of writs, and otherwise, as they or any of them of
right ought to have before the making of this act.

ITINERARY and INDEX.
INTRODUCTION. Genealogical Table of the Kings of Northumberland. A State of
Northumberland under the Romans, and the Succession of Kings under the Saxon
Heptarchy. A Chronological Table of the Kings of Northumberland. A Table of
Coins. ALDSTON in Cumberland Page 3 WHITLEY CASTLE, the Alione of the Romans --
KIRKHAUGH Page 7 KNARESDALE, with a description of the Roman Maiden Way Page 8
KNARESDALE HALL Page 9 LAMBLEY -- FEATHERSTON CASTLE, with a Plate Page 10
BELLISTER CASTLE Page 11 HALTWEZELL Page 12 CARR-VORAN, the Magna of the Romans
Page 14 with a Plate of Inscriptions Page 18
BLENKINSOP CASTLE -- THE PICTS WALL described Page 19 Part of the Manuscripts
of Roger Gale, Esquire -- Two letters from Mr John Horsley, notes Page 40
THIRLWALL CASTLE, with a large Plate Page 42 WARDREW Page 43 WALL TOWN Page 44
GREAT CHESTERS, the Aesica of the Romans -- Plate of monumental Effigies Page 46
WILLIMOTESWICK Page 50 LITTLE CHESTERS, the Vindolona of the Romans -- A
sketch of the mode of sacrificing Page 54
HOUSE STEADS, the Borcovicus of the Romans Page 61 MANUSCRIPTS of R. Gale. Esquire
-- Letter from J. WARBURTON, with Mr Gale's Notes thereon, notes SHOWING
SHEELS, called by Camden the Hunnum of the Romans Page 64 CARROWBROUGH, the
Procolitia of the Romans Page 65 WALWICK Page 71 WALWICK CHESTERS, the Cilurnum
of the Romans Page 72 Plate of the Roman manner of encamping, according to
POLYBIUS Page 73 Plate of an ideal drawing of a ROMAN CAMP Page 79
WALWICK GRANGE Plate of a monumental Effigy and Inscription Page 81 Plate of
another monumental Effigy Page 82 Plate of another monumental Effigy and
Inscription Page 83
HEXHAM Page 86 Plate of an elegant Inscription in the CHURCH OF HEXHAM. Plate
of a Tomb in the Church. Plate of an Effigy of Silenus in the Church. Large
Plate of Antiquities in the Church. Plate of an Inscription in the Old Tower.
Manuscripts of R. Gale, Esquire -- Letter from Sir John Clerk, notes Page 101
HAYDEN BRIDGE Page 109 LANGLEY CASTLE -- RIDLEY HALL Page 110 STAWARD CASTLE
Page 111 WHITFIELD HALL Page 112 Manuscripts of R Gale, Esquire notes Page 112
Letters from R. Gale, Esquire to Mr John Warburton notes Page 112 -- from Mr J.
Warburton to Mr Gale notes Page 112 -- from Mr Gale to Mr Warburton notes Page
112
BLANCHLAND Page 118 BOLBECK Page 119 MINSTER ACRES Page 120 PRUDHOE Page 121 A
Plate of the Castle.
OVINGHAM Page 127 WYLAM -- CLOSE HOUSE Page 128 RUTCHESTER, the Vindoiata of
the Romans -- CHEESBURN GRANGE Page 130 BYWELL Page 131 STAMFORDHAM Page 135
FENWICK TOWER -- WEST MATFEN -- WELTON TOWER Page 138 HALTON TOWER -- HALTON
CHESTERS, the Hunnum of the Romans Page 140 AYDEN CASTLE Page 142 CORBRIDGE
Page 144 AN ELEGANT LARGE PLATE of the Roman Laux found at Corbridge, now in
the custody of his Grace the Duke of Northumberland. Manuscripts of R. Gale,
Esquire -- Letters on this Piece of Antiquity, from Mr Robert Cay, Sir John Clerk,
Mr Maurice Johnson, Dr Stukeley, and Mr Gale Page 146 Manuscripts, etc. notes
Page 162 Letter from Mr Horsley to Mr Gale on the Roman Altars found at
Corbridge notes Page 162 -- from Mr Gale to Mr Horsley notes Page 162 A LARGE
PLATE, an Etching of the Altar inscribed to Astarte, now in the custody of the
Rev. Dr Graham of Netherby.
CORCHESTER, the Corstopidum of the Romans Page 168 DILSTON Page 170 NUNSBROUGH
Page 172 BEAUFRONT Page 173 Manuscripts, etc. -- Letter from Mr Robert Cay to
Roger Gale, Esquire
PORTGATE Page 174 THOCKRINGTON -- LITTLE BAVINGTON -- ST. OSWALDS Page 175
HANGING SHAWS Page 177 HALYTON MESNES -- HAUGHTON CASTLE -- SWINBURN CASTLE
Page 178 CHIPCHASE CASTLE -- WARK Page 179 BELLINGHAM Page 180 HEZLEYSIDE --
RISINGHAM, the Habitancum of the Romans. -- ETCHING of the Effigy on a Rock
called Robin of Risingham. Inscriptions found at CHESTER HOPE Page 184
ELISHAW Page 193 ELSDEN -- Manuscripts, etc. -- Letter from the Rev. Mr Robert
Patten to R. Gale, Esquire notes.
OTTERBURN Page 196 An Account of the Battle of OTTERBURN. Manuscripts, etc. --
Letter from Mr J. Horsley to R. Gale, Esquire notes.
RIECHESTER, the Bremenium of the Romans Page 198 Manuscripts, etc.
Letter from Mr Robert Cay to R. Gale, Esquire -- Mr Gale's Answer. -- from Sir
John Clerk to R. Gale, Esquire -- from Mr J. Horsley to R. Gale, Esquire -- from the
same. -- from the same. -- Mr Gale's Answer. -- from Mr J. Horsley to R. Gale,
Esquire -- Mr Gale's Answer. -- from Mr J. Horsley to R. Gale, Esquire -- from the same.
PLATE of a Sculpture and Inscription lately found at this Station, not
published before. NUNWICK Page 211 SYMONDBURN Page 212 BAVINGTON Page 216
CAPHEATON -- HARNHAM Page 217 BELSEY CASTLE Page 218 LITTLE HARLE Page 219 KIRK
HARLE -- WALLINGTON Page 220 ROTHLY CASTLE Page 223 ROTHBURY Page 227 HEPPLE
Page 228 CARTINGTON -- HALYSTONE Page 229 HARBOTTLE CASTLE -- WHITTINGHAM Page
230 CALLELEY -- LEMINGTON Page 231 EDLINGHAM Page 232 ESLINGTON -- LITTLE RYLE
AND UNTHANK Page 233 BITTLESDON -- BOLTON -- EGLINGHAM Page 234 BEANLY -- A
Plate of Percy's Cross.
RODHAM Page 235 A Plate of the Druids Monument at Three-stone Burn Page 236
LINHOPE SPOUT -- ILDERTON Page 237 LILBURN -- CHILLINGHAM CASTLE -- HORTON
CASTLE Page 240 WOOLER Page 241 The Battle at Redrigs Page 242
YEVERING Page 243 YEVERING BELL, a Saxon Monument Page 246 With a large Plate
of the Monument on the Crown of the Mountain called Yevering Bell.
NEWTON EAST AND WEST TOR Page 257 Remarks on the Country and Inhabitants Page
258
KIRK NEWTON Page 260 THE CASTLE OF COPELAND -- The Battles of Milfield,
Haltwell-Sweir, and Broonridge Page 261
KELSO Page 263 A large Plate of the North-east Aspect of KELSO ABBEY. A small
Plate of the South-east Aspect of KELSO ABBEY Page 266
ROXBURGH CASTLE Page 271 A Plate of a fine Danish Fort on the Banks of Tweed
Page 279 A Description of the Fort Page 280
DRYBURGH ABBEY Page 281 A small Plate of the Ruins of the Abbey --
MAILROSS Page 282 Manuscripts, etc.
Letter from Mr Francis Drake, of York, to Roger Gale, Esquire -- notes. A large
Plate of the South-east Aspect of MAILROSS ABBEY.
NEW STEAD Page 299 COLDSTREAM Page 301 End of the First Part. APPENDIX. Act of
Parliament for annexing Exam and Examshire to the county of Northumberland.
ERRATA.
Page 22 line 22 for Praetentatura read Praetentura. -- 34 for Praetentatura
read Praetentura. 93 10 for TRIDSTOL read FRIDSTOL. 97 -- for Fig. III. under
the plate, read Fig. IIII. 183 27 for page 38 read page 48. 223 -- for Rothbury
read Rothly. 229 -- for Unfranvil read Umfrevill. 276 -- for have- read having
286 33 for high altar read choir. 34 for this part read high altar. -- for
three windows toward the East and two side windows in the aile, read by three
windows, one toward the East and two side windows. 37 for center read other.
Order of the Plates.
Genealogical Table of the Kings of Northumberland to face the 1st page of the
Introduction. A Plate of Thirlwall Castle Page 42 -- Inscription in the Church
at Hexham Page 91 -- The Effigies in the Church of Hexham, etc. Page 97 --
Inscription in the great Tower at Hexham Page 107 -- The Roman Lanx found at
Corbridge, now in the Custody of his Grace the Duke of Northumberland Page 145
-- The Altar found at Corbridge Page 166 -- The Monument on Yevering Bell Page
246 -- The North-east Aspect of Kelso Abbey Page 263 -- The South-east Aspect
of Mailross Abbey Page 282
BOOKS printed by T. SAINT, and sold by the Booksellers in Town and Country.
Price 6s. An EXCURSION to the LAKES in Westmoreland and Cumberland, by W.
HUTCHINSON. Price 4s. The SPIRIT of MASONRY, in Moral and Elucidatory LECTURES.
By W. HUTCHINSON, Master of the Barnardcastle Lodge of Concord. Price 5s.
OBSERVATIONS ON POPULAR ANTIQUITIES; Including the whole of Mr BOURNE'S
Antiquitates Vulgares, with Addenda to every Chapter of that Work: As also, an
APPENDIX containing such Articles on that Subject, as have been ommitted by
that Author. By J. BRAND, A. B. and F.S.A. Price 1s. 6d. ILLICIT LOVE, a POEM.
By J. BRAND, A. B. of Lincoln College, Oxford, F. S. A.

