OBSERVATIONS, RELATIVE CHIEFLY TO PICTURESQUE BEAUTY, Made in the YEAR 1776,
On several PARTS of GREAT BRITAIN; PARTICULARLY THE HIGH-LANDS of SCOTLAND.

VOL. I.

By WILLIAM GILPIN, A. M. PREBENDARY OF SALISBURY; AND VICAR OF BOLDRE IN
NEW-FOREST, NEAR LYMINGTON.

LONDON; PRINTED FOR R. BLAMIRE, STRAND.

M.DCC.LXXXIX.

TO THE EARL HARCOURT.
MY LORD,
BESIDES your Lordship's great attachment to the polite arts, I have other
reasons for placing your name before these papers. If you will accept this
address as an instance of my gratitude, I leave it to the world to judge of
it is propriety.

In perusing these remarks your Lordship will be pleased to recollect, they
were written in the year 1776; since which time many of the artificial scenes
taken notice of in them, have probably undergone great improvement. In such
instances I only show how much has been done, by showing how much was wanting.

The subject of these volumes, my Lord, is so nearly that of a late publication
on the lakes, and mountains of Cumberland, that similar ideas must of course
frequently occur. In this case I have endeavored to vary my object by throwing
different lights upon it -- and to vary my remarks by throwing them on
different circumstances.

In the work I have just alluded to, many thought my language too luxuriant --
particularly a friend of your Lordship's, whose practice in versification makes
his taste the more easily offended, when prose, deviating into poetical phrase,
transgresses it is proper bounds. Your Lordship's correct judgment may probably
likewise have taken offense on this head. I can only say, I endeavored, as I
could, to adapt my language to my subject; and as picturesque description was
rather a novel mode of writing, I thought I had some little right to adopt my
own. But as I find many of my friends disallow my apology, I submit; conscious
that no man is a proper judge in his own case. I have endeavored therefore to
make the following observations less liable to that objection.

But however justly I may have been censured on this head, I have heard other
criticisms, founded on plain ignorance of the subject. Picturesque ideas lie
not in the common road of genius and learning. They require perhaps a distinct
faculty to comprehend them -- at least they require more attention to the
scenes of nature, and the rules of art, than men of letters in general, unless
stimulated by a peculiar inclination, bestow upon them. Such men therefore are
improper judges. If your Lordship's name, and countenance can skreen me from
critics of this kind, I shall rejoice at having secured myself behind so good a
shield.

On the whole, if my remarks are so fortunate as to meet your Lordship's
approbation; I have little doubt, but it will be an earnest of the approbation
of the public. I am, my Lord, with great respect,

Your Lordship's obliged, and most obedient humble servant, WILLIAM GILPIN.
VICAR'S HILL, APRIL 20, 1789.
TABLE OF CONTENTS TO VOLUME I.
SECTION I. COUNTRY about Enfield-chace; and through Hertfordshire. 1. --
Alconbury-hill. 2. -- Whittlesea-mere. 2. -- Monk's woods. 3. --
Burleigh-house. 3. SECT. II. Gunnersby-hill. 11. -- Course of the Trent. 12. --
Remarks on flat distances. 13. -- Newark. 16. -- Thorsby. 18. -- Clumber-park.
18. -- Worksop. 18. SECT. III. Roche-abbey. 21. -- Remarks on the scenery of
ruins. 24. SECT. IV. Kirkstall-abbey. 29. -- Harrowgate. 33. -- Riply. 33. --
Stainmore. 33. SECT. V. Strength of Liddel. 35. -- Banks of the Esk. 35. --
Johnny Armstrong, 37. -- Debateable land. 38. -- Border-castles. 40. -- Story
of the earl of Monmouth. 40. -- Extracts from Haynes's state papers with regard
to incursions on the borders. 42. SECT. VI. Banks of the Tiviot. 47. -- Hawick.
49. -- Selkirk. 50. -- Atric. 51. -- Tweed. 51. -- Yar. 51. -- Ferney. 51. --
Approach to Edinburgh. 53. -- Dalkeith-house. 54. -- Earl of Morton in
Elizabeth's time. 55. SECT. VII. First view of Edinburgh. 59. -- The town. 60.
-- The castle. 62. -- Holy-rood house. 63. -- Chapel belonging to it. 64. --
Chapel, and castle at Roslin. 65. -- Arthur's seat. 66. SECT. VIII. Castle of
Garvy. 67. -- Hopton-house. 68. -- Blackness-castle. 72. -- Linlithgow. 73. --
Assassination of the regent Murray. 74. -- Great canal. 75. -- Arthur's oven.
76. -- Carron-works. 78. -- Falkirk. 78. -- Approach to Sterling. 79. SECT. IX.
Castle of Sterling. 81. -- Views from it. 82. -- Scenes of action in it is
neighborhood. 84. SECT. X. Loch-leven. 89. -- Scenery around it. 90. -- The
castle. 92. -- Escape of Mary, queen of Scotts. 92. -- Observations on
allegorical painting. 93. SECT. XI. Strathern. 97. -- Battle of Duplin. 98. --
Vale of Tay. 98. -- The most pleasing mode of inlightening a distance. 99. --
Grampian hills. 100. -- Battle between the Romans and Britons. 102. --
Insularity of Britain first authenticated. 104. -- Inaccuracy of Tacitus. 105.
SECT. XII. Approach to Perth. 107. -- Town, and bridge. 108. -- Gowry-house.
109. -- Scone. 110. -- Dunkeld. 112. -- Dunkeld-abbey. 114. -- Birnam wood, and
Dunsinane. 117. SECT. XIII. River Bran. 119. -- Remarks on contrast. 120. --
Description of a cascade. 121. -- Claude Loraine glasses. 124. --
Rumbling-brig. 125. -- Death of the late duke of Athol. 127. SECT. XIV. River
Tay. 131. -- River Tummel. 131. -- Remarks on coloring. 132. -- Pass of
Killicranky. 134. -- Death of the viscount Dundee. 136. -- Blair-castle. 138.
-- River Tilt. 140. -- Grounds about Blair-castle. 141. SECT. XV. River Freer.
145. -- Remarks on representing mountains. 146. -- River Garry. 150. Glenlion.
150. -- Tay vale. 153. -- Kenmore. 153. -- Loch-Tay. 153. -- Cascade there.
154. -- Island. 155. SECT. XVI. Taymouth-house. 157. -- Remarks on the
situation of great houses. 158. -- Massacre of Glencoe. 160. -- Valley of
Glencoe. 166. SECT. XVII. Loch-tay. 167. -- Killin. 168. -- Account of a
migration. 169. -- Road between Killin, and Tindrum. 172. -- Loch-dochart. 172.
-- Mount Bendoran. 174. -- Kilchurn-castle. 176. -- Approach to
Inverary-castle. 178. SECT. XVIII. Inverary-castle. 181. -- Loch-Fyne. 182. --
Character of the ancient highlanders. 188. SECT. XIX. Account of the contention
between two Scotch chiefs. 191. SECT. XX. Present character of the highlander.
209. -- Quotation from Burn's poems. 215. END OF THE CONTENTS OF THE FIRST
VOLUME.

VOL. II.
SECT. XXI. LOCH-FYNE. 1. -- Remarks on the height of mountains. 2. --
Uncharacterized scenery. 3. -- Passage in Tacitus illusrated. 4. -- Carndow. 6.
-- Valley of Kinlas. 6. -- Remarks on skies. 7. -- Glen-Croey. 10. --
Loch-Loung. 12. -- Tarbet. 13. SECT. XXII. Loch-Lomond. 15. -- Road from Tarbet
to Luss. 15 -- Remarks on a passage of Joel. 17. SECT. XXIII. View of the
several islands of Loch-Lomond from Devannoe. 23. SECT. XXIV. A reverie. 34. --
Salmon passing through the lake. 37. -- Agitation in Loch-Lomond. 37. --
Agitation in Loch-Tay. 38. SECT. XXV. Dunbarton-rock, and castle. 43. -- Lychen
geographicus. 47. -- Views from the batteries. 48. -- Account of similar
fortresses. 49. -- Seized in queen Mary's time. 51. SECT. XXVI. Dunglas-castle.
55. -- Glasgow. 55. -- Chapel at Paisley. 56. -- Bothwell-castle. 56. --
Hamilton house, and grounds. 57. -- Earl of Denbigh, by Vandyck. 58. --
Criticism on Ruben's picture of Daniel in the lions den. 59. -- Chatelherault.
65. SECT. XXVII. Account of the admirable Crichton. 68. -- Falls of the Clyde.
71. -- Lead-mines. 73. -- Story of Mr. Lothian. 74. -- Tailor, a miner. 76. --
Approach to Drumlanrig. 77. SECT. XXVIII. Queensberry-house. 79. -- Sir James
Douglas. 80. -- Garden of Queensberry-house. 83. SECT. XXIX. Grounds around
Queensberry-house. 87. -- The Scottish buffalo. 88. -- Remarks on disguises.
90. -- On the natural color of cattle. 92. -- Queensberry-hill. 85. --
Tieber's castle. 95. -- Entreken. 96. SECT. XXX. Linclouden college. 97. --
Dumfries. 98. -- Account of a wonderful recovery from a lethargy. 100. --
Shores of Solway-frith. 101. -- St. Mary's isle. 103. -- Story of Paul Jones.
105. -- Gretna-green. 107. -- Approach to England. 109. SECT. XXXI. General
remarks on Scotch landscape. First, on it is being in a state of nature. 111.
SECT. XXXII. Poverty of Scotch landscape from want of objects; particularly of
wood. 117. SECT. XXXIII. General remarks on the mountains, lakes, and rivers of
Scotland. 127. SECT. XXXIV. The cattle, and inhabitants of the highlands
considered in a picturesque light. 135. SECT. XXXV. Improvements of taste in
Scotland. 141. -- Variety which different circumstances introduce in landscape.
144. SECT. XXXVI. Cockbridge. 147. -- Whitehall. 147. -- Retrospect of the
borders of Scotland. 148. -- Approach to Cockermouth. 148. -- Vale of
Cockermouth. 149. -- Castle of Cockermouth. 149. -- Description of the road
from Cockermouth to Keswick, by Armithwaite bridge. 151. SECT. XXXVII. Tour
round the lake of Keswick. 159. -- How such a scene might be improved. 161.
SECT. XXXVIII. View from Lancaster-castle in a storm. 173. SECT. XXXIX. Country
through Lancashire. 179. -- Trentham. 182. -- Enville. 185. -- Bulstrode. 187.
-- Witton. 192. -- Mr. Pope's garden at Twickenham. 192. -- View of the Thames.
193. -- Strawberry-hill. 194.
OBSERVATIONS ON SEVERAL Parts of GREAT BRITAIN; PARTICULARLY THE HIGHLANDS of
SCOTLAND.
SECTION I.
IN this excursion we proposed to visit some of the more remarkable scenes in
Scotland; and in our journey through England, some parts of it also, which we
had not seen before.

Having passed the wild, open country of Enfield-chace, lately despoiled by act
of parliament of it is trees; and having left the sweet woodlands of
Hertfordshire; our views became coarse, and unpleasant. The fatiguing
uniformity of them was, here and there, just relieved by a distance;
particularly at Alconbury-hill.

From hence among other remote objects, that large piece of water, called
Whittleseymere, makes a considerable appearance, stretching into length, far to
the right. You get a sight of it from other parts of the road; and if the
foreground happen in any degree to rise, you may see perhaps a point of land
pushing out into the water: but, in general, it appears only a long narrow
slip, without form. The eye however makes some judgment of it is length, which
is two leagues; tho none of it is breadth, which is at least one. It Is
dimensions are larger than most of the Cumberland lakes; yet through it is want
of accompaniments, it is flat shores, and vile neighborhood of fens, and
marshes, of which it is the great drain, few travelers desire to see more of
it than is exhibited from the road.

To the inhabitants of it is shores however it is a great source both of use,
and amusement. It abounds with fish: and the winds being more constant here,
than in a lake surrounded with mountains, where they blow in gusts, and eddies,
a boat is more manageable, and sailing a more agreeable amusement.

In Danish times Whittlesey-mere was considered as a great inland sea, and
navigated only in cases of necessity. Camden tells us, from an old history of
Ely, that it was once the scene of a great calamity. When Canute resided at
Peterborough, his children, and others of the royal family, had occasion to go
to the abbey of Ramsey. Whittlesey-mere lay directly in the way. Here they
embarked; when in the midst of their pleasant voyage, and their singing, and
jollity, the turbulent winds, and a tempestuous storm arose; their vessel
foundered; and the greatest part of the royal family perished.

About the sixty-ninth stone, the view is beautifully confined by Monk's woods.
As we approach Stamford, the country, tho every where full of little varieties,
is on the whole rather flat.

From Stamford we visited Burleigh-house; which is a place of great
magnificence. It has no advantage of situation; being buried in the dip of a
park, which indeed possesses no where much agreeable scenery. The house
formerly was approached by descending avenues; which were as displeasing, as
formality, and awkwardness could make them. Mr. Brown was employed to reform
them; and if possible to give some air of elegance to the approach. Much he
could not do. The situation of the house forbad; and the unaccommodating form
of the park. Every thing however, that was disgusting he has removed. He has
closed the avenues: he has varied the slopes; and has led the approach through
a winding valley, in the very path, which nature would have chosen, as the
easiest. The magic of these improvements is such, that it has given the house a
new site. It appears, as you approach it, to assume even an elevated station.
-- But the scenery about Burleigh is not the object: it is the house chiefly
which attracts the traveller.

Burleigh-house is one of the noblest monuments of British architecture in the
times of Elizabeth, when the great outlines of magnificence were rudely drawn,
but unimproved by taste. The architect, till lately, was unknown; as indeed we
know very little of the architects of those days. But the earl of Warwick has a
book of original plans in his possession, by John Thorpe; from which it
appears, that he was the architect of Burleigh house. It is an immense pile,
forming the four sides of a large court; and tho decorated with a variety of
fantastic ornaments according to the fashion of the time, before Grecian
architecture had introduced symmetry, proportion, and elegance into the plans
of private houses, it has still an august appearance. The inside of the court
is particularly striking. The spire is neither, I think, in itself an ornament;
nor has it any effect; except at a distance, where it contributes to give this
whole immense pile, the consequence of a town.

How far the fashionable array, in which Mr. Brown has dressed the grounds
about this venerable building, agree with it is formality, and antique
appendages, I dare not take upon me to say. A doubt arises, whether the old
decoration of avenues, and parterres was not in a more suitable style of
ornament. It is however a nice question, and would admit many plausible
arguments on both sides.

The rooms are fitted up in that rich, but solemn manner, which the
magnificence of the house requires. Some of them indeed, which had been long
disused, are now adorned in a lighter taste: but their uniformity is lost. --
The grand staircase, and many of the ceilings are painted by Verrio, who spent
twelve years, we were informed, in this work; during which time he had a
handsome pension; a table kept; and an equipage. Verrio was a man of
extraordinary pomp; and had been so carressed by Charles the second, that he
thought himself a capital artist. He was a painter, as Mr. Walpole justly
observes, whose exuberant pencil was well adapted to adorn those public
surfaces, on which the eye never rests long enough to criticize: but he was
certainly not worth the attention, which lord Exeter paid him; tho his works at
Burleigh are confessedly the most correct of any he has left behind him.

Painted ceilings however are at best, I think, but awkward ornaments; not only
as it is impossible to examine them without pain; but also as the
foreshortening of the figures, which is absolutely necessary to give them any
kind of effect, is so contrary to what we see in common life, that it is
disgusting. Mr. Pope also, with his usual just taste, suggests another
objection to them. He speaks of the sprawling saints of Verrio, and Laguerre:
by which expression he seems to consider them as floundring in some strange
medium, we know not what, which affords them no stable footing. Figures indeed
represented in the clouds, are not so obvious to this exception. We can bear
however to see such an artist as Verrio employed on a ceiling; but when we see
a master, like Rubens so engaged, it is mortifying.

Yet still a painted ceiling, if the colors are rich, and dark, adds a
pleasing solemnity to these antique mansions: but we wish only for elegant,
ornamental scrolls. It is merely the general effect of the gloom that pleases;
as in a chapel we are soothed with that solemn light, which passes through
painted glass; tho we wish neither for figures, nor any other form of creation.

In rooms of a lighter taste, as they are generally now fitted up in great
houses, more airy ceilings are suitable. Lightness and gaiety in furniture is
now the fashion; corresponding more perhaps with the manners of the times. The
manners of the great were formerly, reserved, grave, and dignified. Their
apartments, of course contracted a more solemn air. They were hung with darker
colors; to which the furniture was adapted. How far the manners of those days
were more agreeable, I know not: but I have no scruple in giving the preference
to their apartments. Awkwardnesses there might be, and certainly were: I speak
only of their general air.

The pictures in Burleigh-house, of which there is great profusion, are highly
valued. Indeed we seldom find a better collection. They are in general
pleasing. In the chapel, which is adapted rather to amusement, than devotion,
hang several very shewy pictures. Solomon's idolatry, and Moses in the rushes,
both by Loti, are such. The altar-piece, by P. Veronese is more classical; but
it is so deficient as a whole, that we could admire only some of the parts.
Among these the head of St. James is wonderfully expressive. The death of
Seneca by L. Giordano, is esteemed one of the best pictures in the collection:
but it is wanting, both in composition and in effect of light. Either of these
requisites will contribute greatly to an agreeable whole: but when a picture is
deficient in both, the eye cannot rest upon it with pleasure. The passion of
grief is indeed well distributed among the attendants of the dying philosopher:
but it is conveyed through the medium of very awkward characters.

We must not leave this grand house without looking into the kitchen; which is
a noble room; and decorated with the ensign armorial of hospitality, an immense
carcass of beef well painted.

From Burleigh-house, we visited a more retired mansion, which this noble
family possesses at Stamford. The family-vault there is a curious scene of the
kind. Here lies the old statesman of queen Elizabeth; with a numerous race of
his descendants collected around him. Even in these silent regions are found
the vanities of dress. The ancients of the house are clad in plain lead and
stone; but you trace the progress of fashion in the decorations of succeeding
ages. Many, who came last from the upper regions, are adorned in crimson
velvet, coronets, and lace; and figure away in these cells of darkness. One
would think the grave had little to do with vanity: but our foibles adhere to
our last sand. It has ever been so.

-- quae gratia --
-- fuit vivis, --
-- eadem sequitur tellure repostos.
SECT. II.
FROM Stamford we proceeded to Newark, through Colsterworth, a neighborhood
famous for giving birth to Sir Isaac Newton. This whole tract of country
affords little that is amusing, till we come to Gunnersby-hill; from whence we
have a very extensive view. The grounds, on which the eye immediately falls,
are level sheep-walks, with few intersections, but no way offensive. Distant
views seldom enjoy this advantage. The near grounds, when cultivated are always
formal and disgusting. Here they were uncultivated and pleasing. Beyond the
sheep-walks a vast stretch of flat country, enriched with a variety of
indistinct objects, melts into the horizon. It consists only of the common
features of a flat distance; but they are uncommonly broad and ample.

Through this country the Trent takes it is course, tho it rarely appears in any
part. No river in England is subject to such wide, and lasting inundations: and
on inspecting the map of the country, as it lay now before us, we wanted no
geometrical level to convince us, that when the waters of this sluggish stream
become once swollen, it is floods must be diffusive, and of long continuance: for
there appears to be no where any descent to carry them off. The scenery before
us was finely varied, when we surveyed it, by floating lights, which spreading
over one part, and another, showed us every part by turns. Nothing in landscape
is more beautiful than these lengthened gleams See other remarks on this
subject in treating of the floating lights on Skiddaw, near the close of these
observations.
. The Dutch masters who painted from a flat country, knew the force of their
effect, and often introduced them.

When the distance consists, as it does here, of a vast flat surface, the
painter cannot well manage it without these adventitious lights. It would be
one heavy fatiguing tint. And yet too many of these gleams occasion what the
artists call a spottiness in landscape. Two at most are sufficient: and if two,
there should always be a subordination between them. The nearer may be broader,
and more vivid; leaving the more distant a mere strip.

When the distance, tho very extensive, is not merely a flat, but is varied
with prominent parts, it may support it is consequence, tho the whole be in
shadow. It will itself produce variety. A knoll may run out, of such
conspicuous size, that according to the common rules of keeping, it will
naturally be invested with a deeper tint, than the country, which lies beyond
it: for as it is greater height intercepts a portion of that country, it is seen
against a part more remote than itself; and will of course be tinted with a
darker hue. Thus also the spot, or mote (which the eye conceives to be a
castle, a clump of trees, or some other object in the distance), is tinted with
a darker touch; because in the same manner, it is seen against a country more
remote than itself, and consequently lighter. Even the folding of rising
grounds over each other, will produce the same effect. The nearer ground
intercepting a valley will always appear darker. Tho the inaccurate observer
therefore may think a distant landscape, when in shadow, might be represented
by one broad dash of equal color, excepting only what difference the gradation
of shade occasions, he is mistaken. Simplicity and breadth are every where
pleasing; and particularly in distance; but still if the inequalities of a
surface are not attended to, and marked by a discrimination, however slight;
the picture may appear unnatural to an eye, which may not have knowledge enough
in keeping, and the perspective of nature, to suggest a reason.

Under every circumstance a country retiring into remote distance, is among the
most beautiful parts of landscape, and is a very pleasing study to a lover of
nature. If he be a true disciple of nature; and attend closely to all her
variations of weather -- of seasons -- of morning, and evening suns, he will
discover, more and more, her magical secrets in the illumination of distant
objects. He will see with what vivid touches of light she often marks each
prominent part -- nearly as vivid as those upon the foregrounds. -- At the same
time the shadows being suppressed, and every little detail; the object takes
it is proper place in the distance, notwithstanding it is strong illumination. --
Yet even in a distance he will observe a variety of little animated touches,
which give it life, and spirit. He will study nature's mode of expressing these
touches -- the tuftings of the forest, the roughness of the mountain, and the
stillness of the lake. -- He will observe also what disposition of sky gives
that cold blue tint to a removed country, which we sometimes see -- what again
gives it that clearness, in which the very delineation of every object may be
discerned -- and what throws over it that greyish tint, the sweetest of all
hues that invest a distance; and gives it that amusing indistinctness, which
leads the imagination of the spectator to -- body forth
The forms of things scarce seen --
Turn them to shape; and give to airy nothing
A local habitation --
As we descended Gunnersby hill, and saw more around it, a distinct view of
Belvoir-castle opened on the left: and we could have wished to have examined
that noble repository of the works of eminent masters; but our time would not
allow.

As we got more into the flat country, we found, that however qualified it is
objects were, to melt into a beautiful distance, it contained nothing engaging
on the spot. All the country through which the Trent flows, as far as we could
command it from the great road, is unpicturesque.

Newark was formerly defended by a castle; which is now but an unpleasing ruin.
It has more the appearance of a dwelling, than a fortress. It was once however
a considerable place, and at the conclusion of the civil wars, sustained a
siege of seven months from the whole Scotch army; during which period, in the
necessity of the times, those shillings in the form of lozenges were stamped,
which are now found in collections of old coins. They bear a crown on one side,
inscribed C. R.; and on the other, mark the occasion of their being struck.
Here also began that infamous treaty for the sale of the king, who had
delivered himself into the hands of the Scotch army, of which the whole nation
has deservedly of which the whole nation has deservedly been ashamed ever
since.

From Newark the country still continues dreary and uninteresting. When the
road happens to make any little rise, we had, far to the right, a distant view
of Lincoln-cathedral, over the flats between it and the eye. It is so noble a
pile, that it makes a respectable object at the distance of twenty miles. But
this extraordinary appearance is owing to a mere deception: for tho the eye
considers it as standing in the plain; it stands in fact upon a hill; and the
elevation of the ground being lost in the distance, all it is height is added to
the church. The whole country between Newark, and Lincoln is highly cultivated;
and is famous for a breed of large sheep, and heavy horses, peculiar to itself.
-- A little after you pass Tuxford, you see the deception in the situation of
Lincoln-cathedral. It appears there plainly to stand at the point of a long
ridge of elevated land, rising above the flat country.

In this neighborhood lie a cluster of great houses. Thoresby belongs to the
celebrated duchess of Kingston. We rode through the park, which has no
advantages of situation. The house we found shut up by the duchess's order.

Welbeck, the duke of Portland's seat, we did not see. It lay some miles out of
the road.

Clumber-park, the seat of the duke of Newcastle, disappointed us. We expected
an old magnificent house, a park adorned with oaks, that had seen a fourth or a
fifth generation of their noble owners; and other appendages of ancient
grandeur. But every thing is new: the house is just built, the woods just
planted; and the walks just planned. Clumber-park will hardly be worth a
traveller's notice before the next century.

A few miles farther lies Worksop. This house is a singular instance of the
spirit, perseverance, and disinterestedness, of it is proprietor, the duke of
Norfolk. It had belonged formerly to the earls of Shrewsbury, and was gone much
into decay. But the duke liking the situation; and conceiving it to be a good
centre-house to his great estates in these parts, resolved to restore it to
it is ancient splendour. He was now in years; but for the advantage of his heir,
the honorable Mr. Edward Howard, he engaged in the work, and having fitted it
up in a very noble manner at the expense of thirty thousand pounds, he was just
preparing to take possession of it: when on the 22d of October 1761, a fire
left carelessly in the library, caught hold of the flooring of the apartment,
and communicating itself with great rapidity to the other chambers, the whole
edifice and all it is valuable furniture, pictures, and books were burnt to the
ground. The loss was estimated at an hundred thousand pounds.

Such a catastrophe, one should have imagined, might have checked the duke's
farther designs in building: but it only roused him. Almost before the ashes of
the old house were cold, he engaged again in building a new one; and taking his
young heir in his hand, he laid the foundation stone of a most magnificent pile
on the 25th of March 1763. It was to consist of a center, and two wings. With
this work he went on so rapidly, that the center part, as it now stands, which
is itself a complete palace, extending three hundred feet, was finished in the
year 1765. At that time Mr. Edward Howard dying, the duke, who built only for
him, dropped all farther thoughts of completing his design.

The house stands in the midst of an extensive park; but we saw nothing, that
tempted us to take more than a cursory view of it. The approach seemed easy,
and beautiful.

A few miles from Worksop, on the borders of Yorkshire, lies Aston; where Mr.
Mason, with a generosity rather singular, has built at his own expense one of
the most comfortable, and elegant parsonage-houses in England. The old house,
which is shrouded with trees, is converted into offices; while the new house
consists entirely of excellent apartments. In this sweet retreat we spent a day
or two, and from thence made an excursion to Roche-abbey, a beautiful scene in
the possession of the earl of Scarborough.

SECT. III.
ROCHE-ABBEY stands in the center of three valleys; each of which is about a
mile in length; but otherwise their dimensions, as well as forms are different.
One is open, another is close; and a third still closer, and rocky. All of them
are woody, and each is adorned with it is little stream.

A very small part of the abbey remains; two fragments only of the transept of
the great church. The architecture is rather of a mixed kind; but in general
the Gothic prevails.

These ruins and the scenery around them were in the roughest state, when Mr.
Brown was employed to adorn them. He is now at work; and has nearly half
completed his intention. This is the first subject of the kind he has
attempted. Many a modern palace he has adorned, and beautified: but a ruin
presented a new idea; which I doubt, whether he has sufficiently considered. He
has finished one of the valleys, which looks toward Laughton spire: he has
floated it with a lake, and formed it into a very beautiful scene. But I fear
it is too magnificent, and too artificial an appendage, to be in unison with
the ruins of an abbey. An abbey, it is true, may stand by the side of a lake;
and it is possible, that this lake may, in some future time, become it is
situation; when the marks of the spade, and the pick-ax are removed -- when
it is osiers flourish; and it is naked banks become fringed, and covered with
wood. In a word, when the lake itself is improved by time, it may suit the
ruin, which stands upon it is banks. At present, the lake, and ruin are totally
at variance. -- The spire, which terminates this view, deserves particular
notice, as a very beautiful piece of Gothic architecture, tho the ornament only
of a country church. It is also one of the most extensive land marks in
England; and may, in some directions, be seen at the distance of fifty miles.

Mr. Brown is now at work in the center part of the three valleys, near the
ruin itself. He has already removed all the heaps of rubbish, which lay around;
some of which were very ornamental; and very useful also, in uniting the two
parts of the ruin. They give something too of more consequence to the whole, by
discovering the vestiges of what once existed. Many of these scattered
appendages also, through length of time, having been covered with earth, and
adorned with wild brush-wood, had risen up to the windows, and united the ruin
to the soil, on which it stood. -- All this is removed: a level is taken, and
the ruin stands now on a neat bowling-green, like a house just built, and
without any kind of connection with the ground it stands on. There is certainly
little judgment shown in this mode of improvement. I do not mean to place Mr.
Brown's works at Roche-abbey, and those of a late improver of Fountain's-abbey
See observations on the mountains and lakes of Cumberland, etc. v. II. p. 183.
in the same light. At Fountain's-abbey every thing was done with a childish
hand. Here, every thing is manly, and in it is way masterly. The character only
of the scene is mistaken. If Mr. Brown should proceed a step farther -- pull
down the ruin, and build an elegant mansion, every thing would then be right,
and in it is proper place. But in a ruin the reigning ideas are solitude,
neglect, and desolation. The environs of a house should partake of the elegance
or grandeur of the mansion they adorn, because harmony and propriety require
it. If there is force in this reason, it surely holds equally true, that a ruin
should be left in a state of wildness, and negligence. Harmony and propriety
require one, as much as the other.

Of what improvement then is the scenery of a ruin capable?

Of some no doubt. Tho we should not wish to adorn it with polished nature --
tho the shorn lawn, the flowering shrub, and the embellished walk, are alien
ideas; yet many things offensive may be removed. Some part of the rubbish, or
of the brushwood may be out of place, and hide what ought to be seen. The
ground, in many parts, may be altered, but discretely altered. A path may wind;
but not such grand walks as are here introduced, rather for parade, than
contemplation; and such certainly as the convent never knew, even in it is
highest state of prosperity. Trees also may be planted; and water may be
introduced. But a sort of negligent air should run through the whole: and if
art should always be concealed; it should here be totally hid. The precept
conveyed in those beautiful lines, cannot be too religiously applied to scenes
like these.

-- If art
Ever dares to tread; it is with unsandal'd foot,
Printless, as if the place were holy ground.
No sunk fence, or netted barrier, should restrain the flock. Let them browze
within the very precincts of the ruin. It is a habitation forsaken of men, and
resumed by nature; and tho nature do not require a slovenly path to walk in;
yet she always wishes for one with some degree of rudeness about it.

If the mansion house stand near the ruins you wish to adorn, the ruins
themselves will then become only appendages. Neatness in part must be
introduced. Yet still, even in this case, one should wish to have the ruins in
a sequestered place, less adorned, than the environs of a mansion ought to be.

There is another species of improvement, of which a ruin is susceptible; but
it is of the most delicate kind. Few ruins are exactly what we could wish. We
generally find a deficiency, or a redundancy, as far as composition is
concerned. The ruin we now consider, from the squareness, and uniformity of its
two parts, is heavy, uniform, and displeasing. The parts are elegant in
themselves; but for want of contrast, they form a disagreeable whole. You can
see them to advantage only from particular stands, where one part is thrown
behind another in perspective. By the small alteration therefore of making
either part lower or higher, you might improve the composition: but the
operation would be exceedingly nice. No picturesque hand durst take away. But
an addition might be made without much hazard; because what you add, you may
likewise remove. The beauty of the composition, and the harmony of the
architecture would be the two chief points to be attended to. The ruins of
Roche-abbey might receive great beauty from the fragment of a tower. If this or
any other prominent addition could happily be made, it would certainly have a
good effect: but it would require great knowledge both of the ruin, and it is
deficient appendages, to make it with propriety, and verisimilitude.

Of the three valleys, which center in these ruins, I have mentioned one only,
which Mr. Brown has yet improved. Both the others are beautiful: but one of
them, which is a sort of rocky chasm, is in it is natural state so pleasing;
that I should fear, every touch of art would be injurious.

I shall conclude these remarks on the improvement of ruins, with a few
beautiful images of desolation, which the prophet Isaiah introduces in subjects
of this kind. His ruins have their proper accompaniments. The passages I quote
are interspersed in different chapters, but I shall bring them together in one
view.

"It shall never be inhabited: neither shall the Arabian pitch his tent there;
nor the shepherd make his fold. Thorns shall come up in it is palaces; nettles,
and brambles in the fortresses thereof. The cormorant, and the bittern shall
possess it. The raven shall dwell there. It shall be an habitation for dragons;
and a court for owls. There the wild beasts of the desert shall meet. The satyr
shall cry to his fellow. The screech-owl shall find herself a place of rest;
and the vultures shall be gathered together, every one with it is mate."

SECT. IV.
FROM Roche-abbey we proceeded to Wakefield, and from thence to Leeds, where we
visited another scene of a similar kind, the ruins of Kirkstall-abbey, which
belong to the duke of Montague.

Three miles from Leeds, the river Air, taking it is course in an eastern
direction, passes through a valley, which is about five miles in length, and
one in breadth. The area of it is level. This form gives a sluggishness to the
stream; which instead of sparkling over beds of pebbles, as the northern rivers
commonly do; is adorned with reeds, and sedges, and water-lilies. The hills,
which slope into the valley, descend in different directions: in some parts
they are steep; but in general their descent is easy. Formerly, when this
valley was the retreat of solitude, all these hills were covered with wood;
which formed delicious bowers in various parts, and descending in clumps around
the abbey, skreened it from inclement blasts. Now these beautiful skreens are
removed: the abbey stands exposed; and the ancient limits of the woods are
scarce marked by a few scattered trees. All the interval is divided into
portions, and furrowed by the plough.

At the bottom of the valley, near the southern bank of the river, stand the
ruins of the abbey; a very large proportion of which is still left. Almost the
whole body of the great church remains, which seems to want little, except the
roof. The tower is still entire; and the cross aile. A variety of ruined
buildings are scattered round, the uses of which are guessed at, rather than
ascertained. Some of them are in sufficient repair to answer modern purposes.
On the south are the traces of a beautiful Gothic cloister.

With regard however to the style in general of the abbey of Kirkstall, and
it is picturesque form, but little can be said. It is composed of a sort of
mixed architecture. Here and there you see a piece of Gothic has been added;
but in the greater part the Saxon heaviness prevails. The pillars in the nave
are massy, and void of grace. The form too of the ruin is unpleasing. It is
debased by the commonness of it. You have merely the shell of an old church. It
is too perfect also. We rather wish for that degree of dilapidation, which
gives conjecture room to wander; and the imagination some little scope. A
certain degree of obscurity adds dignity to an object.

The precincts of the abbey were formerly surrounded by a wall, (as abbeys
generally were) the vestiges of which may still be traced. The circumference of
the whole is about a mile, drawn round in a semicircular form; the river
completing the boundary on the south. In one part of this boundary, northwest
of the abbey, stands a gate, which seems to have been the grand entrance. It is
yet a considerable pile, and makes an excellent farm-house.

As we were examining the ruins, our guide pointed to a very narrow winding
staircase at the west end of the church, which led formerly to the roof. Into
this staircase, he told us, a cow, pushing herself probably at first, to avoid
the flies, at length gained the top; and was discovered by her owner, looking
through the broken arch of a window, which he showed us, where a narrow shelf
had formerly supported the roof. The man had no expectation of seeing his beast
again at the bottom without broken bones; but such was her dexterity, that with
a very little assistance, she got down by the same narrow passage, by which she
had ascended. -- As this story belongs to the natural history of the place, I
have recorded it: but rather, I must confess, with a view to discredit it, than
to authenticate. There are so many stories told of cows climbing up narrow
stair-cases, among ruins, that they destroy each other. One is told at Norwich;
and I remember, at the abbey of Lanercost in Cumberland, a cow not only got up
a narrow staircase, but rang a bell at an unseasonable hour, by which she
alarmed the whole neighborhood. Why this unwieldy animal is fixed on for these
feats of activity, I can assign no reason, but that it makes the story more
wonderful.

From Leeds to Harrowgate, the landscape is seldom interesting See an account
of this country, in vol. II. p. 204, of Observations on the lakes and mountains
of Cumberland, etc.
: but on crossing the river Need, we found ourselves in a very pleasant
country. Few villages stand more agreeably than Ripley.

The passage over the mountains of Stainmore has very little in it that is
amusing, till we come to a flat, near the close of it; where, tradition says,
Maiden-castle formerly stood; tho no vestiges of it now remain.

From this elevated ground the eye commands a noble sweep of mountain-scenery.
The hills sloping down, on both sides, form a vast bay of wide, and distant
country, which consists of various removes, and is bounded at length by the
mountains of Cumberland. The lines are elegant, and the whole picturesque, as
far as a distance, enriched neither by wood, nor any other object, can be so.
The scene, tho naked, is immensely grand. It has a good effect in it is present
state, uniting a dreary distance with the dreary country, we had passed; and
the wild foreground, on which we stood. We might perhaps have a better effect,
if the distance were more enriched. The beauties of contrast would then succeed
happily to those of uniformity -- at least, if the middle ground, or second
distance, were somewhat rough; and the landscape proceeded gradually from that
roughness into a rich distance.

Appelby-castle, Brougham-castle, and other parts of the road, between Appelby
and Penrith (which is in general pleasing) afforded us many views; but we had
traveled the country before: as we had likewise the country about Carlisle See
observations on the lakes, etc. vol. II.
.

SECT. V.
AT Longtown, which is seven miles beyond Carlisle, we crossed the Esk; and
soon entered Scotland, taking the Langham road to Edinburgh. The Esk is
properly a Scottish river, flowing along a small part only of the English
border; but along a considerable part of the Edinburg road. In a few miles it
is joined by the Liddel, and at the confluence of these streams a sort of
promontory is formed, on which stand the ruins of a fort, called in the country
the Strength of Liddel. It is supposed to have been a Roman station, and was
once the curb of the country. It commands a very extensive view, which
presents, if not a picture, at least a map well adapted to military speculation.

In after times, when other oppressors succeeded those of Rome, prevailing
factions of Picts, and Britons, Scotts and English, had it alternately in
possession. As contemptible as it now appears, it was twice besieged by royal
armies; once under Edward the third of England; and again under David the
second of Scotland. It is shocking to humanity that few of these places can be
found, without some horrid tale annexed to them. When David took the place, he
condemned the governor to death. That might be justice: but it could only be
through the dictates of vengeance that he ordered his two sons to be butchered
before his eyes, as he was led to execution. And yet David, according to
Buchanan, was a prince in omni virtutum genere, ac in primis clementia,
memorabilis.

In later ages this country wanted a stronger curb, then such a fortress as the
Strength of Liddel could impose. It was an almost singular instance, in the
history of civil society, that a paltry district should continue in an
independent state; between two powerful kingdoms; inhabited by clans of
banditti, alike obnoxious to each, and not to be subdued by the police of both.
Their captains lived in fortified castles; bad defiance to the power of a
sheriff, and feared only the attack of regular troops. The importance of these
border-chiefs is well described in an old ballad, which does honor to Johnny
Armstrong, who was in his day one of the most celebrated of them. This hero,
having been sent for, in the year 1528, by James the fifth (who was then upon a
progress to the borders,) came unexpectedly into the royal presence,
magnificently apparelled, and attended by a numerous train of followers. The
poet introduces him in this dignified manner: When Johnny came before the king,
With his eightscore men so gallant to see;
The king he moved his bonnet to him,
For he thought he would been a king as well as he.
Numbers of the lower members of this plundering community were executed every
year, both in England and Scotland; but no depopulation ensued. A livelihood
from other men's labors, and an asylum from the penal laws, were powerful
incentives to the idle and profligate of both kingdoms; and fully repaired such
casual depredations, as were annually made by the hand of justice.

In Edward the sixth's time, about the year 1552, the affair of the debatable
land, as this country was called, seems to have been taken into serious
consideration. The plan was to divide it into two equal parts, that each
kingdom might introduce order into it is respective division. Commissioners for
this purpose were appointed, and a letter is still preserved, in which the
English commissioners inform the council, that there be two small brooks in the
debatable, the one called Hawburn, the other Woodhouseburn, whereof the former
falls into the river Sark, and the other into the river Esk; and they wish
the division might be made from the mouth of one of these brooks to that of the
other See Hayne's state papers. p. 120.
. This division they explain by a plan sent along with their letter, having,
they say, three lines drawn across the debatable. The first toward the
seaside, expresses the division, which the Scottish commissioners offered:
the second, being the middle line, and named by us STELLATA LINEA, represents
the division, whereof we now write; and the third is that, which our
commissioners offered to the Scotts. The stellata linea seems to have been some
abatement of what had been offered to the Scotts; but the commissioners still
think, that rather than leave the matter undone, they should relent somewhat
even of the said STELLATA LINEA, but so that the two houses of stone (the one
being Sandy Armstrong's, the other Thomas Greme's) may be within the limits of
the English debatable. How far this good work proceeded, does not appear; it is
certain however, that it produced no effect; for throughout the reign of
Elizabeth, we meet with numberless instances of the continuance of these border
depredations. Sufficient employment perhaps could not be found for these
borderers, in the infancy of arts and tillage which certainly meliorate the
manners of a savage people; and to a certain period at least, till luxury is
introduced, supply the place of penal laws.

As we passed through the debatable land, we were often amused with the sweet
valleys of the Esk, which make the road generally pleasant, if not interesting.
Most of these valleys are well wooded; and the trees, tho far from what may be
denominated timber, are yet sufficient to beautify the scene.

In one of these retreats stands Gilnoc-hall, the ancient castle of Johnny
Armstrong.

We met with many of these little fortresses in different parts of the borders.
They are commonly built in the form of square towers. The walls are thick: the
apertures for light small. They are divided generally into three or four
stories, each containing only one apartment. The lowest was the receptacle for
cattle, which were driven into it in time of alarm. The family occupied the
upper stories. As these towers were chiefly meant as places of security against
the banditti of the country, the garrison had seldom more than the siege of an
hour or two to sustain. They could bear therefore crouding together; and were
not anxious about their magazines. If they were attacked by any of the
neighboring garrisons, they could make no defense.

Sir Robert Carry, earl of Monmouth, gives us an account, in his memoirs,
written in the time of Elizabeth, of his manner of attacking one of these old
towers. He was warden of the western march; and lay with his garrison at
Carlisle; where hearing of an outrageous act committed by some Scotts, he
pursued them with twenty horse. When he came up with them, he found they had
taken refuge in a tower. In this exigence his horse was of little use, except
to prevent an escape. He sent therefore to Carlisle for a few foot, and
presently set them at work to get up to the top of the tower, and to uncover
the roof, and then some twenty of them to fall down together; and by that means
to win the tower. The Scotts seeing their present danger, offered to parley;
and opening the iron gate, yielded themselves to mercy.

Gilnoc-hall is probably what the commissioners call the house of stone of
Sandy Armstrong. It has still a castle-like form: but it is situation, which is
under a woody hill, is rather that of an abbey, than of a castle. As it had
nothing however to do with the defense of the country; but only to take care of
itself, a sequestered situation might suit it best.

Besides the Esk, we met with many rivulets; each of which in it is turn, has
run purple to the sea, with the blood of our ancestors. If the borders were
subject to constant ravages in the time of peace, we may well suppose what they
were in time of war. The borderers were expert in all the arts of rapine, and
plundering; and having on both sides a national antipathy, wanted only a
pretense to indulge it. The ravages that were committed, when open hostility
commenced between the two kingdoms, by the regular garrisons of both, were so
ruinous, and so frequent, that we are astonished how countries so often
desolated, could be worth plundering.

Among Haynes's state papers, we have the history of one of these irregular
campaigns, in the time of Henry the eighth, under the title of Exploits done
upon the Scotts in the year 1544. The first exploit was done on the 2d of July,
and the last on the 17th of November. Between these two dates (which include
little more than four months) is contained an account of ninety-seven different
inroads into the borders of Scotland; which no doubt were repaid in kind by the
Scotts; tho probably not in so full a measure. In each of these details the
actors are specified, the time, the scene, the mischief done, and the booty
obtained. As the paper is curious, two or three, out of the ninety-seven
exploits, may be worth transcribing.

July 19. Mr. Clifford, and his garrison, burned a town, called Bedroul, with
fifteen or sixteen steds Houses.
; whereby they have gotten three hundred nolt Black-cattle.
, six hundred sheep, and much inside gear Houshold-goods.
. In their coming home they fought with lord Farnyhurst, and his company, and
took him, and his son, with three basses, which lord Farnyhurst brought into
the field with him.

August 7. Sir Ralph Evers, with the garrisons of the middle marches of
Tinedale, and Ridsdale, to the number of fourteen hundred men, rode, and burnt
Jedworth, and Ancram-spittle, with two other towns, called East Nesbit, and
West Nesbit; and won diverse strong castle-houses, and slew all the Scottish men
in the same to the number of eighty, and brought away two hundred and twenty
head of nolt, and four hundred sheep, with much inside goods.

August 16. William Buncton and John Order, and certain of the garrison of
Berwick, burnt and spoiled the town of Dunglasse very sore; and seized three
hundred and twenty nolt, eight hundred sheep, and much spoilage. In their
return they fought with the Scotts, and put them to flight; and slew Alexander
Hume, and forty other good men, and took the lord of Anderwicke and his son
Hamilton, and sixty more prisoners.

August 27. Sir Brian Layton, etc. ranged the woods of Woddon, where they got
many nags, sheep, and nolt, and slew in the said woods thirty Scotts. From
thence they went to a tower of lord Buccleugh's, called the Moss-house, and
smoked it very sore, and took thirty prisoners, and have brought away eighty
nags, two hundred nolt, and four hundred sheep; and they burned the town of
Woddon, and many shielings, and houses in the said wood, and other steds and
mills in their way.

I need not multiply extracts from this horrid catalogue, in which the pillage,
ruin, and slaughter of thousands of individuals (contributing nothing to the
sum of the war) are related with as much indifference, as the bringing in of a
harvest. We consider war as a necessary evil; and pride ourselves now on making
it like gentlemen. Humanity certainly requires us to alleviate it is miseries as
far as we can. But while our wars by land are tempered with generosity, why are
our wars by sea carried on like barbarians? Taking the ships of an enemy, it is
true, destroys resources: so would plundering a country; and carrying away it is
inhabitants captive, in the old style of Babylonish conquest. From this however
we refrain by land; tho we practice it by sea. The great point of difference
between the two services, in this respect, lies here. By land, all private
plunderers, and morauders, which are the most cruel kind of oppressors, are
restrained: by sea, they are licensed: or, in other words, by sea we still
practice the brutality of Scotch, and English borderers.

SECT. VI.
WE traveled along the banks of the Esk many miles; and found several
beautiful scenes. Near Langham particularly, it winds through groves, which
diversify the road; and it is bed is finely channelled with rock.

The banks of the Tiviot soon after received us; and conducted us into a new
country. On the borders of the Esk our views had been in general confined
within contracted valleys. But now the country began to expand; and assumed
features entirely different. The Tiviot takes it is course through wide valleys
of smooth extended pasturage, sloping down to it in all directions; and in
general forming beautiful lines; tho otherwise void of all those circumstances,
and that variety of objects, particularly of wood, which give beauty to
landscape. In some parts these valleys also are contracted; but in a different
manner from those of the Esk. The same breadth of feature is still preserved,
which we had in the more open parts, only it is here brought nearer the eye.
Tho the lofty skreens rush down precipitately to the river, and contract the
valleys, you see plainly they are the parts of a large-featured country; and in
a style of landscape very different from those little irriguous valleys which
we had left.

The downy sides of all these valleys are covered with sheep, which often
appear to hang upon immense green walls. So steep is the descent in some parts,
that the eye, from the bottom, scarce distinguishes the slope from a
perpendicular. Several of these mountainous slopes (for some of them are very
lofty) are finely tinted with mosses of different hues, which give them a very
rich surface. This however is the garb only, which nature wears at this season
of the year. She has a variety of dresses for all seasons; and all so becoming,
that when she deposits one, and assumes another, she is always adorned with
beauties peculiar to herself.

Hawick has a romantic situation among rocks, sounding rivers, cataracts, and
bridges; all of which are very picturesque. When we meet with objects of this
kind (the result of nature, and chance,) what contempt do they throw upon the
labored works of art? There is more picturesque beauty in the old bridge at
Hawick, than in the most elegant piece of new-made river scenery. I mean not to
assert, that such an object would suit a piece of improved ground. It would
there be out of place. All I mean, is, that the picturesque eye has that kind
of fastidiousness about it, that it is seldom pleased with any artificial
attempts to please. It must find it is own beauties; and often fixes, as here,
on some accidental, rough object, which the common eye would pass unnoticed.

As we proceeded to Selkirk, we found the road on the north of Hawick a perfect
contrast to what we had passed on the south. There we were carried along the
valleys, and looked up to the hills. Here we were carried along the hills, and
looked down upon the valleys. Here too, in general, the mountains formed
beautiful lines; but as in history-painting, figures without drapery, and other
appendages, make but an indifferent group; so in scenery, naked mountains form
poor composition. They require the drapery of a little wood to break the
simplicity of their shapes, to produce contrasts, to connect one part with
another; and to give that richness in landscape, which is one of it is greatest
ornaments. We are told indeed, that this was formerly a very woody country --
that it was called the forest of Selkirk; and extended over great part of the
southern counties of Scotland. And yet if this information did not depend on
good historical authority, we might be led to dispute it. For people are seldom
at the trouble of felling a forest, unless they want either the timber, or the
ground it stands on; neither of which, in the present case, seems to have been
wanted.

These mountains however, unadorned as they appear, are by no means void of
beauty. We had several pleasing views along the valleys; particularly one
toward Sunderland hall, where the river Atric plays round the promontories of
several sweeping mountains, which guide it is course.

A little beyond the Atric we meet the Tweed; which is here a river of no great
consequence; but it is deficiency in grandeur, is made up in beauty. We
traveled along it is banks about a mile; and in that short space were
entertained with two or three pleasing views; the most striking of which were
at Yar, and Ferney.

The house at Yar, which belongs to the duke of Buccleugh, is no object; nor is
the river visible in this view; but the road winds beautifully to a bridge,
beyond which the mountains make agreeable intersections.

At Ferney we had a grand scene of mountain-perspective. It is not often that
these elevated bodies coincide with the rules of beauty, and composition --
less often indeed than any other mode of landscape. In a level country, the
awkwardness of a line is hid. But the mountain rearing it is opakeness against
the sky, shows every fault both in it is delineation, and combination with great
exactness. These mountains however had few faults to show. They were both
well-formed, and well connected; and showed also in great perfection the
beauties of gradation -- gradation in form -- gradation in light -- and
gradation in color. With these adjuncts, which are among the most beautiful in
landscape, the exhibition could not but be pleasing. One of the nearest of
these mountains was enriched, when we saw it, with a deep purple tint; which
did not seem the production of any vegetable substance, but rather some
enamelled mineral stain.

It is no little recommendation of the rivers we met with here, that almost
every one of them is the subject of some pleasing Scotch ditty; which the scene
raises to the memory of those, who are versed in the lyrics of the country. The
elegant simplicity of the verse, and the soothing melody of the music, in
almost all the Scotch songs, is universally acknowledged. Tweed-side, and
Atric's banks, are not among the least pleasing.

Beyond the Tweed the country becomes again mountainous, wild and uncultivated;
in which state it continues till within thirteen or fourteen miles of
Edinburgh. A little beyond Middleton, before we descended the higher grounds
into the plain, we had a view from the brow of the hill, of the situation of
that capital.

The plain is bounded by the Pentland hills; which in themselves are not
magnificent; but appeared considerably so to us through the medium of a light
mist, which began to overspread the distance. Deceptions of this kind are very
common in mountainous countries. Under such a circumstance I have often
conceived myself about to ascend some stupendous mountain, which dwindled, on a
nearer approach, into a mere hill. On the right of the Pentland hills arises
Arthur's seat; a rock, which hangs over Edinburgh, of peculiar appearance;
romantic, but not picturesque. It continues long the striking feature of the
view; neither the castle, nor any part of the town appearing for some time.

As we approach nearer; the environs of Edinburgh become more distinct. We get
a view of the Forth; and see the grounds about Musselborough and Dalkeith, on
the southern side of it; and the mountains of Fifeshire on the northern.

About six or seven miles on this side or Edinburgh we turned a little out of
the way to visit Dalkeith house; which belongs to the duke of Buccleugh. It
stands on a knoll overlooking a small river. The knoll is probably in part
artificial; for an awkward square hollow hard by indicates that the knoll has
been dug out of it. Beyond the river are woods; and a picturesque view of the
town and church of Dalkeith. But the house fronts the other way, where it is
not only confined, but the ground rises from it. It might have stood with great
advantage, if it had been carried two or three hundred yards farther from the
river; and it is front turned toward it. A fine lawn would then have descended
from it, bounded by the river, and the woods. We often see a bad situation
chosen: but we seldom see a good one so narrowly missed.

There are several pleasing pictures in Dalkeith-house; one of the most
striking, is a landscape by Vernet, in Salvator's style. It is a rocky scene
through which a torrent rushes: the foaming violence of the water is well
expressed. I have not often met with a picture of this fashionable master,
which I liked better. And yet it is not entirely free from the flutter of a
French artist.

Here, and in almost all the great houses of Scotland, we have pictures of
queen Mary; but their authenticity is often doubted from the circumstance of
her hair. In one it is auburn, in another black, and in another yellow.
Notwithstanding however this difference, it is very possible, that all these
pictures may be genuine. We have a letter preserved See Hayne's state papers p.
511.
, from Mr. White, a servant of queen Elizabeth, to Sir William Cecil, in which
he mentions his having seen queen Mary at Tutbury castle. " She is a goodly
personage, says he, has an alluring grace, a pretty Scottish speech, a
searching wit, and great mildness. Her hair of itself is black; but Mr. Knolls
told me, that she wears hair of sundry colors."

This house was formerly, like most of the great houses in Scotland, built in
the form of a castle. It belonged then to the noble family of Douglas; and was
once the gloomy retreat of a celebrated chief of that name -- the earl of
Morton; who was regent of the kingdom nominally under James; but really under
Elizabeth. That artful princess, having imprisoned Mary, conducted the affairs
of Scotland, through this minister, as she pleased. Elizabeth was not nice in
the choice of her instruments. Moral failings, in men of abilities, were no
blemishes. Morton's character is marked in history with those vices which
unbounded ambition commonly ingrafts upon the fiercer passions, cruelty, and
revenge; to which we may add an insatiable avarice. Popular odium at length
overpowered him, and he found it necessary to retire from public life. This
castle was the scene of his retreat; where he wished the world to believe, he
was sequestered from all earthly concerns. But the terror he had impressed
through the country during his power was such, that the common people still
dreaded him even in retirement. In passing toward Dalkeith, they generally
made a circuit round the castle, which they durst not approach, calling it, the
lion's den. While he was thus supposed to be employed in making his parterres,
and forming his terraces, he was planning a scheme for the revival of his
power. It suddenly took effect, to the astonishment of all Scotland. But it was
of short continuance. In little more than two years, he was obliged to retreat
again from public affairs; and ended his life on a Scaffold.



SECT. VIII.
AS we approached Edinburgh from Dalkeith, the country around is woody, and
cultivated; but it is cultivated in the Numidian fashion; praeter oppido
propinqua, alia omnia vasta, atque inculta Sal. Bell. Jug.
.

A nearer approach did not give us a more pleasing idea of the environs of
Edinburgh. We had always heard it represented as one of the most picturesque
towns in Britain; but people often consider romantic and picturesque, as
synonymous. Arthur's seat which is still the principal object, appears still as
odd, misshapen, and uncouth as before. It gave us the idea of a cap of
maintenance in heraldry; and a view with such a staring feature in it, can no
more be picturesque, than a face with a bulbous nose can be beautiful. The town
and castle indeed on the left, make some amends, and are happily introduced. In
front also, between the eye and Arthur's seat, stands an old castle-like
building, called Craigmiller, which has a good effect. It is celebrated for
being the scene, where the unfortunate Mary, repenting her rash match with
Darnley, would often retire from the public eye, and indulge her melancholy in
private. Here too her imagination might draw a parallel between the brutal
manners of that prince, and those of the all-obsequious Bothwell, for whom her
passion at this time is said to have taken root.

But the situation of Edinburgh, tho it cannot be called picturesque, is very
peculiar. The castle stands so loftily, that it was called by the Romans, the
alatum castrum, or the winged castle, as if it stood in the air. The rock is
perpendicular on every side, but the cast; from whence it descends gently, in a
ridge, through the space of a mile and a half, into the plain below. On this
ridge, which contains room only for one ample street, the town is built. From
this form it is easy to conceive, the different appearances, which Edinburgh
presents, on going round it. As you approach from the south, it appears like a
grand city of noble extent. As you move to the right, it is size gradually
diminishes. But when you view it from the Musselborough road, which is in a
direction due east, the street is gone; and the houses are all crowded
together, as if they had retreated under the walls of the castle. And yet the
appearance of the town, and castle thus united by perspective into one vast
object, is extremely grand. If they had been seen before from no other
situation; and the ground plot unknown, the imagination would have been totally
lost in developing so strange a production of art. Formerly, the whole town was
surrounded by water; from which the French gave it the name of L'isleburgh. But
now the water is entirely drained off.

The antiquity of Edinburgh cannot be traced: but it is history easily may. No
times, but those of anarchy, and aristocratic confusion, could have fixed on
such a situation for a capital -- a situation so extremely inconvenient, that
the town would long ago have left the craggy ridge it occupies, and have
descended into the plain below, which lies perfectly commodious to receive it;
if the magistrates, whose interest it is to keep it where it stands, had not
forcibly prohibited it is removal; notwithstanding which it is, in one part
spreading into a noble city, constructed on modern rules of symmetry and
convenience. -- It was not however till late in the Scottish annals, that
Edinburgh became the seat of empire. A situation, south of the Forth, was
thought too much exposed to English inroads: and tho it has now been long
considered as the capital of Scotland, it was never, except occasionally, the
residence of the Scottish kings. Perth had that honor anciently; and Sterling
in more modern times.

The castle is almost the only object of picturesque curiosity in Edinburgh.
They, who go to see it, are commonly satisfied with being carried into it;
where they find a number of patched, incoherent buildings without any beauty.
Scarce any thing in it deserves the least attention; except the views from the
batteries, which are very amusing; particularly those over the Forth. -- But he
who would see Edinburgh-castle in perfection, must go to the bottom of the
rock, it stands on, and walk round it. In this view the whole appears a very
stupendous fabric. The rock, which is in itself an amazing pile, is in many
parts nobly broken; and tho, in it is whole immensity, it is too large an object
for a picture, unless at a proper distance; yet many of it is craggy corners,
with their watch-towers and other appendages, are very picturesque.

One part is particularly pleasing, in which the bridge over the North-loch
(which is a noble piece of architecture) is introduced in the distance like a
Roman aquaduct.

Holy-rood house is a grand palace, occupying a large square. The front
consisting of a round tower on each side of the gate, is of ancient
architecture. The body of the edifice was constructed by Sir William Bruce,
since the Grecian orders were introduced. The gallery is a noble room. It is a
hundred and forty-seven feet long, and twenty-nine broad; and has that dark
solemn appearance, in which grandeur and dignity so much consist. It is adorned
with a succession of an hundred and eleven kings from Fergus the first to James
the seventh; -- a series which carries the Scottish monarchy, in the ordinary
scale of calculation, not indeed quite to the times of Noah, but above two
thirds of the way. Be the authenticity of these princes however what it may, as
they are all painted by one hand (which has been no despicable one) and in a
dark style, suited to the solemnity of the place, they have all together a
uniform, and pleasing effect. In this palace we were shown the blood of David
Rizio -- the chamber where the queen sat at supper when he was killed -- the
private door, through which Ruthven entered in complete armor; and the room,
into which Rizio was dragged, adjoining to that, in which the queen sat. Such
was the barbarity of those times, that the lord high chancellor of Scotland,
the guardian of it is laws, himself joined with a band of ruffians in
perpetrating this murder.

Holy-rood house was formerly an abbey, as well as a royal mansion; and among
it is appendages are the ruins of a Gothic chapel, which was once very
beautiful. Divine service had ceased in it, since the time of the reformation:
but it had long continued to be the burial place of some of the best families
in Scotland: and in honor of this sacred trust, it was some years ago
repaired. But the architects employed in the repairs, had very different ideas
from those, who had been employed in the original structure. A modern heavy
roof was thrown over light, airy Gothic walls: the consequence of which was, it
crushed them. On the night of the 2d of December, 1768, a crash was heard by
the inhabitants of the neighboring district; and in the morning, the roof,
walls, and monuments were all blended in one confused mass of irretrievable
ruin.

This chapel is said to have been the most beautiful specimen of Gothic
architecture in Scotland, except one, which still exists, at Roslin, in the
neighborhood of Edinburgh; which, through an unhappy mistake we did not see.
It was built about the year 1440, which was the age of the purest Gothic; and
therefore we could easily give credit to what we were told of the beauty of
it is construction. It Is sides are supported by buttresses, like King's
College-chapel, and Westminster-abbey; but in a style still richer than either
of those structures.

At Roslin also stand the ruins of a castle, built on a projecting rock, which
overlooks a deep valley. The whole, we were told, affords a very beautiful
scene.

Arthur's seat presents an unpleasing view from every station. Some formal part
stares you in the face in every corner of Edinburgh. You rarely meet even with
a picturesque fragment. It Is great regularity has in part been owing to the
streets of London; which were paved from it is bowels. A girdle of quarry
running round it, adds to it is formality.

This rocky hill was once probably a picturesque scene; for it was once, we
were informed, covered with wood. But this was then thought so great a
nuisance, that, we were told, there is still existing an ancient record, from
which it appears, that every man, who would take building-timber from Arthur's
seat, should be indulged with the privilege of projecting his house over the
street.

SECT. VIII.
FROM Edinburgh we took the Sterling road, along the Forth; which afforded us a
great variety of pleasing views.

In one of the most pleasing, the castle of Garvy is introduced, standing near
the water-edge, at the point of a promontory, which seems to be formed by the
high lands, on the northern side of the Forth. This however is only it is
apparent situation. In fact it stands upon an island; the insularity of which
is entirely hid. In this place the Forth becomes a narrow strait of about two
miles over; and Garvy-castle, which occupies the mid-channel, was intended for
it is defense. It commands a view of the whole Forth -- on the west as far as
Sterling -- and on the east as far as the isle of May. On the southern shore of
this strait stands Queen's-ferry, from whence the Forth widens again into a
considerable bay on the west. The whole scenery is indeed very pleasing; and to
those, who had time to examine it as it deserves, would afford very beautiful
views.

Hopton-house is the next great object we meet. The first view of it from the
road, at a distance, over a bay of the Forth, is very picturesque. It appears
behind a sloping hill, which hides one of it is wings. The horizontal lines of
the house, and the diverging lines of the hill accord agreeably. -- A regular
building always appears best, when thus connected with some irregular object. A
new source of beauty arises from the contrast: and indeed without it, a regular
building has seldom a good effect. When the artist therefore is under the
necessity of painting a modern house, he is under the necessity also of
breaking it is regularity, at least with a few branches of trees, if he have
nothing else at hand. Square lines, and angles uncontrasted, can never be
picturesque.

As we approach Hopton-house, it is situation appears very grand. It is seated
on a magnificent lawn, which forms a kind of Situation of HOPETON HOUSE.

terrace along the Forth. This lawn extends more than a mile in the front of
the house; and at the extremity of it the Forth (which is still a noble
estuary,) making a bold sweep, winds round it, and presents the appearance of a
wide, extensive lake, interspersed with islands, and enlivened with a variety
of shipping.

Behind the house the ground is more various, breaking into hills, valleys, and
promontories, which shoot into the Forth. All the grounds, to a considerable
extent, appear planted and adorned, and the house is very judiciously flanked
with wood against the north winds, which attack it from the Forth.

On this side, as well as in front, the Forth appears in various shapes,
assuming sometimes the form of a lake, and sometimes of a river, according to
the point from which it is seen. The former shape it assumes, when it is seen
in lengthened perspective; the latter when it is viewed directly across. Under
both ideas, it is equally grand.

Around this vast and magnificent scenery, arise mountains in various forms,
and at various distances. In short, the whole scene, and all it is appendages,
on every side, as far as the eye can traverse, is great, and noble; and the
house is so fixed, as to receive the full advantage of it is situation.

With regard to improvements indeed little can be said That is, little could be
said in the year 1776, when we saw it. It may, by this time, have undergone
many changes.
. The old ideas of formality still exist; and have taken full possession of the
environs of the house. But they might easily be displaced. There is so much
depth in the woods, so much variety in the ground, and so much space on every
side, that the whole scene is capable of any improvement.

The house is a very magnificent piece of architecture. It was begun by Sir
William Bruce, the most celebrated architect That is, little could be said in
the year 1776, when we saw it. It may, by this time, have undergone many
changes.
the Scotch ever had; and finished by Mr. Adam. The latter, I believe, added
the wings, which are a great ornament to it. That wing, which appears in the
view, next to the Forth, is a range of stables. The other, which is hid, is
intended for a library; but it is not yet finished. When it is complete it will
be a Colin Campbell, tho a Scotchman, was an English architect.
very noble room. Some of the other rooms also are grand; but, in general, the
apartments are smaller, than we should expect to find in so magnificent a
structure: nor does the contrivance of the house seem equal to the beauty of
the architecture.

The pictures, of which there is a numerous collection, have been chosen with
good taste: but most of them were undersized. Little pictures give a littleness
even to a grand room. A suitableness even in these things should be observed.

From Hopton-house we still continued our ride along the Forth; and were
entertained, for some miles, with views of the woods, and grounds belonging to
the noble mansion we had left.

Many natural beauties also we saw -- hills and promontories, and winding bays,
which had a fine effect in nature; and tho deficient in point of objects to
characterize each scene, they were still accommodated to the pencil. A country
may please the eye in all it is naked, and unadorned rudeness; but when a
portion of it is selected for a view, it is features must be uncommonly
striking, if it can support itself without the ornament of some artificial
object, which both characterizes a scene; and adds dignity to it. The natural
beauties of this country in a great degree rendered these appendages
unnecessary. We had many noble views formed by the Forth, and it is lofty
shores, which would have made good pictures, tho unsupported by artificial
objects. And yet in some parts we found objects also.

One view of this kind we had, which was very picturesque. It was a view of
Blackness-castle, which shooting a considerable way into the lake, forms a bay
between it, and the eye. This bay is one of the noblest inland harbors in
Scotland: and the castle was its defense. It preserved also the communication
by water between Sterling, and Edinburgh. In after times it became a state
prison; and, if fame speaks truth, could unfold, during the religious
dissentions of the country, many a tale of cruelty.

Objects often owe their happiest effects to accidental circumstances; and
among others, as we have often observed, to evening suns. Let the picturesque
traveller watch for these effects, and attend closely to them, when he finds
them accompanied with a noble landscape. We had this accompaniment at
Blackness-castle. The sun was now set, and the shades of evening were more and
more effacing that ruddy glow, which had not yet left the horizon. Right
against this fading splendour rose the towers of the castle. The outline
appeared very distinct; but all the detail, and surface were lost in obscurity:
while the landscape around was overspread with that gray, and dubious tint,
which brought the whole into the exactest harmony.

From hence we directed our course to Falkirk. At Linlithgow, which lies in the
road, the kings of Scotland had formerly one of their noblest palaces; in the
number and grandeur of which they seem to have equalled any princes in Europe.
This palace stands on a rising ground running into a lake; a situation which
can rarely fail of pleasing; but we were prevented by the weather from taking
such a view of it as we wished. In this palace was born the celebrated Mary
queen of Scots.

In Linlithgow the house is still shown from whence the earl of Murray, regent
of Scotland, was shot as he passed along the street. It was one of the most
deliberate assassinations upon record. Scotland, during the imprisonment of
Mary, was divided by violent factions. The earl of Murray and his adherents
sided against the queen: the house of Hamilton supported her. A gentleman, of
this name, and family, inflamed both by party, and a very flagrant private
injury, resolved to destroy the regent. He had long attended his motions, to
find a favorable opportunity; and at length determined to shoot him, as he
passed through Linlithgow in his way from Sterling to Edinburgh. The regent was
riding leisurely through the high street, talking with a gentleman on his left
hand, when a musket was fired suddenly from a window on the right; and the
regent receiving the ball, fell dead over his horse's neck. The house from
whence the blow came, was immediately assaulted; but the front door being
barricaded, could not immediately be forced. Hamilton, in the mean time,
mounted a swift horse, which stood ready at a postern, and escaped.

From Falkirk, we still continued our rout to Sterling. In our way we crossed
the great canal; which forms the northern part of Scotland into an island, by
joining the frith of Clyde with that of Forth. Busy man is ever at work
grubbing the soil on which he exists; sometimes casting up heaps, and sometimes
throwing them down. A few centuries ago the bands of Agricola were as eager in
raising this very spot into a rampart, as our contemporaries are now in delving
it into a canal. Both works were great efforts of human power: but the British
seems to be the greater. It was a mighty work, no doubt, to raise an earthen
mound sufficient to confine a nation: but it is still perhaps a greater work,
to introduce a new element, and bring the sloops of the ocean to land their
cargoes among the inland mountains of the country. -- As a useful and humane
work however the modern one is, beyond all doubt, more respectable; inasmuch as
it is more conducive to the happiness of mankind to open a communication
between one country, and another; than to block a nation up in it is barbarity,
and shut it out from every opportunity of knowledge, and improvement. -- In a
picturesque light, I know not whether to call the Roman, or the British work,
more disgusting. Both equally deform the natural face of the country.

In this neighborhood are still to be traced the works of Agricola. Some parts
of the mound, which he threw up, and fortified between the Forth and the Clyde,
are still visible; and known by the name of Graham's dyke. The antiquarian also
traces many forts in different parts, where this mound ran, capable of
containing an army. It is not however generally supposed, that these were all
the works of Agricola; but that other generals, who succeeded him, made
additions to what he had done.

Among these remains on the banks of the Carron, one of the most remarkable was
an edifice; the use, and origin of which exceedingly puzzled antiquarians. It
was a rotunda, open at the top, like the Pantheon at Rome, tho of very inferior
workmanship, and dimensions. From the ground to the summit of the dome it
measured twenty-two feet -- the diameter in the inside was nineteen and an
half. Boethius is the chief historian, who gives us any account of it is more
perfect state. He tells us, that it is area within was surrounded by stone seats
-- that on the south was an altar; and that the floor had been tesselated. The
common people called it Arthur's oven: but many antiquarians have supposed it
to have been a temple, built for the god Terminus by Agricola, on his fixing
here the boundaries of the Roman empire. This valuable piece of antiquity was
destroyed by the proprietor, Sir Michael Bruce, in the year 1742, for the sake
of the stone, with which it was constructed. The deed raised such indignation
in Dr. Stukely, that I have heard, he drew Sir Michael carrying off his lap
full of stones; and the devil goading him along. This drawing, miserable as we
may suppose it from such an artist, was engraved, I believe, and published by
the antiquarian society in their repertory.

In the neighborhood of the new canal are the great forges of the
Carron-works; which exhibit a set of the most infernal ideas. In one place,
where coal is converted into coke by discharging it of sulphur, and the fire
spread of course over a large surface; the volumes of smoke, the spiry flames,
and the suffocating heat of the glimmering air, are wonderfully affecting. How
vast the fire is, we may conceive, when we are told, it consumes often a
hundred tons of coal in a day. At night it is glare is inconceivably grand.

In another part of these works, we admired the massy bellows, which rouse the
furnaces. They are put in motion by water; and receiving the air in large
cylinders, force it out again through small orifices, roaring with astonishing
noise. The fire of the furnace thus roused, becomes a glowing spot, which the
eye can no more look at, than at the sun. Under such intense heat, the rugged
stone instantly dissolves in streams of liquid iron.

Among the horrid ideas of this place, it is not the least, that you see every
where, black, sooty figures wheeling about, in iron wheel-barrows, molten
metal, glowing hot.

Within less than a mile from the Carron-works was fought the battle of
Falkirk. The workmen pointing out the place on a moor; bad us observe, upon the
highest part of it, two small houses together, and one at a distance: between
these, they said, the principal attack was made: tho I believe, now Falkirkmoor
is enclosed, and cultivated; and the scene of action perhaps scarcely to be
traced In 1788.
.

As we approach Sterling, the Forth, contracting it is dimensions, loses the
form of an estuary; and takes that of a river: but we leave it is banks; and
afterward have only distant views of it; and these by degrees became less
frequent. The country, through which we traveled, was in general flat, and
barren of objects, except that here and there we had a mountain scene in the
offskip. In one part we saw the remains of an old fortress, called Briscastle;
which rather diversified an uninteresting scene.



SECT. IX.
THE castle of Sterling, tho an object of great importance, makes no
appearance, till we approach within three miles of it. It has the air of the
castle of Edinburgh; only instead of the formality of Arthur's seat, the
back-ground here is a simple mountain. There is nothing very beautiful in the
scenery around it; but an object of such consequence will give dignity to any
scene.

As we approach nearer, and the castle comes forward from the back ground, it
appears with still more dignity.

Viewed upon the spot, the outside of it is very inferior to the castle of
Edinburgh. The rock, on which it stands, has neither the height, the
circumference, nor the broken surface of that superb fortress. But if it be
inferior on the outside, it is infinitely grander within. Edinburgh castle is
only a collection of barracks, magazines, and officers houses; whereas in
Sterling-castle you find very noble remains of royal magnificence. It was often
the residence of the kings of Scotland. Almost the whole minority of James the
sixth, under his tutor Buchanan, was spent here; and in troublesome times it
was always a place of refuge to the distresses of majesty. Accordingly it
contains all the accompaniments of a regal residence; a palace, a chapel, and a
parliament house. The palace, in the inside, is totally without form, being now
converted into barracks; but on the outside, it is very richly and curiously
adorned with grotesque figures. The chapel is an elegant and simple pile; and
the parliament house is a very magnificent room: it is one hundred and twenty
feet in length, and lofty in proportion. At the entrance of the castle, the
palaces of the earls of Argyle and Mar stand, like two royal supporters. They
are now indeed in ruins; but they have once been very sumptuous buildings.

The views from the castle are in general over a barren, and uninteresting
country: but amends is made by the superior excellence of one of them over the
Forth, which has always been esteemed the most celebrated view in Scotland. It
is not indeed picturesque; but it is exceedingly grand, and amusing. You
overlook a flat valley of vast extent, stretching almost as far as Edinburgh;
through which the windings of the Forth are very intricate, and curious. From
the castle gate to Alloa it is four miles by land; but if you go by water, it
is above twenty. Through a few of the first large peninsular sweeps the eye can
follow the course of the river; but afterward all becomes confused, and broken
into patches of land and water. At Alloa, the river is a mile broad: at
Sterling, it is contained within four arches. Through the whole of this vast
channel the tide winds as through a great gut. But it is a sedgy, impure
stream; the flux and reflux of the tide continually mixing the soil with it is
waters, and stirring up the mud. It is navigated as far as Sterling by ships of
seventy or eighty tons: but if they trust to their sails alone through the
course of this sinuous navigation, they must wait for the benefit of every wind
round the compass, two or three times over.

The valley through which the Forth makes these uncommon windings, tho not a
rich one, is by no means barren. It is varied with wood in several parts, with
villages also, and other buildings; among which the abbey of Cambuskenneth is
conspicuous. Of this ruin nothing now remains, but a single tower. On the
right, this valley, which is wide in proportion to it is length, is bounded only
by high grounds; but on the left, it is more nobly confined by the mountains of
Ochil, and Clackmannan.

There are few countries perhaps on the face of the earth, of such narrow
dimensions as Scotland, which have been the scenes of a greater variety of
military events. Invasions from Norway, from Denmark, and from Ireland --
irruptions from the Roman barrier -- together with the various feuds, and
animosities among the Scotch themselves, which have been more frequent than
among any other people, have deluged the country, through different periods, in
blood. But above all, the constant quarrels between the Scotch, and English,
which were generally decided in Scotland, have made it a fertile scene of
military events; to which several have been added by rebellions, since the
union. In fact you can hardly ascend any elevated ground, without throwing your
eye over the scene of some memorable action.

As the castle of Sterling has for many ages been a fortress, we are not
surprised that it is neighborhood abounds with scenes of this kind. Many a
siege it has sustained; one through the space of a whole year against the
puissant arms of Edward the first. Not fewer, I believe, than a dozen fields of
battle may be counted from it is walls. Of the four great battles, which were
fought by the two first Edwards, in support of their tyranny in Scotland, three
were in the vicinity of this castle.

Within two years after the battle of Dunbar, in which Edward the first broke
the power of Scotland, the spirit of Wallace roused the Scotch again to arms.
Edward was then in France: but a large force under earl Warren endeavored to
quell them. A battle was fought under the walls of Sterling; in which Wallace
was victorious.

This success drew Edward out of France. He entered Scotland at the head of a
large army; and at the memorable battle of Falkirk, fought in the year 1298,
broke it is power a second time.

The famous battle of Bannocburn was the last of these four great battles; and
was fought within two miles of Sterling. This was the most glorious action in
the whole annals of Scotland; as it entirely freed it from the English yoke. --
Philip of Mowbray held this fortress for Edward the second, which was almost
the only fortress he possessed. Mowbray was hard pressed by the Scotts, and had
promised to capitulate, if he was not relieved by such a day. Edward, in the
mean time, resolved to relieve him; and entered Scotland with an army much
greater than had ever entered it before. Many historians rate it at one hundred
thousand men, which number however is wholly incredible. Early on the morning
of the 25th of June 1314, the English army was descried from the castle,
marching in gallant array to relieve them. The Scotch army, well posted, lay
between. The walls were crowded with anxious spectators. Very soon the English
cavalry, led on by the earl of Gloucester, was seen to push forward, and begin
the attack. But they were presently repulsed. Immediately after, the whole
field was seen in confusion; but from what cause, could not at that distance be
conjectured. This confusion soon ended in a total rout. The English army fled;
and the Scotts with all their force pursued. The case was, the horse had been
decoyed into pitfalls, where many of them being overthrown, the rest fell back
with confusion on the main body. The disorder was still farther increased by
the appearance of a new army marching round their flanks, tho in fact it was
artfully composed only of suttlers, furnished with military ensigns. The lowest
accounts make the English to have lost, on that day, ten thousand men. The earl
of Gloucester was killed; and the king himself with difficulty escaped.

As we stood upon the seven gun battery an old gunner showed us the situation
of the rebels, and their intrenchments, when they attacked the castle in the
year 1745. Blakeney, the governor, brought two or three of his batteries to
bear upon a piece of rising ground between him and their works, which he took
it for granted they would endeavor to occupy. The spot is so near, that you
may throw a stone upon it from the walls. Then feigning intimidation, he
ordered his men to lie close, till the rebels, among whom he saw every symptom
of rashness, and inexperience, should advance their works to the destined
ground. As soon as they were well collected upon it, such a terrible discharge
of cannon, and small arms, burst at once upon them, from various parts, that
seven hundred men were left dead upon the spot, the rest fled with trepidation;
and the siege was instantly raised.



SECT. X.
AS we left Sterling, we had a fine retrospect of it, in which the castle takes
a more exalted station, than any in which we had yet seen it.

At Sterling we crossed the Forth, and traveling twenty four miles under the
Ochil mountains, on the north side of the river, (a tract of country affording
little amusement) we came to the town of Kinross with an intention to visit the
scenes of Loch-leven.

This lake, on the side next Kinross, is bounded by a plain; on the other side,
by mountains. It is about eleven miles in circumference, and is of a circular
form: but as the eye views it on a level, it loses it is circular appearance,
and stretches into length, forming many beautiful bays.

Near the middle of the lake, are two islands. One of them is noted for
pasturage: the other (which contains little more than an acre of ground) is
adorned with a castle, which, as a spot of peculiar beauty, or perhaps rather
of security, was once a royal mansion.

All the level side of the lake, between the water and Kinross, is occupied by
open groves. At the west end of the lake stands a handsome house, delightfully
situated, belonging to the family of Bruce. It was built in the reign of
Charles the second by Sir William Bruce, for his own residence; and is esteemed
a beautiful piece of architecture. In this neighborhood there is another
monument of his genius; the house of the earl of Rothes, near Lesley; but we
had not time to see it. The gardens at Kinross run down to the margin of the
lake; which in all it is splendour is spread before them. Sir William Bruce, when
he built the house, made wide plantations around it; which are now come to
maturity. Indeed all it is appendages were so pleasing, that I do not remember
being often struck with a more beautiful scene; which a sweet evening, no
doubt, contributed greatly to improve. If we had seen it under a gloomy sky, it
might perhaps have lost some of it is beauties.

I shall never forget the sweet composure of an evening walk along the margin
of the lake; shrouded on the right by an irregular screen of Mr. Bruce's pines;
and open to the water on the left. A soothing stillness ran through the scene.
It was one of those mild, soft evenings, when not a breath disturbs the air.
About sun set, a light gray mist, arising from the lake, began to spread over
the landscape. Creeping first along the surface of the water, it rose by
degrees up the hills; blending both together in that pleasing ambiguity,
through which we can but just distinguish the limits of each. I do not call
this the most beautiful mode of vision: but it certainly exhibits in great
perfection a graduating tint; which is among the most pleasing sources of
beauty. The mist becoming thinner, as it ascended the mountain; the ground of
course appeared gradually stronger, as it emerged from it.

Our view was still improved by picturesque figures upon the foreground. Some
fishermen were dragging a net to the shore, which had been carried into the
lake by a boat. We waited, till the contents of the net were discharged; among
which were some very fine trout. We saw them again at supper; and found
afterward that this species of fish, which is more red than salmon, is
peculiar to this lake: and tho a critic in eating would travel many miles to
taste this delicate food in perfection, we were informed it sold at the price
of three farthings a pound.

The castle, which appeared floating on the lake, was a happy circumstance in
the scene; pointing the view from every part. It was important in itself; and
still more so by an association of ideas, through it is connection with that
unfortunate princess, Mary, queen of Scotts; whose beauty, and guilt have
united pity, and detestation through every part of her history A late
historian, Mr. Whitacre, has given the public some new lights on the history
of Mary; and thrown the guilt on Elizabeth.
. In this castle she was confined by the confederate lords, after the murder of
the king, and her marriage with Bothwell.

Her escape from it was effected thus. The castle belonged to a gentleman of
the name of Douglas; to whose care the confederate lords had entrusted her.
George Douglas, his younger brother, a youth of eighteen, lived in the family,
whom Mary singled out as the instrument of her deliverance. When she had
secured his heart, she employed his abilities. A plan was laid between them,
and executed on Sunday night, the 2d of May 1568. Young Douglas contrived, as
his brother sat down to supper, to secure the keys of the castle. The queen
stood ready at the gate; which her faithful conductor locked behind her, and
threw the keys into the lake. A boat had been prepared, and the oars of all the
other boats were thrown adrift. Every possibility of immediate pursuit being
cut off, the queen reached the shore in security; where lord Seaton, and sir
James Hamilton stood ready, with swift horses, to receive her.

Every picturesque subject may be treated on canvas two ways. The fact may be
represented under it is plain circumstances -- or it may be represented under an
allegory. These two modes of representation answer to history, and poetry; both
of which may often adorn the same subject.

In the historical representation of a fact, the artist has only to observe the
common rules of his art. He must attend to design, composition, light and
shade, expression, and so forth. But in the allegorical representation, besides
these, something more is required. The allegory must be just, and consistent;
and demands another kind of knowledge, besides that of the principles of his
art. It may be formed either on a heathen, or a christian plan: but, on either,
it must be both uniform in itself; and agreeable to the mode of machinery,
which it adopts. It is the neglect of this uniformity, and propriety, which
renders the allegorical mode of treating a subject, so often disgusting.

Nobody has contributed more to bring contempt on allegory, than Rubens.
Nobody painted more in that mode; and when he had to do with subjects, entirely
fabulous, he generally did well: but in his attempts to allegorize history, he
often failed. In representing a marriage, for instance, he would not scruple to
introduce a christian bishop performing the the ceremony; while Minerva, or the
Graces perhaps waited as bride-maids. Nothing can be more absurd, than such a
medley.

If the subject be treated historically, let the king, or the prince give his
daughter away; and let the gentlemen, and ladies of the court attend in their
proper dresses. If it be treated in heathen allegory, erect the temple of Hymen
-- let the God himself appear -- rear the altar -- call in Juno pronuba -- and
let as many of the gods, and goddesses attend in their different capacities, as
may be thought convenient. But if the allegory be christian, dismiss the
heathen deities -- introduce christian virtues in their room -- and deck the
temple, and altar with proper appendages. Allegory thus treated is very
pleasing: and tho, where the subject is grand, and noble, I should in general
prefer a history piece well-painted, to the same subject treated equally well
in allegory; yet such subjects, as a marriage for instance, which afford few
circumstances of importance, and little room for expression, are best treated
in the allegorical style. The imagination of the painter must enrich the
poverty of the subject.

The little story of Mary's escape from Loch-leven, is one of these. It is
replete with circumstances, which admit of allegory; but are little adapted to
history. Love is the subject of it; and love-stories, which of all others are
below the dignity of historical representation, are best consigned to allegory.
The narrative, in this light, might run thus; from which the painter might
choose his point of time, and adorn his subject with such emblematical
appendages, as he liked best.

But neither the walls of Loch-leven castle, nor the lake which surrounded it,
were barriers against love. Mary had those bewitching charms, which always
raised her friends. She wore a cestus; and might be said to number among her
constant attendants, the God of Love himself. His ready wit restored her
liberty. Time, and place were obedient to his will. His contrivance laid the
plan. His address secured the keys: and his activity provided the bark; to
which he led her; with his own hand carrying the torch, to guide her footsteps
through the darkness of the night. -- Confusion ran through the castle. Hasty
lights were seen passing and repassing at every window; and traversing the
island in all directions. The laughing God, the mean while, riding at the poop,
with one hand, held the helm; and with the other waved his torch in triumph
round his head. The boat soon made the shore, and landed the lovely queen in a
port of security; where Loyalty, and Friendship waited to receive her.

SECT. XI.
FROM Loch-leven we continued our rout northward, through a country of little
curiosity. About eight miles before we reach Perth, we have a noble view from
the higher grounds of an extensive vale -- the fertile country of Strathern;
through which the river Erne appears winding with many a meander, till it enter
the Tay. This vale extends at least thirty miles; and the eye commands it
almost from end to end. Of the beautiful situations it affords great advantage
has been taken by the gentlemen of the neighborhood. You see it in many parts
marked with distant plantations; and can often distinguish the buildings, of
which these plantations are the appendages. Far to the west stands
Drummond-castle, once the residence of the earls of Perth -- now an ill-fated,
forsaken mansion. -- In an opposite direction, beyond the Erne, you distinguish
a rich scene of plantation. There the earl of Kinnoul has extended his woods on
every side. You may yet distinguish Duplin-castle rising among them; but soon
the woods will totally obscure it. In it is neighborhood was fought the
celebrated battle of Duplin; in which the family of Hay, like the Roman Fabii,
were almost cut off to a man. From a passage in Claudian one would suppose, the
Erne to have been often before dyed with blood.

Scotorum cumulos flevit glaci^lis Ierne. Beyond the vale of Erne, which is a
much richer landscape, than is commonly found in Scotland, the eye is still
carried into a distance more remote. It easily distinguishes where that river,
at the end of the vale, enters the Tay; which is now a grand estuary, and is
one of the principal features of the view. You trace it, if the day be clear,
as far as Dundee; where making a sudden turn, it retreats behind the higher
grounds. This whole vast distance, both of Strathern, and of the vale of Tay,
is bounded by mountains; as the Scotch views in general are, which add both
ornament, and dignity to them.

We did not however see this landscape with full advantage. The day was clear;
and a noontide sun, in all it is dazzling brightness, had spread over it that
full profusion of light, which is so unfavourable to landscape. A perpendicular
ray scarce allowed the existence of shade: whereas to give the landscape it is
full advantage, the shadow, not the light should have prevailed. The mountains
particularly should have been in shade. In almost all cases the darkened
mountain makes the most respectable figure, except perhaps when under a
morning, or an evening sun, you wish to tip it is prominent knolls with light.
Under the shadow of the mountains a gentle light spreading into the vale, would
have had a beautiful effect; and as it decayed, it might have marked two or
three objects with splendour, to carry on the idea to the end of the scene.

We did not enter Strathern; but left it on the right, and made toward the
mountains of Moncrief.

From these heights we had a retrospect of the same scenes; only more extended.
The vale of Erne, which lay before to the north, was now removed to the south:
but under this different aspect had still a better effect; at least it was so
much better enlightened, when we now saw it, that it appeared to much greater
advantage. In another direction the eye extended over the rich plains of Gowry,
and the Frith of Tay, even to it is junction with the ocean.

The high grounds, where we now stood, make a part of the Grampian hills, which
run through the middle of Scotland, from Aberdeenshire in the east, into
Argyleshire in the west. Some interruption, no doubt, they meet with; and
rarely, I believe, in any part, swell into mountains of remarkable note; but in
the lowest parts they form a considerable rise, and on the whole may be
esteemed among the grand features of the country. In a picturesque light, from
the little specimen we saw of them, they afford great variety of ground, rising
into well-shaped hills, and sinking into beautiful valleys, adorned with
foaming rivulets, which carry their succors on both sides of the Grampian, to
the different rivers of eminence their several divisions.

But this country is still more remarkable as a scene of history, than of
picturesque beauty. Here we trod, what may almost be called classic ground;
where the last effort was made in defense of British liberty.

As yet the Glota, and Bodotria, (the friths of Clyde, and Forth) were the
boundaries of the Roman power in Britain: and the neck of land between these
estuaries, being fortified See page 67.
, confined the barbarous inhabitants within it is bounds. This curb they bore
with impatience; and determined to exert themselves in driving the Romans still
farther from their frontiers. In one of their incursions falling upon the ninth
legion in the night, they committed great slaughter.

The wise, and prudent Agricola, who commanded the Roman legions, seems to have
had no great desire to carry his arms farther: but being roused by these
repeated insults, he at length drew out his legions, and marched them into the
enemy's country; ordering his fleet, which had sailed round the eastern coast
of England from Sandwich, and was then in the Forth, to attend his march.

The news of the Roman legions in motion soon drew together the whole force of
the Britons, under one of their ablest leaders. What was the name of this
commander in his own barbarous language, we know not: but in the Latin of
Tacitus he takes the name of Galgacus. This chief, seizing the highest ground
of the Grampian hills, resolved there to wait the enemy. A battle ensued; the
particulars of which we have at large in Tacitus. The event was fatal to the
Britons. They had fought gallantly through the whole day; but were at length
entirely defeated, with the loss of ten thousand of their men killed upon the
spot.

The next morning, the Romans had a full view of the melancholy event. The
field was now silent, and solitary. Heaps of dead were lying round; but not a
single body of the enemy appeared, either on the plain, or in possession of any
post; while the country at a distance was seen from the heights involved in
smoke, as if it had been ravaged by an enemy. The cause was soon discovered.
The Britons flying from the field, had themselves, with barbarian fury, set
fire to their own houses, and villages; and many of them had even put to death
their wives and children The description, which Tacitus gives of the behavior
of the Britons, after their defeat, is so animated a picture of that
irresolution, and contention of various passions, which we might expect in a
fierce, savage people under those circumstances, that I cannot help
transcribing it.

Britanni palantes, mixtoque virorum mulierumque ploratu, trahere vulneratos;
vocare integros; deserere domos, ac per iram ultro incendere; eligere latebras,
et statim relinquere; miscere invicem consilia aliqua, dein sperare; aliquando
frangi aspectu pignorum suorum; saepius concitari: satisque constabat, saevisse
quosdam in conjuges, ac liberos, tanquam misererentur.


. So innate a love of liberty burned within them, that when that was lost, they
thought all was lost.

The exact spot, where this great battle was fought, is not easily ascertained:
but from the investigation of learned antiquarians, it is supposed to be
somewhere among these hills; and I have heard there is a place, where the vale
of Strathern unites with them, which is to this day called Galgachan-moor.

Agricola, having refreshed his troops, marched with a slow, and solemn motion,
through the country; ordering his fleet to sail round the island, through the
Orcades, and Hebrides, and along the western coast of England. After a
prosperous voyage it arrived safe at Sandwich in Kent; if that be, as it is
supposed to be, the portus Trutulensis of Tacitus; from whence, round the
eastern coast, it had joined the army of Agricola in the frith of Forth.

This is commonly supposed to be the first account we have of the insularity of
Britain. Camden supposes it; and indeed Tacitus seems rather to imply it, when
he tells us, that the Britons were uncommonly alarmed at the appearance of the
Roman fleet, lest if it should be found they were bounded by the sea, they must
relinquish their last hope, which consisted in the ignorance of the Romans So I
interpret the concise expression of Tacitus. Britannos ipsa (...), tanquam
aperto mar^s s^^ secreto, ultimum victis perf^g^um cla^^^eretur.
. It is implied too in the story he tells us (if I understand it rightly) of
the Usipian cohort Vit. Agric.
.

On the other hand many writers before Tacitus speak of Britain as an island;
and Caesar gives us, with surprising accuracy, the dimensions of it. -- I can
only reconcile this difference, by supposing that Agricola's voyage was the
first authenticated circumnavigation of Britain; and that all the accounts the
Romans had before, were founded on conjecture, and vague report; at least not
on any knowledge of their own.

Before I leave this account of Galgacus, I cannot forbear a short remark on
the elegant, and judicious historian, from whom we have it.

The candor of criticism commonly allows the historian to put the intentions
and views of generals into the form of speeches; tho such speeches neither
were, nor could be spoken. It is a graceful decoration of action; and gives
life to a character. Of this the best models of history afford frequent
examples. But then manners, and customs should be well observed. A Roman should
speak like a Roman; and a barbarian like a barbarian. But Tacitus seems in this
particular to have forgotten his usual accuracy. He has put a long and labored
speech into the mouth of Galgacus, which had no kind of similitude to the
manners of the Britons of that day, even as he himself describes them. Galgacus
seems perfectly informed of the state, and history of mankind at that period;
and reasons from a variety of topics, with so much elegance, perspicuity, and
coherence of argument, that Agricola himself, who harangues his troops in the
next page, does not appear to more advantage. An inadvertence of this kind is
the more surprising in Tacitus, as such admirable rules with regard to
propriety of character had just been fixed by a celebrated writer, almost his
contemporary.

Si dicenti^ erunt fortunis absona dicta
Romani tollunt equites, peditesque cachinum.
Aut f^mam sequere, aut sibi conv^^ientia finge.
Respicere exemplar vitae, mor^mque, jubebo
Doct^m imitatorem, et vivas hinc ducere voces.
SECT. XII.
WE were now descending the mountains of Moncrief; and as we approached Perth,
we had a beautiful view of that town. and it is invirons. Strathtay, or the vale
of Tay, was spread before us. It is a level plain of considerable extent,
skreened with woods, and surrounded with mountains. The Tay, forming a grand
stream, winds through it; and about the middle of the vale stands the town;
which with it is noble bridge, and the whole scenery around, forms a very
amusing landscape.

This view, as we approach still nearer, would be extremely picturesque, were
it not for one awkwardness, which totally incapacitates it for the pencil. The
Tay runs in a direct line between parallel banks, from the town to the eye. --
In a foreground, I think, the painter, tho copying nature, need pay little
attention to such awkwardnesses; but may venture to correct them. A liberty of
this kind must be taken: it is impossible to compose a picture without it. The
translation must needs be bad, if the idiom of the language, into which you
translate, be not observed.

Perth was once the capital of Scotland See page 62.
. Here the courts of justice sat; the parliament assembled; and the king
resided. It was then defended by a strong castle; and was remarkable for being
the only walled town in the kingdom. It Is dignity of course subjected it to
many insults. Whoever prevailed in Scotland, had generally his eye first on
Perth. In the English wars, it was always warmly contested. Each of the three
first Edwards had possession of it; and each of them lost it. It had it is share
also in the religious wars of 1559. And in the civil wars of the succeeding
century, it was besieged first by Montrose; and afterward by Cromwell. It Is
last siege is said to have been the basis of it is glory. Cromwell's soldiers
being dispersed about the country, introduced a spirit of industry, unknown
before.

The bridge at Perth, which is but just finished, is equal to any bridge we
find on this side of Westminster. But the bridge at Perth has undergone as many
revolutions as the town. It was swept away in the year 1210 by a prodigious
flood, which destroyed great part of the town itself. Many lives were lost; and
the royal family escaped with difficulty in a boat. Five times since that, it
has met the same fate.

At Perth every stranger must look through the window of Gowry-house, from
whence James the sixth called for help, when he feared assassination from the
earl of Gowry. Among all the doubtful facts, which history has endeavored to
develop, this is one of the most mysterious. Whether James intended to
assassinate the earl of Gowry, and his brother; or, whether those noblemen
intended to assassinate him, is a point equally doubtful. Circumstances the
most improbable attend both suppositions. And yet the king was certainly
attacked by the earl; and the earl was certainly killed by the king's
attendants. These are the critical points, which chiefly exercise the judgment
and penetration of the historian: and it is very amusing to observe, how
admirably Dr. Robertson has developed this dark affair. He first states the
facts; and shows the almost impossibility of either supposition. When he has
brought his reader into this dilemma, who knows not what to think of the
matter, he takes up the facts again -- throws a new light upon them, on another
supposition; and makes it very clear, that the earl of Gowry intended only to
get James in his power, who was in fact the property of each party, as it
gained the ascendant.

Soon after we leave Perth we come in view of a place, famous in story; the
ruins of Scone. Tho we cannot apply here the first lines of Virgil's noble, and
very picturesque description of Latinus's palace -- the grandeur of it is
architecture -- and the dignity of it is accompaniments -- the Tectum augustum,
ingens, centum sublime columnis,
Horrendum sylvis, and religione parentum: etc.
we may however apply to it the following part of the description.

Hinc sceptra accipere, and primos attollere fasces
Regibus omen erat --
And yet Scone, tho in a state of ruin, was at least so far habitable in the
year 1715, that the pretender found it sufficient to receive all his court;
where he affected to live with the splendour of majesty. Preparations too were
making for his coronation; but they were interrupted by a body of the king's
horse.

The situation of Scone on the northern banks of the Tay, as we rode along the
opposite side, appeared not unpleasant. It is surrounded by distant mountains;
but lying low, it has not that grandeur of situation, which a palace demands.

The celebrated stone-chair, the palladium of the Scottish empire, which
formerly had it is station here, is now one of the appendages of royalty in
Westminster abbey. I have heard that a silly distich, in the form of a
prediction, contributed not a little to reconcile many of the bigots of the
Scotch nation to the union.

Ni fallat fatum, Scoti quocunque locatum
Invenient lapidem, regnare tenenter ibidem.
From Scone we proceeded to Dunkeld, but met with nothing worth our notice,
till we came within a few miles of it. This tract of country however, tho not
beautiful, is remarkable. You pass over a very high, and flat plain. As you
approach Dunkeld, this wild, unshapely desert begins to separate into parts;
and form itself into hills, hung with wood, and broken with rock. But, what is
remarkable, from these high grounds you descend into the Highlands: for here
the country begins, which takes that denomination. The road winding among the
hills of this descent, discovers new beauties, as we advance. We had a hasty
view of the abbey of Dunkeld -- of a picturesque bridge over the Bran -- of the
mountains, that inviron the whole -- and other objects as we passed. The
several scenes shifted rapidly; and we suffered them to pass; as we proposed
afterward to take a more distinct view of them. There is something very
amusing even in a hasty succession of beautiful scenes. The imagination is kept
in a pleasing perturbation; while these floating, unconnected ideas become a
kind of waking dream; and are often wrought up by fancy into more pleasing
pictures; than they in fact appear to be, when they are viewed with deliberate
attention.

The object of our curiosity at Dunkeld, was the seat of the duke of Athol.
From Inver we ferried over the Tay; and in crossing, had a grand view up the
river. It was a vista of rock, and wood, which in nature's hands, was managed
without any formality, and made a scene of great beauty. We landed in the
duke's garden; where a green walk along the side of the river, brought us to
his house. It is a villa, rather than a ducal mansion: but being a favorite
spot, it has been the object of much attention, and expense.

Dunkeld was formerly both an archiepiscopal see, and an abbey: and the limits
of the duke's improvements are those, which formerly confined the monks. Nature
has marked them with very decisive boundaries.

This favored spot (for it is indeed a beauful scene) consists of a large
circular valley, the diameter of which is in some parts a mile; in others, two
or three. It Is surface is various; and some of the rising grounds within the
valley itself, would even be esteemed lofty, if it were not for the grand
skreen of mountains, which circles the whole. At the base of those, toward the
south, runs the Tay, in this place broad, deep and silent. The whole valley is
interspersed with wood; both on the banks of the river, and in it is internal
parts; and would have been a still more beautiful scene, if art had done as
much as nature. Much indeed it has done; but nothing well. Cascades, and
slopes, and other puerilities deform a scene which is in itself calculated to
receive all the grandeur of landscape. The walks show some contrivance; and
might with a few alterations, be made beautiful. Indeed the whole is capable of
receiving any improvement; and may by this time have received it. I speak of it
only as it was a dozen years ago.

The remains of the abbey, shrouded in wood, stand on the edge of the lawn; but
rather too near the house. The solitude, which naturally belongs to them, and
the embellishments which are necessary about a habitable mansion, interfere
rather too much with each other See this idea more explained; page 24.
. These ruins consist of the nave of the great church, the two side ailes, and
the tower. The architecture is a mixture of Gothic, and Saxon; yet elegant in
it is kind. The tower is handsome. At the west end we observed the peculiarity
of a round, ornamental window, which is not exactly in the middle, but appears,
as if it had been pushed aside by the point of the large one. Part of the old
cathedral is now the parish church; and is very beautiful, and very slovenly.
Near it is a square room, the burying place of the dukes of Athol, adorned with
a tablet, containing the arms of all their connections.

Besides the church, nothing of the abbey remains. And indeed in most of the
ruined abbeys, both in England, and Scotland, we find the great church is the
only part left; which was owing to the piety of the times. It was merit to
destroy the habitations of the monks; but it was profaneness to injure the
house of God. Thus Knox would exclaim, "Down with the nests, and the rooks will
fly off:" but his rage vented itself chiefly against the cells of the monks:
the abbey churches were generally spared. Such was the piety also of temporal
spoilers. In a paper of Haynes's, to which reference has already been made See
page 38.
, when we find an instance of a town, or a village destroyed, we often find it
specified also, that the church was left uninjured. To this piety even amidst
the rage of war, and the zeal of reformation, we are indebted for most of the
ruins of abbeys, that are yet left in Britain.

Round one of the rocky mountains, which skreen the valley of Dunkeld, the duke
has carried walks; and has planted both that mountain, and some others. Many
thousands of young pines are struggling for existence among the crannies of
rocks; and many thousands more, which have gotten hold of the soil, are
flourishing greatly: for the situation seems wonderfully agreeable to them: but
on so broad and lofty a base, the whole has yet the appearance only of a green
moss tinting the rocks; and it will be a century before these woods, thriving
as they are, will have consequence to break the lines of the mountains; and
give a proper degree of sylvan richness to the scene.

On the top of one of the mountains behind the duke's house, are five small
lakes; which communicate: but we did not see them; nor is their scenery
probably of any value.

Opposite to this moutain, and making a part of the same circular skreen,
stands a hill celebrated in dramatic story; the hill of Birnam: but it is now
totally divested of wood. Shakespeare however is right in making it once a woody
scene, which it certainly was. Of Dunsinane no vestiges remain; except a deep
double ditch. The situation appears to have been very strong.

SECT. XIII.
HAVING thus taken a view of that side of the Tay, on which the house is
placed, we crossed it again to see the Hermitage; a name the duke has given to
some improvements he has made on the Bran.

Down the side of one of those mountains, which forms the southern boundary of
the valley of Dunkeld, this river tumbles through a steep rocky channel; and
falls into the Tay, at Inver. A considerable part of the ground along it is
course the duke has enclosed: but his improvements are not suitable to the
scene. Nothing was required but a simple path to show in the most advantageous
manner the different appearances of the river, which is uncommonly wild, and
beautiful; and should have been the only object of attention. In adorning such
a path, the native forest wood, and natural brush of the place had been
sufficient. Instead of this, the path, which winds among fragments of rock, is
decorated with knots of shrubs and flowers.

Rocks and flowers, no doubt, make a contrast: and contrast is a source of
beauty. But the pleasing contrast should be founded either in harmony, or
propriety. In Horace's human head joined to a horse's neck, there is contrast;
but it is such a contrast, as the poet tells us every body would laugh at. The
contrast is just the same between rocks, and cultivated flowers -- between the
grandest works of nature; and the prettiest little decorations of art. We
object not to wild flowers, growing naturally among rocks. They are nature's
decoration, and are nurtured in the soil, that suits them. We object only when
we see the hand of art laying them out in knots. Such ideas in scenes,
dedicated to grandeur and solitude are incongruous.

And yet propriety may sometimes happily unite ideas, which in themselves are
inharmonious. A bull, for instance, grazing with flowers tied to his horns, is
absurd: but lead him in the pomp of sacrifice to the altar, and his flowers,
which connect him properly with the scene, for that reason become him. Thus an
elegant path round the environs of a house, where you would naturally expect
the decorating hand of art, is pleasing: propriety gives it beauty. But in a
wild, rocky scene, where you expect no human dwelling; nor any thing but the
naked print of nature's foot, all appearance of artificial ornament offends.

Having passed through this elaborate parterre, half inclined to turn back at
every step, we came unexpectedly to an astonishing scene.

The two rocky cheeks of the river almost uniting compress the stream into a
very narrow compass; and the channel, which descends abruptly, taking also a
sudden turn, the water suffers more than common violence from the double
resistance it receives from compression and obliquity. It Is efforts to
disengage itself, have in a course of ages undermined, disjointed, and
fractured the rock in a thousand different forms; and have filled the whole
channel of the descent with fragments of uncommon magnitude, which are the more
easily established, one upon the broken edges of another, as the fall is rather
inclined, than perpendicular. Down this abrupt channel the whole stream in
foaming violence forcing it is way, through the peculiar and happy situation of
the fragments, which oppose it is course, forms one of the grandest, and most
beautiful cascades we had ever seen. At the bottom it has worn an abyss, in
which the wheeling waters suffer a new agitation, tho of a different kind.

This whole scene, and it is accompaniments, are not only grand; but
picturesquely beautiful in the highest degree. The composition is perfect: but
yet the parts are so intricate, so various, and so complicated, that I never
found any piece of nature less obvious to imitation. It would cost the readiest
pencil a summer day to bring off a good resemblance. My poor tool was so
totally disheartened, that I could not bring it even to make an attempt. The
broad features of a mountain, the shape of a country, or the line of a lake,
are matters of easy execution. A trifling error escapes notice. But these high
finished pieces of nature's more complicated workmanship, in which the beauty,
in a great degree, consists in the finishing; and in which every touch is
expressive; especially the spirit, activity, clearness, and variety of agitated
water, are among the most difficult efforts of the pencil. When the cascade
falls in a pure, unbroken sheet, it is an object of less beauty indeed, but of
much easier imitation.

This grand view, which I scruple not to call the most interesting thing of the
kind, I ever saw, is exhibited through the windows of a summer house; which I
suppose, gives name to the scene: but it bears no resemblance to the idea of a
Hermitage. A more exact Hermitage had been a better decoration. We can conceive
a recluse to have chosen such a retreat, and to have felt tranquillity of mind
perhaps the more forcibly near the roar of a cataract. It Is noise might exclude
every other idea, and leave the mind to itself. -- But such a summer house as
this would not suit a recluse. It is too much adorned.

Among it is other ornaments, the panes of the windows are in part composed of
red and green glass; which to those, who have never seen deceptions of this
kind, give a new and surprising effect; turning the water into a cataract of
fire, or a cascade of liquid verdigrease. But such deceptions are tricks below
the dignity of scenes like this. Colored glasses may be amusing; but I should
rather wish to have them hung up in frames with handles to be used at pleasure,
than fixed in a window, and to impose the necessity of looking through them.

The only picturesque glasses are those, which the artists call Claud Loraine
glasses. They are combined of two or three different colors; and if the hues
are well sorted, they give the objects of nature a soft, mellow tinge, like the
coloring of that master. The only use of these glasses, (which have little,
but in sunshine,) is to give a greater depth to the shades; by which the effect
is shown with more force. How far the painter should follow his eye, or his
glass in working from nature, I am not master enough of the theory of coloring
to ascertain. In general, I am apt to believe, that the merit of this kind of
modified vision consists chiefly in it is novelty; and that nature has given us
a better apparatus, for viewing objects in a picturesque light; than any, the
optician can furnish.

From the Hermitage we continued our rout about a mile and a half farther up
the river, to see another grand scene upon the Bran, at a place called the
Rumbling-brig. Here nature had almost formed a bridge of rock, which is
finished by art. Under it is arch the river makes a noble rush, precipitating
itself near fifty feet, between the two cheeks of the rock, which support the
bridge. The scenery too around it is very grand; but it is also very local: for
all the ground at a little distance from the Rumbling-brig is a desert heath.
This bridge made us some amends for having lost, through a mistake, the sight
of another of the same kind, near Kinross; tho the rumbling-brig there was much
superior in grandeur to this, as we were informed by those who had seen both.

This scene is not among the duke's improvements: but we entered them again
about a mile above the grand cascade; and were entertained with many beautiful
pieces of rock scenery in our return to the Hermitage. -- Almost all the Scotch
rivers are rapid, and rocky, as the rivers in mountainous countries commonly
are; but we thought the Bran superior in these respects, to any we had seen.
It Is whole course is a continued scene of violence, opposition, and every
species of agitation; till it is impetuous waters find peace at length in the
tranquillity of the Tay.

Very little advantage however is taken of the romantic banks of this river.
The path might have been carried up one side of it, and down the other;
straying artlessly to those parts, where the most beautiful views are
presented; without any forced openings, formal stands, white seats, or other
artificial introductions preparatory to the several scenes. But this walk,
which has neither nature in it, nor art, carries you up and down in the same
track. It is fortunate however that you have such a variety of beautiful
scenes, that the eye is not disgusted with seeing them twice over.

In a gloomy cell, on the banks of the river, we found an inscription, which
joined it is kindred ideas with those of the scene.

Ah! see the form, which faintly gleams:
It Is Oscar, come to cheer my dreams.
On wreaths of mist it glides away:
Oh! stay, my lovely Oscar, stay.
Awake the harp to doleful lays,
And sooth my soul with Oscar's praise.
Wake, Oscian, last of Fingal's line;
And mix thy sighs, and tears with mine.
The shell is ceased in Oscar's hall,
Since gloomy Cairbar saw thee fall.
The roe over Morven playful bounds,
Nor fears the cry of Oscar's hounds.
Thy four gray stones the hunter spies,
Peace to the hero's ghost he cries.
As we passed along the higher banks, we saw another inscription engraven upon
a rock within the bed of the river; and as we descended to it, we expected to
see an account of some life preserved, or some natural curiosity found upon
that spot: but when we arrived at it, we were informed, in fair and handsome
Roman characters, that a hole in the rock, near the inscription (scooped, as
there were many, by the vortices of the river) was on such a day, some years
ago, drunk full of punch by a set of gentlemen, whose names are inscribed at
length. The achievement appears to have been great in it is way; but one should
have been sorry to have met the name of a friend recorded on such an occasion.

At Dunkeld we heard, in all it is circumstances, the melancholy tale of the
late duke of Athol's death. He had shown no symptoms of despondency, till
within a few weeks of that event; yet it was thought proper to give his
servants a caution over him. His watchfulness however eluded theirs.

It was about eight o'clock in a dark November night, when he slipped out of a
door, which opens upon the lawn. He was instantly missed, and lights were
dispatched in all directions; but without effect. His brother was in the house.
The servants privately informed him. A full hour was spent in fruitless search.
It was now thought necessary to inform the duchess. Several hours passed in
painful suspense. Intelligence of no kind could be obtained. Every one had his
suspicions; but no one durst avow them.

Some time after midnight, a fellow brought in the duke's hat, which he had
found by the side of the river. This put an end to every glimpse of hope: but
the fatal event was not confirmed, till late the next morning, when the body
was found in the Tay, about three miles below the house.

What it was that threw him into that dejection of spirits, which occasioned
this catastrophe; or whether it was a malady of mind or body, could never be
explained. No cause appeared, either from his fortunes, or any other
circumstance. He was one of the most amiable noblemen in Scotland. His life was
not only innocent and domestic; but correct, and virtuous: and what in men of
his rank is more uncommon, I have heard, it was religious. No man was more
beloved: nor did any man enjoy more of that serenity and cheerfulness, which
generally attend a benevolent, and well regulated mind.

When we see a man who has raised a sudden and princely fortune by the iron
arts of oppression, sinking, after the heyday of enjoyment is over, into
melancholy; unable to endure the horror of his own thoughts, and arming his own
hand against himself, we are not surprised: it is the natural course of things:
it is the serpent, that recoils upon itself. But when we see a man of virtue,
and piety under these terrors of mind; when we see the appearance of guilt in
the breast of innocence; when we see that, neither the highest fortunes, nor
even the cheerfulness of religion itself can secure the mind from these inbred
horrors; human nature stands abashed in the midst of all it is precarious
enjoyments: we revere the mysterious hand of heaven; and learn a lesson of
humility, which nothing else in this world can give.



SECT. XIV.
FROM Dunkeld we continued our journey to Blair-castle, which is about twenty
miles farther north. The whole road is a continuation of picturesque scenery.
Through the first eight miles we accompanied the Tay; which entertained us with
all the playful variety that a river can exhibit. Sometimes it came running up
to the foreground. Then it would hide itself beneath a woody precipice. Then
again, when we knew not what was become of it, it would appear in the distance,
forming it is meanders along some winding vale.

When we leave the Tay, we meet the Tummel, which, tho less wild in it is
accompaniments, performs it is evolutions with as much beauty. One scene upon
it is bank called aloud for the pencil. We had many, in which were greater
beauties; but they were mixed, as is often the case, with something awkward.
But this view was almost purely picturesque. A broad sand-bank stretched before
the eye, as a second distance, round which the river formed an indented curve:
it is banks were well decorated, and the view was closed, in the fashion of
Scotch landscape, with beautiful mountains.

Mere drawing, without coloring, can at best, only express the forms of
objects; and by adding a little light and shade, endeavor to grace them with
something of an artificial effect. How much the face of nature must suffer from
such partial imitation, is evident; as her colors and tints are her principal
glory: but they are so local, so fugitive, so mixed, and indiscriminate, that
they must often be taken on the spot, or lost. The only true method of
transferring the tints of nature, is, with your pallet in your hand: and every
painter, who wishes to form himself as a colourist after nature, must accustom
himself to copy her features, and complexion, as he does those of other
beauties, from the life. And in this operation, it is his best method, when it
is in his power, to watch the opportunity of the best lights: for the face of
nature, like other Yellow and Red. Yellow and Blue. Blue and Red. Yellow, Blue
and Red. 1 2 3 13 14 15 25 26 27 37 38 39 4 5 6 16 17 18 28 29 30 40 41 42 7 8
9 19 20 21 31 32 33 43 44 45 10 11 12 22 23 24 34 35 36 46 47 48 faces, appears
to more advantage under some lights, than under others.

The next best method of catching the hues of nature, is by tinting a drawing
on the spot, from which the artist may paint at his leisure. But this is a very
imperfect method, as the hues of nature must greatly evaporate, and lose their
spirit in a second translation.

To assist however in this matter, I cannot help mentioning a method which
might perhaps be of some little use in fixing at least the coarser tints of
nature, where time and opportunity of doing it better, are wanting. Let the
artist carry about with him a book, on the leaves of which are exhibited in
squares a variety of different tints. As all the tints of nature are supposed
to be mixed from three original colors, yellow, blue, and red, they may be
classed under them. With these tints the artist may compare the hues of nature;
and each square being numbered, he may fix a few characteristic hues in his
drawing by a reference to the number. I call this however a mere succedaneum;
as there are a thousand variegated tints in nature, which it would be
impossible to fix in this way: and indeed as the whole method is mere theory;
and was never, as far as I know, applied to practice, it might be found, upon
trial, very inadequate. -- This digression was occasioned by a view upon the
Tummel, to which the coloring of a sand-bank, and it is harmonizing with the
objects in it is neighborhood, gave a beauty, that in a mere uncoloured drawing
is entirely lost.

The banks of the Tummel are chiefly pastoral, but when it is joined by the
Garry, or rather received into it, we had an ample specimen of the sublime. The
pass of Killicranky began now to open, which is the great entrance into the
highlands in these parts; and may be called the Caledonian Thermopyle; tho
indeed what are generally called the highlands, as I observed, begin at
Dunkeld. This pass forms a very magnificent scene. The valleys, as we approach
it, are beautiful. Two or three gentlemen have fixed their habitations among
them, and seem to have made a good choice.

As we enter the pass, the mountains, on each side, expand in noble, irregular
wings. The road takes the right, and may be said to traverse the base of the
mountain, when compared with it is summit: but when compared with it is real
base, it is raised to a giddy height. It is a great addition to the scene to
look down upon the river foaming among rocks, diving into woods, and forcing
it is way among the huge fragments that have tumbled into it is channel from the
mountain.

Two of the scenes we met with in these wild regions, were particularly
picturesque. In one the sloping corner of a mountain, with the road winding
round it, forms the foreground: the middle is occupied by a bridge over the
Garry; and some of the grand prominences of the pass fill the distance.

The other consists chiefly of a second distance, in which the river forms a
sort of pool, and the mountains a very pleasing combination around it.

By this time we had nearly opened the pass, which continues about a mile,
displaying, in one part or other of it is ample curve, every species of rough
and picturesque scenery. In general, however, as it is lofty skreens are brought
very near the eye, they are too large, and refractory to be molded into
composition. Innumerable parts of them may with little trouble be hewn into
good foregrounds: but they afford few materials delicate enough for a distance.

In a military light, this entrance into the highlands has, at all times, been
considered as a very formidable defile. In the last rebellion a body of
Hessians having been detached into these parts of Scotland, made a full pause
at this strait, refusing to march farther. It appeared to them as the ne plus
ultra of habitable country.

In king William's time, it was marked with the destruction of a royal army.
The only spirited attempt, in his reign, in favor of the Jacobite cause, was
made by Clavers lord viscount Dundee. This chief, who was a man both of honor
and enterprise, collected a body of forces, and set up the standard of the
exiled prince. With great zeal he importuned all the disaffected clans to join
him; but amidst the warmest professions he found only lukewarm assistance.
Mortified by repeated disappointments, and chagrined at having the whole burden
of the war upon himself, he was skulking about Lockabar with a few starved, and
ill armed troops, hesitating what course to take; when he received advice, that
general Mackay, who was in quest of him, at the head of the English army, was
in full march toward the pass of Killicranky. In the midst of despair a beam
of hope inspired him. He harrangued his men; assured them of success; roused
them to action; and fell upon Mackay, as he filed out of the straits, with so
much judgment, and well directed fury, that in seven minutes the English
infantry was broken, and the horse in as many more. -- In the article of
victory Dundee was mortally wounded. An old highlander showed us a few trees,
under the shade of which he was led out of the battle; and where he breathed
his last with that intrepidity, which is so nobly described by a modern Scotch
poet Poems by Robert Burns, p. 38,
, in an interview between death, and a victorious hero.

"Nae cauld faint-hearted doubtings teaze him.
"Death comes. Wi' fearless eye he sees him;
"Wi' bloody hand a welcome gies him:
"And when he fa's,
"His latest draught of breathing leaves him
"In faint huzzas."
Dundee was the life of a cause, which in this short blaze of success expired.

From the straits of Killicranky we soon arrived within the district of the
Blair of Athol, as this part of the country is called. Blaircastle, which is
the capital of this wide domain, makes but a mean appearance. It stands, as you
approach it, under a mountain, with a wood before it: but the former is ill
shaped; and the latter, which is chiefly of sir, is formal.

Mean however as this castle appears at present in the light of a fortress, it
was once a place of high renown; and has many a history annexed to it. As it
was the only fortress in these wild parts, it was ever thought a place of
consequence; and had it is share in every disturbance of the times. In many
scenes of violence it was engaged, during the feuds of aristocracy: but it
makes no figure in history, before the civil wars of the last century. In the
year 1644 it ventured to check the career of that celebrated hero the marquess
of Montrose: but it paid dear for it is temerity. He laid siege to it; and took
it by assault. Ten years after, it fell under the displeasure of Cromwell; and
experienced the same fate. But in the last rebellion it had better fortune. Sir
Andrew Agnew seized it with a body of seventy horse, and held it for the king.
The rebels twice attacked it, but each time without success.

The late duke of Athol seeing his family seat thus subjected to so many
insults on account of it is strength, took a resolution to dismantle it, that it
might never again be an object of military concern. He did not perhaps
sufficiently consider, that if any future trouble should arise, it is full as
likely in it is present state of weakness to become a prey; as in it is ancient
state of prowess to have been made a fortress. Be it as it will, the
picturesque eye regrets the loss of it is towers, and battlements; and is hurt
at seeing a noble castle transformed into an ordinary house.

But tho Blair-castle appeared, on our approach, to stand under a mountain, it
changed it is situation, as we arrived on the spot. The mountains take a
circular form around it; and it stands seated on a plain, as the word Blair, in
the Erse language, implies. We found also, that notwithstanding it is outward
appearance, the apartments are noble, and furnished in grand taste.

The scenery about the house is inferior to that at Dunkeld; and yet it is
suitable to the grandeur of a great house, and capable of much improvement. The
plain, on which the house stands, spreads about a mile in front; and might be
beautifully diversified with lawns and wood. At present it is much injured by
vistas, and a kitchen-garden, which tho extraordinary in it is way, is still a
nuisance.

At the end of the plain runs the Tilt, a rapid and rocky stream: but it is of
no service in the view; for it lies within such lofty banks, that it is
invisible, till you arrive on the spot. There the duke has conducted walks; but
I cannot say much in praise either of the artifice with which they are
conducted, or of their simplicity. In the course of them you see the cascades
of two or three streams, which fall down the bank into the Tilt, and are
admired more than they deserve. The bank is of lofty and broken rock; and the
streams are by no means inconsiderable; yet the very circumstance of their
falling into the river is a great disservice to them as capital objects. It
makes them appear smaller by bringing them into comparison with a greater
stream. It exhibits them also in an awkward situation: for as they fall down
the side of an extended bank, they do not fill the eye like a river, pouring
down between rocks, and seen as a simple object in one grand point of view. One
of them is called the York-cascade, in compliment to the late archbishop
Drummond; and is admired for it is broken stages. For myself, I am more pleased
with a simple construction. That at Dunkeld indeed is infinitely broken; but it
is still one noble gush: whereas this is frittered, and divided into several
distinct parts, each of which makes a little separate whole.

Having viewed the disposition of the ground in the front of the house, we
viewed it next on the other side, where it is much more beautiful. The
mountains here approach nearer the house, between two of which runs a valley
about a mile in length; and a quarter of a mile in breadth. The sides and
bottom of this valley are wholly filled with wood, through which runs a rocky
and sounding stream. This beautiful piece of natural scenery is improved as it
ought to be. A delightful walk about two miles in length is conducted round it;
and is in all it is parts easy, and natural; except that, here and there, a
semi-circular parapet is set off from the walk, to show some parts of the river
and rocks at the bottom. They might have been shown better by the simple, and
natural curve of the walk. These preparatory stations always injure the effect,
by exciting beforehand the expectation of it. The charm of novelty is so far
lost.

Between this scenery and the house are a few acres, which are laid out with
more embellishment; but less taste. What we chiefly admired here, were some
firs of the spruce kind, which we thought the most picturesque, we had ever
seen. They were indeed -- a stately progeny of pines;
With all their floating foliage richly robed.


If Dunkeld appeared more the retired seat pleasure; Blair-castle, especially
in it is ancient form, was more the residence of the highland chieftain. Here he
was always found in the article of danger. Here his clan mustered around him;
and here he fed them, and kept their courage alive, from his extensive
pastures, and vast ranges of forest.

These wastes we wished much to visit; and should have found great amusement in
traversing their extensive boundaries, and examining their various inhabitants
-- in springing the ptarmigan, and other heath birds, that frequent them; in
hearing their various cries and notes; and in seeing those herds of wild stags,
which are never seen in cultivated chases; and among them the nimble roe-buck,
bounding in it is native clime: but so wide are these domains, that we were
informed we might have traveled twenty or thirty miles, before we could have
gratified our curiosity.

SECT. XV.
FROM Blair to Taymouth, which we proposed next to visit, we found two roads;
one to the north by Donacardoc, and the other to the south by repassing the
straits of Killicranky. The latter is the better road, but we chose the former,
as leading through a new country.

The first object, that called our attention, after we left Blair, were the
falls of the river Freer. About two miles beyond Blair, we were directed to
leave the road on our right, and to pursue the course of that river, which, as
it comes tumbling down a lofty hill, would show us several fine cascades. They
were scarce worth so long and perpendicular a walk. One of them indeed is a
grand fall; but it is so naked in it is accompaniments, and seen from so bad a
point, that upon the whole it is of little value.

In our way to Donacardoc, and beyond it, the country in general, is wild and
mountainous: but the valleys are wide, and extensive; and as we passed along
their sweeping sides, many of the scenes were very noble. The mountains
retiring in different distances from the eye, marshalled themselves in the most
beautiful forms, and expanded their vast concave bosoms to receive the most
enchanting lights. The picturesque traveller indeed, if he finds the lights as
we found them, will be sufficiently rewarded for his trouble in traversing this
rough country. The scenes on the right, are those, which will chiefly engage
his attention.

And here I cannot help disclosing what appears to me a truth; tho so bold a
one, that it ought only perhaps to be opened to the initiated. In the
exhibition of distant mountains on paper, or canvas, unless you make them
exceed their real or proportional size, they have no effect. It is
inconceivable how objects lessen by distance. Examine any distance, closed by
mountains, in a camera, and you will easily see what a poor, diminutive
appearance the mountains make. By the power of perspective they are lessened to
nothing. Should you represent them in your landscape in so diminutive a form,
all dignity, and grandeur of idea would be lost. The case is, a scrap of canvas
compared with the vastness of nature's scale, misleads the eye; and if the
exact proportion of the mountain be observed, it is so trifling, that we cannot
easily persuade ourselves, it is the representative of so vast, and enormous a
mass.

If indeed the mountain always, and invariably appeared under one hue, the eye
might in some degree learn to infer the distance from the color, and of course
the bulk. But this is not the case. The color of mountains is as various, as
the color of the sky. Light etherial blue, which is the color of the air, is
the hue thrown upon the most removed objects. But the blue mountain can only be
represented under the bright and colorless sky. You would often wish to adorn
your landscape with other appearances of nature; in which the distant mountain
assumes other hues. It is brown, or it is purple, or it is gray: and all these
in a variety of degrees. So that color is by no means a criterion of bulk. --
Besides you often wish to introduce your mountain nearer than the distance at
which it assumes aerial blue. And when this is the case, it is surface is
subject to a still greater variety of tints; and it is bulk, is consequently
with more difficulty ascertained from it is color.

Even in nature the eye is apt to make frequent mistakes; and often misjudges
with regard both to bulk, and distance; notwithstanding it is able to form
comparisons from the various objects that appear in the extent of landscape
around, which may assist the judgment. But in painting, the eye has not this
assistance. It has only the objects of a very circumscribed spot to compare by,
and cannot therefore deduce the real size of the mountain, for want of objects
of comparison. We must therefore enlarge the scale a little beyond nature, to
make nature look like herself. If indeed the picture and nature should be
brought together, the deception will be apparent: otherwise the deception
appears the reality.

The celebrated boat of Raphael, in the cartoon of the draught of fishes, is a
fiction somewhat of this kind, in which the boat is represented much less than
the truth, lest the real truth should offend. An object of the full size of a
boat so near the eye, would have engrossed too much of the spectator's
attention; and the painter hoped the beauty of his figures would engage the eye
so much, as to pass over the inaccuracy. If indeed the absurdity could have
been removed with a little contrivance, it would certainly have been better. As
so great a master however found reason to make his object too little; another
artist, by a parity of reason, may make his object too large.

The ancient columnal sculptures at Rome were accompanied with a degree of this
artificial deception. As the figures at the top of the column, would be seen
from the bottom diminished out of all proportion, if they had been of the
natural size, the sculptors very properly made them much larger than the life;
so that the eye seeing them from the bottom, conceived them to be of the proper
size.

As we left the wild country about Donacardoc, we met our old acquaintance the
river Garry: and were surprised to see it, tho so much nearer it is source, in
better plight than it appeared at Killicranky. Here it occupies a broad
channel; and makes an ample sweep: but there, tho it had received many
considerable accessions, it made no figure. The case was, it was there
contracted, and limited within narrow banks, except in that part, where it
spreads into a pool: so that although it contained more water, it made a less
appearance.

From the banks of the Garry we found more coarse country: but it was of no
continuance. The steep sides of Glen-lion received us, and afforded us several
views, which were magnificent in their kind, into the deep recesses of the
dell; where the river is sometimes seen, but oftener only heard; and where it is
sequestered haunts are seldom interrupted by human curiosity. The eye is often
carried many fathoms below, into these depths of solitude; and is as often
arrested in midway by the spreading tops of trees, from whence getting passage
perhaps again through some opening among them, it is baffled a second time, by
the darkness of the recess. The splendid tints of sunshine sleeping, as
Shakespeare phrases it, upon the tops of the trees, and the deep shadows beneath
them, afforded the strongest contrast, and were blended with the most perfect
harmony; an effect, which nature is wonderful in producing; but which art,
without great attention, will fail in attempting. It is much easier to carry
off justly a light or shade; and blend it gradually with it is opposite; than to
manage with just expression the extremes of either, when brought into contact.
Amusing as these views were, they would have been more so, if the edge of the
precipice on which we traveled, had been better guarded. Our attention, in
some degree, was engaged by our danger.

Along the side of Glen-lion we missed our road; and instead of taking the
direct way to Taymouth, we went six miles round by general Wade's bridge. This
we had reason to esteem good fortune. What we missed we knew not: but the
country we gained, was uncommonly beautiful. It is of that species, which may
be technically termed a plano-valley. Before us stretched a champaign of four
or five miles in length, and near two in breadth. Through the middle of it ran
a winding road. On the right, it was skreened by a mountain wooded with clumps,
and varied with objects, at such a distance, as throws that equivocal veil over
them, in which the eye so much delights. The conclusion only of this mountain
could be introduced in a picture: but the whole was beautiful in nature. The
opposite skreen of the valley was still bolder, more rocky, and equally
picturesque. The middle was occupied by a fine distance of retiring mountains.

At the bottom of the right hand mountain ran the Tay; but it kept out of
sight, till we had passed the bridge. It then took the lead among the objects,
that entertained us; and presented us with two or three fine reaches; in one of
which especially, the mountains, water, and wood combined with peculiar beauty
in picturesque composition.

LOCH-TAY.


Soon after, we came to Kenmore, which is a neat little town, built by Lord
Breadalbin, at the foot of Loch-tay. Nothing can stand more sweetly: the lake
is spread on one side of it, and on the other, are Lord Breadalbin's
improvements.

The view of the lake from the rising grounds near the church, is capital. On
the right, a lofty mountain falls into the water, and forms a grand promontory.
It Is lines at the base are finely broken by a wooded island. Another promontory
projects from the opposite shore, and both together form the water into a
spacious bay. Between the two promontories the distant mountains recede in
perspective; and the lake goes off in the form of another bay. We seldom meet
with a grander piece of lake-scenery.

Having taking this first view of the lake, we embarked upon it; expecting,
that as it is reaches opened, our entertainment would increase. But having
continued our voyage near a league, we found no part equal to what we first saw.

One inducement to this voyage, was a cascade on the banks of the lake, which
had been represented to us as an uncommon piece of scenery. A pompous preface
so often produces disappointment, that expecting a disappointment here, we were
agreeably surprised. We found a very beautiful scene. It is not indeed of so
sublime a kind, as that of the Hermitage at Dunkeld. It is of a tamer nature,
gliding down an excavated rock; but meeting with interruption enough to give it
variety. It Is accompaniments are very beautiful. The rock it falls from, is
lofty, and well broken: and it graces the center of a little woody theater;
which nature seems to have made on purpose for it, and where it is shown to
much advantage. Lord Breadalbin, to whom it belongs, introduces the stranger to
it through a sort of subterranean passage, the necessity of which did not
appear. It is an exhibition, which wants no aid to give it consequence.

In our return we had a view of the church and bridge of Kenmore, and of the
mountains, and island, in it is neighbourhoood: but from so low a point, they
lost much of their dignity. We landed also upon the island; but found little to
amuse us.

And yet this island, small and contemptible as it appears, has more than one
history annexed to it. Here stood formerly a small, but elegant priory
dedicated by Alexander the first of Scotland, to the memory of his beloved
queen, who was the natural daughter of Henry the first of England. At his death
it was more liberally endowed; and he entrusted the repose of his own soul, as
well as his queen's, to the prayers of pious monks, whom he established for
that purpose, in this religious retirement. Often in the calm still hour of
evening, or before the sun had risen upon the mountains, the boatman plying his
course, would rest on his oars, to listen to the chanted hymn, or early matins,
as they came floating in the breeze along the surface of the lake.

In after times this island wore another face. When the bravery of Montrose
carried every thing before him in defense of the royal cause, which was nearly
in it is wane in England; a numerous body of Campbells, against whom the rigor
of Montrose was chiefly directed, took possession of this island, where they
fortified themselves among the ruins. Montrose took, and garrisoned it; and it
continued in the hands of the loyalists till 1654, when general Monk retook it.
It would now however be difficult to trace the least vestige in it either of
religion, or war.

SECT. XVI.
HAVING finished our voyage, we took a walk to Taymouth, lord Breadalbin's
seat, where we met with little to engage our curiosity. The house stands on a
lawn, between two mountains, which open to the lake; tho the architect has
contrived to skreen it entirely from the view of the water. The lawn is about a
mile in breadth, diversified with a great variety of ground. Under the southern
mountain, a quarter of a mile behind the house, runs the Tay; which, tho not so
grand a river, as we found it at Dunkeld, is however a noble, and rapid stream.
The banks of the river, the lawn, and the mountains around, are all well
clothed with wood; and the whole scene is capable of great improvement: but
when we saw it In the year 1776.
, nothing like taste had been exercised upon it. The house was formerly a
turreted castle, and is now by the addition of two wings, a large, convenient,
tho unpleasing mansion. The grounds around it were laid out with little beauty;
and the walks were formal, and ill contrived; pacing under the paling of the
park, instead of winding around, and taking such circuits as might show the
lake, and mountains to most advantage. There was a grand walk also beyond the
Tay; which had cost more than it deserved. Indeed the walks on neither side of
the river seemed intended to show the scenery; but rather as avenues to a few
tawdry, inelegant buildings, which terminated them. Nothing could show a more
thorough inattention to every idea of beauty and taste, than the whole
contrivance of the place.

Perhaps no country in the world abounds more with grand situations, especially
in the highland parts of it, than Scotland: and perhaps none of the Scotch
nobility have a greater variety of noble situations, than the earls of
Breadalbin. Whether they wished for elevated, or sheltered situations -- for
views of wood, of water, or of mountains -- they had choice of every kind. When
therefore, we see a situation so unhappily chosen, in the neighborhood of such
a scene as Loch-Tay; we are apt to think it required some ingenuity, and
contrivance to fix it. The situation indeed in itself would not be so bad, if
we did not see every where around it, situations that are so much better.

Of all the views which a great house should wish to command, I think a noble
distance is the most desirable. This was the opinion of Horace. He commends the
house, -- longos quae prospicit agros. And I think he is right. Distant views,
if there is a good foreground, are generally the most pleasing; as they contain
the greatest variety, both in themselves, and in their accidental variations.
But if you have before your windows, a beautiful lake retiring among mountains
into remote distance, as lord Breadalbin might have had, adorned with woody
banks, and tufted islands; while his house might have been skreened from the
rough quarters of the sky; it is all one would wish for in a situation.

As we left lord Breadalbin's, we had, from the road near Maxwell's temple, a
very picturesque view of the lake and it is environs. The water bears only a
small proportion; but the promontories sweeping into it, the islands detached
from the main, and a distant view of the grand mountain of Benavoir, which
occupies the head of the lake, unite in forming a very noble landscape.

In this country originated the massacre of Glencoe. The fact is noted: but a
detail of circumstances does not often find it is way into history I believe Dr.
Smollet is the only historian, who enters into the detail of this shocking
affair.
. They who have never met with this detail, will be shocked to find in the
seventeenth century, an action marked with such circumstances of horrid cruelty
and treachery, as are rarely found in the annals of a Roman, or an Eastern
despot.

After the act of settlement had passed in Scotland, as well as in England, in
favor of king William; and the government expected submission from all it is
subjects, a number of the highland-clans bowed with great reluctance to the new
yoke. Many ineffectual efforts having been made to bring them to a better mind,
the ratio ultima regum was at length resolved on; and a proclamation was
issued, which threatened them with military execution, if they did not take the
oaths before the beginning of the year 1692. This measure carried strong
conviction into the Highlands, and made several converts to the principles of
the revolution. Many however could ill brook the idea of what they esteemed so
arbitrary a proceeding; and among these, the loudest was Macdonald of Glencoe.
This haughty chief, in opposition to all the persuasions of his friends, would
exclaim with eager asseverations, that he would suffer any extremity rather
than submit. "When I take arms against them, he would cry, let them send their
military executioners: but while my opinions keep at home, they injure no man."
Notwithstanding however this lofty language, as the day of grace began to
expire, his fears for his wife, his children, and his dependents, got the
better of his indignation; and he made his submission at Inverary before the
sheriff of the county; tho, through an unavoidable accident, three or four days
after the allotted period.

This chief it seems, in the violence of the times, a little before the
revolution, had plundered the lands of the earl of Breadalbin. For this, and
some other acts of animosity, that nobleman, it is thought, had devoted him to
destruction; and is accused of persuading king William to put him, and all his
clan under military execution, as a terror to other disaffected parts of the
Highlands. No inquiry therefore was made, whether Macdonald had submitted, or
would submit; but a warrant for putting to death near two hundred innocent
people, was dispatched with as little ceremony, as if it had been an order to
apprehend a smuggler. This horrid warrant having passed through all the usual
forms, was brought to the king, who signed it, it is said, without scruple; tho
I think, it is probable, that Macdonald's submission was concealed from him.
Bishop Burnet indeed See his history of his own times.
endeavors to make the king entirely ignorant of the whole affair. He was
rather dilatory, the bishop says, in business; and used to put off signing
papers, till they began to multiply; when he would sign them in a lump with too
little examination. In this precipitate manner, he gives us to understand, the
king signed the fatal warrant against the inhabitants of Glencoe.

From the king it was directed to the secretary of state in Scotland; who sent
it, in the course of business, to the commanding officer of Argyle's regiment,
then in garrison at Fort William.

Early in February, 1691, a detachment from that corpse took possession of the
valley of Glencoe; and when Macdonald inquired into their intention, he was
told it was friendly; and had in view only to levy the arrears of some ill-paid
taxes. Upon this Macdonald and his dependents, laid aside all apprehensions (as
indeed having submitted to government, they had no grounds to harbor any) and
entertained the troops hospitably, during the space of fifteen days.

On the evening of the sixteenth day, young Macdonald observed the guards were
doubled; and thought he saw something among the troops, which he did not well
understand. He brought his suspicions to his father: but the old man
endeavored with jocularity to disperse them. The youth however at the close of
day, drew his brother aside, and carried him out privately among the soldiers,
to make observations. Approaching a guard under the cover of the night, they
overheard a sentinel tell his fellow, that It was a brutal work, but their
officers must answer for it. Upon this the two young men in terror made
instantly to the^^ father's house: -- but the bloody deed was begun. As they
approached, they heard the report of fire arms -- they heard the shrieks of
despair; and saw the house surrounded by armed men. Old Macdonald was shot
through the head, as he slept by his wife: and, at the same time, a Highland
gentleman, who was then upon a visit to him; tho he had the king's protection
in his pocket. The houses of the tenants, and dependents of the family, were
surrounded also, and every man butchered, who was found. A pillage ensued; and
all the wanton cruelty was practiced, which is customary at the sacking of a
town.

The women and children indeed were spared: but such of them, as had neither
died of the fright, nor had been butchered by mistake, were turned out naked,
at the dead of night -- a keen, freezing night, -- with all their calamities
about them, into a waste covered with snow.

When the morning rose, the horrid deed appeared in all it is guilt.
Thirty-eight slaughtered bodies were drawn out; and the women, who had never
attempted to fly, were in general found either starved to death; or expiring
with their children under hedges. It was thought, that about a hundred of those
destined to slaughter, had escaped through the intelligence given them by their
friends among the troops.

This horrid affair was, never sufficiently examined. King William endeavored
to repel the odium from himself, by throwing it upon the Scotch secretary; who
had exceeded, he said, his orders. But various circumstances, and especially
the lenity shown to all concerned in this business, rendered such an apology
very defective. The king sent orders, says Burnet, to inquire into the matter;
but when the letters writ upon this business, were all examined, which I myself
read, it appeared, that so many were involved in the matter, that the king's
gentleness prevailed on him to a fault; and he contented himself with
dismissing only the master of Stair from his service. Indeed the not punishing
this with due rigor, was the greatest blot in this whole reign.

We did not see the valley of Glencoe; as it would have carried us too far out
of our road: but it is described as one of the most interesting scenes in the
whole country; hung with rock, and wood; and abounding with beauties of the
most romantic kind. This valley is famous also for being the birth place of
Oscian. In it is wild scenes that bard is said to have caught his first poetic
raptures. Near it lies the country of Morven; which Fingal has turned into
classic ground by his huntings, and his wars.

SECT. XVII.
FROM Kenmore we proposed great pleasure in our ride to Killin, which was our
next stage. It lies at the head of the lake, which is about fifteen miles long;
and as the road kept almost entirely by the water side, we expected many
beautiful scenes. But we were disappointed. We had seen the lake in it is
greatest glory from Kenmore. It never spreads into any considerable expanse of
water; but has the appearance rather of a river of unequal dimensions. Where it
is widest, it seldom exceeds a mile: but in general it is much narrower. Nor
are it is boundaries pleasing. They exhibit no bold shores, broken promontories,
nor other forms of beauty; but are rather tame hills, than picturesque
mountains. Nor are they furnished with wood, or other pleasing appendages. --
Upon the whole however, as the evening was cold, sour, and unpleasant, it is
probable, that it tinged the landscape with similar ideas. The effect is
common. A clear evening might have dispelled these gloomy visions, which we
attributed to the landscape; and might have opened new beauties. I have heard
indeed judicious travelers, who have seen it under a more favorable aspect,
speak of many grand views from advantageous stands along the shores of the
lake. Of this I have not the least doubt; and am only unhappy in not being able
to add my own testimony to what I have heard.

As we approached Killin, the country began to amend, and pleased us in spite
of the untoward medium of a drizzling rain, through which we viewed it. Many of
the hills were clothed with wood; and some of them finely disposed, skreening
little irriguous valleys, which played among them. But as the evening grew
worse, and set in wet, we could not examine the landscape as it deserved. In
general, however, the two ends of Loch-Tay are certainly the most beautiful
parts of it.

The town of Killin is celebrated for being the receptacle of the bones of
Fingal. We were shown the place, where tradition says, they were buried: but
the traveller must view his tomb with the eye of faith. Not the least
monumental fragment remains.

At Killin we heard the little history of a Highland migration. Several
expeditions of this kind to America, from different parts of Scotland (which
were supposed to have been attended with success) began to make a noise in the
country; and a discontented spirit got abroad, even in those parts, where no
oppression could be complained of; particularly in the domains of the earl of
Breadalbin; the happiness of whose tenants seems to have been among the
principal sources of the happiness of their lord. The word was given, as it was
phrased, in the beginning of March 1775; and a rendezvous was appointed at
Killin, on the first of the ensuing May. Here convened about thirty families,
making in all above three hundred people. The first night they spent at Killin,
in barns, and other outhouses, which they had previously engaged. Early the
next morning the whole company was called together by the sound of bag-pipes,
and the order of their march was settled. Men, women, and children, had all
their proper stations assigned. They were all dressed in their best attire; and
the men were armed in the Highland fashion. They who were able, hired carts for
their baggage: the rest distributed it in proper proportions, among the several
members of their little families; each of them, in the patriarchal style,
carrying provisions for the way. Then taking a long adieu of their friends, and
relations, who gathered round them, the music began to play, and in the midst
of a thousand good wishes mutually distributed, the whole train moved on.

Goldsmith, in his deserted village, gives a melancholy picture of a body of
emigrants, taking a last farewell of their country.

Even now, methinks, as pondering here I stand,
I see the rural virtues leave the land:
Down, where yon anchoring vessel spreads the sail,
That idly waiting, flaps in every gale,
Downward they move, a melancholy band,
Pass from the shore, and darken all the strand.
But these emigrants were of a different stamp. Many of them were possessed of
two or three hundred pounds, and few of less than thirty or forty; which at
least showed, they had not starved upon their farms. They were a jocund crew;
and set out, not like people flying from the face of poverty; but like men, who
were about to carry their health, their strength, and little property, to a
better market. The first day's march brought them to Loch-Lomond, which is
about twenty-five or thirty miles from Killin. At the head of this lake they
had provided vessels, in which the greater part of them embarked; and were
carried by water twenty-four miles farther, into the neighborhood of
Dunbarton; where they cantoned themselves, till their transport vessel was
ready at Grenock.

We proposed also to visit Loch-Lomond, and Dunbarton; but not by the rout of
these emigrants; which would have abridged our tour. We chose a wider circuit
by Tindrum and Inverary.

From the pleasing environs of Killin we launched out into a wild country,
which nature had barely produced; but had done little to adorn. Neither had art
ever deigned to visit it, except in the shape of a soldier working on a
military road. Even the cottage smoking among a few trees, which almost every
heath presents, was not here to be found. All was wide, waste and rude; totally
naked; and yet in it is simplicity often sublime; the ground heaving, like the
ocean into ample swells; and subsiding into valleys equally magnificent. The
ideas were grand, rather than pleasing. The imagination was interested, but not
the eye. Here and there indeed a mountain-scene fell within the rules of
composition. But in general, we had few forms of picturesque beauty, at least
in the larger parts. In the smaller, we often found them; in the winding of
rivulets, in their rocky beds, and in their little bustling cascades, of which
we had great variety.

The ground plot, if I may so call it, of this rude landscape, was a wild
valley, ascending through the space of twenty miles from Killin to Tindrum. It
could not be called steep; yet was generally steep enough to give rapidity to
the rocky rivulet which adorned it. This rivulet is one of the chief sources of
Loch-Tay: but it does not assume the name of the Tay, till it leave the lake.
About the middle of this ascent, the country becoming flat, we found the
torrent arrested by a valley; and formed into a small lake, called
Loch-Dochart; the shores of which afforded us some fine scenery, both when we
saw it in extent (for tho it was small, it had dimensions sufficient for any
landscape) and when we saw only a portion of it. In the former situation, the
distant hills made an agreeable boundary to the water. In the latter we had a
huge promontory hanging over a castle, which stood upon an island at it is feet.

The great picturesque use of islands, in these situations, is to break the
tedious lines of such promontories, and mountains, as fall into the water. But
this island, besides it is use in composition, is itself an object of beauty. It
is decorated with wood; and adorned with a castle.

Castles in the middle of lakes, tho not proper for regal fortresses, were
commonly chosen as seats of security by those chiefs, who had the advantage of
such situations. The island-castle could only be attacked by water. In summer
the lake could not afford navigation to carry over a body of men; and in winter
the ice formed so exposed an approach, that troops would hardly attempt it.
There was no covering above ground; and the mattock could make none beneath.
This castle however was once stormed by the M'greggors, in the midst of a
frosty winter, by a well contrived project. They brought a vast quantity of
fascines to the edge of the lake, with which they made a stout breast-work.
This they pushed before them along the smooth surface of the ice; and being
sufficiently defended by it from the shot of the castle, they made good their
landing, if I may so speak; and quickly overpowered the place, which trusted
more in it is situation, than in the strength of it is garrison.

About Tindrum we had attained the summit of our ascent. This place is supposed
to be one of the highest inhabited parts of Scotland -- some say of
Great Britain. The word Breadalbin, in which country we now traveled, has that
signification.

Among the mountains, which compose these wild scenes, the mountains of
Bendoran are the most conspicuous. The country people consider them as
enchanted mountains. Before the storm begins to rage, they emit a hollow sound,
which forebodes it. The shepherd knows it well, and instantly shelters his
flock. Sounds however of this kind are not peculiar to mount Bendoran. They are
often mentioned among the signs of bad weather. They were prognostics of
ancient times.

-- Altis
Montibus audiri fragor --
At Tindrum the ground which had been rising from Loch-Tay begins immediately
to fall. The Tay which takes it is source at the summit of this elevation, runs
due east; and a little lake within a quarter of a mile of the fountains of the
Tay, discharges it is waters due west. Along the banks of this little bustling
stream we descended through a valley, wild like that we had left behind, and
nearly in the same style of landscape; but of quicker descent.

Near Dalmaly the view opened upon a rich cultivated country, at least such it
appeared -- a sight we had not met with for many days. We thought it could
hardly be composed of the plains of Lorn, tho that is the richest part of
Argyleshire; and lay directly before the eye; but our maps seemed to place Lorn
at too great a distance; and we had no opportunity of inquiring. The remote
distance however was dubious; and tho it appeared to us a cultivated scene, it
might have been through some deception in the light. The nearer grounds were
varied by a part of Loch-Awe; toward which we approached.

Loch-Awe is one of the grandest lakes in Scotland. It extends thirty miles;
and contains near a dozen islands. We skirted only it is northern shores; but
were much amused with what we saw. On the opposite shore arises, in appearance
almost perpendicular to the lake, the vast mountain of Crouachan, near enough
for the eye to distinguish it is woods and rocks. Beneath it, on an island,
stands the castle of Kilchurn, which is a grand object under the impending
gloom of the mountains. This castle was built originally by the Lady of one of
the Campbells, who went to the holy wars. Here in solitary retirement, she
mourned his absence, and waited his return. In after ages the castle of
Kilchurn taking a more dignified form, became the seat of the earls of
Breadalbin, and was admired chiefly for the view it commanded over the lake,
and over a rich vale, bounded by lofty mountains. It afterward became a
fortress; and when the rebellion broke out in the year 1745, was hastily
fortified by Lord Breadalbin for the government, and garrisoned to defend this
pass into the Highlands; which intention I believe it fully answered.



Besides this island, we had two others in view, both woody, and both very
ornamental. On one of them stood formerly a convent. We had also a long extent
of water before us. The lake winds slowly, and falls off in good perspective,
exhibiting a great variety of bays, promontories, and large peninsulas. In many
parts also the scenery around it was woody; but yet on the whole, it had rather
an unpicturesque appearance. The islands are formally stationed; and many of
the mountain-skreens, which are unadorned with wood, are tame, and unbroken.

We took two drawings however upon this lake. In one of them, two of the
islands appeared with great advantage; and the mountain-skreens behind them,
consisting only of simple parts, were magnificent.

The other view was more contracted, and exhibited a large promontory, under
which stood the island, with the ruins of Kilchurn-castle. The constituent
parts of this latter view are the same as those we had observed upon
Loch-Dochart: but it is one of nature's samenesses: it is alter et idem. There
the island appeared connected with the promontory, under which it stood; here
it appeared detached from the lake, and connected with the foreground. In each
situation the islands broke the lines of the promontories, and had a good
effect. But the island on Loch-Awe afforded the better picture.

Both these lakes deserved more attention, than we were able to pay them. We
wished to make a circuit round them, and view them in various points. The
islands upon Loch-Awe, however formal they might appear in some views, would
unquestionably have a fine effect in many other situations: and promontories,
which, on one side, appeared smooth, tame and unadorned, might appear broken,
animated, and rich on another: but our time was limited; and we were obliged to
satisfy our curiosity with little more than a view of such parts, as the road
presented.

From the neighborhood of Loch-Awe we pursued our rout to Inverary-castle, the
principal seat of the duke of Argyle. A very long and dreary ride had made us
languish for the contrast of a little woody scenery: when the forests rose, as
if by enchantment; vast, rich, and luxuriant. Whole mountains in a great
degree, were covered with woods of ancient standing; which sinking into their
deep shadowy recesses, or standing out boldly upon their knolls in broad masses
enlightened by the sun, wonderfully charmed the eye, both with the greatness,
and novelty of the scene. They seemed planted to exemplify the following
precept.

Does then the song forbid the planter's hand
To clothe the distant hills, and veil with woods
Their barren summits? No; but it forbids
All poverty of clothing. Rich the robe,
And amply let it flow, that nature wears
On her throned eminence. Wherever she takes
Her horizontal march, pursue her step
With sweeping train of forest; hill to hill
Unite with prodigality of shade.
Some powerful hand, it was evident, had been at work in clothing the naked
sides of all these vast ridges; and we might have known, by the noble
decoration of the scene, that we were in the dominions of some potent
chieftain, tho we had not known it, by the geography of the country. Every
moment we looked, when the castle would open to our view. But we traveled at
least four miles among these Alpine plantations, before we arrived at it.

Situation of INVERARY CASTLE.


SECT. XVIII.
INVERARY-CASTLE fully answered the grandeur of the approach. It seems equally
adapted to all the purposes of greatness, beauty, and accommodation. It stands
upon a gentle rise, the ground gradually sloping from it in various directions.
The area, which surrounds it, is spacious, containing two or three miles in
circumference; and is bounded, behind the castle, by a semi-circular skreen of
mountains, rising in different forms, some of them broken, and others adorned
with wood; so that the castle stands in a kind of mountain-recess, open in
front; where it commands a spacious view over Loch-Fyne. One of these
mountains, called Doniquaick, is a noble, spirited object. It Is sides are
shaggy, and broken; and the interstices of soil are filled with wood. On it is
summit stands a lonely watchtower, which like every thing characteristic has a
good effect. Had it been an ornamental building of any kind, thus loftily
seated, it had been absurd.

At the foot of this mountain, runs the Array, a considerable stream. It issues
through a narrow valley, behind the house; and taking a semicircular sweep
around it, at the bottom of the lawn enters Loch-Fyne.

This lake which is the glory of the scene, spreads into a noble bay before the
front of the castle; forming an irregular circle of about twelve or fourteen
miles in circumference, beautifully indented with a variety of peninsulas, and
surrounded by mountains. It is an object, not only beautiful in itself; but it
makes a fine contrast with the woods, and mountains around it.

Loch-Fyne is a salt lake, communicating with the sea, at the distance of about
twenty-five miles from Inverary castle, but as the tide has no very great
effect upon it here, it has almost all the beauties of an inland lake; and
some, which an inland lake cannot have; particularly that of a very crowded
navigation. It is one of the favorite haunts of herring; and at certain
seasons of the year is frequented by innumerable shoals. The country people
express the quantities of this fish in strong language. At those seasons, they
say, the lake contains one part water, and two parts fish. In this single bay
of the lake, we were told that above six hundred boats are sometimes employed
in taking them. The groups of these little fishing vessels with their circling
nets make a beautiful moving picture; which is frequently varied by vessels of
a larger size, shooting athwart; threading the several little knots of
anchoring barks; and making their tacks in every direction.

The herring-boats commonly take their station on the lake, as the evening
comes on; and if all this moving picture should happen to be enlightened with a
splendid sun set, the effect is very fine. The crews of these boats seem
generally to be a cheerful, happy race. Among the implements of each boat, the
bagpipe is rarely forgotten; the shrill melody of which you hear constantly
resounding from every part; except when all hands are at work. On Sunday, the
mirth of the several crews is changed into devotion: as you walk by the side of
the lake, if the evening be still, you hear them singing psalms, instead of
playing on the bagpipe.

The mountain of Doniquaick, and the lake, are two very harmonious neighbors,
in every point, in which they are brought together. We saw them contrasted in
several forms; and always beautifully. One of the grandest views of the whole
may be taken somewhere about the new-inn. The mountain of Doniquaick -- a
bridge over the Array -- the lake, and the mountains, which skreen it, all unite
in very pleasing composition.

From the bay, which Loch-Fyne forms before the castle of Inverary, run two
grand openings; one to the north-east into the country; and the other to the
south-west toward the sea: but all appearance of these outlets is excluded
from the castle by the folding of the mountains. I mean not by this remark, to
express any peculiar excellence in the circular form of a bay. This particular
one indeed contains great variety, and is very beautiful in it is kind: but
still there is in general more variety, and more beauty, in the fading distance
of a lake going off in perspective.

The castle of Inverary is new, but constructed in the old castle form. The
ground plot is square; and each corner is adorned with a round tower. In the
middle rises a square one, which is higher than the rest, and gives a
picturesque apex to the building. The whole is grand, and makes an appearance
suitable to the scene. Yet there are two very disgusting parts about it. These
are the square appendages, which are tacked to each side of the middle tower,
for the purpose of furnishing the interior apartments of the castle with light.
The contrivance is awkward; and greatly injures a noble pile. The inside seems
to be admirably divided into grand, and convenient rooms; but it is yet
unfinished. At the entrance is a guard chamber; which in most private houses
would be ridiculous; but in a Highland castle is characteristic, and gives an
uncommon dignity.

In one of the apartments we were struck with a number of small paintings in a
fine old mellow style; but all of them evidently by the same hand. Upon
examining them more attentively, we found them all copies from pictures we
knew; some of which were very modern. Enquiring farther into the mystery, we
were informed, they were all the work of the present duchess of Argyle; and
were in fact mezzotinto-prints, varnished with gum-copal; and painted on the
back, in a manner lately invented. I have seen no invention of the kind that
has so much merit. Colored prints are in general miserable daubings The method
here mentioned, of coloring mezzotinto prints, was at this time, just
invented; and was sold, under promise of secresy, to many ladies.
.

This noble castle was built by Archibald, duke of Argyle, who finished little
more than the shell: but his ideas seem to have been so grand; that it is
probable he would have struck out something beyond the taste of the times, in
the improvements around it, if he had lived to complete his designs. One great
work he had in view, was to remove the whole town of Inverary, which was indeed
a great nuisance to him. Part of it had even straggled between the castle and
the lake; and the whole, a dirty, ill-built hamlet, was a disgrace to the
scene. With a grandeur of conception, equal to his other designs, the duke
resolved to pull the whole down; and rebuild it upon a peninsula in the lake,
about half a mile from his castle. The situation was admirably chosen, at least
for the benefit of the town; tho it may still perhaps a little interfere with
the views of the castle; particularly of that down the lake toward the south.
The duke proceeded so far in his plan, as to build a noble row of houses; one
of which is an inn, and another a custom house: but his death prevented the
completion of this grand design.

In his successor's time, all operations were at a stand: but the present duke
has called his workmen again together. He has already removed as much of the
old town, as was a nuisance to himself: but whether he means to carry his
predecessor's full intention into execution does not yet appear I am informed
that all the old town is now removed.
. About the castle however he is making great improvements; and, as far as he
has yet done, in a very good taste. A grand walk is conducted over a noble
bridge, at the foot of Doniquaick, and along the banks of the river; from which
an offset carries you in a spiral up the mountain. From the watchtower, at the
summit, we were informed, that one of the grandest views in Scotland is
exhibited, over Loch-Fyne, and the neighboring mountains. -- But a wet morning
prevented our seeing it.

In a word, as Inverary-castle has one of the noblest situations that can be
conceived, it will probably in a few years, be as well worth visiting, as any
place in Britain; if the improvements continue in the same style of simplicity
and grandeur, in which they are begun. No place we had yet seen in Scotland, if
we except Hopeton-house, can bear the least comparison with it. If we found
fault with any thing, it was with some little decorations, and cascade-work
upon the river; but as these things might have been executed before, and may
easily be altered, all censure should cease, till the whole be finished.

We had now almost completed our tour through the Highlands of Scotland,
Inverary being the last town of any consequence we visited in that district;
and through our whole journey were greatly pleased both with the face of the
country, and with the manners of the inhabitants. The former may probably have
some effect upon the latter. The extremes of heat and cold produce nearly
perhaps the same effect. The savage, under a southern clime, is languid, and
inert; under a northern one, benumbed, and torpid. It is in the middle regions,
that we find the boldest, and most spirited exertions. I speak of men in a
barbarous state. Civilization brings all to a level. The early and uncivilized
native of this country seems to have had great vigor of mind and body; but it
was the vigor of a wild beast. Indolence and activity took their turns in his
breast. Every passion had it is course, and when it is rage was spent, he sunk
into sloth. He was easily offended: fierce in his anger, and implacable in his
revenge, he shed blood without remorse.

Some years ago, an old manuscript was printed at Glasgow, under the title of
Feuds and conflicts among the Scottish clans. It contains many anecdotes, very
descriptive of the ancient manners of the country. One little history I shall
present to the reader from the materials See page, 39, etc. and page 95, etc.
which it furnishes, and the co-incident circumstances of the times. It is an
account of the petty wars between Angus Macdonald of Kintire, and Sir Laughlan
Maclean of the Isle of Mull; and is both curious in itself, and will give a
better idea of the ancient state of the Highlands, than any systematic inquiry.
It is likewise nearly connected with the scenes we are now surveying. The
characters too are drawn from the life, and well marked.

SECT. XIX.
ABOUT two centuries ago, it happened, that Donald Gorme, a gentleman of the
isle of Sky, proposing to visit his relation Angus Macdonald of Kintire, was
driven by adverse winds into Invernook-bay in the isle of Jura. This place
belonged to Sir Laughlan Maclean; who happened to be there himself at that
time, tho his principal residence was in Mull.

In Jura also, by an unusual concurrence of circumstances, happened to lurk
some outlaws; whom Donald Gorme for certain offenses, had lately driven from
their country. These fugitives, understanding to whom the vessel in the bay
belonged; and not having it in their power to injure Gorme themselves,
contrived a very malicious scheme to draw upon him the resentment of Maclean.
In the silence of the night, they drove some of Maclean's cattle toward the
bay; and carried them off; not doubting but the suspicion would rest on Gorme.

Suspicion is the evidence of barbarians. Maclean, a young, fiery chief,
without farther inquiry, collected his clan the next night, fell upon Gorme,
and killed sixteen of his people. Gorme himself, and a few of his followers,
with difficulty escaped.

When Angus Macdonald of Kintire, to whom Gorme's visit had been intended,
heard of this disaster, he was much distressed; and the more, as he was nearly
related to both parties. He was first cousin to Gorme; and had married the
sister of Maclean. Fearing therefore the consequences of the affair, he
resolved to employ his good office in making it up.

His first efforts were in the isle of Sky, were he found Gorme not
untractable. From thence he sailed to Mull; proposing an interview with Maclean
at Castle-Duart, the place of his residence. -- But his friends advised him to
be cautious.

As the Scottish government inclined to aristocracy, it had ever been the regal
policy to divide the clans: and to this end the crown, on feudal principles
would often take the occasion of very slight pretenses, to grant some favored
chief a claim on the lands of his more obnoxious neighbor. These grants being
commonly obtained, when families were at variance, gave a kind of sanction to
their quarrels.

A claim of this kind had formerly, it seems, been granted to the Macleans,
upon some lands in Ilay, which belonged to the Macdonalds: and tho the claim
had long lain dormant, and the families were now united by marriage; yet the
friends of Macdonald advised him not to put himself in the hands of a youth,
whose character was little known; and whom, for that reason, it was imprudent
to trust. But Macdonald naturally frank, and generous, and unacquainted with
fear, could not conceive, that a man, whom he had never offended, and whose
sister he had married, could possibly intend him ill. He went therefore with
all confidence to Castle-Duart: and even left, the greatest part of his retinue
behind.

Maclean received him courteously; and gave him hopes that Gorme's conditions
might be the basis of an agreement; and put an end to the unhappy affair
between them. But in the hour of retirement other thoughts possessed him. The
secret whispers of interest and ambition intervened; and all scruples of
integrity, and honor were thrown aside. Before the morning he had settled the
whole affair in his own mind; and with a confident air informed his astonished
guest, that he must expect to spend his future life in captivity, unless he
gave up all title to the disputed lands in Ilay. The unfortunate Macdonald had
no choice. He was obliged to submit; and to leave his son, and brother, as
pledges of his faith.

This act of perfidy roused all the spirit of Macdonald. The affair of
Invernook-bay was forgotten. The quarrel was now his own. But being as cool, as
he was determined, not the slightest whisper of discontent passed his lips. All
appearance of resentment was stifled, till he could show it with effect.

It was necessary, it seems, for Maclean in person to take possession of those
lands, which had thus been ceded to him. He went therefore to Ilay, and
encamped his little company upon the ruins of a fort, near the Kinnes, which
was the name of the lands, he was going to possess.

It was a custom among the highland chiefs to invite all strangers to their
houses; and make them welcome, as long as their provision lasted. When this was
consumed, the master of the family accompanied them to his next neighbor's,
where their visit was limited by the same necessity. This chief also joined the
procession; and thus they went on, increasing their company, and devouring the
provisions of a whole district.

Of this jovial custom, and the inconvenient situation of the camp of Kinnes,
Macdonald took the advantage. He offered Maclean the use of his own habitation
at Mullintrea; and describing his neighbors, as disposed to mirth and jollity,
wished him to pay a friendly visit among them: observing, that his retinue,
which was numerous, and especially his hostages, would effectually secure him
from any affront.

Credulity is as much the characteristic of a state of barbarism, as suspicion.
Maclean with little hesitation complied; and scrupled not to accept an
invitation from a man, with whom he had just before broken every rite of
hospitality.

But other thoughts than those of merriment possessed the mind of Macdonald. He
had privately sent orders to his clan to rendezvous in arms, at an appointed
place; and at midnight to surround a house, which he had appropriated for the
reception of Maclean. -- The habitation of a highland chief was a little town,
consisting of various appendages; many of which were detached.

The carousal, which had purposely been prolonged to a late hour, was now over;
all were retired to rest; and the highland-clan had taken their appointed stand
around the lodgings of Maclean, when Macdonald in a peremptory tone calling
loud at the window of his guest, ordered him to come down. The alarmed chief
started from his bed; and seeing through the lattice, the house surrounded by
armed men, he cursed his own imprudence, gave up all for lost, and opened the
door, holding the young son of Macdonald, his hostage, before his breast, to
prevent any sudden attack. But Macdonald assured him, that nothing against his
life was intended. The possession of his person was all he desired, and having
obtained this, he proclaimed liberty to all the rest of Maclean's followers.
Two of them only were excepted, who were thought to have been their chief's
principal advisers. With these Macdonald made short work, ordering fire to the
out-house in which they lodged, and leaving them to perish in the flames.

Maclean had scarce taken possession of his dungeon, when a plot nearer home
was contrived to complete his ruin. One of his near relations, Allen Maclean,
thinking this a favorable opportunity to serve his own interest, spread a
report that Maclean had sent secret orders to put Macdonald's brother to death,
who had been left as an hostage in Mull. In consequence of this he hoped, that
Macdonald would retaliate upon his prisoner; while he himself, being prepared,
might seize the estate. His contrivance miscarried in it is principal aim; tho
it had horrid consequences. Macdonald believing the report, massacred in his
rage all the retinue of Maclean, above eighty men, who had not yet left the
island. Maclean himself he spared, reserving him probably for a more exemplary
punishment.

The superiority of Macdonald in this contest, and his own personal abilities,
began now to raise the jealousy of the little court of Inverary. The
territories of Kintire, which lay upon the shores of Loch-Fyne, were contiguous
to those of Argyle; and the large island of Ilay, which belonged also to
Macdonald, was immediately upon the coast. These insular possessions gave him
the con^^quence of a maritime power: he had a navy in his ports, and could have
carried a sudden war up Loch-Fyne to the very walls of Inverary. So potent a
neighbor therefore became matter of just alarm. Many councils were called, and
it was at length, resolved to raise a body of forces, ostensively to adjust the
quarrel between these contending chiefs, but really to check the power of
Macdonald.

The earl of Argyle however soon found he had embarked in a matter above his
strength. Macdonald had address in council, and abilities in the field, beyond
the barbarism of the times, in which he lived; and put on so resolute a
countenance, that Argyle thought it prudent to draw back. His attempts took a
safer channel. He made an application to the king, whom by certain arguments he
induced to come forward in the affair. James the sixth, who was then king of
Scotland, menaced in his usual tone of magnificence: but a highland chief, tho
of a secondary order, would not easily at that day, submit to a royal mandate,
when issued from such a prince as James.

It happened however that Macdonald was himself at this time disposed to settle
his difference with Maclean. He had just engaged to assist the quarrel of a
neighboring chief upon the coast of Ireland; and wished to transport himself
into that country, as soon as he could. On some rigid conditions therefore; and
the delivery of several hostages; Maclean was set at liberty.

Neither prudence, foresight, nor contrivance, mark the events of savage war:
every man seizes his prey, like a wild-beast, either by open force, or by a
sudden spring, when it is off it is guard. He considers not, whether he is able
to maintain the quarrel. He begins it with temerity, and thinks not beyond the
first attack. -- Thus Macdonald had no sooner embarked for Ireland, than
Maclean incited probably by the counsel, and assistance of Argyle, entered Ilay
with fire and sword. He had every reason to believe, that Macdonald would put
his hostages to instant death: but he gave up every motive to the gratification
of revenge.

Macdonald however with unusual generosity, scorned to revenge a public quarrel
upon a few unfortunate individuals. The innocent blood he shed at Mullintrea,
had probably taught him this lesson of humanity. But he was rapid in taking
open vengeance. He instantly transported his troops from Ireland into the isle
of Mull, which he burned, ravaged, and destroyed from one end to the other. The
clan Lean could make no resistance, flying before him like sheep; whom the
raging chief sometimes slaughtered in a scattered pursuit; and sometimes
driving them in bodies into corners of the island, butchered in a promiscuous
heap. Cattle and every thing of value he carried off; and left the place
smoking under the effects of his vengeance. Nullum in barbaris saevitiae genus
omittit ira, et victoria Tacitus.
.

Maclean, in the mean time, was not backward in retaliating; but finding
himself unable to cope with the prowess of Macdonald, he had, as usual,
recourse to perfidy.

John Macean, of the kindred of Macdonald, had, in peaceable times, expressed a
great attachment to Maclean's mother, who was then a blooming widow. The
disposal of a mother in marriage, was, it seems, among the privileges of a
highland-chief; and Maclean was eager to bring on this match, in expectation,
that it might be the mean of alluring his new father-in-law into a confderacy
against Macdonald. Macean heard with pleasure, that his proposals would be
accepted; and came to Mull with great joy, where the marriage was solemnized.
But after the nuptials, when Maclean sounded him about a league against
Macdonald, the proposal was received with disdain. Macean would not hear of
acting so perfidious a part against his friend, his patron, and his near
relation.

In revenge for this disappointment, Maclean, with a brutality almost
unparalleled, broke at midnight into Macean's chamber, tore him from his bride,
put him to death; and killed eighteen of his men, who ran to assist their chief.

Barbarous as the country was, an act like this was received with horror. The
massacre at Mullintrea had thrown no odium on Macdonald. He was pitied for a
mistake. But Macean's nuptials became a proverb to express every thing that was
vile, and shocking in human nature.

This horrid deed seemed the expiring act of despair. The credit, which Maclean
had lost, accrued of course to Macdonald; and all Scotland acknowledged the
inequality of the contest between them. The king saw it with concern; and
considered the chief who pressed before his peers, as disturbing the balance of
the aristocracy, and trespassing on the royal authority.

In this light Macdonald appeared at court; where James, incited by suspicion,
and jealousy, determined to curb his influence. That prince, ever inclined to
an oblique path, instead of boldly calling the man to account (as he might
legally have done) who in the open defiance of law, durst presume to revenge
his own quarrel; had recourse to an act of perfidy. He pretended great zeal to
serve two kinsmen, who ought to be so dear to each other: he cajoled them with
the kindest expressions, and gave each of them a safe conduct to Edinburgh,
where he promised to make up the matter to the satisfaction of both. The method
he took to settle their differences, if we except the perfidy of it, was
sensible enough. He shut them both up together in Edinburgh-castle; and left
them to manage the dispute by themselves. This conference brought affairs to a
speedy issue. The two chiefs tired of their company, and confinement, made the
king every promise he desired; and to recover their liberty, left their sons as
hostages for their future behavior.

A peace during several years ensued. But the highland quarrel of those days
was never worn out. Macdonald growing old, and leaving the management of his
affairs to his son, who was a mere youth, the revenge and ambition of Maclean
again took fire. He got his old claims on Ilay confirmed, and enlarged, by a
new grant from the crown; and at the head of his clan entered the island.

Young Macdonald, hearing of his preparations, raised forces likewise; and
appeared in Ilay at the same time. Great endeavors were made by their common
friends to prevent bloodshed; and young Macdonald offered to give up half the
disputed lands, rather than have his father's age disturbed: but Maclean
rejected the offer, and proudly bad him prepare for battle.

At the head of a small lake, called Groinart, these two little highland-bodies
were drawn up; and began one of those desperate conflicts, which is seldom seen
among regular troops. Maclean's party were more numerous; but Macdonald's were
better soldiers, having been trained in the Irish wars, and long inured to
discipline.

The event of the battle was favorable to Macdonald. By a feigned retreat,
that young chief disordered the enemy, and wheeling suddenly round, charged
them with such unexpected fury, that after a brave, tho ineffectual defense,
they gave way. A great slaughter ensued. Three hundred were left dead upon the
field; near eighty of whom were of the kindred of Maclean; and the dead body of
that restless, and perfidious chief himself was found amidst the carnage.

Before Maclean engaged in this enterprise he consulted one of the weird
sisters of those uninlightened times; and was answered, that if he landed in
Ilay on a thursday; or drank of a well near Groinart, he waged a war with fate.
Both these injunctions he transgressed. A storm drove him upon the coast on a
thursday; and he drank of the well before he had inquired the name of the place.

Thus ended, this long dispute between the Madonalds, and the Macleans; and it
ended as the disputes of those times commonly did, in the death of one of the
contending parties.

Victory however did not secure repose to the brave Macdonald. Other contests
ensued. The death of Maclean had thrown so much power into his hands, that it
excited anew the jealousy and ambition of the earl of Argyle. That protent
chief got a grant from the crown, as was usual in those days, of the disputed
lands both in Kintire, and in Ilay, which Macdonald now possessed. This
produced a new series of wars, which lasted many years, between the Campbells,
and the Macdonalds. Old Angus Macdonald was dead; but tho his son inherited his
virtues, the power of the house of Inverary at length prevailed; and the lands
in dispute were finally annexed to it is vast domains.

This narrative places in a strong light, the character of those barbarous
times -- the spirit of aristocratic chiefs -- and the extensive mischief of
their quarrels, which were continually raging in some part of Scotland. In the
mean time the lower members of each little community were as frequently making
depredations on their neighbors in a lower style; and often indeed under the
influence of their chiefs, who enriched themselves at the hazard of their
vassals, or made them the instruments of some act of vengeance, in which they
did not care to appear openly themselves. When the chief did not want the
services of his clan, they pillaged for themselves. It was no uncommon thing,
we are told, for a father to give as a dowry with his daughter, what he could
plunder in three Michaelmas moons.

The arts of rapine generated the arts of defense. Cattle were the great
objects of plunder; and many ingenious modes of securing them were practiced.
Among these arts we are told wonderful stories of the sagacity of the
highlanders in tracing their cattle. They could distinguish the track of their
own beasts from any other -- either by their number -- or by their different
ages -- or by some other signs we are ignorant of; and would pursue it through
the territories of different clans, with the certainty of hounds following
their game. Whenever the track was lost, the owner of the land was obliged to
recover it: and if he could not, he was sued for the damage. This plea had by
long custom obtained the force of law.

SECT. XX.
HAVING thus shown the unfavourable side of the highland character, let us
consider it next in a more pleasing light. The whole system of manners indeed
which belongs to it, is now wholly changed. You may travel through any part of
Scotland; and rarely hear of an atrocious deed. Contention among the chiefs is
subsided; and theft, and rapine among the inferior orders are at an end.

There are very few instances, in the annals of human nature of a country so
suddenly reclaimed. After the battle of Culloden, when the sovereignty of the
highland chiefs was abolished by act of parliament, this happy change
immediately took place.

But yet, wise as this measure was, it would have answered no end in reclaiming
the manners of the people, if they had not been naturally of a virtuous cast.
They thieved not so much from principle, as through the force of clanship. When
this was abolished, the honest principles of nature revived. And yet it is very
certain, that the prohibition of theft, and rapine among barbarous nations
makes no part of their moral code. From the times of the ancient Greeks, to the
present Arabs, the invasion of another's property was never considered as
having any criminality in it; tho one would obviously be apt to suppose, that
justice should be among the first principles of nature. At this very day, the
young Circassian prince is taught by his preceptor to ride, to use his arms, to
steal, and to conceal his thefts. The word thief is a term of the utmost
reproach; but only as it implies detection. He is afterward led to more
considerable, and dangerous robberies; till his cunning, his address, and
strength are supposed to be perfect See Ellis's account of the Caucasian
nations.
.

The Scotch highlander was greatly addicted also to revenge: and carried his
quarrels, (as we have just seen), to the last extremity. But for this we can
easily account: it was chiefly through a desire to do himself justice; and to
repair wrongs, for which the law, but weakly executed, would give him no
redress. This we see verified in the narrative I have just given. But one of
the strongest illustrations of this remark, is a story told of James Hamilton,
who assassinated the regent Murray See page 74.
. After the assassination, Hamilton fled into France; where party then raged
high. A person there, who knew him, and who wished to assassinate the admiral
Coligny; but had not resolution to perpetrate the deed himself; thought he
could not apply to a properer man, than Hamilton, who had just committed an act
of the same kind in his own country. Hamilton shocked at the proposal, cried
out; "What! Villain, do you suppose me an assassin?" and challenged him on the
spot.

But notwithstanding the proneness of the Scotch highlander to acts of revenge,
and rapine, he was, in other respects, in the worst of times, a virtuous
character. He was faithful, hospitable, temperate, and brave; and if he did not
easily forget an injury; he was always esteemed grateful for a benefit. How
strict he was where confidence was reposed, appears in a very strong light from
that universal protection and fidelity, which the pretender experienced after
the battle of Culloden. Tho the penalty for concealing him was so great; and
the reward for giving him up so tempting; there was not a single man sound
among such numbers whom he was obliged to trust, who did not contribute all he
could to conceal, and succor him. A fellow of the name of Kennedy, to whom he
was particularly obliged, is often mentioned. This man had virtue enough to
resist the temptation of L 30,000, tho he was afterward hanged, I have heard,
for stealing a cow. We are told also of a very celebrated robber of the name of
Roy M'greggor, who even formed thieving into a science; and yet was one of the
most benevolent men in the country; and remarkable for his many acts of
kindness, and friendship. -- There appears to be therefore in the Scotch
highlander, notwithstanding the blemishes in his national character, a good
foundation of moral virtue. A spurious kind of religion he always had: but it
disturbed the career of none of his passions. It struck no root in his heart;
but appeared only in a few wild shoots of superstition. He was a religious
observer, for instance, of his oath: but it was only when he had sworn by
something, which for some whimsical reason he deemed sacred; his dagger
perhaps, or his father's soul: but he would break an oath, taken on a bible,
without scruple.

A better direction has now been given to minds thus in a degree prepared by
superstition. King George the second gave, out of the forfeited estates, L 1000
a year, which is still continued, to erect schools -- to translate the bible
into Erse -- and to maintain ministers, and catechists. The good effects of
this bounty are very visible It has done a great deal; but Mr. Knox, in his
Tour through the Highlands, and Hebride Isles, tells us, that much remains yet
to be done; and that the difficulties, which he enumerates, of the missionary
preachers, are exceedingly great.
. Through the whole country we found not only a pleasing simplicity, and
civility of manners; but a serious, and religious deportment among the common
people, which can hardly be conceived by those, who are acquainted with the
profaneness and profligacy of the lower ranks near the capital. A small Erse
bible is the highlander's usual companion; and it is common to see him reading
it, as he tends his cattle, or rests upon the road. We had frequently this
pleasing sight. It is common also, when you enter his little cottage, to see
the mother spinning, or knitting, and the children standing round either
reading in the bible; or repeating their catechism.

To this virtuous disposition of the highlander may be added, what commonly
accompanies a virtuous disposition, an independent spirit. There are no
poor-rates in Scotland; and indeed a relief of that kind would be but
ill-relished in the country. While the English peasant will often forge
pretenses to live on the labor of others; the Scotch highlander, even in his
real distresses, will make his last effort, and submit to any inconvenience,
before he will complain.

To these remarks on the present character of the Scotch highlander I shall
subjoin a pleasing picture of domestic life, both as an illustration of what I
have said; and as a contrast to the bloody scenes I presented a little above.
It is taken from a book of poems, which I have just quoted, by Robert Burns, a
bard as he calls himself, from the plough: but the images being caught from
nature, are such as must give pleasure to every feeling heart. The whole indeed
is equal to any praise.

The Cotter's Saturday Night.
November chill blaws loud with angry sugh Sugh is a very expressive word,
which we want in English, signifying the sound, which the wind makes, when it
is resisted: as when you strike a stick through it; or when it blows against
trees.
;
The short'ning winter-day is near a close;
The miry beasts retreating frae the pleugh;
The black'ning trains of craws Craws, rooks.
to their repose:
The toil-worn Cotter Cotter, cottager.
frae Frae, from.
his labor goes,
(This night his weekly moil is at an end,)
Collects his spades, his mattocks, and his hoes,
Hoping the morn in ease and rest to spend,
And weary, over the moor, his course does hameward bend.
At length his lonely cot appears in view,
Beneath the shelter of an aged tree;
The expectant wee-things, toddlin, stacher through Wee-things toddlin, stacher
through -- Children walking unsteadily, stagger along.

To meet their Dad, wi' flichterin Flicterin, fluttering like young birds.
noise and glee.
His wee-bit His wee-bit ingle blinking -- his little fire blazing with
unsteady light.
ingle, blinkin bonilie,
His clean hearth stane, his thrifty wifie's smile,
The lisping infant, prattling on his knee,
Does a' his weary kiaugh Kiaugh, distress of mind.
and care beguile,
And makes him quite forget his labor and his toil.
Belyve the elder bairns Belyve the elder bairns. Soon the elder children.
come drapping in,
At service out, amang the farmers roun';
Some ca' the pleugh Ca, drive.
, some herd, some tentie rin Tentie rin -- carefully run.

A cannie Cannie, dextrous.
errand to a neebor town:
Their eldest hope, their Jenny, woman grown,
In youthful bloom, love sparkling in her e'e,
Comes hame, perhaps, to show a braw Braw, fine.
new gown,
Or deposite her fair-won penny-fee,
To help her parents dear, if they in hardship be.
With joy unfeigned, brothers and sisters meet,
And each for other's weelfare kindly spiers Spiers, inquires.
;
The social hours, swift-wing'd, unnotic'd fleet;
Each tells the uncos Uncos, news.
that he sees or hears.
The parents, partial, eye their hopeful years;
Anticipation forward points the view;
The mother, wi' her needle and her sheers,
Gars auld claes look amaist as weel's the new Gars auld claes look amaist as
weel's the new.
Makes old clothes look almost as well as new.

;
The father mixes a wi' A wi' -- all with.
admonition due.
Their master's and their mistresses's command,
The youngkers a' are warned to obey;
And mind their labors wi' an eydent hand Eydent, diligent.
,
And never, though out of sight, to jauk To jauk, to loiter.
or play:
'And O! be sure to fear the Lord always!
'And mind your duty Mind your duty. Say your prayers.
, duly, morn and night!
'Lest in temptation's path ye gang astray,
'Implore his counsel and assisting might:
'They never sought in vain that sought the Lord aright!'
But hark! a rap comes gently to the door;
Jenny, wha kens Wha kens. Who knows.
the meaning of the same,
Tells how a neebor lad came A neebor lad came. A neighbor lad came.
over the moor,
To do some errands, and convoy her hame.
The wily mother sees the conscious flame
Sparkle in Jenny's e'e, and flush her cheek,
With heart-struck anxious care enquires his name,
While Jenny hafflins Hafflins, hesitatingly.
is afraid to speak;
Weel pleased the mother hears, it is nae wild, worthless rake.
With kindly welcome, Jenny brings him ben Ben. The Scotch cottage consists
commonly of two apartments, the but, and the ben. The latter is the inner part,
where the family sit.
;
A strappan youth; he takes the mother's eye;
Blythe Jenny sees the visit's no ill taken No ill taken. Not ill-taken.
;
The father cracks Cracks, talks with pleasure.
of horses, pleughs, and kye Kye, cows.
.
The youngster's artless heart overflows wi' joy,
But blate an Blate an laithfu -- modest, and bashful.
laithfu', scarce can weel behave;
The mother, wi' a woman's wiles, can spy
What makes the youth sae bashfu' and sae grave;
Weel pleased to think her bairn's respected like the lave The lave, like other
young women.
.
O happy love! where love like this is found!
O heartfelt raptures! bliss beyond compare!
I Have paced much this weary, mortal round,
And sage experience bids me this declare --
'If Heaven a draught of heavenly pleasure spare,
'One cordial in this melancholy vale,
''Tis when a youthful, loving, modest pair,
'In other's arms, breathe out the tender tale,
'Beneath the milk-white thorn that scents the evening gale.'
Is there, in human form, that bears a heart --
A wretch! a villain! lost to love and truth!
That can with studied, sly, ensnaring art,
Betray sweet Jenny's unsuspecting youth?
Curse on his perjured arts! dissembling smooth!
Are honor, virtue, conscience, all exiled?
Is there no pity, no relenting ruth,
Points to the parents fondling over their child?
Then paints the ruined maid, and their distraction wild!
But now the supper crowns their simple board,
The healsome parritch Healsome parritch. Wholesome porridge. It is a mess made
of oatmeal and water boiled thick together; which is eaten with milk. In the
next line we are told their hawkie (their cow) affords the soup; or the milk,
with which it is eaten. This is the common food for breakfast, and supper among
the low people.
, chief of Scotia's food:
The soupe their only hawkie does afford,
That 'yont the hallan Hallan, a separation in the house, beyond which the cow
is housed in winter.
snugly chews her cood.
The Dame brings forth in complimental mood,
To grace the lad, her weel hain'd kebbuck, fell Weel-hained kebbuck, fell --
well-preserved cheese of strong taste.
,
And aft he is pressed, and aft he ca's it guide:
The frugal wifie, garrulous, will tell,
How 'twas a towmond auld, sin' lint was in the bell How 'twas a towmond auld
sin lint was in the bell. That it was a year old, when flax was in bloom. The
vegetation of different plants makes the common calendar among the low people
in Scotland.
.
The cheerfu' supper done, wi' serious face,
They, round the ingle, form a circle wide;
The Sire turns over, with patriarchal grace,
The big have bible Big have bible. Large hall bible.
, ance his father's pride:
His bonnet rev'rently is laid aside,
His lyart haffets His lyart haffets. His gray temples.
showing thin and bare:
From strains that once did sweet in Zion glide,
He wales Wales. Seeks out, selects.
a portion with judicious care;
And, "Let us worship God!" he says with solemn air.
They chant their artless notes in simple guise;
They tune their hearts, by far the noblest aim:
Perhaps Dundee's Names of psalm-tunes.
wild-warbling measures rise,
Or plaintive Martyrs Names of psalm-tunes.
, worthy of the name;
Or noble Elgin A psalm tune.
beets Beets, adds fuel to.
the heavenward flame,
The sweetest far of Scotia's holy lays:
Compared with these Italian trills are tame;
The tickled ears no heartfelt raptures raise;
Nae unison hae they, with our Creator's praise.
The priest-like father reads the sacred page,
How Abram was the friend of God on high;
Or Moses bade eternal warfare wage
With Amelek's ungracious progeny;
Or how the royal bard did groaning lie,
Beneath the stroke of Heaven's avenging ire;
Or Job's pathetic plaint, and wailing cry;
Or rapt Isaiah's wild, seraphic fire;
Or other holy seers that tune the sacred lyre.
Perhaps the Christian volume is the theme,
How guiltless blood for guilty man was shed;
How He, who bore in heaven the second name,
Had not on earth whereon to lay His head:
How His first followers and servants sped;
The precepts sage they wrote to many a land:
How he, who 'lone in Patmos banished,
Saw in the sun a mighty Angel stand;
And heard great Bab'lon's doom pronounced by Heaven's command.
Then kneeling down to heaven's eternal King,
The saint, the father, and the husband prays;
Hope 'springs exulting on triumphant wing Pope's Windsor forest.
,'
That thus they all shall meet in future days:
There ever bask in uncreated rays,
No more to sigh, or shed the bitter tear,
Together hymning their Creator's praise,
In such society, yet still more dear;
While circling time moves round in an eternal sphere.
Compared with this, how poor religion's pride,
In all the pomp of method, and of art,
When men display to congregations wide,
Devotion's every grace, except the heart!
The Power, incensed, the pageant will desert,
The pompous strain, the sacerdotal stole;
But happily, in some cottage far apart,
May hear, well pleased, the language of the soul;
And in his book of life, the inmates poor enroll This pleasing picture of a
family supper, I am told, is drawn from the life. After their meal it is the
common practice to unite in worship. A psalm is first sung. Then the father of
the family reads a chapter in the bible; and they all afterward join in prayer.
.
Then homeward all take off their several way;
The younglin cottagers retire to rest:
The parent pair their secret homage pay,
And proffer up to Heaven the warm request,
That He who stills the raven's clamorous nest,
And decks the lily fair in flowery pride,
Would, in the way His wisdom sees the best,
For them, and for their little ones provide;
But chiefly, in their hearts with grace divine preside.
END OF THE FIRST VOLUME.

