THE SPIRIT of MASONRY



in MORAL and ELUCIDATORY LECTURES.

by WM HUTCHINSON MASTER of the Barnardcastle Lodge of CONCORD.

LONDON Printed for J. WILKIE, No. 71 in St. Paul's Churchyard and W.
GOLDSMITH, No. 24 Paternoster Row.

MDCCLXXV.

THE SANCTION
WHEREAS brother William Hutchinson has compiled a book, entitled, "The Spirit
of Masonry," and has requested our sanction for the publication thereof; we
having perused the said book, and finding it will be of use to this society, do
recommend the same.

PETRE, G. M. ROWLAND HOLT, D. G. M. THOMAS NOEL, S. G. W. JOHN HATCH, J. G. W.
ROWLAND BERKLEY, G. T. JAMES HESELTINE, G. S.


TO THE ANCIENT AND HONORABLE SOCIETY of FREE AND ACCEPTED MASONS.
BRETHREN,
THE following LECTURES were composed for the use of the LODGE over which I
presided for several successive years. Since that time I have added explanatory
notes, to support my propositions, or exemplify the principles of the work.

With the utmost humility and diffidence I give these LECTURES to the public:
they may indeed serve to detect the wretched artifices used by wicked men to
impose upon the world; and if I succeed so far with YOU, as to excite the due
exercise of those moral works which our PROFESSION enjoins, I shall have my
reward.

From the nature of our SOCIETY, and its LAWS, it is difficult to write on the
subject of MASONRY. -- We are not allowed that explicit language any other
topic would admit of. -- My diction will appear technical and abstruse, to all
but MASONS: and with the CRITIC, I am exposed to every degree of severity;
without his candor will admit the MORAL INTENTION of the WORK, in extenuation
of those imperfections our mystical expression throws upon the following pages.

As SUPREME of this SOCIETY, the Right Honorable the LORD PETRE, in the first
place, and after him MR HOLT and the OFFICERS OF THE GRAND LODGE OF ENGLAND,
command my most humble acknowledgments and gratitude, for the candor and
condescension with which this little work was received under their precedence.

MY LORD PETRE,
DEDICATIONS, my Lord, were originally devised by authors, as supplications,
for protection of their labors, under the illustrious character to which they
were addressed.

It is for this purpose, MY LORD, I presume to prefix your NAME; whilst I
confess myself

YOUR LORDSHIP'S MOST DEVOTED, HUMBLE SERVANT, and FAITHFUL BROTHER, W.
HUTCHINSON.

THE CONTENTS.
LECTURES.
1. THE general Design of the Work Page 1 2. On the Rites, Ceremonies, and
Institutions of the Ancients Page 23 3. A Continuation of the Rites,
Ceremonies, and Institutions of the Ancients Page 51 4. The Nature of the Lodge
Page 82 5. The Furniture of the Lodge Page 110 6. The Apparel and Jewels of
Masons Page 121 7. The Temple at Jerusalem Page 131 8. On Geometry Page 148 9.
The Master Mason's Order Page 156 10. The Secrecy of Masons Page 169 11. Of
Charity Page 189 12. On Brotherly Love Page 202 13. On the Occupations of
Masons Page 210 14. A Corollary Page 226
LECTURE I.
The DESIGN.
IT is my design in the following Lectures, to investigate the ORDERS OF FREE
MASONRY; and under distinct heads, to arrange my observations on the nature of
this Society.

On my initiation, I was struck with the ceremonials; and immediately
apprehended, there was more conveyed by them, than appeared to the vulgar eye:
as I attended to the matter, I was convinced my first impressions were just;
and by my researches, to discover their implications, I presume, I have
acquired some degree of knowledge, touching the Origin of Masonry, the reasons
of its several institutions, the meaning of its various symbols, and their
import; together with the progress of the profession.

It is known to the world, but more particularly to my Brethren, that there are
three degrees of MASONS -- APPRENTICES, CRAFTSMEN, and MASTERS -- the
initiation to, and several advancements from, the order of APPRENTICES, will
necessarily lead my observations to three distinct channels.

How the several mysteries are revealed to MASONS, they alone know -- so
steadfastly have the FRATERNITY preserved their Faith, for many ages, that this
remains a secret to the world, in defiance of the corruptions and vices of
Mankind.

In order to comprehend our PROFESSION, we must look back into the remotest
antiquity, and from thence collect the several parts, which have been united in
the forming of our Order -- in the first place, we must give our attention to
the Creation of Man, and the state of our first Parent in the Garden of Eden.
Genesis -- chapter i. ver. 26. And God said let us make man in our image, after our
likeness. Ver. 27. -- So God created man in his own image, in the image of God
created he him. Ver. 31. -- And God saw every thing that he had made, and
behold it was very good. Chapter 2. ver. 7. -- And the Lord God formed the man of
the dust of the ground, and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life; and
man became a living soul.


It is not to be doubted, when Adam came from out the hand of his Creator, the
Image of God, from whom he immediately proceeded, that he was perfect in
Symetry and Beauty; that he was made in the highest degree of excellence human
nature was capable of on earth -- calculated for Regions of Felicity and
Paradise, where sin or sorrow had not known existence -- made in such
perfection of body and mind, that he could endure the presence of God; and was
capable of conversing with the Almighty face to face Genesis, chapter ii. ver. 16
-- 17 -- 19. -- Chapter iii. ver. 9 -- 10 -- 11 -- 12 -- 17.
-- so much was he superior to the chosen ones of Israel. -- He was endowed
with understanding suitable to his station, as one whom the Almighty deigned to
visit; and his heart was possessed of all the VIRTUES unpolluted: endowments of
an heavenly temper -- his hours were full of wisdom, exultation, and transport
-- the Book of Nature was revealed to his comprehension, and all her mysteries
were open to his understanding -- he knew whence and what he was. -- Even this
was but a minute degree of his capacity; for astonishing as it may appear to
us, yet it is an uncontrovertable truth, that he had a competent knowledge of
the mighty, the tremendous CREATOR OF THE UNIVERSE; -- he saw him with his
natural eyes, he heard his voice, he understood his laws, and was present to
his Majesty.

To this fountain of human perfection and wisdom, we must necessarily look
back, for all the science and learning which blessed the earliest ages of the
world -- calculated for such exalted felicity and elevated enjoyments, placed
in regions of peace, where Angels ministered and the Divinity walked abroad, was
the parent of mankind.

But alas he fell! -- his disobedience forfeited all that glory and felicity --
and horrible to recount, even in the midst of this exalted state, SATAN
prevailed!

If we presume to estimate the change which befell ADAM, on his expulsion from
Paradise, by the deformity that took place on the face of the world, we should
be apt to believe the exile, though not distorted in body, was yet darkened in
understanding -- instead of confidence and steady faith, that distrust and
jealousy would take place, and disbelief confound even testimony; that argument
would be deprived of definition, and wander by excentric propositions; that
confusion would usurp the throne of wisdom, and folly of judgment; thorns and
thistles grow up in the place of those excellent flowers of science which
flourished in Eden, and darkness cloud the day of his capacity.

It is not possible for me to determine, from any evidence given to us, in what
degree disobedience and sin immediately contracted the understanding of ADAM;
but we are certain that great and dreadful effects very early took place on
Adam's posterity. -- We may conclude, memory was retained by our first parent
in all its energy -- a terrible portion of the punishment his disobedience had
incurred; restoring to him perfect images, and never-dying estimates, of what
he had lost, and thereby increasing the bitterness of what he had purchased.
Through the endowments of memory, ADAM would necessarily teach to his family
the sciences which he had comprehended in Eden, and the knowledge he had gained
of NATURE and her GOD. -- It will follow, that some of them would retain those
lessons of wisdom, and faithfully transmit them to posterity. -- No doubt the
family of Cain (who bore the seal of the curse on his forehead) was given up to
ignorance. Genesis, cha. iv. ver. 16. -- And Cain went out from the presence of
the Lord.


Tradition would deliver down the doctrines of our first parents with the
utmost truth and certainty, whilst the Antideluvians enjoyed that longivity of
which the books of Moses give evidence -- but when men came to multiply
exceedingly upon the face of the earth, and were dispersed to the distant
regions of the globe, then the inestimable lessons of KNOWLEDGE and TRUTH,
taught by the first men, fell into confusion and corruption, and were retained
pure and in perfection but by few -- those few, to our great consolation, have
handed them down to after ages -- they also retained the UNIVERSAL LANGUAGE,
uncorrupted, with the confusion of the plains of Shinar, and preserved it to
posterity.

Thus we must necessarily look back to OUR FIRST PARENT, as the original
Professor of the WORSHIP OF THE TRUE GOD, to whom the Religion and mysteries of
NATURE were first revealed, and from whom all the WISDOM of the world was in
the beginning derived.

In those times, when the present Rules and maxims of our profession of FREE
MASONRY had their beginning, the minds of men were possessed of Allegories,
Emblems, and mystic devices, in which, peculiar sciences, manners,
institutions, and doctrines in many nations were wrapped up -- this was an
invention of the earliest ages -- the priests in Egypt secreted the mysteries
of their religion from the vulgar, by symbols and hieroglyphics comprehensible
alone to those of their own order. The priests of Rome and Greece practiced
other subtleties by which the art of divination was enveiled, and their oracles
were intelligible only to their brethren, who expounded them to the people.

These examples were WISELY adopted for the purposes of concealing the
mysteries of MASONRY -- like the Cybil's leaves, the secrets of the brotherhood
would appear to the world as indistinct and scattered fragments, whilst they
convey to MASONS an uniform and well-connected system.

In the forming of this society, which is at once RELIGIOUS AND CIVIL, great
regard has been given to the first knowledge of the GOD OF NATURE, and that
acceptable service wherewith he is well pleased.

This was the first stage on which our originals thought it expedient to place
the foundation of MASONRY: -- they had experienced that from religion all civil
ties and obligations were compacted, and that thence proceeded all the bonds
which could unite mankind in social intercourse: -- hence it was that they laid
the corner stone of the EDIFICE on the bosom of religion. Religions all!
descending from the skies
To wretched man, the goddess in her left
Holds out this world, and, in her right, the next:
Religion! the sole voucher man is man;
Supporter sole of man above himself;
Even in this night of frailty, change, and death,
She gives the soul a soul that acts a God.
Religion! Providence! an after state!
Here is firm footing; here is solid rock;
This can support us; all is sea besides;
Sinks under us; bestorms, and then devours.
His hand the good man fastens on the skies,
And bids earth roll, nor feels her idle whirl.
Young's Night Thoughts.


In the earliest ages, after the deluge, in those nations made known to us, the
service of the true God was clouded with imagery, and defiled by idolatry. --
Men who had not been taught the doctrines of truth, by those who retained the
wisdom of the Antideluvians, but were left to the operations of their own
judgments, perceived that there was some great cause of nature's uniformity,
and wonderful progressions of her works: suitable to their ignorance, they
represented the Author of those works, by such objects as struck their
observation, for their powerful effects on the face of the world -- from whence
the SUN AND MOON became the symbols of the Deity. The posterity of Ham forsook
the doctrines of their predecessor, for the Deity whose adoration he taught,
they soon substituted the symbol, and for the original, worshipped the Sun,
which was regarded in the first ages after the deluge, as the Type or Emblem of
the Divinity.

The descendants of Chus, called Cuthites, were those Emigrants who carried
their rites, religions, and customs into various quarters of the globe; -- they
were the first apostates from the Truth, yet great in worldly wisdom; -- they
were joined in their expeditions by other nations, especially by the collateral
branches of their family, the Mizraim, Caphtorim, and the sons of Canaan; --
these were all of the line of Ham, who was held by his posterity in the
highest veneration; -- they called him Amon, and havin process of time raised
him to a Divinity, they worshipped him as the Sun, and from this worship they
were styled Amonians.

The Deity which they worshipped was the Sun, but they soon conferred his
titles upon some of their ancestors; whence arose a mixed worship. They
particularly deified the great Patriarch who was the head of their line, and
worshipped him as the Fountain of Light; making the Sun only an emblem of his
influence and power.

Bryant's Analysis of ancient Mythology.


MOSES was learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians; he was initiated in all
the knowledge of the WISEMEN of that nation, by whom the learning of antiquity
had been retained and held sacred; wrapped up from the eye of the wicked and
vulgar, in symbols and hieroglyphics, and communicated to men of their own
order only, with care, secrecy, and circumspection. -- This secrecy is not in
any wise to be wondered at, when we consider the persecution which would have
followed a faith unacceptable to the ignorance of the nations who were
enveloped in superstition and bigotry; and more particularly, as these sages
were in possession of that valuable knowledge of the powers of nature, of the
qualities of matter, and properties of things, so dangerous to be communicated
to wicked and ignorant men, from whose malevolence the most horrid offenses
might be derived: of which we may judge by the extraordinary and astonishing
performances even of those impious and unenlightened men, who contended with
MOSES, in the miracles he performed, under the immediate impression and
influence of the Deity. Exodus, chapter vii. ver. 11 -- 12 -- 22. Chapter viii. ver. 7
-- 18.


MOSES divested the worship of the Deity of its cloak of mysteries and images,
and taught the Jews the knowledge of the God of the Universe, unpolluted with
the errors of the nations of the earth, and uncorrupted with the devices and
ludicrous ceremonies instituted by the people of the East, from whom he derived
his first comprehension and knowledge of the Divinity. The Author of the
Dissertation on the ancient Pagan Mysteries, defending Dr Warburton's positions
against Dr Leland, writes thus: that to the Pagan Divinity there was not only
an open and public worship, but also a secret worship paid to them, to which
none were admitted but those who had been selected by preparatory ceremonies,
called Initiation. This secret worship was termed the Mysteries.

Of these there were two sorts, the greater and the lesser: according to the
Bishop of Gloucester, the lesser taught, by certain secret rites and shows, the
Origin of Society, and the doctrine of a future State; they were preparatory to
the greater, and might be safely communicated to all the initiated, without
exception.

The Arcana of the greater Mysteries, were the doctrine of the Unity, and the
detection of the errors of the vulgar Polytheism; these were not communicated
to all the aspirants, without exception, but only to a small and select number,
who were judged capable of the secret.

The initiated were obliged by the most solemn engagements, to commence a life
of strictest piety and virtue; it was proper therefore to give them all the
encouragement and assistance necessary for this purpose. Now in the Pagan world
there was a powerful temptation to vice and debauchery, the profligate examples
of their Gods. Ego homuncio hoc non facerem, was the absolving formula,
whenever any one was resolved to give a loose to his passions. This evil the
Mysteries remedied, by striking at the root of it; therefore such of the
initiated as were judged capable, were made acquainted with the whole delusion.
The Mystagogue taught them, that Jupiter, Mercury, Bacchus, Venus, Mars, and
the whole rabble of licentious Deities, were only dead mortals; subject, in
life, to the same passions and infirmities with themselves; but having been on
other accounts benefactors to mankind, grateful posterity had deified them;
and with their virtues, had indiscreetly canonized their vices.

The fabulous Gods being thus rooted, the Supreme Cause of all things naturally
took their place. Him they were taught to consider, as the Creator of the
universe, who pervaded all things by his virtue, and governed all by his
providence. But here it must be observed, that the discovery of this Supreme
Cause, was so made, as to be consistent with the notion of local tutelary
deities, beings superior to men, and inferior to God, and by him set over the
several parts of his creation. This was an opinion universally holden by
antiquity, and never brought into question by any Theist. What the Arcana of
the Mysteries overthrew, was the vulgar Polytheism, the worship of dead men.

It was natural for these politicians, to keep this a secret in the Mysteries;
for in their opinion, not only the extinction, but even the gradation of their
false gods, would have too much disconcerted and embroiled the established
system of vulgar Polytheism.

From hence we may be led to determine, that to Moses the secret of the
Egyptian Mythology was divulged by his preceptors, and the knowledge of the
only God revealed to him, divested of all the symbols and devices which engaged
the vulgar.




The second stage of FREE MASONRY is grounded on this period -- the TEMPLE AT
JERUSALEM owns the probation of the CRAFTSMEN.

Moses was also possessed of knowledge superior to that of his Egyptian
teachers, through the revelations and inspirations of the Deity; -- he had
acquired the comprehension of, and was instructed to decipher all the
hieroglyphical characters used by that people in their records: -- it was no
doubt a part of the original knowledge, to express by characters to the eye,
the thoughts and sentiments of the mind -- but this was obscured and debased in
after ages by symbols and hieroglyphics: yet by the immediate dispensation of
heaven, Moses attained the knowledge of those original characters; by which he
was enabled to reveal to his people, and preserve to posterity, the
COMMANDMENTS OF GOD, delivered to him on the mount by inscribing them on tables
of stone. Exodus, chapter xxxi. ver. 18. -- And he gave unto Moses, when he had
made an end of communing with him upon Mount Sinai, two tables of testimony,
tables of stone, written with the finger of God. Chapter xxxiv. ver. 1. -- And the
Lord said unto Moses, hew thee two tables of stone like unto the first, and I
will write upon these tables the words that were in the first tables, which
thou brakest. Ver. 27. -- And the Lord said unto Moses, write thou these words;
for after the tenor of these words I have made a covenant with thee and with
Israel.


It is natural to conceive that the Israelites would be instructed in this act,
by which the will of the Deity was communicated; -- they would be led to write
the doctrines of their leader, and his expositions of the law, that they should
be preserved to their children; -- and if we give credit to the observations
and conjectures of learned travelers, the written mountains remain monuments
of the peregrinating Hebrews to this day.

But to return to the progressions of our profession. -- It is not to be
presumed, that we are a set of men, professing religious principles contrary to
the revelations and doctrines of the SON OF GOD, reverencing a Deity by the
denomination of the GOD OF NATURE, and denying that mediation which is
graciously offered to all true believers. -- The members of OUR SOCIETY at this
day, in the third stage of masonry, confess themselves to be CHRISTIANS -- the
veil of the temple is rent -- the builder is smitten -- and we are raised from
the tomb of transgression.

I humbly presume, it is not to be understood, that the name of MASON, in this
society, denotes that the origin or rise of such society was solely from
builders, architects, or mechanics: -- at the times in which MOSES ordained the
setting up of the sanctuary, Exodus, chapter xxxi. ver. 2. -- See. I have called by
name, Bezaleel, the son of Uri, the son of Hur, of the tribe of Judah. Ver. 3.
-- And I have filled him with the spirit of God, in wisdom, and in
understanding, and in knowledge, and in all manner of workmanship. Ver. 4. --
To devise cunning works, to work in gold, and in silver, and in brass. Ver. 5.
-- And in cutting of stones to set them, and in carving of timber, to work in
all manner of workmanship. Ver 6. -- And in the hearts of all that are
wise-hearted I have put wisdom, that they may make all that I have commanded
thee. Ver. 7. -- The tabernacle of the congregation, etc. Chapter xxxvi. ver. 1. --
Then wrought Bezaleel and Aholiab, and every wise-hearted man, in whom the Lord
put wisdom and understanding, to know how to work all manner of work for the
service of the sanctuary, according to all that the Lord had commanded. Ver. 2.
-- And Moses called Bezaleel and Aholiab, and every wise-hearted man, in whose
heart the Lord had put wisdom, even every one whose heart stirred him up to
come unto the Work to do it.
and when SOLOMON was about to build the TEMPLE at Jerusalem, they selected
from out the people, those men who were enlightened with the true faith, and
being full of wisdom and religious fervor, were found proper to conduct these
works of piety. -- It was on those occasions that our predecessors appeared to
the world as architects, and were formed into a body, under salutary rules, for
the government of those who were employed in these great works: since which
period builders have adopted the name of masons, as an honourary distinction
and title to their profession. -- I am induced to believe the name of MASON has
its derivation from a language, in which it implies some strong indication, or
distinction, of the nature of the society; and that it has not its relation to
architects. -- The French word MASON signifies a Family or particular race of
people: -- it seems as if the name was compounded of (...), QUERO SALVUM; and
the title of MASONRY no more than a corruption of (...), SUM IN MEDIO COELI, or
(...), SIGNA COELESTIA. Job xxxviii. 32. -- which conjecture is strengthened by
our symbols. The titles of masons and masonry most probably were derived from
the greek language, as the greek idiom is adopted by them, and is shown in many
instances in the course of this work -- the Druids, when they committed any
thing to writing, used the greek alphabet -- and I am bold to assert, the most
perfect remains of the Druids rites and ceremonies are preserved in the
ceremonials of masons, that are to be found existing among mankind. -- My
brethren may be able to trace them with greater exactness than I am at liberty
to explain to the public. -- The original names of masons and masonry may
probably be derived from, or corrupted of (...), res arcana, mysteries, and
(...), sacris initiatus mysta -- those initiated to sacred mysteries.




I am inclined to determine, that the appellation of MASON implies a member of
a RELIGIOUS SECT, and a professed devotee of the Deity, WHO IS SEATED IN THE
CENTER OF HEAVEN.

To prove these several propositions in MASONRY to be true, and to demonstrate
to MASONS the importance of their order, shall be the subject of the following
lectures.

The principles of MORALITY are rigorously enjoined us; -- CHARITY AND
BROTHERLY LOVE are our inindispensable duty: -- How they are prescribed to us,
and their practice enforced, will also be treated of in the following pages.

My original design in these lectures, was not only to explain to my brethren
the nature of their profession, but also to testify to the world, that our
MYSTERIES are important; and to take away the reproach which has fallen upon
this society, by the vices, ignorance, or irregularities of some profligate
men, who have been found among MASONS. -- Should the errors of a few, stain and
render ignominious a whole society, or bring infamy and contempt on a body of
men; there is no association on earth, either civil or religious, which might
not be affected.

LECTURE II. On the Rites, Ceremonies, and Institutions of the Ancients.
THERE is no doubt that our ceremonies and mysteries were derived from the
rites, ceremonies, and institutions of the ancients, and some of them from the
remotest ages. Our morality is deduced from the maxims of the Grecian
philosophers, and perfected by the christian revelation.

The institutors of this society had their eyes on the progression of religion,
and they symbolized it, as well in the first stage, as in the advancement of
masons. -- The knowledge of the God of Nature forms the first estate of our
profession; the worship of the Deity under the jewish law, is described in the
second stage of masonry; and the christian dispensation is distinguished in the
last and highest order.

It is extremely difficult, with any degree of certainty, to trace the exact
origin of our symbols, or from whence our ceremonies or mysteries were
particularly derived. -- I shall point out some ancient institutions from
whence they may have been deduced.

The ASSIDEANS (a sect among the Jews, divided into (...) the merciful, and
(...) the just) the fathers and predecessors of the PHARISEES and ESSENES: --
they preferred their traditions before the written word, and set up for a
sanctity and purity that exceeded the law: they at last fell into the error of
the Sadduces, in denying the resurrection, and the faith of rewards and
punishments after this life.

The ESSENES The etymologies of the names Essaei or Esseni, i. e. Essenes, are
diverse; that which I prefer is from the Syriac (...) Asa, signifying (...), to
heal or cure diseases; for though they gave themselves chiefly to the study of
the Bible, yet with all they studied physic.

Concerning the beginning of this sect, from whom or when it began, it is hard
to determine. Some make them as ancient as the Rechabites, and the Rechabites
to have differed only in the addition of some rules and ordinances from the
Kenites, mentioned Judge. i. 16. and thus by consequence the Essenes were as
ancient as the Israelites departure out of Egypt: for Jethro, Moses's father-in
law, as appears by the text, was a Kenite: but neither of these seems
probable, for the Kenites are not mentioned in scripture, as a distinct order
or sect of people, but as a distinct family, kindred, or nation. Numb. xxiv. 2.
-- Secondly, the Rechabites did not build houses, but dwelt in tents; neither
did they deal in husbandry; they sowed no seed, nor planted vine-yards, nor had
any. Jer. lv. 7. -- The Essenes, on the contrary, dwelt not in tents, but in
houses, and they employed themselves especially in husbandry. One of the Hebrew
doctors says, that the Essenes were Nazarites: but that cannot be, because the
law enjoined the Nazarites, when the time of the consecration was on, to
present themselves at the door of the tabernacle or temple. Numb. vi. Now the
Essenes had no access to the temple; when, therefore, or from what author this
sect took its beginning is uncertain. The first that I find mentioned by the
name of an Essene Josephus, l. xiii. c. 19.) was one Judas, who lived in the
time of Aristobulus, the son of Jannes Hyrcanus, before our Savior's birth
about one hundred years: however this sect was of greater antiquity, for all
three, pharisees, Sadduces, and Essenes, were in Jonathan's time, the brother
of Judas Maccabeus, who was fifty years before Aristobulus. Certain it is, that
this sect continued until the days of our Savior and after: Philo and Josephus
speak of them as living in their times. What might be the reason then, that
there is no mention of them in the New Testament? I answer, first, the number
of them seems not to have been great in Philo and Josephus's time, about four
thousand, which being dispersed in many cities, made the faction weak: and
happily in Jerusalem, when our Savior lived, they were either few or none.
Secondly, if we observe histories, we shall find them peaceable and quiet, not
opposing any, and therefore not so liable to reproof as the Pharisees and
Sadduces, who opposed each other, and both joined against Christ. Thirdly, why
might they not as well be passed over in silence in the New Testament
(especially containing themselves quietly without contradiction of others) as
the Rechabites in the Old Testament, of whom there is mention only once, and
that obliquely, although their order continued about three hundred years before
this testimony was given of them by the prophet Jeremy; for between John (with
whom Jonadab was coetanean) and Zedekia, chronologers observe the distance of
many years. Lastly, though the name of Essenes be not found in scripture, yet
we shall find in St Paul's Epistles many things reproved, which were taught in
the school of the Essenes: of this nature was that advice given to Timothy, 1 Timothy v. 13. Drink no longer water, but use a little wine. -- Again, 1 Timothy iv.
3. Forbidding to marry, and commanding to abstain from meat, is a doctrine of
devils -- but especially Coloss. 2d, in many passages the apostle seems
directly to point at them: Let no man condemn you in meat and drink, v. 16. --
Let no man bear rule over you, by humbleness of mind, and worshipping of
angels, v. 18. -- (...), why are ye subject to ordinances, v. 20. -- The
apostle uses the word (...), which was applied by the Essenes to denote their
ordinances, aphorisms, or constitutions. -- In the verse following he gives an
instance of some particulars, Touch not, taste not, handle not, ver. 21. -- Now
the junior company of Essenes might not touch their seniors: and in their diet,
their taste was limited to bread, salt, water, and hyssop: and these ordinances
they undertook, (...), says Philo, for the love of wisdom: but the apostle
concludes, ver. 23. that these things had only (...) a show of wisdom. And
whereas Philo terms the religion of the Essenes by the name of (...), which
word signifies religious worship, the apostle terms in the same verse,
(...), voluntary religion, or will worship: yea, where he terms their
doctrine (...), a kind of philosophy received from their forefathers by
tradition, St Paul bids them beware of philosophy, ver. 8. Godwyn's Moses
and Aaron.


were of very remote antiquity, and it has been argued by divines, that they
were as ancient as the departure of the ISRAELITES out of EGYPT. They might
take their rise, from that dispersion of their nation, which happened after
their being carried captive into Babylon. The principal character of this sect
was, that they chose retirement, were sober, were industrious; had all things
in common; paid the highest regard to the moral precepts of the law, but
neglected the ceremonial, any further than what regarded bodily cleanliness,
the observation of the sabbath, and making an annual present to THE TEMPLE AT
JERUSALEM. They never associated with women, nor admitted them into their
retreats. By the most SACRED OATHS, though they were in general averse to
swearing, or to requiring an oath, they bound all whom they INITIATED among
them, to the observance of piety, justice, fidelity, and modesty; to conceal
the secrets of the fraternity, preserve the books of their instructors, and
with great care commemorate the names of the angels. They held, that GOD was
surrounded by spiritual beings, who were MEDIATORS with him, and and therefore
to be reverenced. Second, that the soul is defiled by the body, and that all
bodily pleasures hurt the soul, which they believed to be immortal, though they
denied the resurrection of the body, as it would return the soul to sin. Third,
that there was a great MYSTERY in numbers, particularly in the number SEVEN;
they therefore attributed a natural holiness to the seventh or SABBATH DAY,
which they observed more strictly than the other Jews. They spent their time
mostly in contemplation, and abstained from every gratification of the senses.
The ESSENES introduced their maxims into the CHRISTIAN CHURCH; and it is
alleged by the learned, that St PAUL, in his epistles to the Ephesians and
Colossians, particularly censures the tenets of this sect.

Of these ESSENES there were two sorts; some were THEORICKS, giving themselves
wholly to speculation; others PRACTICKS, laborious and painful in the daily
exercise of those arts or manufactories in which they were most skilful. Of the
latter, Philo treats in his book, entitled, Quod omnis vir probus: of the
former, in the book following, entitled, De vita contemplativa. -- Godwyn's
Moses and Aaron. The ESSENES were denied access to the TEMPLE.

The PRACTICKS and THEORICKS both agreed in their aphorisms or ordinances; but
in certain circumstances they differed.

1. The PRACTICKS dwelt in the cities; the THEORICKS shunned the cities, and
dwelt in gardens and solitary villages.

2. The PRACTICKS spent the day in manuel crafts, keeping of sheep, looking to
bees, tilling of ground, etc. they were artificers. The THEORICKS spent the day
in meditation and prayer; whence they were, from a kind of excellency, by
Philo, termed supplicants.

3. The PRACTICKS had every day their dinner and supper allowed them; the
THEORICKS only their supper.

The PRACTICKS had for their commons, every one his dish of water gruel and
bread; the THEORICKS only bread and salt: if any were of a more delicate palate
than other, to him it was permitted to eat hyssop; their drink for both was
common water.

Some are of opinion that these THEORICKS were CHRISTIAN MONKS; but the
contrary appears for these reasons.

1. In the whole book of Philo, concerning the Theoricks, there is no mention
either of Christ or Christians, of the Evangelists or Apostles.

2. The THEORICKS, in that book of Philo's, are not any new sect of late
beginning, as the christians at that time were, as is clearly evinced by
Philo's own words, in calling the doctrine of the ESSENES (...), a philosophy
derived unto them by tradition from their forefathers.

In Grecian antiquity, we find a festival celebrated in honor of CAERES, It
was the most celebrated and mysterious solemnity of any in Greece; whence it is
often called, by way of eminence, the Mysteries; and so superstitiously careful
were they to conceal the sacred rites, that if any person divulged any of them,
he was thought to have called down some divine judgment upon his head, and it
was accounted unsafe to abide in the same house with him; wherefore he was
apprehended as a public offender, and suffered death. Such also was the secrecy
of these rites, that if any person, who was not lawfully initiated, did but out
of ignorance or mistake, chance to be present at the mysterious rites, he was
put to death. The neglect of initiation was looked upon as a crime of a very
heinous nature; insomuch that it was one part of the accusation for which
Socrates was condemned to death. Persons convicted of witchcraft, or any other
heinous crime, or had committed murder, though involuntary, were debarred from
these mysteries. In later times certain institutions were made, called the
lesser mysteries, and were used as preparative to the greater; for no persons
were initiated in the greater, unless they had purified at the lesser. The
persons who were to be admitted to the greater mysteries, made their sacrifice
a year after purification, the secret rites of which (some few excepted to
which only priests were conscious) were frankly revealed to them. -- The manner
of initiation was thus: the candidates being crowned with myrtle, had
admittance by night into a place called (...), i. e. the mystical temple, which
was an edifice so vast and capacious, that the most ample theater did scarce
exceed it. At their entrance they purified themselves by washing their hands in
holy water, and at the same time were admonished to present themselves with
minds pure and undefiled, without which the external cleanness of the body
would by no means be accepted. After this the holy mysteries were read to them
out of a book called (...), which word is derived from (...) a stone; because
the book was nothing else but two stones fitly cemented together. Then the
priest that initiated them, called (...), proposed certain questions, to which
they returned answers in a set form, as may be seen in Meursius's Treatise on
this festival. This done, strange and amazing objects presented themselves;
sometimes the place they were in seemed to shake round them, sometimes appeared
bright and resplendent with light and radiant fire; and then again covered with
black darkness and horror -- sometimes thunder and lightning, sometimes
frightful noises and bellowings, sometimes terrible apparitions astonished the
trembling spectators. The garments in which they were initiated were accounted
sacred, and of no less efficacy to avert evils than charms and incantations.

The chief person that attended at the initiation, was called (...), i. e. a
revealer of holy things. The hierophantes had three assistants, the first of
which was called from his office (...), i. e. torch-bearer; the second was
called (...), or the crier; the third ministered at the altar, and was for that
reason named (...).

Hierophantes is said to have been a type of the great Creator of all things,
"(...) of the Sun,
"(...) of Mercury,
"And (...) of the Moon."



at Eleusis, a town of Attica, where the Athenians, with great pomp and many
ceremonies, attended the mystic rites. -- Historians tell us, that these rites
were a MYSTICAL representation of what the mythologists taught of that goddess;
and were of so sacred a nature, that no less than death was the penalty of
discovery.

There was another great festival celebrated by the Greeks at PLATAEA, in
honor of JUPITER ELEUTHERIUS; the assembly was composed of delegates from
almost all the cities of GREECE; and the rites which were instituted in honor
of JUPITER, as the guardian of LIBERTY, were performed with the utmost
magnificence and solemn pomp.

In BALSARA, and along the banks of JORDAN, a sect of christians are known, who
call themselves CHRISTIANS OF ST. JOHN; but as they profess no knowledge of the
union of the third person in the TRINITY, I am induced to believe no part of
our profession was derived from them. Their ceremonies and mysteries are
founded on traditions, and they permit no canonical book to be received amongst
them.

In the institution of the orders of KNIGHTHOOD, the eyes of the founders were
fixed on various religious ceremonies, being the general mode of ancient times
-- Knights of the Bath had their hair cut and beards shaven, were shut up in
the chapel alone all the night preceding their initiation, there to spend the
solemn hours in fasting, meditation, and prayer: they offered their sword at
the altar, as devotees to the will of heaven, and assumed a motto expressive of
their vow, "Tres in Uno;" meaning the unity of the three theological virtues.
-- Various orders of Knights wear a cross on their cloaks: the order of Christ,
in Livonia, instituted in 1205, wore this ensign, and were denominated brothers
of the sword. -- The order of the Holy Ghost wear a golden cross.

An ancient writing which is preserved amongst masons with great respect,
requires my attention in this place, as it discovers to us what the ancient
masons regarded as the foundation of our profession [See the Appendix].

This writing is said to have come from the hand of King Henry the Sixth, who
began his reign in 1422: it is in the form of an inquisition for the discovery
of the nature of masonry.

From this ancient record we are told, that the mystery of masonry is a
knowledge of nature and its operations. [Appendix].

"That this science arose in the East." Ezekiel, chapter xliii. ver. 2. And behold
the glory of the God of Israel came from the way of the East: and his voice was
like the noise of many waters, and the earth shined with his glory. Chapter xxiv.
ver. 2. -- The East gate shall be shut, it shall not be opened, and no man
shall enter in by it, because the glory of the God of Israel has entered in by
it, therefore it shall be shut. Ver 3. -- It is for the Prince. The Prince he
shall sit in it to eat bread before the Lord.
-- From the East, it is well known, learning first extended itself into the
western world, and advanced into Europe. -- The East was an expression used by
the ancients to imply Christ: -- in this sense we find (...) used in the
prophets.

That the Phoenicians first introduced this science. It is the opinion of many
great antiquaries, that the Druids were established in Britain before they
gained any footing in Gaul: -- to quote the authorities for this, would render
my work too prolix.

In order to show how early the maxims and principles of the eastern nations
might be communicated to this land, I must mention some observations of learned
men.

Arthur Agard, Deputy Chamberlain of the Exchequer, 1570, (vide Bibl. Cotton.
Faustina, E. V.) speaking of the admeasurement of lands in this country, says,
Our nation having their origin from the Trojans, brought from thence the same
order as was observed in that country, our lands were measured by hides, the
etymology whereof is derived from Dido's act mentioned in Virgil, the word hyda
not being to be found in any other language but ours.

It is the opinion of the learned Dr Stukely, that there is no doubt our first
British ancestors were of the progeny of Abraham, in the Arabian line, by Hagar
and by Keturah, the Ishmaelites and Medianites who came hither with the Tyrian
Hercules to seek for tin. -- After naming many evidences and authorities to
support this assertion, he adds, and these matters mutually prove one another,
both that they came hither by sea from the coast of Phoenicia, and that they
brought the arts mentioned with them from the East.

Admitting that there is merely a probability in these opinions, it will
follow, that from thence the Druids would at once derive their theological
principles and their religious rites -- the sacred groves, the unhewn altars,
the stone pillars, the consecrated circles, emblematical of eternity, were
adopted from the manners of the Hebrews and the eastern nations.


[Appendix].

That Pythagoras journey'd into Egypt and Syria, and brought with him these
mysteries into Greece. [Appendix].

It is known to all the learned that Pythagoras traveled into Egypt, and was
initiated there into several different orders of priests, who in those days
kept all their learning secret from the vulgar. -- He made every geometrical
theorem a secret, and admitted only such to the knowledge of them, as had first
undergone a five-years silence. -- He is supposed to be the inventor of the
47th proposition of Euclid, The 47th proposition of Euclid, which is attributed
to Pythagoras, is contained in the first book, and is as follows.

THEOREM. In any right-angled triangle, the square which is described upon the
side subtending the right angle, is equal to the squares described upon the
sides which contain the right angle.

The DEMONSTRATION.


In geometrical solutions, and demonstrations of quantities, this proposition
is of excellent use, and the example is held by us as a memorial of Pythagoras.


for which, in the joy of his heart, it is said he sacrificed an hecatomb. --
He knew the true system of the world, revived by Copernicus.

The record [appendix] also says, that PYTHAGORAS framed a great Lodge at
Crotona, in Greecia Magna, and made many MASONS; some of whom journey'd to
France, and there made MASONS; from whence, in process of time, the art passed
into England. -- From whence it is to be understood, that the pupils of this
philosopher, who had been initiated by him in the Crotonian school in the
sciences and the study of nature, which he had acquired in his travels,
dispersed themselves, and taught the doctrines of their preceptor. From hence
it would seem that our Druids received their origin in Gaul; but antiquaries of
late years have been of opinion that they originated in Britain.


The same record [appendix] says, that MASONS teach mankind the arts of
agriculture, architecture, astronomy, geometry, numbers, music, poesy,
chemistry, government, and religion.

I will next observe how far this part of of the record correspondends with
what PYTHAGORAS taught.

The Pythagoric tetracties, were a point, a line, a surface, and a solid. --
His philosophical system is that, in which the SUN is supposed to rest in the
center of our system of planets, and in which the earth is carried round him
annually, being the same with the Copernican.

It seems as if this system was professed by MASONS, in contradistinction to
those who held the Mosaic system.

Among the Jews were a set of men who were called MASORITES: in Godwyn's Moses
and Aaron this account is given of them, that their name was derived from (...)
masar, signifying tradere, to deliver, and masor, a tradition, delivered from
hand to hand to posterity without writing, as the Pythagorians and Druids were
wont to do.

PYTHAGORAS lived at Samos, in the reign of Tarquin, the last king of the
Romans, in the year of Rome two hundred and twenty, or according to Livy, in
the reign of Servius Tullius, in the year of the world three thousand four
hundred and seventy-two. -- From his extraordinary desire of knowledge, he
traveled, in order to enrich his mind with the learning of the several
countries through which he passed. -- He was the first that took the name of
philosopher, that is, a lover of wisdom; which implied, that he did not ascribe
the possession of WISDOM to himself, but only the desire of possessing it. In
Godwyn's Moses and Aaron, treating of the Essenes, we have the following
comparisons between their principles and the maxims of Pythagoras. -- Their
dogmata, their ordinances or constitutions did symbolize in many things with
Pythagoras's: therefore my purpose is first to name Pythagoras's, and then to
proceed with the Essenes. They follow thus.

The Pythagorians professed a communion of goods; so did the Essenes; they had
one common purse or stock -- none richer, none poorer than other. Out of this
common treasury, every one supplied his own wants without leave, and
administered to the necessity of others: only they might not relieve any of
their kindred without leave from the overseers. They did not buy or sell among
themselves, but each supplied the other's want, by a kind commutative
bartering: yea, liberty was granted to take one from another what they wanted,
without exchange. They performed offices of service mutually one to another;
for mastership and service cannot stand with communion of goods. When they
traveled, besides weapons for defense, they took nothing with them; for in
whatsoever city or village they came, they repaired to the fraternity of the
Essenes, and were there entertained as members of the same. And if we do
attentively read Josephus, we may observe, that the Essenes of every city
joined themselves into one common fraternity or college. Every college had two
sorts of officers, treasurers who looked to the common stock, provided their
diet, appointed each his task and other public necessaries; others who
entertained their strangers.

2. The Pythagorians shunned pleasures; so did the Essenes. To this belonged
their avoiding of oil, which if any touched unawares, they wiped it off
presently.

3. The Pythagorians garments were white; so were the Essenes white also --
modest, not costly: when once they put on a suit, they never changed it till it
was worn out or torn.

4. The Pythagorians forbade oaths; so did the Essenes. They thought him a
noted liar who could not be believed without an oath.

5. The Pythagorians had their elders in singular respect; so had the Essenes:
the body or whole company of the Essenes were distinguished in four ranks or
orders, according to their seniority; and happily if any of the superior ranks
had touched any of the inferior, he thought himself polluted, as if he had
touched an heathen.

6. The Pythagorians drank water; so did the Essenes water only -- wholly
abstaining from wine.

7. The Pythagorians used inanimate sacrifices; so did the Essenes: they sent
gifts to the temple, and did not sacrifice, but preferred the use of their holy
water thereto; for which reason the other Jews sorbade them all access unto the
temple.

8. The Pythagorians ascribed all things to fate or destiny; so did the
Essenes. In this aphorism all three jewish sects differed each from other --
the Pharisees ascribed some things to fate, and other things to man's free will
-- the Essenes ascribed all to fate -- the Sadduces wholly denied fate, and
ascribed all things to man's free will.

9. The Pythagorians the first five years were not permitted to speak in the
school, but were initiated per quinque male silentium, and not until then
suffered to come into the presence of, or sight of Pythagoras. To this may be
referred the Essenes silence at table, straightly observed, so that december simul
sedentibus, nemo loquiter invitis novem -- Drusius renders it, that ten of them
sitting together, none of them spoke without leave obtained of the nine. When
any did speak, it was not their custom to interrupt him with words, but by nods
of the head or beckenings, or holding their finger, or shaking their heads, and
other suchlike dumb signs and gestures; to signify their doubtings, disliking,
or approving the matter in hand. And to the time of silence among the
Pythagorians, that it must be five years, may be referred the initiation of the
Essenes; for amongst them none were presently admitted into their society,
without full trial and four years probation. -- The first year they received
dolo^ellum, a spade; Perezoina, a pair of breeches used in bathing; and vestem
albam, a white garment which the sect affected. At this time they had their
commons allowed them, but without, not in the common dining hall. The second
year they admitted them to the participation of holy matters, and instructed
them in the use of them. Two years after they admitted them in full manner,
making them of their corporation, after they had received an oath truly to
observe all the rules and orders of the Essenes. If any brake his oath, one
hundred of them being assembled together, expelled him; upon which expulsion
commonly followed death within a short time: for none having once entered this
order, might receive alms or any meat from other; and themselves would feed
such a one only with distasteful herbs, which wasted his body, and brought it
very low. Sometimes they would re-admit such a one, being brought near unto
death; but commonly they suffered him to die in that manner.

10. The Essenes worshipped toward the Sun rising.

11. The Essenes bound themselves in their oath, to preserve the name of
angels:" the phrase implying a kind of worshipping of them.

12. They were above all others strict in the observation of the sabbath day:
-- on it they would dress no meat, kindle no fire, remove no vessels out of
their place, no nor ease nature; yea, they observed every seventh week a solemn
pentecost; seven pentecosts every year.

From the great similitude in the principles of the Pythagorians and Essenes,
it seems as if they were derived from one origin, varying in some few
particulars suitable to the constitutions of the people: and most probably they
first sprang from Egyptian tenets and maxims.


-- His maxims of morality were admirable, for he was for having the study of
philosophy solely tend to elevate man to a resemblance of the Deity. -- He
believed that God is a soul diffused through all nature, and that from him
human souls are derived: that they are immortal, and that men need only take
pains, to purge themselves of their vices, in order to be united to the Deity.
-- He made unity the principle of all things, and believed that between God and
man there are various orders of spiritual beings, who are the ministers of the
supreme will. -- He condemned all images of the Deity, and would have him
worshipped with as few ceremonies as possible -- His disciples brought all
their goods into a common stock -- contemned the pleasures of sense --
abstained from swearing -- eat nothing that had life -- and believed in the
doctrine of a metempsychosis or transmigration of souls.

Some eminent writers deny that Pythagoras taught that souls passed into brute
animals. Reuchlin, in particular, denies this doctrine, and maintains that the
metempsychosis of Pythagoras implied nothing more than a similitude of manners
and desires, formerly existing in some person deceased, and now reviving in
another alive.

PYTHAGORAS is said to have borrowed the notion of metempsychosis from the
Egyptians; others say from the ancient Brachmans.

LECTURE III. On the Rites, Ceremonies, and Institutions of the Ancients.
THE disciples of PYTHAGORAS were divided into two classes; the first were
SIMPLE HEARERS, and the LAST such as were allowed to propose their
difficulties, and learn the reasons of all that was taught. -- The figurative
manner in which he gave his instructions, was borrowed from the Hebrews,
Egyptians, and other orientals.

If we examine how MORALITY or moral philosophy is defined, we shall find that
it is a conformity to those unalterable obligations, which result from the
nature of our existence and the necessary relations of life; whether to God as
our creator, or to man as our fellow creature; -- or it is the doctrine of
virtue, in order to attain the greatest happiness.

PYTHAGORAS showed the way to SOCRATES, though his examples were very
imperfect, as he deduced his rules of morality from observations of nature; a
degree of knowledge which he had acquired in his communion with the priests of
Egypt. -- The chief aim of Pythagoras's moral doctrine, was to purge the mind
from the impurities of the body, and from the clouds of the imagination. -- His
morality seems to have had more purity and piety in it than the other systems,
but less exactness; his maxims being only a bare explication of divine worship,
of natural honesty, of modesty, integrity, public-spiritedness, and other
common offices of life.

SOCRATES improved the lessons of PYTHAGORAS, and reduced his maxims into sixed
principles.

PLATO refined the doctrine of both these philosophers, and carried each virtue
to its utmost height and accomplishment; mixing his ideas of the universal
principle of philosophy through the whole design.

The ancient masonic record [appendix] also says, that masons know the way of
gaining an understanding of ABRAC. -- On this word, all commentators (which I
have yet read) on the subject of MASONRY, have confessed themselves at a loss.

ABRAC, or ABRACAR, was a name which BASILIDES, a religious of the second
century, gave to GOD, who he said was the author of three hundred and
sixty-five.

The author of this superstition, is said to have lived in the time of Adrian,
and that it had its name after ABRASAN or ABRAXAS, the denomination which
Basilides gave to the Deity. -- He called him the SUPREME GOD, and ascribed to
him seven subordinate powers or angels, who presided over the heavens: -- and
also according to the number of the days in the year, he held that three
hundred and sixty-five virtues, powers, or intelligences, existed as the
emanations of God: the value, or numerical distinctions, of the letters in the
word, according to the ancient Greek numerals, made 365 -- A 1 3 P 100 A 1 60 A
1 S 200.

Amongst antiquaries, ABRAXAS is an antique gem or stone, with the word abraxas
engraven on it. -- There are a great many kinds of them, of various figures and
sizes, mostly as old as the third century. -- Persons professing the religious
principles of Basilides, wore this gem with great veneration, as an amulet;
from whose virtues, and the protection of the Deity, to whom it was
consecrated, and with whose name it was inscribed, the wearer derived health,
prosperity, and safety.

The annexed plate is from a drawing taken in the British Museum, of a gem
deposited there; is near twice the size of the original, which is engraved on a
beril stone, of the form of an egg. The head is in camio, the reverse in
taglio. The head is supposed to represent the image of the Creator, under the
denomination of Jupiter Ammon: Jupiter Ammon, a name given to the supreme
Deity, and who was worshipped under the symbol of the Sun. He was painted with
horns, because with the astronomers the sign Aries in the zodiac is the
beginning of the year: when the sun enters into the house of Aries, he
commences his annual course. Heat, in the Hebrew tongue Hammah, in the prophet
Isaiah Hammamin, is given as a name of such images. The error of depicting him
with horns, grew from the doubtful signification of the Hebrew word, which at
once expresses heat, splendor, or brightness, and also horns.

The sun was also worshipped by the house of Judah, under the name of Tamuz,
for Tamuz, says Hierom, was Adonis, and Adonis is generally interpreted the
sun, from the Hebrew word Adon, signifying dominus, the same as Baal or Moloch
formerly did the lord or prince of the planets. The month which we call June,
was by the Hebrews called Tamuz; and the entrance of the sun into the sign
Cancer, was in the Jews astronomy termed Tekupha Tamuz, the revolution of
Tamuz. -- About the time of our Savior the Jews held it unlawful to pronounce
that essential name of God Jehovah, and instead thereof read Adonai, to prevent
the heathen blaspheming that holy name, by the adoption of the name of Jove,
etc. to the idols. -- Concerning Adonis, whom some ancient authors call Osiris,
there are two things remarkable; (...), the death or loss of Adonis, and (...),
the finding of him again: as there was great lamentation at his loss, so was
there great joy at his finding. By the death or loss of Adonis, we are to
understand the departure of the sun; by his finding again, the return of that
luminary. Now he seems to depart twice in the year; first when he is in the
tropic of Cancer, in the farthest degree northward, and secondly when he is in
the tropic of Capricorn, in the furthest degree southward. Hence we may note,
that the Egyptians celebrated their Adonia in the month of November, when the
sun began to be farthest southward, and the house of Judah theirs in the month
of June, when the sun was farthest northward; yet both were for the same
reasons. Some authors say, that this lamentation was performed over an image in
the night season; and when they had sufficiently lamented, a candle was brought
into the room, which ceremony might mystically denote the return of the sun,
then the priest with a soft voice muttered this form of words, Trust ye in God,
for out of pains salvation is come unto us. Godwyn's Moses and Aaron.
-- the sun and moon on the reverse, the OSIRIS AND ISIS of the Egyptians; and
were used hierographically to represent the omnipotence, omnipresence, and
eternity of God -- The star Our next inquiry is, what idol was meant by Chiun
and Remphau, otherwise in ancient copies called Repham. By Chiun we are to
understand Hercules, who in the Egyptian language was called Chon. By Repham we
are to understand the same Hercules; for Rephaim in holy tongue signifies
giant. By Hercules we may understand the planet of the sun. There are
etymologists that derive Hercules's name from the Hebrew Hiercol, illuminavit
omnia: the Greek etymology (...), aeris gloria, holds correspondency with the
Hebrew, and both signify that universal light which flows from the sun, as
water from a fountain. Porphyry interprets Hercules's twelve labors, so
often mentioned by the poets, to be nothing else but the twelve signs of the
zodiac, through which the sun passes yearly. But some may question whether the
name of Hercules was ever known to the Jews? It is probable it was, for
Hercules was God of the Tyrians, from whom the Jews learned much idolatry, as
being their near neighbors. It is apparent, that in the time of the Maccabees
the name was commonly known unto them; for Jason the high priest sent three
hundred drachmes of silver to the sacrifice of Hercules, 2 Mac. iv. 19. -- The
star of Remphau is thought to be the star which was painted in the forehead of
Molech; neither was it unusual for the heathen to paint their idols with such
symbolica additamenta. Godwyn's Moses and Aaron. The Egyptian Apis was to bear
such mark.


seems to be used as a point only, but is an emblem of PRUDENCE, the third
emanation of the Basilidian divine person. -- The scorpion, I own myself
doubtful of the implication of these hieroglyphics: I am inclined to believe
the whole of them implied the tenets of the Egyptian philosophy; -- that the
scorpion represents Egypt, being her ruling sign in the zodiac; -- and that the
serpent represents a religious tenet. The learned Mr. Bryant proves to us, that
it was adopted amongst the ancients as the most sacred and salutary symbol, and
rendered a chief object of adoration; in so much that the worship of the
serpent prevailed so, that many places as well as people received their names
from thence.


in hieroglyphics, represented malice and wicked subtlety, and the serpent --
The corruptions flowing from the Egyptian philosophy, when adapted to
christianity, were these: They held that the God of the Jews was the Demiurgus:
that to overthrow and subvert the power and dominion of this Demiurgus, Jesus,
one of the celestial Aeons, was sent by the supreme Being to enter into the
body of the man Christ, in the shape of a dove: that Christ by his miracles and
sufferings, subverted the kingdom of the Demiurgus; but when he came to suffer,
the Aeon Jesus carried along with him the soul of Christ, and left behind upon
the cross, only his body and animal spirit: that the serpent who deceived Eve,
ought to be honored, for endeavoring to rescue man from their slavery to the
Demiurgus. Key to the New Testament.
an heretic; -- the implication whereof seems to be, that heresy, the
subtleties and vices of infidels, and the devotees of satan, were subdued by
the knowledge of the true God; -- the description I own myself at a loss how to
decipher; the characters are imperfect, or ill copied. I have obtained two
constructions of the inscription on the Abrax. The one is, The earth shall
praise thee, 1305, purporting the date of the sculpture. -- This date can have
no relation to the christian era; Basilides existed in the earliest age of
christianity, and the ensignae with which the gem is engraven, have relation,
most evidently, to the Egyptian philosophy; which renders it probable this
antique owes its creation to very remote ages. The other construction, without
noticing the numerals, is Terra declarat laudem magnificientiamque tuam. Both
these gentlemen say the characters are very rude and imperfect.

As to the numerals, computing the date from the deluge, it will relate to that
remarkable era of David's conquest of Jerusalem, and settling the empire and
royal seat there. The descendants of Ham would probably take their date from
the departure of Noah's sons from the ark.




The MOON, with divines, is an hieroglyphic of the CHRISTIAN CHURCH, who
compared I. C. to the SUN, and the CHURCH to the MOON, as receiving all its
beauty and splendor from him.

In church history, ABRAX is noted as a mystical term, expressing the supreme
God; under whom the Basilidians supposed three hundred and sixty-five dependant
Deities: -- it was the principle of the gnostic hierarchy; whence sprang their
multitudes of thaeons. -- From ABRAXAS proceeded their PRIMOGAENIAL MIND; --
from the primogaenial mind, the LOGOS or word; -- from the logos, the
PHRONAESIS or prudence; -- from phronaesis, SOPHIA and DYNAMIS, or wisdom and
strength; -- from these two proceeded PRINCIPALITIES, POWERS, AND ANGELS; and
from these other angels, of the number of three hundred and sixty-five, who
were supposed to have the government of so many celestial orbs committed to
their care. -- The GNOSTICS Of the gentiles who were converted to christianity,
the most dangerous and pernicious kind, were those who were infected with the
Egyptian philosophy; a system, as it was then taught, entirely chimerical and
absurd. The christians of this sort assumed to themselves the name of Gnostics;
a word of Greek extraction, implying in it a knowledge of things much superior
to that of other men. This word does not occur in the New Testament; but the
Nicolaitans made mention of in the apocalypse of St. John, seem to have been of
the gnostic sect; and most of the errors maintained by Cerinthus, and opposed
in the gospel of St John, may be derived from the same source. When we say the
gentile converts were chiefly liable to the gnostic infection, we must not be
understood to exclude those of the jewish race, many of whom were tainted with
it, but they seem to have derived it from the Essenes. The maintainers of the
Egyptian philosophy held, that the Supreme Being, the infinitely perfect and
happy, was not the creator of the universe, nor the alone independent Being:
for, according to them, matter too was eternal. The Supreme Being, who resides
in the immensity of space, which they call Pteroma or fullness, produced from
himself, say they, other immortal and spiritual natures, styled by them Aeons,
who filled the residence of the Deity with beings similar to themselves. Of
these beings some were placed in the higher regions, others in the lower. Those
in the lower regions, were nighest to the place of matter, which originally was
an inert and formless mass, till one of them, without any commission from the
Deity, and merely to show his own dexterity, reduced it into form and order,
and enlivened some parts of it with animal spirit. The being who achieved all
this they called the Demiurgus, the operator, artificer, or workman; but such
was the perverseness of matter, that when brought into form, it was the source
of all evil. The Supreme Being, therefore, never intended to have given it a
form, but as that had been now done, he, in order to prevent mischief as much
as possible, added to the animal spirit of many of the enlivened parts rational
powers. The parts to whom rational powers were thus given, were the original
parents of the human race; the other animated parts were the brute creation.
Unluckily, however, the interposition of the Supreme Being was in vain; for the
Demiurgus grew so aspiring, that he seduced men from their allegiance to the
Supreme Being, and diverted all their devotion to himself. Key to the New
Testament.
were a sect of christians having particular tenets of faith, -- they assumed
their name to express that new knowledge and extraordinary light to which they
made pretensions; the word gnostic implying an enlightened person.

The gnostic hierarchy here pointed out, represents to us the degrees of
etherial persons or emanations of the Deity. -- This leads me to consider the
hierarchy of the christian church in its greatest antiquity, which in the most
remote times, as a society, consisted of several orders of men, (viz.) RULERS,
BELIEVERS, and CATECHUMENS: the rulers were bishops, priests, and deacons; the
believers were perfect christians, and the catechumens imperfect.

Catechumens were candidates for baptism. -- They were admitted to the state of
catechumen by the imposition of hands, and the sign of the cross. -- Their
introduction to baptism was thus singular: -- Some days before their admission,
they went veiled; and it was customary to touch their ears, saying, BE OPENED;
and also to anoint their eyes with clay: both ceremonies being in imitation of
our Savior's practice, and intended to shadow out to the candidates their
ignorance and blindness before their initiation. They continued in the state of
catechumen, until they proved their proficiency in the catechistic exercises,
when they were advanced to the second state, as believers.

As the DRUIDS Tacitus says, among the Britains, there is to be seen in their
ceremonies and superstitious persuasions, an apparent conformity with the
Gauls. Both nations had their Druidae, as both Caesar and Tacitus evidence; of
whom Caesar thus records: "The Druidae are present at all divine service;
they are the overseers of public and private sacrifices, and the interpreters
of religious rites and ceremonies. They are the preceptors of youth, who pay
them the highest honor and esteem. They determine all controversies, both
public and private. In the cases of heinous offenses, murder, or manslaughter,
they judge of the matter, and give rewards, or decree penalties, and
punishments. They determine disputes touching inheritance and boundaries of
lands. If either private person or body politic obey not their decree, they
debar them from religious ceremonies, as excommunicate; which is esteemed by
this people as a grievous punishment. Whoever are under this interdict are
esteemed wicked and impious persons, and are avoided by all men, as fearing
contagion from them: they have no benefit of the law, and are incapacitated
from holding any public office. Of the Druidae there is a chief, who has the
greatest authority amongst them: at his death the most excellent person amongst
them is elected as his successor; but upon any contest the voice of the Druidae
is required; -- sometimes the contest is determined by arms. -- They at a
certain season of the year hold a solemn session within a consecrated place in
the Marches of the Carmites (near Charhes, in France): hither resort, as unto
the term, from all parts, all persons having controversies or suits at law; and
the decree and judgment there delivered is religiously obeyed. Their learning
and profession is thought to have been first devised in Britain, and so from
thence translated into France: and in these days they that desire more
competent learning therein, go thither for instruction. The Druids are free
from tributes and service in war; and like these immunities, are they also
exempt from all state impositions. Many, excited by such rewards, resort to
them to be instructed. It is reported, they learn by heart many verses. They
continue under this discipline for certain years, it being unlawful to commit
any of their doctrines to writing. Other matters which they trust to writing,
is written in the Greek alphabet. This order they have established, I presume,
for two reasons; because they would not have their doctrines divulged, nor
their pupils, by trusting to their books, neglect the exercise of the memory.
This one point they are principally anxious to inculcate to their scholars,
that man's soul is immortal, and after death that it passes from one man to
another. They presume by this doctrine men will contemn the fear of death, and
be steadfast in the exercise of virtue. Moreover, concerning the stars and their
motions, the greatness of heaven and earth, the nature of things, the power and
might of the Eternal Divinity, they give many precepts to their pupils.

From Pliny we learn, The Druidae (for so they call their diviners, wisemen,
and priests) esteem nothing in the world more sacred than misleto, and the tree
which produces it, if it be an oak. The priests choose groves of oak for their
divine service: they solemnize no sacrifice, nor celebrate any sacred
ceremonies with the branches and leaves of oak; from whence they may seem to
claim the name of Dryidae in Greek. Whatsoever they find growing to that tree,
besides its own proper produce, they esteem it as a gift sent from heaven, and
a sure sign that the Deity whom they serve has chosen that peculiar tree. No
wonder that misleto is so revered, for it is scarce and difficult to be found;
but when they do discover it, they gather it very devoutly, and with many
ceremonies. To that end they observe that the moon be just six days old, for on
that day their months and new years commence, and also their several ages,
which have their revolutions every thirty years. They call the misleto
all-heal, for they have an opinion that it is an universal remedy against all
diseases When they are about to gather it, after they have duly prepared their
sacrifices and festivals under the tree, they bring thither two young bullocks,
milk-white, whose horns are then, and not before, bound up: this done, the
priest arrayed in a surplice or white vesture, climbeth the tree, and with a
golden bill cutteth off the misleto, which those beneath receive in a white
cloth: they then stay the beasts for sacrifice, pronouncing many orisons and
prayers, " that it would please God to bless these his gifts, to their good on
whom he had bestowed them."


were a set of religious peculiar to GAUL AND BRITAIN, it may not be improper
to cast our eyes on the ceremonies they used: their antiquity and peculiar
station, render it probable some of their rites and institutions might be
retained, in forming the ceremonies of our society. -- In so modern an era as
one thousand one hundred and forty, they were reduced to a regular body of
religious, in France, and built a college in the city of Orleans. -- They were
heretofore one of the two estates of France, to whom were committed the care of
providing sacrifices, of prescribing laws for worship, and deciding
controversies concerning rights and properties.

In the greatest antiquity in ancient Gaul and Britain, they were elected out
of the best families, and were held both from the honors of their birth and
office in the greatest veneration. Their study was astrology, geometry, natural
history, politics, and geography: they had the administration of all sacred
things, were the interpreters of religion, and the judges of all matters
indifferently. -- They had a chief or arch-druid in every country. -- They had
the tutorage of youth, and taught them many verses, which they caused them to
learn by heart, without the assistance of writing; in which manner they
instructed them in the mysteries of their religion, the sciences, and politics.
-- At the conclusion of each year they held a general festival and assembly, in
which they paid their adoration, and offered gifts to the GOD OF NATURE,
bringing with them misleto and branches of oaks; in mystic verses supplicating
for approaching spring, and the renewing year. -- At their sacrifices, I cannot
quit the subject of the Druids, worship, without taking notice of the charge
made against them by Solinus and Dio Cassius, that they offered human victims
or men's flesh in their sacrifices. -- If we examine this charge with candor,
we will not impute to them so great an offense against the God of Nature and
Humanity as appears at first fight: they were judges of all matters civil and
religious; they were the executors of the law: as being the ministers of God,
to them was committed the administration of justice. I shall admit that they
used human sacrifices, but those sacrificed were criminals; were offenders
against society, obnoxious to the world for their sins, and adjudged to be
deserving of death for their heinous wickedness. The great attribute of God, to
which they paid the most religious deference, was justice: -- to the God of
Justice they offered up those offenders who had sinned against his laws: --
punishments by death were of very early date, and such punishments have never
been esteemed a stigma on the states in which they were used. -- Such
executions, by the Druids, were at once designed as punishments and examples:
the utmost solemnity, and the most hallowed rites, preceded and prepared this
tremendous exhibition, to impress on the minds of the spectators the deepest
religious reverence; and the utmost horror of the sufferings, and detestation
of the crimes for which they suffered, were endeavored to be instilled into
the hearts of those who were present at this execution, by the doctrine of the
Druids. The criminals were shut up in an effigy of wicker work, of a gigantic
size, in whose chambers of tribulation they suffered an ignominious death, by
burning. -- This effigy represented the Tyrian Hercules, whose name of Remphan,
in the Hebrew tongue, implies a giant. -- With him came the Phoenicians to this
land, from whom the Amonian rites and Hebrew customs were taught to the Druids.
-- Under his name, worship was also paid to the God of Nature, symbolized by
the sun. -- In honor and commemoration of him, the criminals were committed to
his effigy, as being delivered up to the God of Justice.


and in their religious offices, they wore white apparel; and the victims were
two white bulls. -- They opened a sessions once a year, in a certain
consecrated place, in which all causes were tried and determined. -- They
worshipped one supreme God, immense and infinite; but would not confine their
worship to temples built with human hands; professing the universe was the
temple of the Deity; esteeming any other inconsistent with his attributes. --
Their whole law and religion were taught in verse. -- Some Druids spent twenty
years in learning to repeat those sacred and scientific distichs, which it was
forbidden to commit to writing; by which means they were withheld from the
vulgar. Such was the aversion and enmity entertained by the Romans against the
Druids, that (as Suctonius says) their rites were prohibited by Augustus, and
totally abolished by Claudius Caesar.

Many probable conjectures have been made, that the Phoenicians When we speak
of the Phoenicians, we must distinguish the times with accuracy. These people
possessed originally a large extent of countries, comprised under the name of
the land of Canaan. They lost the greatest part of it, by the conquests of the
Israelites under Joshua. The lands which fell in division to the tribe of
Asher, extended to Sydon; that city notwithstanding was not subdued. If the
conquests of Joshua took from the Phoenicians a great part of their dominion,
they were well paid by the consequences of that event. In effect, the greatest
part of the ancient inhabitants of Palestine, seeing themselves threatened with
entire destruction, had recourse to flight to save themselves. Sidon offered
them an Asylum. By this irruption of the Hebrew people, the Sidonians were
enabled to send colonies where ever they thought proper. Sidon lent them ships,
and made good use of these new inhabitants, to extend their trade and form
settlements. From hence that great number of colonies, which went then from
Phoenicia, to spread themselves in all the country of Africa and Europe. -- We
may date this event about the year of the world two thousand five hundred and
fifty-three, and one thousand four hundred and fifty-one years before Christ.

Spain was not the only country beyond the pillars of Hercules which the
Phoenicians penetrated. Being familiarized with the navigation of the ocean,
they extended themselves to the left of the Straits of Cadiz as far as the
right. -- Stabo assures, that these people had gone over a part of the western
coast of Africa a little time after the war of Troy.

We might perhaps determine their passage into England, by a reflection which
the reading of the writers of antiquity furnishes us with: they are persuaded
that all the tin that was consumed in the known world came from the isles of
Cassitorides; and there is no doubt that these isles were the Sorlingues, and a
part of Cornwall. We see by the books of Moses, that in his time tin was known
in Palestine. Homer teaches us also, that they made use of this metal in the
heroic ages. It should follow then, that the Phoenicians had traded in England
in very remote antiquity.

De Goguer, on the Origin of Arts and Sciences.


visited this land in very early ages. -- It has been attempted to be proved,
from the similarity of the habit worn, and staff carried, by the western
Britons. -- This staff was used by the Druids, and has the name of Diogenes'
staff. In a description given by Mr Seldom, of some statues of Druids which
were dug up at Wichtelberg, in Germany, it is particularly mentioned. -- The
Phoenicians most probably introduced to those teachers, the laws and customs
known amongst the ancient Hebrews, and specified in the Levitical institutions.
-- The altars or temples of the Druids, and also their obelisks, or monuments
of memorable events, of which many remains are to be seen at this day, bear the
greatest similarity to those mentioned in the Old Testament: Genesis xxviii. 16.
And Jacob awaked out of his sleep, and said, Surely the Lord is in this place,
and I knew it not. -- Ver. 17. And he was afraid, and said, How dreadful is
this place! this is none other but the house of God, and this is the gate of
heaven. -- Ver. 18. And Jacob rose up early in the morning, and took the stone
that he had put for his pillow, and set it up for a pillar, and poured oil upon
the top of it. -- Ver. 22. And this stone, which I have set up for a pillar,
shall be God's house. -- Exodus xx. 25. And if thou will make me an altar of
stone, thou shall not build it of hewn stone; for if thou lift up thy tool upon
it, thou have polluted it. -- Exodus xxiv. 4. And Moses wrote all the words of
the Lord, and rose up early in the morning, and builded an altar under the
hill, and twelve pillars according to the twelve tribes of Israel. -- Ver. 5.
And he sent young men of the children of Israel, which offered burnt-offerings,
and sacrificed peace offerings of oxen unto the Lord. -- Deuteronomy xxvii. 2.
And it shall be on the day when ye shall pass over Jordan unto the Land which
the Lord thy God gives thee, that thou shall set thee up great stones. -- Ver.
4. Therefore it shall be when ye be gone over Jordan, that ye shall set up
these stones, which I command you this day in Mount Ebal. -- Ver. 5. And there
thou shall build an altar unto the Lord thy God, an altar of stones: thou shall
not lift up any iron tool upon them. -- Ver. 6. Thou shall build the altar of
the Lord thy God of whole stones, and thou shall offer burnt-offerings thereon
unto the Lord thy God. -- It was usual to give those places the name of the
house of the Lord, 1 Chro. xxii. 1. This is the house of the Lord God, and this
is the altar of the burnt-offering for Israel. -- This is said of the altar
erected by David, where afterward the brazen altar stood in Solomon's temple.

The oak Diodorus Siculus terms the Gaulish priests (...), which betokens
the oak.

Bryant, in his Analysis, speaking of those who held the Amonian rites, says,
In respect to the names which this people, in process of time, conferred either
upon the deities they worshipped, or upon the cities which they founded, we
shall find them either made up of the names of those personages, or else of the
titles with which they were in process of time honored. He proceeds to class
those, and reduce them to radicals, as he terms them, and inter alias gives the
monofyllable (...), Sar. -- Under the word Sar, says he, we are taught, that as
oaks were styled Saronides, so likewise were the ancient Druids, by whom the
oak was held sacred. -- This is the title which was given to the priests of
Gaul, as we are informed by Diodorus Siculus; and as a proof how far the
Amonian religion was extended, and how little we know of druidical worship,
either in respect to its essence or its origin. Bryant's Analysis of Ancient
Mythology.

Maximus Tyrius says, the Celts (or Gauls) worshipped Jupiter, whose symbol or
sign is the highest oak.

The Saxons called their sages (...), from the Druids.


was held sacred by the Druids, under whose branches they assembled and held
their solemn rites. -- The oak and groves of oak were also held in great
veneration by the Hebrews and other ancient nations, as appears by Deuteronomy
xii. 2, 3. -- Judges vi. 19. -- 1 Kings xviii. 19. -- 2 Kings xxi. 37. -- 2 Chronicles. xv. 16, 17. -- Deuteron. vii. 5. and xvi. 21. -- Exodus xxxiv. 13. --
Judges iii. 7. Deuteronomy xii. 2, 3. Ye shall utterly destroy all the places
wherein the nations which ye shall possess served their Gods, upon the high
mountains, and upon the hills, and under every green tree. And ye shall
overthrow their altars, and break their pillars, and burn their groves with
fire, and ye shall hew down the graven images of their gods, and destroy the
names of them out of that place. Judges vi. 19. The flesh he put in a basket,
and he put the broth in a pot, and he brought it out unto him under the oak,
and presented it. 1 Kings xviii. 19. And the prophets of the groves four
hundred. 2 Kings xxi. 3. For he built up again the high places, which Hezekiah
his father had destroyed, and he reared up altars for Baal, and made a grove,
as did Ahab King of Israel, and worshipped all the host of heaven, and served
them. Ver. 7. And he set a graven image of the grove which he had made, etc. 2 Chronicles. xv. 16. He removed her from being queen, because she had made an idol in
a grove. Ver. 17. But the high places were not taken away out of Israel.
Deuteronomy vii. 5. Ye shall all destroy their altars, and break down their
images, and cut down their groves, and burn their graven images with fire. Cha.
xvi. ver. 21. Thou shall not plant the grove of any trees near unto the altar
of the Lord thy God. Exodus xxxiv. 13. But ye shall destroy their altars, break
their images, and cut down their groves. Judges iii. 7. And the children of
Israel, etc. served Baalim, and the groves.
Isaiah i. 29. They shall be ashamed of the oaks which they have desired. --
The French Magi held the (...) or oak in great veneration: Plin. Not. Hist.
-- the Celtae revered the oak as a type or emblem of Jupiter. Maximus Tyrius.


I have been thus particular on this subject, as it encourages a conjecture,
that the Druids gained their principles and maxims from the Phoenicians, as
appears from those capital similarities before remarked: In the plain of
Tormore, in the isle of Arran, are the remains of four circles. By the number
of the circles, and by their sequestered situation, this seems to have been
sacred ground. These circles were formed for religious purposes: Boethius
relates, that Mainus, son of Fergus I. a restorer and cultivator of religion,
after the Egyptian manner, (as he calls it) instituted several new and solemn
ceremonies; and caused great stones to be placed in form of a circle: the
largest was situated toward the south, and served as an altar for the
sacrifices to the immortal gods. Boethius, lib. 11. pa. 15. Boethius is right in
part of his account: the object of the worship was the sun: and what confirms
this, is the situation of the altar, pointed toward that luminary in his
meridian glory. Pennant's Voyage to the Hebrides.
and thence it may be conceived, they also received from them the doctrines of
Moses; and the original principles of wisdom and truth, as delivered down from
the earliest ages.

The oak hierogliphically represents strength, virtue, and constancy, and
sometimes longevity: -- under these symbolic characters, it might be revered by
the Druids: and the misletoe, which they held in the utmost veneration, has
excellent medicinal qualities, which in those days of ignorance, might form the
chief of their materia medica; being a remedy for epilepsies and all nervous
disorders, to which the Britons in those ages might be peculiarly subject, from
the woodiness of the country, the noxious respiration proceeding from large
forests, the moisture of the air from extensive uncultivated lands, and the
maritime situation of this country.

From all these religious institutions, rites, customs, and ceremonies, which
bear in many degrees a striking similarity to those of this society, we may
naturally conjecture, that the founders of our present maxims, had in view the
most ancient race of christians, as well as the first professors of the worship
of the God of Nature. Our ancient record, which I have mentioned, brings us
positive evidence of the Pythagorian doctrine, and Basilidian principles,
making the foundation of our religious and moral rules. -- The following
lectures will elucidate these assertions, and will enable us, I hope, with no
small degree of certainty, to prove our original principles.

LECTURE IV. The Nature of the Lodge.
I Now take upon me to prove my first proposition, and to show that the first
state of a MASON is representative of the first stage of the worship of the
true God.

The LODGE, when revealed to an entering mason, discovers to him A
REPRESENTATION OF THE WORLD; The proportion of the measures of the tabernacle
proved it to be an imitation of the system of the world; for that third part
thereof which was within the four pillars to which the priests were not
admitted, is as at were an heaven peculiar to God: but the space of the twenty
cubits, is as it were sea and land, on which men live: and so this part is
peculiar to the priests only.

When Moses distinguished the tabernacle into three parts, and allowed two of
them to the priests, as a place accessible and common, he denoted the land and
the sea; for these are accessible to all. But when he set apart the third
division for God, it was because heaven is inaccessible to men. And when he
ordered twelve loaves to be set on the table, he denoted the year, as
distinguished into so many months. And when he made the candlestick of seventy
parts, he secretly intimated the decani, or seventy divisions of the planets.
And as to the seven lamps upon the candlesticks, they referred to the course of
the planets, of which that is the number. And for the veils, which were
composed of four things, they declared the four elements. For the fine linen,
was proper to signify the earth, because the flax grows out of the earth. The
purple signified the sea, because that color is dyed by the blood of a sea
shell fish. The blue is fit to signify the air, and the scarlet will naturally
be an indication of fire. Now the vestment of the high priest being made of
linen, signified the earth; the blue denoted the sky, being like lightning in
its pomegranates, and in the noise of the bells resembling thunder. And for the
ephod, it showed that God had made the universe of four elements; and as for
the gold interwoven, I suppose it related to the splendor by which all things
are enlightened. He also appointed the breast plate to be placed in the middle
of the ephod, to resemble the earth; and the girdle which encompassed the high
priest round, signified the ocean. Each of the sardonyxes declares to us the
sun and the moon; those I mean that were in the nature of buttons on the high
priest's shoulders. And for the twelve stones, whether we understand by them
the months, or whether we understand the like number of the signs of that
circle which the Greeks call the zodiac, we shall not be mistaken in their
meaning. And for the mitre, which was of a blue color, it seems to me to mean
heaven; for how otherwise could the name of God be inscribed upon it? That it
was also illustrated with a crown, and that of gold also, is because of that
splendor with which God is pleased.

Josephus Antiq. Jud. cha. 7. In another place Josephus says, the candlestick
was emblematical of the seven days of creation and rest.

The tabernacle set up by the Israelites in the desert, may nevertheless give
some ideas of the manner in which, at that time, the Egyptian temples were
constructed. I believe really, that there must have been some relation between
the taste which reigned in these edifices and the tabernacle. The tabernacle,
though only a vast tent, had a great relation with architecture. We ought to
look upon it as a representation of the temples and palaces of the East. Let us
recollect what we have said before of the form of government of the Hebrews.
The Supreme being was equally their God and King. The tabernacle was erected
with a view to answer to that double title. The Israelites went there sometimes
to adore the Almighty, and sometimes to receive the orders of their sovereign,
present in a sensible manner in the presence of his people. I think then we
ought to look upon the tabernacle, as a work which God would have, that the
structure should have relation with the edifices destined in the East, whether
for the worship of the Gods, or the habitation of Kings. The whole construction
of the tabernacle presented moreover, the model of an edifice, regular and
distributed with much skill. All the dimensions and proportions appeared to
have beeen observed with care, and perfectly well adapted. DE GOGUET.
in which, from the wonders of nature, we are led to contemplate her great
original, and worship him for his mighty works; and we are thereby also moved,
to exercise those moral and social virtues, which become mankind, as the
servants of the great architect of the world; in whose image we were formed in
the beginning.

The CREATOR, designing to bless man's estate on earth, has opened the hand of
his divine benevolence with good gifts; -- he has spread over the world the
illumined canopy of heaven; -- the covering of the tabernacle, and the veil of
the temple at Jerusalem, were representations of the celestial hemisphere, and
were "of blue, of crimson, and purple;" and such is the covering of the lodge.
2 Chronicles. iii. 14. And he made the veil of blue, and purple, and crimson, and
fine linen, and wrought cherubims thereon. See also Josephus.


-- As an emblem of God's power, his goodness, omnipresence, and eternity, the
lodge is adorned with the image of the SUN; Besides what is already noted
touching the Amonian rights and the worship of the sun, the doctrine of the
Magians was, "the Original Intelligence, who is the first principle of all
things, discovers himself to the mind and understanding only, but he has
placed the sun as his image in the visible universe, and the beams of that
bright luminary are but a faint copy of the glory that shines in the higher
heavens. It appears to the man studying nature, that the sun is the most
probable place in the universe for the throne of the Deity; from whence are
diffused throughout creation, light and heat: a subtle essence inexhausting,
and self-subsisting -- conveying, or in themselves being, the operative spirits
which conduct the works of God through all the field of nature.

Psalm civ. 1. Bless the Lord, O my soul. O Lord, my God, thou art very great,
thou art clothed with honor and majesty. Ver. 2. Who coverest thyself with
light, as with a garment. Ver. 3. Who makes the clouds his chariot, who
walks upon the wings of the wind. Ver. 4. Who makes his angels spirits, and
his "ministers a flaming fire."


which he ordained to arise from the East, and open the day; thereby calling
forth the people of the earth to their worship, and exercise in the walks of
virtue.

The great author of all has given the MOON to govern the night; a fit season
for solemn meditation. -- When the labors of the day are ended, and man's mind
is abstracted from the cares of life, then it is for our souls recreation to
walk forth, with contemplative mind, to read the great works of the Almighty in
the starry firmament, and in the innumerable worlds which are governed by his
will; and thence to meditate on his omnipotence. O majestic night!
Nature's great ancestor! day's elder born!
And fated to survive the transient sun!
By mortals, and immortals, seen with awe!
A starry crown thy raven brow adorns,
An azure zone thy waist; clouds in heaven's loom
Wrought through varieties of shape and shade,
In ample folds of drapery divine,
Thy flowing mantle form, and heaven throughout
Voluminously pour thy pompous train.
Thy gloomy grandeurs (nature's most august
Inspiring aspect) claim a grateful verse;
And like a fable curtain starr'd with gold,
Drawn over my labors past shall close the scene!
Young's Night Thoughts.
-- Our thoughts returning from this glorious scene toward ourselves, we
discern the diminutiveness of man, and by a natural inference, confess the
benevolence of that God, who regards us (such minute atoms) in the midst of
his mighty works; whose UNIVERSAL LOVE is thus divinely expressed, that not a
sparrow shall fall without your father; but the very hairs of your head are all
numbered.

When the world was under the hands of her great architect, she remained dark
and without form; but the divine fiat was no sooner pronounced, than behold
there was light Silence, ye troubled waves, and thou deep, peace,
Said then the omnisic word, your discord end:
Nor stayed, but on the wings of cherubim
Uplifted in paternal glory rode
Far into Chaos, and the world unborn;
For Chaos heard his voice: him all his train
Followed in bright procession, to behold
Creation and the wonders of his might.
Then stayed the servid wheels, and in his hand
He took the golden compasses, prepared
In God's eternal store, to circumscribe
This universe and all created things:
One foot he centered, and the other turned
Round through the vast profundity obscure,
And said, thus far extend, thus far thy bounds,
This be thy just circumference, O world.
Let there be Light, said God, and forthwith light
Ethereal, first of things, quintessence pure
Sprung from the deep, and from her native east
To journey through the aerie gloom began,
Spher'd in a radiant cloud, for yet the Sun
Was not; she in a cloudy tabernacle
Sojourned the while.
-- Thus was the first day even and morn:
Nor past uncelebrated, nor unsung
By the caelestial quires, when orient Light
Exhaling first from darkness they beheld
Birthday of heaven and earth; with joy and shout
The hollow universal orb they filled,
And touched their golden harps, and hymning praised
God and his works, Creator, him they sung.
Milton's Par. Lost.
-- creation was delivered from darkness, and the sun shot forth instantaneous
rays over the face of the earth. -- He gave that great constellation to the
espousal of nature, and vegetation sprang from the embrace; the moon yielded
her influence to the waters, and attraction begat the tides.

Remembering the wonders in the beginning, we claiming the auspicious
countenance of heaven on our virtuous deeds, assume the figures of the SUN and
MOON, as emblematical of the great LIGHT OF TRUTH discoverd to the first men;
and thereby implying, that as true masons, we stand redeemed from darkness, and
are become the sons of LIGHT: acknowledging in our profession, our adoration of
him, who gave LIGHT unto his works. Let us then by our practice and conduct in
life show, that we carry our emblems worthily; and as the children of LIGHT,
that we have turned our backs on works of DARKNESS, OBSCENITY and DRUNKENNESS,
HATRED and MALICE, SATAN and his DOMINIONS; preferring CHARITY, BENEVOLENCE,
JUSTICE, TEMPERANCE, CHASTITY, and BROTHERLY LOVE, as the acceptable service on
which the GREAT MASTER OF ALL, from his beatitude, looks down with approbation.

The same divine hand, pouring forth bounteous gifts, which has blessed us
with the sight of his glorious works in the heavens, has also spread the earth
with a beauteous carpet: he has wrought it in various colors; fruits and
flowers, pastures and meads, golden furrows of corn, and shady dells, mountains
skirted by nodding forests, and valleys flowing with milk and honey: -- he has
wrought it "as it were in mosaic work," giving a pleasing variety to the eye of
man: -- he has poured upon us his gifts, in abundance; not only the
necessaries of life, but also wine to gladden the heart of man, and oil to give
him a cheerful countenance: and that he might still add beauty to the scene of
life wherein he has placed us, his highly-favoured creatures, he has skirted
and bordered the earth with the ocean; -- for the wise Creator having made man
in his own image, not meaning in the likeness of his person, but spiritually,
by breathing into his nostrils the breath of life, and inspiring him with that
resemblance of the divinity, AN INTELLECTUAL SPIRIT. He skirted the land with
the ocean, not only for that salubrity which should be derived from its
agitation, but also that to the genius of man, a communication should be opened
to all the quarters of the earth; and that by mutual intercourse, men might
unite in mutual good works, and all become as members of one society. These
subjects are represented in the flooring of the lodge.

The universe is the TEMPLE of the Deity whom we serve: -- WISDOM, STRENGTH,
and BEAUTY are about his throne, as the pillars of his works; for his wisdom is
infinite, his strength is in omnipotence, and beauty stands forth through all
his creation in symmetry and order: -- he has stretched forth the heavens as a
canopy, and the earth he has planted as his footstool: -- he crowns his
temples with the stars, as with a diadem, and in his hand he extends the
power and the glory: -- the SUN and MOON are messengers of his will, and all
his law is CONCORD. -- The pillars supporting the lodge are representative of
these divine powers.

A LODGE, where perfect masons are assembled, represents these works of the
Deity.

We place the spiritual lodge in the vale of JEHOSOPHAT, implying thereby, that
the principles of masonry are derived from the knowledge of God, and are
established in the JUDGMENT OF THE LORD; the literal translation of the word
JEHOSOPHAT, from the Hebrew tongue, being no other than those express words. --
The highest hills At length to beautify those holy hills, the places of the
idolatrous worship, they beset them with trees, and hence came the consecration
of groves and woods, from which their idols many times were named. -- At last
some choice and select trees began to be consecrated. Those French Magi termed
Dryadae worshipped the oak, in Greek termed (...), and thence had their names.
-- The Etrurians worshipped an holm-tree: -- and amongst the Celtae, a tall oak
was the idol or image of Jupiter.

Among the Israelites, the idolatry began under the Judges Othniel and Ehud,
Judge. iii. 7. and at the last it became so common in Israel, that they had
peculiar priests, whom they termed prophets of the grove, 1 Kings xviii. 19.
and idols of the grove; that is peculiar idols, unto whom their groves were
consecrated, 2 Kings xxi. 7. 2 Chronicles. xv. 16.

Godwyn's Moses and Aaron.
and lowest valleys were from the earliest times esteemed sacred, and it was
supposed the spirit of God was peculiarly diffusive in those places; -- Ezekiel
xliii. 12. Upon the top of the mountain, the whole limit thereof round about
shall be most holy. -- It is said in the Old Testament, that the spirit of God
buried Moses in a valley in the land of Moab; implying that from divine
influence he was interred in such hallowed retirement. -- On Elijah's
translation, the sons of the prophets said to Elisha, behold now there be with
thy servants fifty strong men; let them go, we pray thee, and seek thy master,
least peradventure the spirit of the Lord has taken him up, and cast him upon
some mountain, or into some valley Hence was derived the "veneration paid to
such places in the earliest ages, and hence the sacred groves of the Easterns
and Druids. -- They chose those situations for their public worship, conceiving
that the presence of the Deity would hallow them: they set up their altars
there, and shadowed them with groves, that there, as it was with Adam, they
might hear the voice of the Lord God walking in the garden.

In the corruption and ignorance of after ages, these hallowed places were
polluted with idolatry The vulgar losing sight of the emblematical
signification, which was not readily understood, but by poets and philosophers,
took up with the plain figures as real divinities. Stones erected as monuments
of the dead, became the place where posterity paid their venerations to the
memory of the deceased. -- This increased into a peculiarity, and at length
became an object of worship. Lord Kames's Sketches of Man.
; -- the unenlightened mind mistook the type for the original, and could not
discern the light from darkness; -- the sacred groves and hills became objects
of enthusiastic bigotry and superstition; -- the devotees bowed down to the
oaken log, and the graven image of the sun, as being divine. -- Some preserved
themselves from the corruptions of the times, and we find those sages and
select men, to whom were committed, and who retained, the light of
understanding and truth, unpolluted with the sins of the world, under the
denomination of magi among the Persians; wisemen, southsayers, and astrologers
among the Caldeans; philosophers among the Greeks and Romans; bramins among the
Indians; druids and bards among the Britons; and with the chosen people of God
SOLOMON shone forth in the fullness of human wisdom.

The MASTER of each lodge should found his government in CONCORD AND UNIVERSAL
LOVE; for as the Great Architect moves the systems with his finger, and touches
the spheres with harmony, so that the morning stars together sing the songs of
gratitude, and the floods clap their hands, amidst the invariable beauties of
ORDER; so should we, rejoicing, be of one accord, and of one law; in unanimity,
in charity, and in affection; moving by one unchanging system, and actuated by
one principle, in rectitude of manners.

A MASON, sitting the member of a lodge, claiming these emblems, as the
testimonies of his order, ought at that instant to transfer his thoughts to the
august scene which is there initiated; and remember that he then appears
professing himself A MEMBER OF THE GREAT TEMPLE OF THE UNIVERSE, to obey the
laws of the MIGHTY MASTER OF ALL, in whose presence he seeks to be approved.

The ancient record which I have before quoted, expresses that the first masons
received their KNOWLEDGE from God; by which means they are endowed with the due
understanding of what is pleasing to him, and the only true method of
propagating their doctrines.

The few who remained uncorrupted with the sins of nations, and who served the
ONLY AND TRUE GOD, despised the fables and follies of idolaters: others who
were emerging from the ignorance and blindness in which they had been
overwhelmed, contemplated on the wonders displayed in the face of nature, and
traced the Divinity through the walks of his power, and his mighty deeds. --
CONTEMPLATION at first went forth admiring, but yet without comprehension from
whence all things had their existence: Contemplation returned, glowing with
conviction, that one great ORIGINAL, of infinite power, of infinite
intelligence, and of benevolence without bounds, was the master of all. -- They
beheld him in his works, they read his Majesty in the heavens, and discovered
his miracles in the deep: every plant that painted the face of nature, and
every thing having the breath of life, described his presence and his power. --
Such men were afterward made known to the enlightened, and were united with
them in the perfection of TRUTH Thus (as our noble author says) through a long
maze of errors, man arrived at true religion; acknowledging but one Being
supreme in power, intelligence, and benevolence who created all other beings,
to whom all other beings are subjected, and who directs every event to answer
the best purposes. Lord Kames's Sketches of Man.
.

As the servants of ONE GOD, our predecessors professed the temple, wherein the
Deity approved to be served, was not of the work of men's hands. -- In this the
Druids copied after them: -- the universe they confessed was filled with his
presence, and he was not hidden from the most distant quarters of creation:
they looked upwards to the heavens as his throne, and wheresoever under the sun
they worshipped, they regarded themselves as being in the dewlling place of the
Divinity, from whose eye nothing was concealed. -- The ancients not only
refrained from building temples, but held it utterly unlawful so to do; because
they thought no temple spacious enough for the SUN, the great symbol of the
Deity. "Mundus universus est templum solis" was their maxim; they thought it
profane to set limits to the infinity of the Deity; -- when, in later ages,
they built temples, they left them open to the heavens, and unroofed.

The TRUE BELIEVERS, in order to withdraw and distinguish themselves from the
rest of mankind, especially the idolaters with whom they were surrounded,
adopted emblems and mystic devices, together with certain distinguishing
principles, whereby they should be known to each other, and also certify that
they were servants of that GOD, in whose hands all creation existed. By these
means they also protected themselves from persecution, and their FAITH from the
ridicule of the incredulous vulgar. -- To this end, when they rehearsed the
principles of their profession, they pronounced that they were worshipers in
that TEMPLE, whose bounds were from the distant quarters of the universe; whose
height was no otherwise limited than by the heavens, and whose depth was
founded on that axis, on which the revolutions of the starry zodiac were
performed.

The Egyptians were the first people known to us, who in the early ages of the
world, after the flood, advanced to any high degree of knowledge in ASTRONOMY,
ARTS, AND SCIENCES: -- these were the means of discovering to them the
existence of the Divinity, and they worshipped the author of those sublime
works which they contemplated; -- but through national prejudices, soon began
to represent the attributes of the Deity in symbols; and as the visible
operations of his omnipotence were chiefly expressed in the powers of the sun
and moon, whose influence they perceived through all the field of nature, they
depicted the Deity by those heavenly bodies, and at length, under the names of
OSIRIS and ISIS, adored the GOD OF NATURE Dr Owen divides the whole of
idolatrous worship into Sabaism and Hellenism; the former consists in the
worship of the Sun, Moon, and Stars, and the host of heaven (which only is to
my present purpose), which it is probable a few ages after the flood had its
beginning. Dr Prideaux says, the true religion which Noah taught his posterity,
was that which Abraham practiced, the worshipping of one God, the supreme
governor of all things, through a Mediator. Men could not determine what
essence contained this power of mediation, no clear revelation being then made
of the Mediator whom God appointed, because as yet he had not been manifested
in the world, they look upon them to address him by mediators of their own
choosing; and their notion of the Sun, Moon, and Stars being, that they were
Habitations of Intelligencies, which animated the orbs in the same manner as
the soul animates the body of man, and were causes of their motion; and that
these intelligencies were of a middle sort between God and them: they thought
these the properest things to be Mediators between God and them; and therefore
the planets being the nearest of all the heavenly bodies, and generally looked
on to have the greatest influence on this world, they made choice of them in
the first place, as their Gods' mediators, who were to mediate with the Supreme
God for them, and to procure from him mercies and favors, which they prayed
for. Herodotus says that Osiris and Isis were two great deities of the
Egyptians; and almost the whole mythology of that ancient people is included in
what their priests sabled of them. Plutarch conceives, that by Osiris the Sun
is to be understood, and this Macrobius confirms, adding that Osiris in the
Egyptian language signifies many-eyed and Isis the ancient, or the Moon.
Osiris, according to Banier, is the same as Misraim, the son of Cham, who
peopled Egypt some time after the deluge. And Dr Cumberland, Bishop of
Peterborough, says Misraim, the son of Cham, grand child of Noah, was the first
king of Egypt, and founder of their monarchy; and that Osiris was an
appropriated title, signifying the prince, and Isis is Ishah his wife. Diodorus
Siculus, who has transmitted down to us with great care the most ancient
traditions of the Egyptians, asserts this prince is the same with Menes, the
first king of Egypt. Perhaps at his apotheosis his name was changed to that of
Isiris, according to some historians. As the images of Osiris were very
resplendent to represent the beams of light from the Sun, so in their hymns of
praise, they celebrate him as resting in the bosom of the Sun.

From the authority of Banier, and other historians, we learn, that the gods of
the Egyptians were adopted by the Phoenicians; that their theology was
propagated by the Phoenicians into the East, and in the West; and some traces
of them are sound in almost every island of the Mediterranean.

In Syria we find the same theology, the sun under the name of Adonis, and the
moon of Ashtaroth. The festival of Adonis is mentioned in Baruch, chap. vii.
30, 31. The priests of the city sat in their temples uncovered and shaven, and
mourning as at a feast for the dead. -- The prophet complains that Solomon went
after Ashtaroth, and after Melcom, the abomination of the Ammonites.

The Chaldeans and Babylonians paid adoration to Fire, and held the Sabaism
worship. -- The Persians worshipped the Sun and Fire.

St Cyril, writing on the Pythagorian principles, says, We see plainly that
Pythagoras maintained that there was but one God, the original and cause of all
things, who enlightens every thing, animates every thing, and from whom every
thing proceeds, who has given being to all things, and is the source of all
motion.

Pythagoras thus defines the Divinity: -- God is neither the object of sense
nor subject to passion; but invisible, purely intelligible, and supremely
intelligent. In his body he is like the light, and in his soul he resembles
Truth. He is the universal spirit that pervades and diffuses itself over all
nature. All beings receive their life from him. There is but one only God, who
is not, as some are apt to imagine, seated above the world, beyond the orb of
the universe; but being all in himself, he sees all the beings that inhabit his
immensity. He is the sole principle, the light of heaven, the father of all; he
produces every thing, he orders and disposes every thing; he is the reason, the
life, and the motion of all beings.

Plutarch says, Osiris is neither the Sun, nor the Water, nor the Earth, nor
the Heaven; but whatever there is in nature well disposed, well regulated, good
and perfect, all that is the image of Osiris.

Seneca the stoie says, It Is of very little consequence by what name you call
the first nature, and the divine reason that presides over the universe, and
fills all the parts of it -- he is still the same God. He is called Jupiter
Strator, not as historians say, because he stopped the flying armies of the
Romans, but because he is the constant support of all beings. -- They call him
Fate, because he is the first cause on which all others depend. We stoies
sometimes call him Father Bacchus, because he is the universal life that
animates nature; -- Hercules, because his power is invincible; -- Mercury,
because he is the eternal reason, order, and wisdom. You may give him as many
names as you please, provided you allow but one sole principle, every where
present.


.

As we derived many of our mysteries, and moral principles, from the doctrines
of PYTHAGORAS, who had acquired his learning in Egypt, and others from the
Phoenicians, who had received the Egyptian theology in an early age, it is not
to be wondered that we should adopt Egyptian symbols, to represent or express
the attributes of the Divinity.

The Pythagorian system of philosophy, also points out to us a reason for the
figure of the SUN being introduced into the lodge, as being the center of the
planetary system which he taught, as well as the emblem of the Deity which he
served. -- This grand (...) was a symbol expressing the first and greatest
principle of his doctrines. -- This was also a representation of the Abrax
which governed the stellary world and our diurnal revolutions.

In the books of Hermes Irismegistus, who was an Egyptian, and said to be
contemporary with Abraham's grandfather, is this remarkable passage; speaking
of the Deity he says, But if thou will see him, consider and understand the
sun, consider the course of the moon, consider the order of the stars. -- Oh
thou unspeakable, unutterable, to be praised with silence.

From hence we are naturally led to perceive the origin of the Egyptian
symbolization, and the reason for their adopting those objects, as expressive
of the might, majesty, and omnipresence of the Deity The learned Dr Stukeley,
speaking of Stonehenge, says he took his dimensions of this monument by the
Hebrew, Phoenician, or Egyptian cubit, being twenty inches and three-fourths of
an inch English measure. He dates this erection from the time of Cambyse's
invasion of Egypt, before the time of building the second temple at Jerusalem,
at an era when the Phoenician trade was at its height; and he presumes that
when the priests fled from Egypt under the cruelties committed by that invader,
they dispersed themselves to distant parts of the world, and introduced their
learning, arts, and religion among the druids in Britain.


.

Posterity, to record the wise doctrines and religious principles of the first
professors of the true worship, have adopted these descriptions of the lodge in
which they assemble; and maintain those religious tenets which nature dictates,
gratitude to him under whom we exist; and working in the acceptable service of
him, who rejoiceth in the upright man.

As such it is to be a FREE MASON; -- as such is A LODGE OF MASONS; -- as such
are the principles of this society; -- as these were the original institutions
of our BROTHERHOOD, let the ignorant laugh on, and the wicked ones scoff. --
And that these are true solutions of our EMBLEMS, I am convinced myself; and
with humble deference to the rest of my brethren, offer them for their
attention.

LECTURE V. The Furniture of the Lodge.
IT is with pleasure I pursue the duty I have imposed upon myself, to give
solutions of the MYSTERIES in MASONRY; which to minds inattentive to the real
import of the objects in their view, might remain undiscovered; and the
professor of masonry might pass on, without receiving a just sense of those
dignities which he has assumed.

I have defined what is intended to be represented by a LODGE, and its origin
and nature; it is now my duty to discover to you the import of the FURNITURE OF
A LODGE.

As SOLOMON at JERUSALEM carried into the Jewish temple all the vessels and
instruments requisite for the service of JEHOVAH, according to the law of his
people; so we MASONS, as workers in moral duties, and as servants of the GREAT
ARCHITECT of the world, have placed in our view, those emblems which should
constantly remind us of what we are, and what is required of us.

The third emanation of ABRAX, in the Gnostic hierarchy, was PHRONAESIS, the
emblem of PRUDENCE, which is the first and most exalted object that demands our
attention, in the lodge: -- it is placed in the center, ever to be present to
the eye of the mason, that his heart may be attentive to her dictates, and
steadfast in her laws; -- for PRUDENCE is the rule of all VIRTUES; -- prudence
is the path which leads to every degree of propriety; -- prudence is the
channel where self-approbation slows for ever; -- she leads us forth to worthy
actions, and as a BLAZING STAR, enlightneth us through the dreary and darksome
paths of this life.

VIRTUE by moralists is defined to be that steadfast purpose and firm will of
doing those things which nature has dictated to us, as the best and most
salutary; -- a habit of the soul by which mankind are inclined to do the things
which are upright and good, and to avoid those that are evil -- In short,
virtue is moral honesty and good principles.

Of the VIRTUES of which PRUDENCE is the rule, three are called Cardinal
Virtues, of which, most properly, a Mason should be possessed, -- FORTITUDE,
TEMPERANCE and JUSTICE; for without these, the name of MASON is an empty title,
and but a painted bubble.

That FORTITUDE must be the characteristic of a mason, I need not argue; by
which, in the midst of pressing evils, he is enabled always to do that which is
agreeable to the dictates of right reason.

TEMPERANCE also must be one of his principles, being a moderating or
restraining of our affections and passions, especially in SOBRIETY AND
CHASTITY. -- We regard TEMPERANCE, under the various definitions of moralists,
as constituting honesty, decency, and bashfulness; and in its potential parts,
instituting meekness, clemency, and modesty.

We profess JUSTICE as dictating to us to do right to all, and to yield to
every man what belongs to him.

The CARDINAL VIRTUES, Prudence, Fortitude, Temperance, and Justice, hold in
their train the inferior powers of Peace, Concord, Quietness, Liberty, Safety,
Honor, Felicity, Piety, and Charity, with many others which were adored by the
ancients in those ages, when they confounded mythology with the worship of the
Divinity. -- Within the starry girdle of PRUDENCE all the virtues are enfolded.

We may apply this EMBLEM to a still more religious import; -- it may be said
to represent the STAR which led the wise men to BETHLEHEM, proclaiming to
mankind the nativity of THE SON OF GOD, and here conducting our spiritual
progress to the author of REDEMPTION.

As the steps of man are trod in the various and uncertain incidents of life;
as our days are chequered with a strange contrariety of events, and our passage
through this existence, though sometimes attended with prosperous
circumstances, is often beset by a multitude of evils; hence is the LODGE
furnished with MOSAIC WORK, to remind us of the precariousness of our state on
earth; -- today our feet tread in prosperity, tomorrow we totter on the uneven
paths of WEAKNESS, TEMPTATION, and ADVERSITY. -- Whilst this emblem is before
us, we are instructed to boast of nothing; -- to have compassion and give aid
to those who are in adversity; -- to walk uprightly, and with humility; -- for
such is this existence, that there is no station in which pride can be stably
founded: -- all men in birth and in the grave are on the level. -- Whilst we
tread on this MOSAIC WORK, let our ideas return to the original which it
copies; and let every mason act as the dictates of reason prompt him, TO LIVE
IN BROTHERLY LOVE.

As more immediate guides for a FREE MASON, the lodge is furnished with
unerring rules, whereby he shall form his conduct; -- THE BOOK of his law is
laid before him, that he may not say through ignorance he erred; -- whatever
the great ARCHITECT of the world has dictated to mankind, as the mode in which
he would be served, and the path in which he is to tread to obtain his
approbation; -- whatever precepts he has administered, and with whatever laws
he has inspired the sages of old, the same are faithfully comprised in THE
BOOK OF THE LAW of MASONRY. That book, which is never closed in any lodge,
reveals the duties which the great MASTER of all exacts from us; -- open to
every eye, comprehensible to every mind; then who shall say among us, that he
knows not the acceptable service?

But as the frailty of human nature wageth war with truth, and man's
infirmities struggle with his virtues; to aid the conduct of every mason, the
master holds the COMPASS, limiting the distance, progress, and circumference
of the work: he dictateth the manners, he gives the direction of the design,
and delineateth each portion and part of the labor; assigning to each his
province and his order. And such is his mastership, that each part, when
asunder, seems irregular and without form; yet when put together, like the
building of the TEMPLE at JERUSALEM, is connected and framed in true symmetry,
beauty, and order.

The moral implication of which is, that the MASTER in his lodge fits dictating
those salutary laws, for the regulation thereof, as his prudence directs;
assigning to each brother his proper province; limiting the rashness of some,
and circumscribing the imprudence of others; restraining all licentiousness and
drunkenness, discord and malice, envy and reproach: and promoting brotherly
love, morality, charity, benevolence, cordiality, and innocent mirth; that the
assembly of the brethren may be with order, harmony, and love.

To try the works of every mason, the SQUARE is presented, as the probation of
his life, -- proving, whether his manners are regular and uniform; -- for
masons should be of one principle and one rank, without the distinctions of
pride and pageantry: intimating, that from high to low, the minds of masons
should be inclined to good works, above which no man stands exalted by his
fortune.

But superior to all, the LODGE is furnished with three LUMINARIES The
particular attention paid by the ancients to the Element of Fire is in no wise
to be wondered at, when we consider, that when ever the Deity deigned to reveal
himself to the human senes it was under this element.

Exodus iii. 2. And the angel of the Lord appeared unto him in a flame of fire
out of the midst of a bush: and he looked, and behold the bush burned with
fire, and the bush was not consumed. Ver. 4. God called unto him out of the
midst of the bush, and said, Moses, Moses. Chap. xiii. 21. And the Lord went
before them by day in a pillar of a cloud, to lead them the way; and by night
in a pillar of fire to give them light: to go by day and night. Chap. xix. 16.
There were thunders and lightnings, and a thick cloud upon the mount. Ver. 18
And Mount Sinai was altogether on a smoke, because the LORD descended upon it
in fire. Chap. xviv. 17. And the sight of the glory of the Lord was like
devouring fire on the top of the mount, in the eyes of the children of Israel.
Chap. xxix. 43. And there I will meet with the children of Israel, and the
tabernacle shall be sanctified by my glory. Numb. ix. 16. That thou go
before them, by day time in a pillar of a cloud, and in a pillar of fire by
night. Deuteronomy v. 4. The Lord talked with you face to face in the mount,
out of the midst of the fire. Ver. 5. For ye were afraid by reason of the fire,
and went not up into the mount. Ver. 22. These words the Lord spoke unto all
your assembly in the mount out of the midst of the fire. Ver. 23. For the
mountain did burn with fire. Ver 24. And we have heard his voice out of the
midst of the fire. Ver. 26. For who is there of all flesh that has heard the
voice of the living God, speaking out of the midst of the fire (as we have) and
lived. To these may be added the shachina in the temple.

It would from a kind of parity in circumstances naturally follow, that men
would look up to the Sun, as the throne of the Divinity, from whence his
ministering spirits dispensed his will to the distant quarters of the universe.
-- Fire became the general emblem of the Divinity in the eastern nations -- was
in great esteem with the Chaldeans and Persians. The Persians used consecrated
fire as the emblem of the Supreme Being: to whom they would not build temples,
or confine the Divinity to space. The etherial fire was preserved in the temple
of the Jews, and in the tabernacle, with great reverence. The druid priests in
their worship looked toward the Sun: -- they retained many of the Ammonian
rites: -- they are said to have made mystical processions round their
consecrated fires sunwise, before they proceeded to sacrifice.


; as the golden candlestick in the tabernacle of Moses was at once emblematical
of the spirit of God, whereby his chosen people were enlightened, and
prophetical of the churches; or otherwise, as Josephus says, representative of
the planets and the powerful works of God: so our three LIGHTS show to us the
three great stages of masonry, the knowledge and worship of the God of nature
in the purity of Eden -- the service under the Mosaic law, when divested of
idolatry -- and the christian revelation: or otherwise our lights are typical
of the holy Trinity.

Such is the furnitures of the lodge; such are the principles dictated to us as
masons; let us rejoice in the exercise of those excellencies, which should set
us above the rank of other men: and prove that we are brought out of darkness
into light. -- And let us show our good works unto the world, that through our
LIGHT so shining unto men, they may glorify the GREAT MASTER OF THE UNIVERSE;
and therefore do JUSTICE -- love MERCY -- and WALK HUMBLY with their GOD.

Mus: Brit: Tab. 6.

Wm Hutchinson del: 1769



LECTURE VI. The Apparel and Jewels of Masons.
MASONS, as one of their first principles, profess INNOCENCE: -- they put on
white apparel, as an emblem of that character, which bespeaks purity of soul,
guiltlessness, and being harmless.

We have the following passage in the Biographia Ecclesiastica: -- The ancients
were also wont to put a white garment on the person baptized, to denote his
having put off the lusts of the flesh, and his being cleansed from his former
sins, and that he had obliged himself to maintain a life of unspotted
innocence. -- Accordingly the baptized are both by the apostle and the Greek
fathers frequently styled (...), the ENLIGHTENED, because they professed to be
the children of light, and engaged themselves never to return again to the
works of darkness Isaiah ix. 2. The people that walked in darkness have seen a
great light: they that dwell in the land of the shadow of death, upon them has
the light shined.
. -- This white garment used to be delivered to them with this solemn charge,
'Receive the white and undefiled garment, and produce it without spot before
the tribunal of our Lord Jesus Christ, that you may obtain eternal life. Amen.'
-- They were wont to wear these white garments for the space of a week after
they were baptized, and then put them off and laid them up in the church, that
they might be kept as a witness against them, if they should violate the
baptismal covenant.

Whilst the apron with which we are clothed indicates a disposition of
INNOCENCE, and belies not the wearer's heart, let the ignorant deride and scoff
on: superior to the ridicule and malice of the wicked, we will enfold ourselves
in the garb of our own virtue; and safe in self-approving conscience, stand
unmoved amidst the persecutions of adversity.

The raiment which truly implies the innocence of the heart, is a badge more
honorable than ever was devised by kings; -- the Roman Eagle, with all the
orders of knighthood, are inferior: -- they may be prostituted by the caprice
of princes; but innocence is innate, and cannot be adopted.

To be a true Mason, is to possess this principle; or the apparel which he
wears is an infamy to the apostate, and only shows him forth to shame and
contempt.

That innocence should be the professed principle of a Mason, occasions no
astonishment, when we consider that the discovery of the Deity leads us to the
knowledge of those maxims wherewith he may be well pleased -- The very idea of
a GOD, is succeeded with the belief, that he can approve of nothing that is
evil; and when first our predecessors professed themselves servants of the
architect of the world, as an indispensible duty, they professed innocence, and
put on white raiment, as a type and characteristic of their conviction, and of
their being devoted to his will. -- The DRUIDS were apparelled in white, at the
time of their sacrifices and solemn offices. -- The Egyptian priests of OSIRIS
wore snow-white cotton. -- We do not find that the priests of other nations
noted for antiquity were singular in this, except that in the service of CERES,
under whom was symbolized the gift of Providence in the fruits of the earth --
the Grecian priests put on white.

Every degree of sin strikes the rational mind of man with some feelings of
self-condemnation. -- Under such conviction, who could call upon or claim the
presence of a Divinity, whose demonstration is good works? -- Hence are men
naturally led to conceive, that such Divinity will only accept of works of
righteousness. -- Standing forth for the approbation of heaven, the servants of
the first revealed God bound themselves to maxims of purity and virtue; -- and
as MASONS, we regard the principles of those who were the first worshippers of
the true God, imitate their apparel, and assume the badge of INNOCENCE.

OUR JEWELS or ornaments imply, that we try our affections by justice, and our
actions by truth, as the square tries the workmankship of the mechanic; -- that
we regard our mortal state, whether it is dignified by titles or not, whether
it be opulent or indigent, as being of one nature in the beginning, and of one
rank in its close. In sensations, passions, and pleasures; in infirmities,
maladies, and wants, all mankind are on a parallel; -- NATURE has given us no
superiorities; -- it is WISDOM and VIRTUE that constitute superiority. -- From
such maxims we make estimates of our brother, when his calamities call for our
council or our aid: -- the works of CHARITY are from sympathetic feelings, and
BENEVOLENCE acts upon the level. -- The emblem of these sentiments is another
of the jewels of our society.

To walk uprightly before heaven and before men, neither inclining to the right
or to the left, is the duty of a Mason, -- neither becoming an Enthusiast or a
persecutor in religion, nor bending toward innovation or infidelity. -- In
civil government, firm in our allegiance, yet steadfast in our laws, liberties,
and constitution. -- In private life, yielding up every selfish propensity,
inclining neither to avarice or injustice, to malice or revenge, to envy or
contempt with mankind: but as the builder raises his column by the plane and
perpendicular, so should the Mason carry himself toward the world.

To rule our affections by justice, and our actions by truth, is to wear a
JEWEL which would ornament the bosom of the highest potentate on earth; --
human nature has her impulses from desires, which are often too inordinate: --
love blinds with prejudices, and resentment burns with fevers; -- contempt
renders us incredulous, and covetousness deprives us of every generous or
humane feeling. -- To steer the bark of life upon the seas of passions, without
quitting the course of rectitude, is one of the highest excellencies to which
human nature can be brought aided with all the powers of philosophy and
religion.

Yet merely to act with justice and truth, is not all that man should attempt;
for even that excellence would be selfishness: -- that duty is not relative,
but merely proper: -- it is only touching our own character, and doing nothing
for our neighbor; for justice is an indispensible duty in each individual: --
we were not born for ourselves alone, only to shape our course through life in
the tracks of tranquillity, and solely to study that which should afford peace
to the conscience at home, -- but men were made as mutual aids to each other;
-- no one among us, be he ever so opulent, can subsist without the assistance
of his fellow creatures. Nature's wants are numerous, and our hands are filled
with very little of the warfare of necessity; -- our nakedness must be
clothed, our hunger satisfied, our maladies visited. -- Where shall the proud
man toil for sustenance, if he stands unaided by his neighbor? -- When we look
through the varied scene of life, we see our fellow creatures attacked with
innumerable calamities; and were we without compassion, we should exist without
one of the finest feelings of the human heart. -- To love and to approve, are
movements in the soul of man which yield him pleasure: but to pity, gives him
heavenly sensations; and to relieve, is divine. -- CHARITY thus has her
existence; -- her rise is, from the consciousness of our similarity in nature;
the level on which mortality was created in the beginning; -- its progress is
in sympathetic feelings, from the affections of the heart breathing love
toward our brother, coupled with the touch of original estimation in our
minds, which proves all our species to be brethren of one existence. -- Its
conclusion is, from comparison producing judgment, we weigh the necessities of
our suffering fellow creatures by our natural equality, by compassion, our
sympathy and our own abilities, and dispense our gifts from affection. -- Pity
and pain are sisters by sympathy.

To be an upright man, is to add still greater luster to the Mason's character:
-- to do justice and to have charity, are excellent steps in human life; but to
act uprightly, gives a superlative degree of excellence; -- for in that station
we shall become examples in religious, in civil, and in moral conduct. It is
not enough that we are neither enthusiasts nor persecutors in religion, neither
bending toward innovation or infidelity; not to be in the passive only, but we
should appear in the active character: we should be zealous practisers,
observers of, and steadfast members in, religious duties. -- In civil matters,
we should not only submit to, but execute, the laws of our country; obey all
their ordinances, and perform all their precepts; be faithful to the
constitution of the realm, and loyal to our king; true soldiers in the defense
of our liberty, and of his crown and dignity. -- In morality, it requires of
us, not only that we should not err, by injuring, betraying, or deceiving, but
that we should do good in every capacity in that station of life wherein kind
Providence has placed us.

By such meets let the MASON be proved, and testify that his emblematical
jewels are ensigns only of the inward man: thence he will stand approved before
heaven and before men, purchasing honor to his PROFESSION, and felicity to the
PROFESSOR.

LECTURE VII. The Temple at Jerusalem.
THE first worshipers of the God of nature, in the nations of the east,
represented the Deity by the figures of the SUN AND MOON, from the influence of
those heavenly bodies on the earth; professing that the universe was the temple
in which the Divinity was at all times and in all places present.

They adopted these with other symbols as a cautious mode of preserving or
explaining divine knowledge: -- but we perceive the danger arising from thence
to religion; for the eye of the ignorant, the bigot, and enthusiast, cast up
toward these objects, without the light of understanding, introduced the
worship of images, and at length the idols of OSIRIS and ISIS became the Gods
of the Egyptians, without conveying to their devotees the least idea of their
great archetype. Other nations (who had expressed the attributes of the Deity
by outward objects, or who had introduced pictures into the sacred places, as
ornaments, or rather to assist the memory, claim devout attention, and warm the
affections) ran into the same error, and idols multiplied upon the face of the
earth.

Amongst the ancients, the worshipers of idols, throughout the world, had at
last entirely lost the remembrance of the original, of whose attributes their
images were at first merely symbols; and the second darkness in religion was
more tremendous than the first, as it was strengthened by prepossession, custom,
bigotry, and superstition.

Moses had acquired the knowledge of the Egyptians, and derived the doctrines
of truth from the righteous ones of the nations of the east; he being also
touched by divine influence, and thence truly comprehending the light from out
the darkness, taught the people of Israel the worship of the true God, without
the enigmas and pollutions of the idolatrous nations which surrounded them.

This was the second era of the worship of the God of nature; -- and at this
period the second stage of masonry arises.

The Ruler of the Jews, perceiving how prone the minds of ignorant men were to
be led aside by show and ceremony; and that the eye being caught by pomp and
solemn rites, perverted the opinion, and led the heart astray; and being
convinced that the magnificent festivals, processions, sacrifices, and
ceremonials of the idolatrous nations, impressed the minds of mankind with a
wild degree of reverence and enthusiastic devotion, thought it expedient for
the service of the God of Israel, to institute holy offices, though in an
humbler and less oftentatious mode; well judging that the service and adoration
of the Deity, which was only clothed in simplicity of manners and humble
prayer, must be established in the judgment and conviction of the heart of man;
with which ignorance was ever waging war.

In succeeding ages, SOLOMON built A TEMPLE for the service of God, and
ordained its rights and ceremonies to be performed with a splendor equal to
the most extravagant pomp of the idolaters.

As this TEMPLE Ezekiel xliv. 2. The east gate shall be shut, it shall not be
opened, and no man shall enter in by it, because the Lord, the God of Israel,
has entered in by it, therefore it shall be shut. Ver. 3. It is for the
prince: the prince shall sit in it to eat bread before the Lord. Ver. 4. Then
brought he me by the way of the north gate before the house.
received the second race of the servants of the true God, and as the true
CRAFTSMEN were here proved in their work, I will crave your attention to the
circumstances which are to be gathered from holy writ, and from historians,
touching this structure, as an illustration of those secrets in masonry, which
may appear to my brethren dark or insignificant, unless they are proved from
thence.

In the first book of Kings, we are told that HIRAM, King of Tire, sent his
servants unto SOLOMON: and SOLOMON sent to HIRAM, saying, Behold I intend to
build an house unto the name of the Lord my God. -- And SOLOMON raised a levy
out of all Israel, and the levy was thirty thousand men. -- And he sent them to
Lebanon, ten thousand a month, by courses; -- a month they were in Lebanon, and
two months at home; and Adoniram was over the levy. -- And SOLOMON had
threescore and ten thousand that bare burdens, and fourscore thousand hewers
in the mountains, -- besides the chief of SOLOMON'S officers which were over
the work, three thousand and three hundred, which ruled over the people which
wrought in the work. -- And the king commanded, and they brought great stones,
costly stones, and hewed stones, to lay the foundation of the house. -- And
SOLOMON's builders and HIRAM's builders did hew them, and the stone-squarers or
GIBILITES. -- In the fourth year was the foundation of the house laid, and in
the eleventh year was the house finished throughout all the parts thereof, and
according to all the fashion of it. -- And King SOLOMON sent and fetched HIRAM
out of Tire. He was a widow's son of the tribe of Napthali, and his father was
a man of Tire, a worker in brass. -- He cast two pillars of brass, with two
chapiters which were of lily-work, and he set up the pillars in the porch of
the Temple. -- And he set up the right pillar, and he called the name thereof
JACHIN; and he set up the left pillar, and called it BOAZ. -- In the second
book of Chronicles, we read that he set three hundred and ten thousand of them
to be bearers of burdens, and fourscore thousand to be hewers in the
mountains, and three thousand and six hundred overseers to set the people a
work. -- And SOLOMON sent to HIRAM, King of Tire, to send him a man cunning to
work in gold and in silver, in brass, in iron, in purple, in crimson, and in
blue, and skilful in engravings. -- And Hiram sent unto him a cunning man,
endowed with the understanding of Hiram his father. -- And he made the veil of
the temple of blue, purple, crimson, and fine linen -- And he made before the
house two pillars, and called the name of that on the right hand JACHIN, and
that on the left BOAZ The raising pillars and obelisks was a custom of the
eastern nations, and of Egypt in particular; the use of which we are told was
to record the extent of dominion, and the tributes of nations subject to the
Egyptian empire, etc. or in commemoration of memorable events. -- Diodorus
tells us, that Sosostris signalized his reign by the erection of two obelisks,
which were cut with a design to acquaint postertity of the extent of his power,
and the number of nations he had conquered. Augustus according to the report of
Pliny, transported one of these obelisks to Rome, and placed it in the Campus
Martius. Pliny says, the Egyptians were the first devisers of such monuments,
and that Mestres king of Heliopolis erected the first. Marsham and others
attribute the invention to Jesostris. The obelisk of Shannesses exceeded all
that had preceded it: Constantine, and Constans his son, caused it to be moved
to Rome, where it remains the noblest piece of Egyptian antiquity existing in
the world. Solomon had pursued this custom in erecting his pillars in the porch
of the Temple, which he designed should be a memorial to the Jews as they
entered the holy place, to warm their minds with confidence and faith; by this
record of the promises made by the Lord unto his father David, and which were
repeated unto him in a vision, in which the voice of God proclaimed, 1 Kings
ix. 5 I will establish the throne of thy kingdom upon Israel for ever.
.

When this splendid structure was finished, SOLOMON stood before the altar of
the Lord, in the presence of all the congregation of ISRAEL, and spread forth
his hands and said, O LORD GOD of Israel, there is no God like thee in the
heaven and in the earth: -- O LORD MY GOD hearken unto the cry and the prayer
which thy servant prays before thee: -- O LORD GOD turn not away the face of
thine anointed.

In the conduct of this great work, we must admire the sagacity of this pious
architect; -- he discerned the necessity there was to assign to portions of his
people, the particular labor they were to pursue; he gave them particular
signs and secret tokens, These were meant for the better conduct of the work,
and were totally abstracted from those other principles which were the
foundation of our profession; -- they were manual proofs of the part each was
stationed to perform: -- the light which had possessed the soul, and which was
the first principle, was in no wise to be distinguished by such signs and
tokens, or revealed, expressed, or communicated thereby.


by which each rank should be distinguished, in order that the whole might
proceed with propriety, and without confusion; -- he selected those of most
enlightened minds and comprehensive understandings, religious men, piously
zealous in good works, as masters to superintend the workmen; men skilful in
geometry and proportions, who had been initiated and proved in the mystical
learning of the ancient sages; those he made overseers of the work: -- the
whole was conducted with that degree of holy reverence, that even the noise of
a tool or instrument was not permitted to disturb the sacred silence on
MORIALI, sanctified by the presence of the Almighty, and by his miraculous
works. -- Was it not reasonable then to conceive under this exalted degree of
pious attention, that no part of this structure was to be formed, but by men of
pure hands and holy minds, who had professed themselves devoted to the service
of the true God, and had enrolled themselves under the banner of true religion
and virtue. -- As the sons of Aaron alone were admitted to the holy offices,
and to the sacrificial rites, so none but devotees were admitted to this
labor. -- On this stage, we see those Religious who had received the truth,
and the light of understanding as possessed by the first men, embodied as
artificers, and engaged in this holy work as architects. -- This together with
the construction of the tabernacle under Moses, are the first instances of our
predecessors being exhibited to the world as builders: for although, it is not to
be doubted, the sages amongst the Hebrews, Egyptians, Persians, Chaldeans,
Greeks, Romans, Bramins, Druids, and Bards, understood geometry and the rules
of proportion and numbers, yet we have no evidence of their being the actual
executors of any plan in architecture; and yet without question they were the
projectors and superintendants of such works in every age and nation.

Without such regulations as Solomon had devised for the government of his
servants, without such artificers, and a superior wisdom overruling the whole,
we should be at a loss to account for the beginning, carrying on, and finishing
that great work in the space of seven years and six months, when the two
succeeding temples, though much inferior, employed so much more time; and when
we have good authority to believe that the temple of Diana at Ephesus, a
structure not comparable to the temple at Jerusalem, was two hundred and twenty
years in building.

The building being conducted by a set of Religious, makes it natural to
conceive, that from devotion and pious fervor, as well as emulation, those
employed had unceasing motives to prompt their diligence, and preserve harmony
and order; as their labor was probationary, and led to an advancement to
superior privileges higher points of knowledge, and at the last to that
honorable pre-eminence of a MASTER of the holy work.

SOLOMON himself was an extraordinary personage, and his wisdom and
magnificence had gained him the wonder and attention of the neighboring
nations; -- but this splendid structure, the wonder of the earth, thus raised
by the pious hands of men laboring in the worship and service of the God of
Israel, would of consequence extend his fame, and attract the admiration of the
more distant parts of the world: -- his name and his artificers would become
the wonder of mankind, and his works their example and emulation: -- from
thence the MASONS of SOLOMON would be dispersed into different states, to
superintend the works of other princes, and there would convert insidels,
initiate brethren in their mysteries, and extend their order over the distant
quarters of the known world.

We find that the like distinction was retained on rebuilding the temple in the
reign of Cyrus, and that the work was performed by the religious of the
Israelites, and not by ordinary mechanics; for they refused to admit the
Samaritans to a share of the work, although they petitioned it, under the
denomination of servants of the same God: -- but they were rejected, as
unworthy of the works of piety, and unacceptable to the God of Israel: for
though they professed themselves to be servants of the true God, they polluted
their worship by idols.

JOSEPHUS, in his History of the Antiquities of the Jews, speaking of SOLOMON's
going about to erect the Temple at JERUSALEM, gives copies of the epistles
which passed between SOLOMON and HIRAM of Tire on that matter; and which he
says remained in his days preserved in their books, and amongst the Tyrians
also Eusebius preparat. Evanget. ix. 33.34. has these letters, though greatly
disguised by Eupolemeus, from whom Eusebius had his copies.
: which epistles are as follow.

SOLOMON to KING HIRAM.
Know thou, that my father would have built a temple to God, but was hindered by
wars and continual expeditions; for he did not leave off to overthrow his
enemies, till he made them all subject to tribute: -- But I give thanks to God
for the peace I at present enjoy, and on that account I am at leisure, and
design to build an house to God; for God foretold to my father, that such an
house should be built by me: -- Wherefore I desire thee to send some of thy
subjects with mine to Mount Lebanon, to cut down timber; for the Sidonians are
more skilful than our people in cutting of wood; -- as for wages for the hewers
of wood, I will pay whatsoever price thou shall determine.


HIRAM to KING SOLOMON,
There is reason to bless God that he has committed thy father's government to
thee, who art a wise man, and endowed with all virtues: -- As for myself, I
rejoice at the condition thou art in, and will be subservient to thee in all
thou requirest; -- for when by my servants I have cut down many and large
trees, of Cedar and Cypress wood: I will send them to sea, and will order my
subjects to make floats of them, and to sail to what place soever of thy
country thou shall desire, and leave them there; after which thy servants may
carry them to Jerusalem: but do thou take care to procure corn for this timber,
which we stand in need of, because we inhabit an island.


JOSEPHUS, speaking of the progress of the building, says, Solomon sent for an
artificer out of Tire, whose name was Hiram, by birth of the tribe of
Naphthali, on the mother's side. -- This man was skilful in all sorts of works,
but his chief skill lay in working in gold, in silver, and brass: the one of
the pillars which he set at the entrance of the porch at the right hand, he
called JACHIN, and the other at the left hand, he called BOAZ.

SOLOMON was wise in all the learning of the ancients, he was possessed of all
the mystical knowledge of the eastern nations; and to perfect the same, was
enlightened by the immediate gift of heaven. -- It was also the mode and
manners of the times, in which the temple of Jerusalem was erected, to use
emblematical and symbolic ornaments in the public edifices; a fashion derived
from the hieroglyphic monuments of the Egyptians, and the mysterious mode in
which their sages concealed their wisdom and learning from the vulgar eye, and
communicated science to those of their own order only.

The pillars erected at the porch of the temple were not only ornamental, but
also carried with them an emblematical import in their names. BOAZ being in its
literal translation, IN THEE IS STRENGTH; and JACHIN, IT SHALL BE ESTABLISHED;
which by a very natural transposition may be put thus: O LORD, THOU ART MIGHTY,
AND THY POWER IS ESTABLISHED FROM EVERLASTING TO EVERLASTING: -- Or otherwise
they might imply, as BOAZ was the father of DAVID, THE HOUSE OF DAVID SHALL BE
ESTABLISHED FOR EVER. I am justified in this latter application, by the express
words of NATHAN the prophet unto DAVID, inspired by the vision of the Lord, --
2 Samuel vii. 12. And when thy days be fulfilled, and thou shall sleep with thy
fathers; I will set up thy seed after thee, which shall proceed out of thy
bowels, and I will establish his kingdom.

Ver. 13. -- He shall build an house for my name, and I will establish the
throne of his kingdom for ever. Ver. 16. And thine house and thy kingdom shall
be established for ever before thee; THY THRONE SHALL BE ESTABLISHED FOR EVER.
In commemoration of this great PROMISE to the faithful, we ornament the
entrance into our LODGES with these EMBLEMATICAL PILLARS; from our knowledge of
the completion of that sacred sentence accomplished in the coming of our
REDEEMER.

LECTURE VIII. On Geometry.
IT is now incumbent upon me to demonstrate to you the great signification of
the letter G, wherewith lodges and the medals of masons are ornamented.

To apply its signification to the name of GOD only, is depriving it of part of
its MASONIC import; although I have already shown that the symbols used in
lodges are expressive of the Divinity's being the great object of Masonry, as
architect of the world.

This significant letter denotes GEOMETRY, which to artificers, is the science
by which all their labors are calculated and formed; and to Masons, contains
the determination, definition, and proof of the order, beauty, and wonderful
wisdom of the power of God in his creation.

GEOMETRY is said originally to have signified nothing more than the art of
measuring the earth, or any distances or dimensions within it: but at present,
it denotes the science of magnitude in general, comprehending the doctrine and
relations of whatsoever is susceptible of augmentation or diminution. So to
geometry, may be referred the construction not only of lines, superficies, and
solids; but also of time, velocity, numbers, weight, and many other matters.

This is a science which is said to have its rise, or at least its present
rules from the Egyptians, who, by nature, were under a necessity of using it,
to remedy the confusion which generally happened in their lands, by the
overflowing of the Nile, which carried away yearly all boundaries, and effaced
all limits of their possessions. Thus this science which consisted only in its
first steps of the means of measuring lands, that every person might have his
property restored to him, was called geometry, or the art of measuring land:
and it is probable, that the draughts and schemes the Egyptians were annually
compelled to make, helped them to discover many excellent properties of those
figures, and which speculation continually occasioned to be improved.

From Egypt GEOMETRY passed into Greece, where it continued to receive new
improvements in the hands of THALES, PYTHAGORAS, ARCHIMEDES, EUCLID, and
others; the elements of geometry, which were written by Euclid, testify to us
the great perfection to which this science was brought by the ancients, though
much inferior to modern geometry. The bounds of which by the invention of
fluxions, and the discovery of an infinite order of curves, are greatly
enlarged.

The usefulness of geometry extends to almost every art and science: -- by the
help of it astronomers turn their observations to advantage; regulate the
duration of times, seasons, years, cycles, and epochas; and measure the
distance, motions, and magnitude of the heavenly bodies. -- It is by this
science, that geographers determine the figure and magnitude of the whole
earth, and delineate the extent and bearings of kingdoms, provinces, oceans,
harbors, and every place upon the globe. -- It is adapted to artificers in
every branch; and from thence, as I said before, architects derive their
measures, justnesses, and proportions.

This naturally leads me to conjecture why the SQUARE is had by masons, as one
of the LIGHTS of MASONRY, and part of the furniture of the LODGE. To explain my
ideas on that matter, I will only repeat to you the words of a celebrated
author, treating of the rise and progress of sciences: -- He says, We find
nothing in ancient authors to direct us to the exact order in which the
fundamental principles of measuring surfaces were discovered. They probably
began with those surfaces which terminated by right lines, and amongst these
with the most simple. -- It is hard indeed to determine which of those
surfaces, which are terminated by a small number of right lines, are the most
simple. -- If we were to judge by the number of sides, the triangle has
indisputably the advantage: -- yet I am inclined to think, that the square was
the figure which first engaged the attention of geometricians. -- It was not
till some time after this, that they began to examine equilateral triangles,
which are the most regular of all triangular figures. -- It is to be presumed
that they understood that rectilinear figure first, to which they afterward
compared the areas of other polygons, as they discovered them. -- It was by
that means the square became the common measure of all surfaces; -- for of all
ages, and amongst all nations of which we have any knowledge, the square has
always been that in planimetry, which the unit is in arithmetic: -- for though
in measuring rectilinear figures, we are obliged to resolve them into
triangles, yet the areas of these figures are always given in the square. --
Thence I am led to determine, that the square was the first and original figure
in geometry, and as such was introduced to our lodges.

The square was the figure under which the Israelites formed their encampments
in the wilderness, and under which they fortified or defended the holy
tabernacle, sanctified with the immediate presence of the Divinity.

As I before declared it to be my opinion, that this society was never formed
for, or of, a set of working architects or masons; but as a religious, social,
and charitable establishment, and never were embodied, or exhibited to the
world as builders, save only under Moses and at the Temple at Jerusalem, where
with holy hands they executed those works of piety, as the patriarchs erected
altars to the honor of the Divinity, for their sacrifices and religious offices
Genesis iv. 3, 4. viii. 20. xxii. 9. xxviii. 18. xxxiii. 20. xxxi. 7.

Exodus xx. 24. xxvii. 1. xxx. 1.

Joshua xxii. 10, 11.


; -- so I am persuaded, that the adoption of geometry by masons, or any emblem
of that science, implies no more than a reverence for such device of the mind
of man as should demonstrate the wisdom of the Almighty in his works, whereby
the powers of Abrax are defined, and the system of the starry revolutions in
the heavens determined.

If we should look upon the earth with its produce, the ocean with its tides,
the coming and passing of day, the starry arch of heaven, the seasons and their
changes, the life and death of man, as being merely accidents in the hand of
nature; we must shut up all the powers of judgment, and yield ourselves to the
darkest folly and ignorance. -- The august scene of the planetary system, the
day and night, the seasons in their successions, the animal frame, the
vegetation of plants, all afford us subject for astonishment: the greater too
mighty, but for the hand of a Deity, whose works they are; -- the least too
miraculous, but for the wisdom of their God.

Then how much ought we to esteem that science, through whose powers it is
given to man to discover the order of the heavenly bodies, their revolutions,
and their stations; thereby resolving the operations of the Deity to an
unerring system, proving the mightiness of his works, and the wisdom of his
decrees.

It is no wonder then that the first institutors of this society, who had their
eye on the revelation of the Deity, from the earliest ages of the world, unto
the days of its perfection under the ministry of the Son of God, that they
should hold that science hallowed amongst them, whereby such lights were
obtained by man, in the discovery of the great wisdom of the Creator in the
beginning.

LECTURE IX. The Master Mason's Order.
AS I at first proposed to investigate the three progressive orders of Masons,
Apprentices, Craftsmen, and Masters, by a definition and description of the
several circumstances which attended the worshipers of the true God, -- so have
I in the former lectures shown, that by order, in the Apprentices, is implied
the first knowledge of the God of nature, in the earliest ages of man. -- Under
the Craftsmen, I have shown the Mosaic legation, and the Jewish Temple at
Jerusalem; together with the light which men received, for the discovery of the
divine Wisdom, by geometrical solutions. -- I now proceed to the third stage,
the most sacred and solemn order of Masons, the MASTER MASON'S ORDER.

Under the Jewish law, the service of God became clouded and obscured by
ceremonies and rites, which had daily crept in upon it, through imitation of
the neighboring heathen. -- When the morals of the Jewish nation were
corrupted, civil jurisdiction reeled upon its throne -- innovations sapped the
religious rule, and anarchy succeeded. -- No sooner was this compact loosened,
than the strength of the Jews was dissolved, and the heathen triumphed in
Jerusalem.

The gracious Divinity, perceiving the ruin which was overwhelming mankind, in
his benevolence, was moved to redeem us. -- He saw that the revelation which he
had deigned to make of his divinity, might, majesty, and wisdom to the Jewish
tribes, was not sufficient to preserve them in their duty: he weighed the
frailty of mankind in the balance which his justice suspended, and to their
deficiencies he bestowed his mercy. -- The Egyptians had abused their learning
and wisdom; -- the Jews had polluted God's ordinances and laws; -- and Sin had
made her dominion in the strong places of the earth.

Piety, which had planned the Temple at Jerusalem, was expunged; -- the
reverence and adoration due to the Divinity, was buried in the filth and
rubbish of the world; -- persecution had dispersed the few who retained their
obedience, and the name of the true God was almost totally lost and forgotten
among men; -- Religion sat mourning in Israel in sackcloth and ashes, and
Morality was scattered as it were by the four winds of the air.

In this situation, it might well be said, That the guide to heaven was lost,
and the master of the works of righteousness was smitten. -- The nations had
given themselves up to the grossest idolatry; Solomon had fallen, and the
service of the true God was effaced, from the memory of those who had yielded
themselves to the dominion of sin.

In order that mankind might be preserved from this deplorable estate of
darkness and destruction, and AS THE OLD LAW WAS DEAD AND BECOME ROTTENESS, a
new doctrine, and new precepts were wanting to give the key to salvation; in
the language of which we might touch the ear of an offended Deity, and bring
forth hope for eternity. TRUE RELIGION was fled: -- Those who sought her
through the wisdom of the ancients were not able to raise her, she eluded the
grasp, and their polluted hands were stretched forth in vain for her
restoration. -- Those who sought her by the old law were frustrated, for Death
had stepped between, and Corruption defiled the embrace; Sin had beset her
steps, and the vices of the world had overwhelmed her.

The great Father of all, commiserating the miseries of the world, sent his
only Son, who was INNOCENCE itself, to teach the doctrine of salvation; -- by
whom man was raised from the death of sin, unto the life of righteousness; --
from the tomb of corruption unto the chambers of hope; -- from the darkness of
despair to the celestial beams of faith; -- and not only working for us this
redemption, but making with us the covenant of regeneration; whence we are
become the children of the Divinity, and inheritors of the realms of Heaven.

We MASONS, describing the deplorable estate of religion under the Jewish law,
speak in figures: -- Her tomb was in the rubbish, and filth cast forth of the
temple, and ACACIA wove its branches over her monument; (...) being the Greek
word for innocence, or being free from sin; implying that the sins and
corruptions of the old law, and devotees of the Jewish altar, had hid religion
from those who sought her, and she was only to be found where INNOCENCE
survived, and under the banner of the divine Lamb; -- and as to ourselves
professing that we were to be distinguished by our ACACY, or as true ACACIANS
in our religious faith and tenets Acacia -- AKAKIA, in antiquity a roll or bag,
represented on the medals of the Greek and Roman Emperors: some think it is
only an handkerchief, which they used as a signal; others take it for a volume
or roll of memorandums or petitions; and others will have it to be a purple bag
filled with earth, to remind the prince of his mortality. Acacians (Acaciani)
in church history, the name of a sect of religious and professed christians,
some of whom maintained, that the Son was only of a like, not the same,
substance with the Father; and others, that he was not only of a distinct, but
also of a dissimilar substance. -- Acacy, (in Johnson's Dictionary) (...) Gr.
innocence, or being free from sin.


.

The acquisition of the doctrine of redemption, is expressed in the typical
character of HURAMEN, ((...), inveni) and by the applications of that name with
masons, it is implied, that we have discovered the knowledge of God and of his
salvation, and have been redeemed from the death of sin, and the sepulcher of
pollution and unrighteousness The mason advancing to this state of masonry,
pronounces his own sentence, as confessional of the imperfection of the second
stage of his profession, and as probationary of the exalted degree to which he
aspires, in this Greek distich, (...), Struo tumulum: I prepare my sepulcher; I
make my grave in the pollutions of the earth; I am under the shadow of death.
-- This distich has been vulgarly corrupted among us, and an expression takes
its place scarcely similar in sound, and entirely inconsistent with masonry,
and unmeaning in itself.


.

Thus the MASTER MASON represents a man under the christian doctrine, saved
from the grave of iniquity, and raised to the faith of salvation.

As the great testimonial that we are risen from the state of corruption, we
bear the emblem of the HOLY TRINITY, as the insignia of our vows, and of the
origin of the Master's order. -- This emblem is given by geometricians as a
demonstration of the Trinity in Unity.



On receiving this ensign, the mason professes himself in a short distich, in
the Greek language, which, from the rules of our order, I am forbid to commit
to writing; the literal meaning of which is, VEHEMENTER CUPIO VITAM, ardently I
wish for life; meaning the everlasting life of redemption and regeneration: an
avowal which carries with it the most religious import, and must proceed from a
pure faith. -- The ceremonies attending this stage of our profession are solemn
and tremendous; during which a sacred awe is diffused over the mind, the soul
is struck with reverence, and all the spiritual faculties are called forth to
worship and adoration.

This our order is a positive contradistinction to the Judaic blindness and
infidelity, and testifies our faith concerning the resurrection of the body.

The divine construction put upon this emblem of the Master's Order, which he
declares, is the principle by which he is raised from darkness; so it is also
the emblem of moral duties professed by the mason, and which in former ages
were most religiously performed. These also are principles immediately
resulting from the christian doctrine.

The MASTER MASON imposes a duty on himself, full of moral virtue and christian
charity, by enforcing that brotherly love which every man should extend to his
neighbor.

FIRST. That when the calamities of our brother call for our aid, we should not
withdraw the hand that might sustain him from sinking; but that we should
render him those services, which, not incumb'ring or injuring our families or
fortunes, charity and religion may dictate for the saving of our
fellow creature.

SECOND. From which purpose, indolence should not persuade the foot to halt, or
wrath turn our steps out of the way: but forgetting injuries and selfish
feelings, and rememb'ring that man was born for the aid of his generation, and
not for his own enjoyments only, but to do that which is good; we should be
swift to have mercy, to save, to strengthen, and execute benevolence.

THIRD. As the good things of this life are partially dispensed, and some are
opulent whilst others are in distress; such principles also enjoin a mason, be
he ever so poor, to testify his good will toward his brother. -- Riches alone
do not allow the means of doing good; VIRTUE AND BENEVOLENCE are not confined
to the walks of opulence: -- the rich man, from his many talents, is required
to make extensive works under the principles of virtue; and yet poverty is no
excuse for an omission of that exercise; for as the cry of innocence ascends
up to heaven, as the voice of babes and sucklings reach the throne of God, and
as the breathings of a contrite heart are heard in the regions of dominion; so
a mason's prayers, devoted to the welfare of his brother, are required of him.

FOURTH. The fourth principle is never to injure the confidence of your
brother, by revealing his secrets; for perhaps that were to rob him of the
guard which protects his property or life. -- The tongue of a mason should be
void of offense, and without guile; -- speaking truth with discretion, and
keeping itself within the rule of judgment; -- maintaining a heart void of
uncharitableness, locking up secrets, and communing in charity and love.

FIFTH. Of charity. So much is required of a mason, in his gifts, as discretion
shall limit; -- charity begins at home, but like a fruitful olive tree, planted
by the side of a fountain, whose boughs over-shoot the wall, so is charity: it
spreads its arms abroad from the strength and opulence of its station, and
lends its shade for the repose and relief of those who are gathered under its
branches. -- Charity, when given with imprudence, is no longer a virtue; but
when flowing from abundance, it is glorious as the beams of morning, in whose
beauty thousands rejoice. When donations, extorted by pity, are detrimental to
a man's family, they become sacrifices to superstition, and, like incense to
idols, are disapproved by heaven.

As Moses was commanded to pull his shoes from off his feet, on Mount Horeb,
because the ground whereon he trod was sanctified by the presence of the
Divinity; so the mason who would prepare himself for this third stage of
masonry, should advance in the naked paths of truth, be divested of every
degree of arrogance and come as a true ACACIAN, with steps of innocence,
humility, and virtue, to challenge the ensigns of an order, whose institutions
arise on the most solemn and sacred principles of religion.

LECTURE X. The Secrecy of Masons.
IN this age, when every thing serious is received with laughter, every thing
religious treated with contempt, and whatever is moral, spurned from the doors
of the polite; no wonder if my intentions to prove this society of religious as
well as civil institution, is ridiculed and despised.

It is not to be doubted many assemblies of MASONS were held before the
christian era; the first stage of masonry took its rise in the earliest times,
was originated in the mind of ADAM, descended pure through the antedeluvian
ages, was afterward taught by HAM, and from him, amidst the corruptions of
mankind, flowed unpolluted and unstained with idolatry to these our times, by
the channel of some few of the SONS OF TRUTH, who remained uncontaminated with
the sins of nations; saving to us pure and spotless principles, together with
the original symbols. -- These ancients, enlightened with original truth, were
dispersed through many states; -- they were called to join the Jewish nation,
and many of them became united with that people. The WISE-HEARTED were employed
in the construction of the tabernacle of Moses, they were embodied at the
building of the temple at Jerusalem, and might from thence emigrate into
distant countries, where they would superintend other religious works. The
ceremonies now known to masons, prove that the testimonials and insignia of the
Masters' order, in the present state of masonry, were devised within the ages
of christianity, and I am confident there are not any records in being, in any
nation, or in any language, which can show them to be pertinent to any other
system, or give them greater antiquity.

In this country, under the Druids, the first principles of our profession most
assuredly were taught and exercised: how soon the second stage and its
ceremonials were promulged after the building of the temple at Jerusalem, we
have no degree of evidence. As to the third and most sacred order, no doubt it
was adopted upon the conversion of those who attended the DRUIDICAL WORSHIP,
who had professed the adoration of the ONE SUPREME BEING, and who readily would
receive the doctrines of a MEDIATOR; a system in religion which had led the
sages of old into innumerable errors, and at last confounded them with idolatry.

Under our present profession of masonry, we allege our morality was
originally deduced from the school of Pythagoras, and that the Basilidian
system of religion furnished us with some tenets, principles, and
hieroglyphics: but these, together with the Egyptian symbols and Judaic
monuments, are collected only as a successional series of circumstances, which
the devotees of the Deity, in different and distant ages of the world, had
professed; and are all resolved into the present system of masonry, which is
made perfect in the doctrine of christianity: from these united members gaining
alone that evidence of antiquity, which shows that we are descendants of the
first worshippers of the Deity.

That there were builders of cities, towers, temples, and fortifications, from
the earliest ages, is indisputable; -- but that the artificers were formed into
bodies, ruled by their own proper laws, and knowing mysteries and secrets which
were kept from the world, I am greatly doubtful: -- for so plain, easy, and
intelligible is the mechanic art of building, that it is comprehensible to any
capacity, and needed not to be wrapped up in mystic rules; neither was there
any occasion for the artificers to go about as conjurers, professing a science
unrevealed to the world.

Man would be taught building by the animals daily under his observation: the
fox, the rabbit, and many other creatures, form themselves caves; the beaver is
an architect in wood, and builds hovels and sheds; the birds at a season for
their increase, prepare their nests for the protection of their young; the be
labors in constructing cities and storehouses; the ants are cloistered in
their little mount, perforated with labyrinths, where their provender and
progeny are secured. -- All these would instruct men in building; -- so that
whilst our race were reaping the first rudiments of knowledge from the book of
nature, after the darkness which had overwhelmed them in their disobedience,
this could remain no secret.

Besides, if we should be resolved into the successors of mechanics, and as
such, should take our grand progress from the building of the temple at
Jerusalem, we shall find, that HIRAM, who was sent from Tire to assist in that
structure, had not his excellence in architecture only, but in molten work, and
also in dying, as is said in Chronicles: He was skilful to work in silver and
gold, in brass, in iron, in stone, and in timber, in purple, in blue, in fine
linen, and in crimson; also to grave all manner of graving. -- He was the
subject of a state, wherein the worship of idols was established. -- This kind
of religion gave encouragement to, and greatly advanced the fine arts, as it
employed statuaries, sculptors, painters, and those who made graven images. --
Solomon ornamented his temple with cherubins and palm trees, fruits and
flowers: from whence I do not doubt Hiram's knowledge was in the business of a
statuary and painter, that he made graven images of stone and wood, and molten
images in metals. -- In Kings, it is said only, that Hiram was filled with
wisdom and understanding, and cunning to work all works in brass. -- As to
Solomon's part in this great structure, he being inclined to this mighty work
of piety through the ordinances of heaven, and the promises made to his father
David, was the executor of that plan which was revealed to him from above: --
he called forth the sages and religious men amongst his people to perform the
work: -- he classed them according to their rank in their religious profession;
as the priests of the temple were stationed in the solemn rites and ceremonies
instituted there. -- This distinction was maintained in most religious
societies, but especially with the primitive christians. -- The chosen ones of
Solomon, as a pious and holy duty, conducted the work. -- If we regard them as
architects by profession, by reason of this duty, so we may Abel, Noah,
Abraham, Jacob, Moses, and David, by reason of the building of their altars,
which were no other than works of piety and devotion. -- From those
circumstances, I am bold to say, that if we trace the antiquity of masonry on
the operative principles, and derive such principles from the building of
Solomon's Temple, we may as well claim all the professions which Hiram excelled
in: -- but I will leave this speculation for more material subjects.

Some masters of design have brought their works to a singular justness,
symmetry, and order, in Egypt and Greece, in Italy and many other European
states: but they, like proficients in painting and music, had their excellence
from a degree of genius and taste peculiar to themselves. -- It was a singular
gift, and they needed not mysteries to keep it secret; for as men's geniuses
are as various as their features, so was this excellence in architecture as
free from usurpation, as if it had been wrapped up in the most profound magic.

I am persuaded there was no occasion to form such secret rules for the compact
of operative masons: -- Solomon, for the conduct of such a multitude, wisely
preserved the order of the religious, and the mysteries of their initiation,
for the rule of his people employed in the temple. -- Assuredly the secrets
revealed to us were for other uses than what relate to laboring up masses of
stone; and our society, as it now stands, is an association on religious and
charitable principles; which principles were instituted and arose upon the
knowledge of God, and in the christian revelation.

Soon after the time that christianity became the established religion of this
country, the professors of it employed themselves in founding religious houses,
and in the building of places of public worship. -- On any reform of religion,
it is observable the first professors are inclinable to enthusiasm. -- Such was
the case in this land, on the advancement of the christian doctrine: -- a
fervor for endowments infatuated the minds of the converted; -- certain days
were assigned for the purpose of attending to religious works and edifices,
called hally-wark-days; on which no man, of what profession, rank, or estate
soever, was exempt from attending that duty. -- Besides, there were a set of
men called haly-werk-folk De Hermitorio Finchalensis Ranulphus Dei gratia
Dunelmensis Episcopus omnibus hominibus suis Francis et Anglis de haly werc
folc salutem, etc.

Many other grants are in my possession of this kind. Ralph Flamberd was
consecrated Bishop of Durham in 1099.


, to whom were assigned certain lands, which they held by the service of
repairing, defending, or building churches and sepulchers; for which pious
labors they were exempt from all feodal and military services: these men being
stone-cutters and builders, might also be of our profession, and most probably
they were selected from thence, the two being in no wise incompatible with each
other. -- The county of Durham Hist. Dunelm. apud Wartoni Aug. Sax.
entertained a particular set of those haly-werk-folk, who were guards of the
patrimony and holy sepulcher of St Cuthbert. -- These men come the nearest to a
similitude of Solomon's masons, and to the title of FREE AND ACCEPTED MASONS,
of any degree of architects I have gained any knowledge of: but whether their
initiation was attended with any peculiar ceremonies, or by what laws they were
regulated, I have not been able to discover; and must lament, that in the
church records of Durham, or in any public office there, there are not the
least remains of evidence, touching these people and the constitution of their
society. It was a matter to be coveted by me, lecturing on this subject, as
most probably such constitution or evidence would have confirmed every
hypothesis I have raised on the definition of our emblems and mysteries.

The emblems used by these people, very much resembled those of our society,
several tokens of which have been found of late years in pulling down old
ruins. -- It is much to be wished, that those noblemen, etc. in whose
possession ancient abbeys stand, would on all occasions of pulling down or
repairing, give instructions to their workmen, to preserve with care any
antique marks, characters, or emblems they may find. -- There are some double
walls, or hollow pillars, in which such things were deposited. -- Few men will
be at the expense of digging to the foundations of such buildings, where
valuable marks and curious inscriptions would be found on the foundation or
what was called the angle-stone, which formed a perfect cube. -- This was a
very ancient custom: the unbelieving Jews accused our Savior of having stolen
the mystic words, the TETRAGRAMMATON, or URIM AND THUMMIM, from the foundation
of the temple at Jerusalem, which they said he carried concealed about him,
whereby he was enabled to work his miracles.

Soon after the progress of christianity in this land, all Europe was inflamed
with the cry and madness of an enthusiastic monk, who prompted the zealots in
religion to the holy war; in which, for the purpose of recovering the holy city
and Judea out of the hands of infidels, armed legions of saints, devotees, and
enthusiasts, in tens of thousands, poured forth from every state of Europe, to
waste their blood and treasure, in a purpose as barren and unprofitable as
impolitic.

It was deemed necessary that those who took up the ensign of the cross in this
enterprise, should form themselves into such societies as might secure them
from spies and treacheries; and that each might know his companion and brother
labourer, as well in the dark as by day. As it was with Jeptha's army at the
passes of Jordan, so also was it requisite in these expeditions that certain
signs, signals, watch-words, or pass-words, should be known amongst them; for
the armies consisted of various nations and various languages. -- We are told
in the book of Judges, that the Gileadites took the passes of Jordan before the
Ephraimites; and it was so, that when those Ephraimites which were escaped
said, let me go over, that the men of Gilead said unto him, Art thou an
Ephraimite? If he said nay, then said they unto him, say now Shibboleth, and he
said Sibboleth, for he could not frame to pronounce it right. Then they took
them and slew them at the passage of Jordan. The application which is made of
the word Sibboleth amongst masons, is as a testimony of their retaining their
original vow uninfringed, and their first says with the brotherhood
uncorrupted. And to render their words and phrases more abstruse and obscure,
they selected such as by acceptance in the scriptures, or otherwise, might
puzzle the ignorant by a double implication. -- Thus Sibboleth, should we have
adopted the Elusimian mysteries, would answer as an avowal of our profession,
the same implying, Ears of Corn; but it has its etymology or derivation from
the following compounds in the Greek tongue, as it is adopted by masons, viz.
(...), Colo, and (...), Lapis; so (...), Sibbolithon, Colo Lapidem, implies,
that they retain and keep inviolate their obligations, as the Juramentum per
Jovem L^pid^m, the most obligatory oath held amongst the heathen. -- The name
Lapis, or, as others write, Lapideus, was given to Jupiter by the Romans, who
conceived that Juramentum per Jovem Lapidem, an oath by Jupiter Lapis, was the
most obligatory oath; and it is derived either from the stone which was
presented to Saturn by his wise Ops, who said that it was Jupiter, in which
sense Eusebius says that Lapis reigned in Crete: or from lipide silice, the
flint stone, which in making bargains the swearer held in his hand and said,
'If knowingly I deceive, so let Diespiter, saving the city and the capital,
cast me away from all that is good, as I cast away this stone.' Whereupon he
threw the stone away. Pantheon.




No project or device could answer the purposes of the crusadors better than
those of masonry: -- the maxims and ceremonials attending the Master's order
had been previously established, and were materially necessary on that
expedition; for as the Mahomedans were also worshippers of the Deity, and as
the enterprizers were seeking a country where the masons were in the time of
Solomon called into an association, and where some remains would certainly be
found of the mysteries and wisdom of the ancients and of our predecessors. Such
degrees of masonry as extended only to the acknowledgment of their being
servants of the God of nature, would not have distinguished them from those
they had to encounter, had they not assumed the symbols of the christian faith.

All the learning of Europe in those times, as in the ages of antiquity, was
possessed by the religious; -- they had acquired the wisdom of the ancients,
and the original knowledge which was in the beginning, and now is, THE TRUTH;
-- many of them had been initiated into the mysteries of masonry; -- they were
the projectors of this enterprise, and as Solomon in the building of the
temple, introduced orders and regulations for the conduct of the work, which
his wisdom had been enriched with from the learning of the sages of antiquity,
so that no confusion should happen during its progress, and so that the rank
and office of each fellow laborer might be distinguished and ascertained
beyond the possibility of deceit; in like manner the priests projecting the
crusades, being possessed of the mysteries of masonry, the knowledge of the
ancients, and of the universal language which survived the confusion of Shinar,
revived the orders and regulations of Solomon, and initiated the legions
therein who followed them to the Holy Land: -- hence that secrecy which
attended the crusaders.

Amongst other evidence which authorizes me in the conjecture that masons went
to the holy wars, is the doctrine of that order of masons, called the HIGHER
ORDER. I am induced to believe that order was of Scottish extraction; separate
nations might be distinguished by some separate order, as they were by singular
ensigns: but be that as it may, it fully proves to me that masons were
crusaders.

As my intention in this lecture was not only to speculate on the ancient
secrecy amongst masons, but also to treat of the secrecy of masons in this age,
I must therefore turn my thoughts to the importance secresy is now of amongst
us, when there are no holy structures to erect, no holy wars to wage, and
nothing but charity and brotherly love to cherish among masons.

This institution, which was first founded in the mysteries of religion, as I
have before rehearsed to you, is now maintained by us on the principles of
lending mutual aid and consolation to each other. -- How should we be able to
discern the brethren of this family, but through such tokens as should point
them out from other men? Language is now provincial, and the dialects of
different nations would not be comprehensible to men ignorant and unlettered.
Hence it became necessary to use an expression which should be cognizable by
people of all nations. -- So it is with masons; -- they are possessed of that
universal expression, and of such remains of the original language, that they
can communicate their history, their wants, and prayers, to every brother mason
throughout the globe: -- from whence, it is certain, that multitudes of lives
have been saved in foreign countries, when ship-wreck and misery had
overwhelmed them: when robbers had pillaged, when sickness, want, and misery
had brought them even to the brink of the grave, the discovery of masonry has
saved them: the discovery of being a brother, has staid the savage hand of the
conqueror, lifted in the field of battle to cut off the captive; has withheld
the sword imbrued in carnage and slaughter, and subdued the insolence of
triumph to pay homage to the craft.

The importance of secrecy with us, is such, that we may not be deceived in the
dispensing of our charities; -- that we may not be betrayed in the tenderness
of our benevolence, and others usurp the portion which is prepared for those of
our own family.

To betray the watchword, which should keep the enemy from the walls of our
citadel, so as to open our strongholds to robbers and deceivers, is as great a
moral crime, as to show the common thief the weaknesses and secret places of
our neighbor's dwelling-houses, that he may pillage their goods. -- Nay it is
still greater, for it is like aiding the sacrilegious robber to ransack the
holy places, and steal the sacred vessels devoted to the most solemn rites of
religion. -- It is snatching from the divine hand of charity, the balm which
she holds forth to heal the distresses of her children; the cordial cup of
consolation, which she offers to the lip of calamity, and the sustenance her
fainting infants should receive from the bosom of her celestial love.

As this then is the importance of masons secrecy, wherefore should the world
wonder that the most profligate tongue which ever had expression has not
revealed it? The sport is too criminal to afford delight even to the wickedest
of mankind; for it must be wantonness only which could induce any man to
divulge it, as no profit could arise therefrom, nor selfish view be gratified.
-- It was mentioned by divine lips as a crime not in nature: What man is there
of you, whom if his son ask for bread, will give him a stone; or if he ask a
fish, will give him a serpent? -- Then can there be a man so iniquitous among
masons, as to guide the thief to steal from his sick brother the medicine which
should restore his health? the balsam which should close his wounds? the
clothing which should shield his trembling limbs from the severity of the
winter? the drink which should moisten his fainting lip? the bread which should
save his soul alive?

Such is the importance of our secrecy: -- were there no other ties upon our
affections or consciences, than merely the sense of the injury we should do to
the poor and the wretched, by a transgression of this rule, I am persuaded it
would be sufficient to lock up the tongue of every man who professes himself
to be a MASON.

LECTURE XI. Of Charity.
AS one of the principal characteristics of a Mason, in this lecture, I will
treat of CHARITY.

I do not mean to make strictures on that modern error of indiscriminately
dispensing alms to all suppliants, without regard to their real wants or real
merits; whereby the hypocrite and knave often eat the bread which virtue in
distress ought to be relieved by. -- This is a mistaken character of charity,
in which she is too often abused. -- Though the bounties of benevolence and
compassion are given with a righteous wish, yet they should be ruled by
discretion.

The ancients used to depict the virtue CHARITY, in the character of a goddess,
seated in a chair of ivory, with a golden tire upon her head, set with precious
stones: -- her vesture, like the light of heaven, represented universal
benevolence; her throne was unpolluted and unspotted by passions and
prejudices; and the gems of her fillet represented the inestimable blessings
which flowed variously from her bounty.

They also represented the charities, otherwise called the graces, under three
personages: -- one of these was painted with her back toward us, and her face
forward, as proceeding from us; and the other two with their faces toward us,
to denote, that for one benefit done we should receive double thanks: -- they
were painted naked, to intimate that good offices should be done without
dissembling and hypocrisy: -- they were represented young, to signify that the
remembrance of benefits should never wax old: -- and also laughing, to tell us
that we should do good to others with cheerfulness and alacrity. -- They were
represented linked together, arm in arm, to instruct us that one kindness
should prompt another; so that the knot and bond of love should be
indissoluble. -- The poets tell us, that they used to wash themselves in the
fountain Acidalius, because benefits, gifts, and good-turns ought to be sincere
and pure, and not base, sordid, and counterfeit.

CHARITY, in the works of moralists, is defined to be the love of our brethren,
or a kind of brotherly affection one toward another. -- The rule and standard
that this habit is to be examined and regulated by among christians, is the
love we bear to ourselves, or that the Mediator bore toward us; -- that is, it
must be unfeigned, constant, and out of no other design than their happiness.

Such are the general sentiments which the ancients entertained of this virtue,
and what the modern moralists and christians define it to be at this day.

In what character CHARITY should be received among masons, is now my purpose
to define, as it stands limited to our own society. The principles which alone
should attend a candidate for initiation to our society, are pathetically
represented in the following psalm.

PSALM XV.
1. Lord, who shall abide in thy tabernacle? who shall abide in thy holy hill?

2. He that walks uprightly and works righteousness, and speaks the truth
in his heart.

3. He that backbiteth not with his tongue, nor does evil to his neighbor; nor
takes up a reproach against his neighbor.

4. In whose eyes a vile person is contemned; but he honors them that fear
the Lord: he that swears to his own hurt and changes not.

5. He that puts not out his money to usury, nor takes reward against the
innocent. -- He that does these things shall never be moved.




As being so limited, we are not through that channel subject to be imposed on
by false pretenses; and are certain of the proper and merited administration of
it. It is hence to be hoped, that it exists with us without dissembling or
hypocrisy, and lives in sincerity and truth: -- that benefits received impress
a lively degree of gratitude and affection on the minds of masons, as their
bounties should be bestowed with cheerfulness, and unacquainted with the frozen
singer of reluctance: -- the benevolence of our society should be so mutual and
brotherly, that each ought to endeavor to render good offices, as readily as
he would receive them. The misplacing of a benefit is worse than the not
receiving of it; for the one is another man's fault, but the other is mine. The
error of the giver does often times excuse the ingratitude of the receiver; for a
favor ill placed is rather a profusion than a benefit. It is the most shameful
of losses, an inconsiderate bounty. I will choose a man of integrity, sincere,
considerate, grateful, temperate, well-natured, neither covetous nor sordid;
and when I have obliged such a man, though not worth a groat in the world, I
have gained my end. If we give only to receive, we lose the fairest objects for
our charity; the absent, the sick, the captive, and the needy. Seneca of
Benefits. The rule is, we are to give as we would receive, cheerfully, quickly,
and without hesitation; for there is no grace in a benefit that sticks to the
fingers. A benefit should be made acceptable by all possible means, even to the
end that the receiver, who is never to forget it, may bear it in his mind with
satisfaction. The same. It is not the value of the present, but the benevolence
of the mind, that we are to consider: that which is given with pride and
ostentation, is rather an ambition than a bounty. The same.


In order to exercise this virtue, both in the character of masons and in
common life, with propriety, and agreeable to such principles, we should forget
every obligation but affection; for otherwise it were to confound charity with
duty. -- The feelings of the heart ought to direct the hand of CHARITY. -- To
this purpose we should be divested of every idea of superiority, and estimate
ourselves as being of the same rank and race of men: -- in this disposition of
mind we may be susceptible of those sentiments which CHARITY delights in, to
feel the woes and miseries of others with a genuine and true sympathy of soul:
-- COMPASSION is of heavenly birth; -- it is one of the first characteristics
of humanity. -- Peculiar to our race, it distinguishes us from the rest of
creation. 1 Corinthians. chap. xiii. Ver 1. Though I speak with the tongues of men
and of angels, and have not charity, I am become as sounding brass, or a
tinkling cymbal.

2. And though I have the gift of prophecy, and understand all mysteries, and
all knowledge; and though I have all says, so that I could remove mountains,
and have not charity, I am nothing.

3. And though I bestow all my goods to feed the poor, and though I give my
body to be burned, and have not charity, it profits me nothing.

4. Charity suffers long, and is kind; charity envieth not; charity vaunteth
not itself, is not puffed up.

5. Does not behave itself unseemly, seeks not her own, is not easily
provoked, thinks no evil.

6. Rejoiceth not in iniquity, but rejoiceth in the truth.

7. Bears all things, believes all things, hops all things, endures all
things.

8. Charity never fails: but whether there be prophecies, they shall fail;
whether there be tongues, they shall cease; whether there be knowledge, it
shall vanish away.

9. For we know in part, and we prophesy in part.

10. But when that which is perfect is come, then that which is in part shall
be done away.

11. "When I was a child, I spoke as a child, I understood as a child, I
thought as a child but when I became a man, I put away childish things.

12. For now we see through a glass, darkly; but then face to face: now I know
in part; but then shall I know, even as also I am known.

13. And now abides faith, hope, charity, these three; but the greatest of
these is charity.




He whose bosom is locked up against compassion is a Barbarian; -- his manners
must be brutal -- his mind gloomy and morose -- and his passions as savage as
the beasts of the forest.

What kind of man is he, who full of opulence, and in whose hand abundance
overflows, can look on virtue in distress, and merit in misery, without pity?
-- Who could behold without tears, the desolate and forlorn estate of a WIDOW,
who in early life, having been brought up in the bosom of a tender mother,
without knowing care, and without tasting of necessity, was not befitted for
adversity; -- whose soul was pure as innocence, and full of honor; -- whose
mind had been brightned by erudition under an indulgent father; -- whose youth,
untutored in the school of sorrows, had been flattered with the prospect of
days of prosperity and plenty; -- one, who at length, by the cruel adversity of
winds and seas, with her dying husband, is wrecked in total destruction and
beggary; driven by ill fortune, from peace and plenty; and from the bed of
ease, changes her lot to the dank dunghill, for the relief of her weariness and
pain; -- grown meagre with necessity, and sick with woe; -- at her bosom
hanging her famished infant, draining off the dregs of parental life, for
sustenance; bestowed from maternal love -- yielding existence to support the
babe. -- Hard-hearted covetousness and proud titles, can ye behold such an
object, dry eyed? -- Can avarice grasp the mite which should sustain such
virtue? -- Can high life lift its supercilious brow above such scenes in human
life; above such miseries sustained by a fellow creature? -- If perchance the
voice of the unfortunate and wretched widow is heard in complainings, when
wearying PATIENCE and relaxing RESIGNATION breathes a sigh, whilst modesty
forbids her supplication; is not the groan, the sigh, more pathetic to your
ear, you rich ones, than all the flattering petitions of a cringing knave, who
touches your vanity and tickles your follies; extorting from your very
weaknesses, the prostituted portion of CHARITY. -- Perhaps the fatal hour's at
hand, when consolation is required to close the last moments of this
unfortunate one's life: -- can the man absorbed in pleasure roll his chariot
wheels beyond the scene of sorrow without compassion, and without pity see the
last convulsion and the deadly gaze which paint misery upon the features of an
expiring saint! -- If angels weep in heaven, they weep for such: -- if they can
know contempt, they feel it for the wealthy, who bestow not of their
superfluities, and snatch not from their vices what would gladden souls sunk in
the woes of worldly adversity. -- The eyes of cherubims view with delight the
exercise of such benevolence as forms the character of the good Samaritan: --
saints touch their golden lyres, to hymn HUMANITY's fair history in realms of
bliss; and approbation shines upon the countenance divine of OMNIPRESENCE, when
a man is found in the exercise of virtue.

What should that human wretch be called, who, with premeditated cruelty and
avarice, devises mischief whilst he is conscious of his neighbor's honesty; --
whilst he sees him industriously, day by day, laboring with sweaty brow and
weary limbs, toiling with cheerfulness for bread, -- on whose exerted labor,
an affectionate and virtuous wife and healthy children, crowding his narrow
hearth with naked feet, depend for sustenance; -- whilst he perceives him, with
integrity more than human, taking scrupulously his own, and wronging no man for
his hunger or his wants; -- whilst he sees him with fatigued sinews, lengthen
out the toil of industry, from morn to night with unremitting ardor, singing to
elude repining, and smoothing his anxieties and pain with hope, that he shall
reward his weariness by the overflowings of his wife's cheerful heart, and with
the smiles of his feeding infants? -- What must he be, who knows such a man,
and by his craft or avarice extorts unjust demands, and brings him into
beggary? -- What must he be, who sees such a man deprived by fire or water of
all his substance, the habitation of his infants lost, and nothing left but
nakedness and tears, -- and seeing this, affords the sufferer no relief? --
Surely in nature few such wretches do exist! but if such be, it is not vain
presumption to proclaim, that like accursed Cain, they are distinguished as the
outcast of God's mercies, and are left on earth to live a life of punishment.

The objects of true CHARITY, are MERIT and VIRTUE in distress; -- persons who
are incapable of extricating themselves from misfortunes which have overtaken
them in old age; -- industrious men, from inevitable accidents and acts of
Providence rushed into ruin; -- widows left survivors of their husbands, by
whose labors they subsisted; -- orphans in tender years left naked to the
world.

What the claims of such, on the hand of charity, when you compare them to the
miscreants who infest the doors of every dwelling with their importunities;
wretches wandering from their homes, showing their distortions and their sores
to prompt compassion; with which ill-gotten gains, in concert with thieves and
vagabonds, they revel away the hours of night which conceals their iniquities
and vices.

CHARITY, when misapplied, loses her titles, and instead of being adorned with
the dress of virtue, assumes the insignificance, the bells and feathers of
folly.

LECTURE XII. On Brotherly Love.
I Shall treat of BROTHERLY LOVE, in this lecture, in that light which solely
appertains to masons.

The necessity there is for the exertion of brotherly regard among masons in
the lodge, is obvious to every one: -- PEACE, REGULARITY, and DECORUM are
indispensible duties here: -- all the sire of resentment, and remembrance of
injuries, should be forgotten; and that cordiality ought to be warm among us,
which brings with it cheerfulness and rejoicing: -- the true worshipers of the
Deity, men who held just notions of the principles of nature, in the times of
barbarous ignorance, durst not publicly practice the one, or promulgate the
other: -- but happy is our estate, in this lettered age and this land of
liberty, we profess our sentiments with freedom, and without fear; we exercise
our religious principles under a full toleration; and as social beings we
assemble in the lodge, to enjoy the pleasures of friendship, and the breathings
of true benevolence without alloy.

After the business of the lodge is dispatched, we are met together to open out
the cheerfulness of our hearts without guile; for here are no tale-bearers,
censors, or revilers among us; -- our lodge is sacred to SILENCE: -- hence we
may say figuratively, it is situate in the secret places, where the cock
holds not his watch, where the voice of railing reaches not, where brawling,
as the intemperate wrath of women, cannot be heard.

Without suspicion of being betrayed in our words, or ensnared in the openness
of our dealings, our mirth here is undisguised, is governed by PRUDENCE,
tempered with LOVE, and clothed in CHARITY: -- thus it stands void of
offense: -- no malicious mind warps innocent expressions to wicked
constructions, or interprets unmeaning jests into sarcasms or satyrs; but as
every sentiment flows full of benevolence, so every ear here, is attuned to the
strain, in harmonious concord, and tastes the pleasures of festivity so pure,
that they bear our reflections, in the morning, without remorse.

Peace, regularity, and decorum, which I said were indispensible duties here,
are not the offspring of control, or the issue of authority; but a voluntary
service, which every man brings to the lodge.

There are seasons indeed, in which authority is properly exercised; -- man is
frail; -- the most prudent may sometimes deviate: -- it was a maxim of the
ancient philosophers, that "to err was human;" therefore in the lodge there
ought to be a constant governor, who should restrain the improprieties which
may creep in among us, by any brother coming here after an intemperance in
liquor.

Another degree of brotherly love which should prevail here, is to hear the
petitions of every member of this society with tenderness and attention. --
Where there is at any time a brother of our community sick or in distress, the
case of his calamities should come here represented by a brother, who will
neither deceive us, nor hold back any part of his merits; -- and the lodge must
testify all due regard, by receiving the petition patiently, and giving relief
according to the deserts.

The most material part of that brotherly love which should subsist among us
masons, is that of speaking well of each other to the world: -- more especially
it is expected of every member of this fraternity, that he should not traduce
his brother. -- Calumny and slander are detestable crimes against society. --
Nothing can be viler than to traduce a man behind his back; it is like the
villainy of an assassin, who has not virtue enough to give his adversary the
means of self-defence; but lurking in darkness, stabs him whilst he is unarmed,
and unsuspicious of an enemy.

Of this crime, the much-admired poet Shakespeare has given a just description.

"The man who steals my purse, steals trash;
"'It Was mine, it is his, and may be slave to thousands:
"But he who pilfers from me my good name,
"Robs me of that which not enriches him,
"But makes me poor indeed."
Calumny has this direful consequence, that it carries with it not a momentary
effect only, but endures for time uncounted. -- The wickedness of the world is
such, that it is greedy of scandal; and when once the voice of defamation has
uttered its poison, like a pestilence it smites and contaminates; -- it spreads
jealousies in families, division and wrath among friends, urges fathers against
children, and brother against brother. -- When once the pernicious tale gets
birth, it cannot be recalled; and thence the sinner's penitence is not capable
of expiation: for the evil consequences may lay dormant in the womb of
futurity, and become an intail of sorrow on the third and fourth generation of
him that is injured. -- What malice and mischief, what infernal disposition,
must actuate the mind which is capable of defaming the innocent! -- there is no
crime of which such a wretch might not be the perpetrator; -- against such a
villain there is no armor for defense; -- he assaults the naked and
unsuspicious, and like the contagion of some horrid disease, he smites whilst
the victim sleeps. -- Justice is disarmed against such a sinner, as concealment
is his safeguard, and only the eye of heaven discovers his iniquity.

It is not only expected of masons, that they should, with a conscientious
soul, re-refrain from evil-speaking; but also, that they should speak well of
each other.

To give a man his just and due character, is so easy a duty, that it is not
possible for a benevolent mind to avoid it; -- it is a degree of common justice
which honesty itself prompts one to. -- It is not enough that we refrain from
slander; but it is required of masons that they should speak graciously and
with affection, withholding nothing that can be uttered to a brother's praise
or good name with truth. -- What a pleasure does it give the heart, feeling
benevolent dispositions, to give praises where due. -- There is a selfish joy
in good speaking, as self-approbation succeeds it. -- Besides, the breast of
such a man feels enlarged, whilst he utters the praise due to his neighbor;
and he experiences all the finest sensations of love, whilst he moves others to
the same object of his regard.

The neutral disposition, frigid and reserved, neither speaks good nor evil; --
but the man tasting brotherly love, is warm to commend. -- It is an easy and
cheap means of bestowing good gifts and working good works; -- for by a just
praise to industry, you recommend the industrious man to those to whom he might
never be known, and thereby enlarge his credit and his trade. -- By a just
commendation of merit, you may open the paths of advancement through those
whose power might never have been petitioned. -- By a proper praise of genius
and art, you may rouse the attention of those patrons to whom the greatest
deservings might have remained a secret. It is a degree of justice which every
man has a right to, from his brother, that his virtues be not concealed.

To shroud the imperfections of our friend, and cloak his infirmities, is
christian-like, and charitable, consequently besitting a mason: -- even the
truth should not be told at all times; for where we cannot approve, we should
pity in silence. -- What pleasure or profit can there arise by exposing the
secrets of a brother? -- To exhort him, is virtuous; -- to revile him, is
inhuman; -- and to set him out as an object of ridicule, is infernal.

From hence we must necessarily determine, that the duty of a good man leads to
work the works of benevolence; and his heart is touched with joy, whilst he
acts within her precepts.

Let us therefore be steadfast and immovable in our ordinances, that we be
proved to have A TONGUE OF GOOD REPORT.

LECTURE XIII. On the Occupations of Masons.
IN my former lectures I have declared it to be my opinion, that MASONS, in the
present state of MASONRY, were never a body of architects. -- By the book of
constitutions published by authority, we see no grand communication held in
form, till of very late date: neither is there any evidence therein to
contradict the propositions I have laid down. -- The succession therein
described, is by no means to be accepted and understood in a literal sense; but
as a pedigree or chronological table of the servants of the Deity, working in
the duties of righteousness.

I ground my judgment of the nature of our profession on our ceremonials, and
am convinced they have not their relation to building and architecture, but are
emblematical, and imply moral, spiritual, and religious tenets. -- It appears
to me self-evident, that the situation of the lodge, and its several parts, are
copied after the tabernacle and temple, and are representative of the universe,
implying that the universe is the temple in which the Deity is every where
present; our mode of teaching the principles of our profession, is derived from
the Druids; our maxims of morality, from Pythagoras; our chief emblems,
originally from Egypt; to Basilides we owe the science of Abrax, and the
characters of those emanations of the Deity which we have adopted, and which
are so necessary for the maintenance of a moral society. -- I am induced to
believe, that our present ceremonies were more generally taught, and more
candidates were initiated therein, on the opening of the crusades, than in any
other era, or on any other known occasion.

The English historians agree, that in the reign of Henry the Second, and in
the year 1188, at an interview between the Kings of England and France,
attended by the prelates and nobility of both nations, the Archbishop of Tire
pronounced such a melancholy account of S^ladine's success in the Holy Land,
and the miseries of the christians in that country, that the audience was
greatly affected with the relation; and the two kings agreed to convert their
whole attention to the relief of those adventurers. -- They received the cross
from the hands of the archbishop, resolving to go there in person; and their
example was followed by Philip Count of Flanders, and a great number of the
prelates and nobility there present: -- A PLENARY INDULGENCE was published in
the pope's name, for all that would make a fair confession of their sins, and
engage in the crusade: -- the different nations assumed crosses of a different
color, and RULES AND ORDERS were established for preventing RIOT, LUXURY, AND
DISORDER on the enterprise.

These were the principal rules made for the regulation of the crusaders. -- We
may conjecture these religious campaigns being over, that men initiated in the
mysteries of masonry, and engaged and enrolled under those rules and orders,
which were established for the conduct of the nations in the holy war, would
form themselves into lodges, and keep up their social meetings when returned
home, in commemoration of their adventures and mutual good offices in
Palestine, and for the propagation of that knowledge into which they had been
initiated.

As a further argument that builders and architects were not the original
members of our society, the MASONS of the city of London obtained their
incorporation and charter in the reign of King Henry the Fifth, in or about the
year 1419; they taking on themselves the name of FREE MASONS. -- By their
charter they are governed by a master and two wardens, with twenty-five
assistants. -- Of this incorporated body, sixty-five are of the livery of
London.

It has never been pretended, that the society of FREE AND ACCEPTED MASONS have
in any manner been connected, or much less have united themselves, with the
incorporated body of masons enchartered; but on the contrary, have kept
themselves totally apart.

It has been alleged, that in the reign of King Henry the Sixth an obsolete
law was enacted, setting forth, that by the yearly congregations and
confederacies made by masons in their general assemblies, the good course and
effects of the statute of laborers were openly violated and broken, and making
the future holding of their chapters and congregations felony.

It is impossible that this statute should relate to any other persons, than
the incorporated body of working masons; who under an exclusive charter, by
secret combinations raised the prices of their labor, and prevented craftsmen
of their fraternity, not members of the charter, from exercising their trade
within the limits of London; which might occasion a grievance worthy of
parliamentary redress: -- but in what manner the statutes of laborers could be
affected by the associations of this fraternity of ours, is not in my power to
comprehend. Our records give us no evidence of any such convocations, at the
time mentioned.

By the charter of MASONS, they assumed the title of FREE MASONS, being
entitled to the franchises of the city of London.

Why the title of FREE is annexed to our society, or that of ACCEPTED, I hope I
may be allowed to conjecture was derived from the crusades. -- There the
volunteers entering into that service must be FREEMEN, born free, and not
villains or under any vassallage; for it was not until long after the crusades,
that vassallage and feudal services, together with the slavish tenures, were
taken away.

They were entitled to the style of ACCEPTED, under that PLENARY INDULGENCE
which the pope published, for all that would confess their sins, and inlist in
the enterprise of the holy war; whereby they were accepted and received into
the bosom of the father of the church. -- Some authors have presumed to tell
us, that it was the original design of the christian powers, in their
enterprise in the Holy Land, to rebuild the temple at Jerusalem; but I cannot
discover any good authority for this assertion. -- In modern masonry it is
given as a principle, why our dedication of lodges is made to ST JOHN, that the
masons who engaged to conquer the Holy Land, chose that saint for their patron
-- I should be sorry to appropriate the Balsarian sect of christians of St
John, as an explanation of this principle; -- ST JOHN obtains our dedication,
as being the proclaimer of that salvation which was at hand, by the coming of
Christ; and we, as a set of religious assembling in the true faith, commemorate
the proclamations of the Baptist. -- In the name of ST JOHN THE EVANGELIST, we
acknowledge the testimonies which he gives, and the divine (...), which he
makes manifest. -- But to return to the subject of the crusaders.

It is probable that the same enthusiastic spirit which engaged men to enter
into the crusades, at the vast expense and hazard which history describes, also
led them into as enormous a folly in the building of religious houses: --
during the reign of Henry the Second, when the English first engaged in the
holy war, there were not less than one hundred and eleven abbeys, nunneries,
and religious houses founded in this kingdom; -- during the reign of Richard
the First, eighteen; -- and during the reign of Henry the Third, forty: which
shows the religious infatuation which had totally overrun the minds of the
people in those reigns. -- The Ecclesiastics, in imitation of the works of
Solomon, might become the masters of those works, and superintend and conduct
the labors of the inferior sect of haly-wark-folk; that by acceptable hands
such pious works might be conducted, and from whence the ignorant and profane
might be rejected, like the Samaritans: -- these might assume the honorary
title of MASONS, which from vulgar acceptance, would naturally confound them
with ordinary mechanics.

In the Angla-Norman Antiquities, it is said of FREE MASONS, that they were an
association of religious, who engaged in the founding and erecting of churches
and religious houses in Palestine. -- I have already mentioned the religious
sect who were really architects and builders of churches, the haly-wark-folk,
with no small degree of respect: they were a body of men subsisting before the
crusades: -- they were maintained by the church, under which they held lands
for the service of erecting and repairing churches, and for the guarding of the
sepulchers of saints. -- It is not improbable, that when the rage of holy works
and holy wars and the desire of Palestine fired the minds of all Europe, but a
body of those people might embark in the enterprise, and be transported thither
to build churches, for the better planting or propagating the christian
doctrine, or to guard and maintain the holy sepulcher. -- I would be ready at
all times to admit these emigrants might possess some rules and ceremonies for
initiation peculiar to themselves, so far as the bearers of burdens were
admitted under Solomon in the building at Jerusalem, and that they might retain
their singular maxims and principles in secrecy: -- and it may also be
admitted, that in honor of that gradation of masonry and of their profession,
they should claim the greatest antiquity, from Solomon's temple at least: --
they might even be more than a collateral branch of the FREE AND ACCEPTED
MASONS, as I have before admitted, and be initiated in the mysteries of
masonry, their occupation being in no wise incompatible with our profession,
and they might be known and distinguished by the title of OPERATIVE MASONS, as
the Essenes were divided into theoricks and practicks: -- but from the writings
of the author of the Angla-Norman Antiquities, I am convinced he was not a FREE
AND ACCEPTED MASON himself; and as the secrecy of that society had attracted
the attention of many, who as their curiosity was exercised, raised conjectures
on the name of masons, to discover their origin and principles, or to reconcile
their own opinions: from whence, nothing was more likely to strike the
attention of an historian, than this body of men; the haly-wark-folk rambling
in Palestine were to his purpose.

Were we claimants only of the title of mechanics, we might have chose as
ancient and a more honorable branch of the arts or sciences; -- we might have
substituted geometry to a more worthy duty, and have honored our Maker in some
profession more expressive of our sense of his power and dignity.

Our ORIGIN in this country is thought to be from the PHOENICIANS who came here
with the Tyrian Hercules, and introduced the doctrines of HAM and the AMONIAN
rites, together with the HEBREW CUSTOMS; and afterward the emigrants from the
Holy Land, who taught us the rules instituted by SOLOMON at the temple of
Jerusalem; and finally, the propagators of the christian doctrine, who brought
with them the principles of the Master's Order, and taught the converted those
sacred mysteries which are typical of the christian faith, and professional of
the hope of the resurrection of the body and the life of regeneration. Yet I
fear few among us are equal to the character we have assumed. Our LODGES are
not now appropriated to WORSHIP and RELIGIOUS CEREMONIES; we meet as A SOCIAL
SOCIETY, inclined to acts of benevolence, and suffer the more sacred offices to
rest unperformed. -- Whether this neglect is to our honor, I presume not to
remonstrate; in our PRESENT STATE professing ourselves FREE AND ACCEPTED
MASONS. We are totally severed from architects, and are become a set of men
working in the duties of CHARITY, GOOD OFFICES, and BROTHERLY LOVE --
christians in religion -- sons of liberty and loyal subjects: -- we have
adopted rules, orders, emblems, and symbols, which enjoin us to live a life of
morality: -- we have furnished our lodges with those striking objects, which
should at once intimate to us the mightiness and wisdom of God, the instability
of the affairs of man, and the various vicissitudes in human life, and have set
before our eyes preceptors of moral works; and to strengthen our faith, we have
enlightened our lodge with the emblem of the Trinity.

It is well known to us, that there is scarce a state in Europe, in which our
fraternity have not formed a body. -- The wisdom of the ancients would pass
abroad into many regions, and those who had assisted in the pious labors at
Jerusalem, would, like Pythagoras, teach the sciences and mysteries which they
professed, and communicate the system to which they had been initiated; --
religious men would retain the doctrines and mysteries with reverence, and with
caution reveal them to those they thought worthy to receive; hence the original
knowledge would pass into many countries: -- but there is no accounting for
this universality of the society, upon the principles of architecture and
operative masonry: -- the rage of church-building had not contaminated all
Europe as it did England; neither is there any probable means to be deduced
from architecture and the practice of builders, to account why in every tongue,
and in every kingdom, the ceremonials of being made a mason should be the same.
-- If the honor of architecture was all that was to be regarded in the society,
various would be the devices by which the members in each nation would profess
it. -- As architecture, according to its present orders, had its progress from
Egypt and Greece, some nations would have borrowed symbols and ensigns peculiar
to those people; or we should have had in our ceremonies, or in our workings,
some devices which might have distinguished to us the beauties, orders,
ornaments, proportions, or symmetries, of some or all of the rules, modes, or
orders of architecture, either from the plains of Shinar, from Egypt,
Jerusalem, Tadmore, or Greece; or have retained some geometrical problems, on
which the general principles of proportion in architecture were grounded or
demonstrated: -- but instead of that, it is well known to us, that there is
nothing of that kind revealed. On the contrary, our mysteries are totally
abstracted from the rules of mechanics: they are relative to religion and
morality, and are conducive to pious works: they are unfurnished with any type,
symbol, of character, but what appertains to demonstrate the servants and
devotees of the great (...).

There is not an instance of the European states uniting in any one enterprise,
save the holy war; and from thence, we most rationally must conceive, the
present number of masons dispersed over the face of Europe was principally
derived. The Amonian rites are almost totally distinguished, religious zeal has
imbrued the sword in carnage, and Europe has groaned under persecutions; the
Romans extirpated the Druids, christians have glutted their cruel hands with
slaughter, bigotry and enthusiasm in every age have reigned in bloodshed. -- By
the crusades, the number of our society would be greatly augmented; the
occasion itself would revive the rules of masonry, they being so well adapted
to that purpose, and also professional of the christian faith, from whence
sprang the spirit of the enterprise. -- After these pursuits subsided, bodies
of men would be found in every country from whence the levies were called; and
what would preserve the society in every state, even during the persecutions of
zealots, the Master Mason's Order, under its present principles, is adapted to
every sect of christians. It originated from the earliest era of christianity,
in honor to, or in confession of, the religion and faith of christians, before
the poison of sectaries was diffused over the church.

To the ancient rules, deduced from Solomon, other laws, rules, and ordinances
were added, upon the enterprises of the crusaders, for the prevention of riot,
luxury, and disorder; and for the maintaining that necessary subordination,
which the command of such armies required. Many of these rules we retain in the
conduct and government of our lodge, which can in no wise be deduced from any
other original.

LECTURE XIV. A Corollary.
I Shall now conclude these Lectures, with collecting into one view, the
propositions and maxims which have engaged my attention throughout the whole
work; thereby to give a clear idea of the mysteries of masonry, the progression
and spirit of its institution, origin, and present state.

I may have seemed prolix, and have filled my arguments or representations with
repetitions; but where that seeming impropriety takes place, it was necessary
to urge a position which contended with some accepted error, prepossession, or
vulgar prejudice.

From the ancient rites and ceremonies which I have laid before you, it will be
easy for you to trace the origins of our own, and to discover the foundations
on which our society was erected. It is evident they had their progress in the
post-deluvian world from Ham. I am under a necessity sometimes to use terms of
art, or expressions which to others may not carry distinct and clear images;
but to my brethren, breathe an energy which flows from the united force of
technical terms, symbols, and hieroglyphics. When I speak of masons under the
denomination of a society, I mean masons as embodied in lodges, according to
the present manners in which such lodges are held. -- Our antiquity is in our
principles, maxims, language, learning, and religion: -- these we derive from
Eden, from the patriarchs, and from the sages of the east; all which are made
perfect under the christian dispensation. -- The light and doctrines which we
possess, are derived from the beginning of time, and have descended through
this long succession of ages uncorrupted; but our modes and manners are deduced
from the different aeras of paradise, the building of the temple at Jerusalem,
and the christian revelation.

I have explained to you, that the structure of the LODGE is a pattern of the
universe, and that the first entry of a mason represents the first worship of
the true God. -- We have retained the Egyptian symbols of the SUN AND MOON, as
the emblems of God's power, eternity, omnipresence, and benevolence; and
thereby we signify, that we are the children of light, and that the first
foundation of our profession, is the knowledge and adoration of the Almighty,
(...), who seateth himself in the center of the heavens: -- we derive from the
Druids many of the Amonian rites; and I am bold to say, that we retain more of
the ceremonials and doctrines of the Druids, than is to be found in the whole
world besides; and have saved from oblivion, many of their religious rites, in
our initiation to the first degree of masonry, which otherwise would have slept
in eternity. These we seem to have mixed and tempered with the principles of
the Essenes, who are a sect as ancient as the departure of the children of
Israel out of Egypt. -- The philosophy of the Egyptians, and the manners,
principles, and customs of the Hebrews, were introduced to this land by the
Phoenicians, and make a part of our profession, so far as they are adapted to
the worship of NATURE'S GREAT AUTHOR, unpolluted by idolatry.

We hold our grand festival on the day of ST JOHN, which is Midsummer-day; in
which we celebrate that season when the sun is in its greatest altitude, and in
the midst of its prolisic powers: the great type of the omnipotence of the
Deity.

The famous lawyer, Lord Cook, in his Treatise on Littleton's Institutes, says,
Prudent antiquity did, for more solemnity and better memory and observation of
that which is to be done, express substances under ceremonies.

I have pointed out to you, that the FURNITURES of the LODGE are emblems
excitive of morality and good government: -- PRUDENCE shines in the center, or
if you would apply this object to more sacred principles, it represents the
blazing star which conducted the wise men to Bethlehem, and proclaimed the
presence of the SON OF GOD. It is here placed in your view, that you may
remember to work out the works of salvation, which is at hand: -- and that you
may pass on in acts of strict propriety with greater alacrity, the TASSALATA or
MOSAIC-WORK intimates to you, the chequered diversity and uncertainty of human
affairs; that you may not set your hearts on the things of this world, but lay
up your treasures where the rust cannot deface their polish and luster, neither
can the moth despoil the garment for the wedding feast.

To protect and support us under the infirmities of nature, and lead us to the
paths of propriety, the BOOK OF TRUE KNOWLEDGE is in the lodge; -- the MASTER
circumscribes you, as with the sweep of the COMPASS; and the SQUARE is your
trial, whereby you shall prove the rectitude and uniformity of your manners.

In my next Lecture I demonstrated to you, that to be a worthy servant in the
temple of God, you must be clothed with INNOCENCE, that your service may stand
in approbation, and you may be accepted in heaven. -- Our jewels are emblems of
that good working in a moral mind which adorns the life of man; FAITH, CHARITY,
AND UPRIGHTNESS.

In the succeeding Lecture, I have led you to a discernment of the second race
of the servants of God, under the MOSAIC LAW; the truth being stripped of the
errors of idolatry. -- This stage is adapted to the second gradation of masonry.

I have argued for the propriety of our adopting GEOMETRY in this society, as
being a science, from whence the mighty powers of God are revealed and
demonstrated to mankind.

Afterward I attended to the estate of the worshippers of the Deity, under the
corruptions of the house of Israel, and under the rottenness of the old law. --
In this assembly of christians, it is in no wise requisite to attempt an
argument on the necessity which there was upon earth for a Mediator and Savior
for man: -- in the rubbish, superstitions, ceremonials, and filth of the Jewish
temple, the true worship of God was buried and confounded, and INNOCENCE became
only the ornaments of its monument. -- Then it was that the Divinity, looking
down with an eye of commiseration on the deplorable state of man, in his mercy
and love sent us a Preceptor and Mediator, who should teach to us the doctrine
of regeneration, and raise us from the sepulcher of sin, to which the human
race had resigned themselves: -- he gave to us the precepts of that acceptable
service, wherewith his Father should be well pleased: he made the sacrifice of
expiation, and becoming the first fruits of them that slept, manifested to
mankind the resurrection of the body and the life everlasting. -- In the
MASTER'S ORDER this whole doctrine is symbolized, and the christian conduct is
by types presented to us.

We MASONS have adopted three particular characteristics, SECRECY, CHARITY, AND
BROTHERLY LOVE. -- I have explained my sense of these three great duties, and
of what especial import they are of to MASONS; or to men who have separated
themselves from the rest of mankind, and professed they are servants of HIM WHO
RULES IN THE MIDST OF HEAVEN.

Lastly, I have attempted to examine into the origin of our society, and in
many instances, wandering without evidence, I have been left to probability in
conjecture only. -- It does not now seem material to us what our originals and
predecessors were, if we occupy ourselves in the true SPIRIT OF MASONRY; in
that divine spirit which inspired the patriarchs when they erected altars unto
the Lord; if we are true servants to our king, faithful and true to our
chartered liberties, christians in profession and in practice, and to each
other, and mankind in general, affectionate and upright.

Whether MASONS were originally builders or religious, it matters not to us in
this age: -- comparing these works with the righteousness to which I have
exhorted you, the honor of the antiquity would be swallowed up in the virtues
of practice, and in the splendour of that LIGHT OF ACCEPTANCE, which at once
proclaims to the world that we are servants of the true God, who saves our
souls alive.

If our ceremonies mean not the matter which I have expressed; if they imply
not the moral and religious principles which I have endeavored to unveil; I
ask you, MASONS, what they do imply, import, or indicate?

Can we presume so many learned and noble personages would, for many successive
ages, have been steady members of this fraternity, if the mysteries were
unimportant, and the ceremonies unintelligible? -- It cannot be; -- take away
their SPIRIT, and they become ridiculous.

Has it been for ages a maxim of foolish sport, to induce men to a silly
snare, in which the guide, having been entrapped into ridicule, longs to laugh
at another for revenge? -- It is too ridiculous to be presumed. -- Besides, if
it was only so, the snare might be formed and ornamented with simple things,
and there was no need to introduce sacred matters into the device. -- This
renders the conjecture so absurd, that it will bear no further animadversions.

We MASONS profess that we are pilgrims in progression from the EAST.

The Almighty planted a garden in the EAST, wherein he placed the perfection of
human nature, the first man, full of innocence and divine knowledge, and full
of honor, even bearing the image of God.

Learning had its first progression from the EAST after the flood: the
Egyptians were the first devisers of the zodiac, and the first discerners of
the wisdom of the great ARCHITECT OF THE WORLD in the revolutions of the
heavens: they were the first projectors of the science of GEOMETRY.

In regard to the doctrine of our Savior and the christian revelation, it
proceeded from the EAST.

The star which proclaimed the birth of the Son of God, appeared in the EAST.

The EAST was an expression used by the prophets to denote the Redeemer.

From thence it may well be conceived, that we should profess our progress to
be from thence; if we profess by being MASONS, that we are a society of the
servants of that Divinity, whose abode is with the Father coeternal, in the
center of the heavens.

But if we profess no such matter, then why should not we have alleged our
progress to have been from the north, and the regions of chaos and darkness?

But I will now, my brethren, forbear all further argument, and close the
labors of my year with a sincere exhortation, that you will continue to act in
this society as upright and religious men; -- that you will exert yourselves in
the promotion of its honor; -- and let the wicked and ignorant revile never so
maliciously, be strenuous in your duties, as MASONS and as BRETHREN: --
exercise your benevolence with openness of heart, and your charity with
cordiality, and not as hypocrites: -- with attention endeavor to arrive at the
utmost knowledge of your PROFESSION, the end of which, I presume to proclaim to
you, is to work out THE WORKS OF RIGHTEOUSNESS.

THE END.
APPENDIX.
A LETTER from the learned Mr JOHN LOCK, to the Right Hon. THOMAS Earl of
PEMBROKE, with an old MANUSCRIPT on the Subject of FREE-MASONRY.
MY LORD, 6th May, 1696.
I Have at length, by the help of Mr Collins, procured a copy of that M. S. in
the Bodleian library, which you were so curious to see: and, in obedience to
your Lordship's commands, I herewith send it to you. Most of the notes annexed
to it, are what I made yesterday for the reading of my lady Masham, who is
become so fond of masonry, as to say, that she now more than ever wishes
herself a man, that she might be capable of admission into the fraternity.

The M. S. of which this is a copy, appears to be about 160 years old; yet (as
your Lordship will observe by the title) it is itself a copy of one yet more
ancient by about 100 years: for the original is said to have been the
handwriting of K. Henry VI. Where that prince had it is at present an
uncertainty; but it seems to me to be an examination (taken perhaps before the
king) of some one of the brotherhood of masons; among whom he entered himself,
as it is said, when he came out of his minority, and thenceforth put a stop to
a persecution that had been raised against them: But I must not detain your
Lordship longer by my preface from the thing itself.

I know not what effect the sight of this old The paper alluded to by Mr Lock,
is the immediately following one.
paper may have upon your Lordship; but for my own part I cannot deny, that it
has so much raised my curiosity, as to induce me to enter myself into the
fraternity, which I am determined to do (if I may be admitted) the next time I
go to London, and that will be shortly.

I am, My LORD, Your LORDSHIP'S most obedient, And most humble servant, JOHN
LOCK.

CERTAIN QUESTYONS; WITH ANSWERS TO THE SAME, CONCERNING THE MYSTERY of
MACONRYE;
Writene by the hand of king HENRYE, the sixthe of the name, And faythfullye
copyed by me (1) JOHAN LEYLANDE, Antiquarius, By the command of his (2)
Highness.
They be as followethe,

QUEST. WHAT mote ytt be? (3)

ANSW. Ytt beeth the skylle of nature, the understondynge of the might that is
hereynne, and its sondrye werckynges; sonderlyche, the skylle of rectenyngs, of
waightes and metynges, and the treu manner of faconnynge al things for man's
use; headlye, dwellynges, and buyldynges of all kinds, and al odher things
that make gudde to manne.

QUEST. Where did ytt begyne?

ANSW. Ytt did begin with the (4) first men in the este, which were before
the (5) ffyrste manne of the weste, and coming westlye, ytt has brought
herwyth all comfortes to the wild and comfortless.

QUEST. Who did bring ytt westlye?

ANSW. The (6) Venetians, whoo being grate merchaundes, comed ffyrste ffromme
the este ynn Venetia, for the commodytye of marchaundysynge beithe este and
weste, bey the red and myddlelonde sees.

QUEST. How comede ytt in Engelonde?

ANSW. Peter Gower (7) a Grecian, journeyedde ffor kunnynge in Egypt, and in
Syria, and in everyche land whereas the Venetians had plauntedde maconrye,
and winning entrance in al lodges of maconnes, he learned much, and
retournedde, and woned in Grecia magna (8) wacksynge, and becommynge a mighty
(9) wyseacre, and greatlyche renowned, and her he framed a grate lodge at
Groton (10), and maked many maconnes, some whereoffe did journeye in France,
and maked many maconnes, wherefromme, in process of time, the art passed in
Engelonde.

QUEST. Does maconnes discover there arts unto odhers?

ANSW. Peter Gower, whenne he journeyedde to lernne, was ffyrste (11) made, and
anonne techedde; evenne so should all odhers beyn recht. Natheless (12)
maconnes hauethe always in everyche time, from time to time, communycatedde to
mannkynde soche of there secrettes as generallyche might be usefulle; they
haueth keped back soche allein as should be harmefulle yff they comed in
euylle haundes, oder soche as ne might be holpynge wythouten the techynges to
be joynedde herwythe in the lodge, oder soche as do bind the freres more
strongelyche together, bey the proffytte and commodytye coming to the
confrerie her-fromme.

QUEST. Whatte arts haueth the maconnes techedde mankind?

ANSW. The arts (13) agricultura, architectura, astronomia, geometria,
numeres, musica, poesy, kymistrye, governmente, and relygyonne.

QUEST. How commethe maconnes more teachers than odher men?

ANSW. The hemselfe haueth allein in (14) art of fyndinge neue arts, which
art the ffyrste maconnes received from Godde; by the which they fyndethe what
arts hem plesethe, and the treu way of techynge the same. Whatt odher men
doethe ffynde out, is onelyche bey chance, and therefore but little I tro.

QUEST. What does the maconnes concele and hyde?

QUEST. They concelethe the art of ffyndynge neue arts, and thattys for here
own proffyte, and (15) preise: They concelethe the art of keeping (16)
secrettes, thatt so the world mayeth nothing concele from them. They
concelethe the art of wunderwerckynge, and of foresayinge things to comme,
thatt so they same arts may not be usedde of the wyckedde to an euyell end;
they also concelethe the (17) art of chaunges, the wey of winning the
facultye (18) of Abrac, the skylle of becommynge good and parfyghte wythouten
the holpynges of fere and hope; and the universelle (19) longage of maconnes.

QUEST. Will he teache me they same arts?

ANSW. Ye shall be techedde yff ye be warthye, and able to learn.

QUEST. Does all maconnes kunne more then odher men?

ANSW. Not so. They onlyche haueth recht and occasyonne more then odher men
to kunne, butt many does fale in capacity, and many more does want
industrye, thatt is pernecessarye for the gaynynge all kunnynge.

QUEST. Are maconnes gudder men then odhers?

ANSW. Some maconnes are not so virtuous as some other men; but, in the most
part, they be more good than they would be if they war not maconnes.

QUEST. Does maconnes love eidther odher myghtylye as beeth said?

ANSW. Yea verylyche, and yt may not odherwise be: For good men and treu,
kennynge eidher odher to be soche, does always love the more as they be more
good.

Here endethe the questyonnes, and awnsweres.
NOTES AND OBSERVATIONS, ON THE FOREGOING QUESTIONS.
By Mr. LOCK.
(1) JOHN LEYLANDE was appointed by Henry VIII. at the dissolution of
monasteries, to search for, and save such books and records as were valuable
among them. He was a man of great labor and industry.

(2) HIS HIGHNESS, meaning the said king Henry VIII. Our kings had not then
the title of majesty.

(3) What mote ytt be?] That is, what may this mystery of masonry be? The
answer imports, that it consists in natural, mathematical, and mechanical
knowledge. Some part of which (as appears by what follows) the masons pretend
to have taught the rest of mankind, and some part they still conceal.

(4) (5) First men in the este, etc.] It should seem by this that masons
believe there were men in the east before Adam, who is called "the ffyrste
manne of the weste;" and that arts and sciences began in the east. Some authors
of great note for learning have been of the same opinion; and it is certain
that Europe and Africa (which, in respect to Asia, may be called western
countries) were wild and savage, long after arts and politeness of manners were
in great perfection in China, and the Indies.

(6) The Venetians, etc.] In the times of monkish ignorance it is no wonder
that the Phenicians should be mistaken for the Venetians. Or, perhaps, if the
people were not taken one for the other, similitude of sound might deceive the
clerk who first took down the examination. The Phenicians were the greatest
voyagers among the ancients, and were in Europe thought to be the inventors of
letters, which perhaps they brought from the east with other arts.

(7) Peter Gower.] This must be another mistake of the writer. I was puzzled at
first to guess who Peter Gower should be, the name being perfectly English; or
how a Greek should come by such a name: But as soon as I thought of Pythagoras,
I could scarce forbear smiling, to find that philosopher had undergone a
metempsycosis he never dreamt of. We need only consider the French
pronunciation of his name, Pythagore, that is Petagore, to conceive how easily
such a mistake might be made by an unlearned clerk. That Pythagoras traveled
for knowledge into Egypt, etc. is known to all the learned; and that he was
initiated into several different orders of priests, who in those days kept all
their learning secret from the vulgar, is as well known. Pythagoras also made
every geometrical theorem a secret, and admitted only such to the knowledge of
them, as had first undergone a five years silence. He is supposed to be the
inventor of the 47th proposition of the first book of Euclid, for which, in the
joy of his heart, it is said he sacrificed a hecatomb. He also knew the true
system of the world, lately revived by Copernicus; and was certainly a most
wonderful man. See his life by DION HAL.

(8) GRECIA MAGNA, a part of Italy formerly so called, in which the Greeks had
settled a large colony.

(9) Wyseacre.] This word at present signifies simpleton, but formerly had a
quite contrary meaning. Weisager, in the old Saxon, is philosopher, wiseman, or
wizard, and having been frequently used ironically, at length came to have a
direct meaning in the ironical sense. Thus, Duns Scotus, a man famed for the
subtilty and acuteness of his understanding, has, by the same method of irony,
given a general name to modern dunces.

(10) Groton.] Groton is the name of a place in England. The place here meant
is Crotona, a city of Grecia Magna, which in the time of Pythagoras was very
populous.

(11) First made.] The word MADE I suppose has a particular meaning among the
masons: perhaps it signifies, initiated.

(12) Maconnes haueth communycatedde, etc.] This paragraph has something
remarkable in it. It contains a justification of the secrecy so much boasted of
by masons, and so much blamed by others; asserting that they have in all ages
discovered such things as might be useful, and that they conceal such only as
would be hurtful either to the world or themselves. What these secrets are, we
see afterward.

(13) The arts, agricultura, etc.] It seems a bold pretense this of the
masons, that they have taught mankind all these arts. They have their own
authority for it; and I know not how we shall disprove them. But what appears
most odd is, that they reckon religion among the arts.

(14) Art of ffyndinge neue arts.] The art of inventing arts, must certainly
be a most useful art. My lord Bacon's Novum Organum is an attempt toward
somewhat of the same kind. But I much doubt, that if ever the masons had it,
they have now lost it; since so few new arts have been lately invented, and so
many are wanted. The idea I have of such an art is, that it must be something
proper to be applied in all the sciences generally, as algebra is in numbers,
by the help of which, new rules of arithmetic are, and may be found.

(15) Preise.] It seems the masons have great regard to the reputation as well
as the profit of their order; since they make it one reason for not divulging
an art in common, that it may do honor to the possessors of it. I think in
this particular they show too much regard for their own society, and too little
for the rest of mankind.

(16) Art of keepyng secrettes.] What kind of an art this is, I can by no
means imagine. But certainly such an art the masons must have: For though, as
some people suppose, they should have no secret at all, even that must be a
secret which being discovered would expose them to the highest ridicule: and
therefore it requires the utmost caution to conceal it.

(17) Art of chaunges.] I know not what this means, unless it be the
transmutation of metals.

(18) Facultye of Abrac.] Here I am utterly in the dark.

(19) Universelle longage of maconnes.] An universal language has been much
desired by the learned of many ages. It is a thing rather to be wished than
hoped for. But it seems the masons pretend to have such a thing among them. If
it be true, I guess it must be something like the language of the Pantomimes
among the ancient Romans, who are said to be able, by signs only, to express
and deliver any oration intelligibly to men of all nations and languages. A man
who has all these arts and advantages, is certainly in a condition to be
envied: But we are told, that this is not the case with all masons; for though
these arts are among them, and all have a right and an opportunity to know
them, yet some want capacity, and others industry to acquire them. However, of
all their arts and secrets, that which I most desire to know is, "The skylle of
becommynge good and parfyghte;" and I wish it were communicated to all mankind,
since there is nothing more true than the beautiful sentence contained in the
last answer, "That the better men are, the more they love one another." Virtue
having in itself something so amiable as to charm the hearts of all that behold
it.

A GLOSSARY,
To explain the old words in the foregoing Manuscript.
ALLEIN, only Alweys, always Beithe, both Commodytye, convenience Confrerie,
fraternity Faconnynge, forming Fore-sayinge, prophesying Freres, brethren
Headlye, chiefly Hem plesethe, they please Hemselfe, themselves Her, there,
their Hereynne, therein Herwyth, with it Holpynge, beneficial Kunne, know
Kunnynge, knowledge Make gudde, are beneficial Metynges, measures Mote, may
Myddlelond, Mediterranean Might, power Occasyonne, opportunity Oder, or
Onelyche, only Pernecessarye, absolutely necessary Preise, honor Recht, right
Reckenyngs, numbers Sonderlyche, particularly Skylle, knowledge Wacksynge,
growing Werck, operation Wey, way Whereas, where Woned, dwelt Wunderwerckynge,
working miracles Wild, savage Winning, gaining Ynn, into
ERRATA.
Page 2 line 1 for of read for. 20 15 for MASON read MAISON. -- 17 for (...)
read (...). -- 20 for (...) read (...). 21 12 in notes, for (...) read (...).
28 22 notes, for (...) read (...). 59 5 for description read inscription. 66 7
notes, for Charhes read Chartres. 67 22 notes, for with read without. 76 2
note, for (...) read (...). 77 17 notes, for as read is. 98 10 for initiated
read imitated. 103 10 notes, for look read took. 107 4 for Irismegistus read
Tristmegistus, 115 19 for he is to tread read to tread is. 120 1 for furnitures
read furniture. 125 4 for regard read regarding. 139 18 for MORIALI read
MORIAH. 156 7 for that by order, in the Apprentices, read that by the
Apprentices Order. 201 3 for what read what are. 224 13 for distinguished read
extinguished.


