JOHN CUNNINGHAM, TAILOR, At the Mahogany Door, near the Chapel, King's Street
Golden Square.
[Name on the Door.]
THE variety of Advertisements by several Master Tailors in London, who have
candor and honesty enough to adhere strictly to the terms of their proposals,
induces him to offer his most humble address to the Public, in hopes of such
encouragement as his ability and integrity shall claim. -- Gentlemen who are
pleased to favor him with their commissions may rely upon their being executed
according to the following rates:

l. s. d. A Suit of the best superfine cloth; 4 15 0 Half trimmed ditto, 5 5 0
Full trimmed ditto, 5 18 0 Superfine cloth coat; 2 15 0 Waistcoat of ditto, 1 7
0 Pair of Breeches of ditto, 0 18 0 Suit of the best Second Cloth, 3 15 0
Satin Waistcoat, 1 15 0 Corded Silk ditto, 1 13 0 Silk knit Breeches, 1 11 6
Velveret ditto, 1 5 0 Manchester ditto, ribed and plain, 0 19 0 Worsted ditto,
four thread, 0 16 0 Fine Bath Coating Surtout Coats, 1 7 0 Suits of India
Nankeen for young gentlemen, 1 3 0 Fine Jean Fustian ditto, Hussar Dresses for
Children, in proportion. 1 5 0 Ladies Riding Habits of the best India Nankeen,
2 12 6 l. s. d. Ladies Riding Habits of fine Dimitty, white or colored, 3 10 0
Ditto of Superfine Cloth, faced with Silk, 5 5 0 Suit of the best Livery Cloth
complete, 3 6 0 Ditto, with waistcoat, coat, cuffs, and collar of coat laced, 3
12 0 If either of the above suits have Shag Breeches, it will add to the price
0 8 0 Livery Drab Surtout Coats, 2 2 0 Chairmens Great Coats, 2 2 0 Thickset
Coats and Waitscoats, lined, 2 2 0 Ditto plain Fustian, lined, 1 16 0 Coachbox
Coats, lined with Padua Serge, and three Capes, complete, 3 0 0 Russia Drab
Frocks for Grooms, 0 14 6 Striped Flannel Waistcoats, lined, for ditto, 0 12 6
Inferior sort, the Coat and Waistcoat together, 0 15 6

Laced or embroidered Clothes cheap in proportion, and executed with the
greatest elegance, propriety and dispatch.

In cases of emergency a Suit made for a gentleman on one day's notice. --
Whole Sets of Liveries executed in two days after receiving the order.

Although the above Prices are much inferior to Tailors Bills in general, he
undertakes to furnish every article of the best quality.

Gentlemen finding their own Cloth, or servants liveries, will be equally
acceptable; and when finished, (upon calculation), will be found not to exceed
the above estimation.

No scruple as to sizes, like some of his advertising Brethren, admitting of
all that comprehend common sizes. -- Silk Garters to Breeches understood. --
Ladies Riding Habits and Childrens Clothes made with taste, and to fit to a
Nicety, which is what few Tailors attempt, and fewer perform to satisfaction.

A little consideration must be productive of the possibility of the above
Plan's being executed with honor and justice, especially as every article is
purchased with ready money; the undertaker's ambition extending no further than
doing justice to his customers, and procuring a genteel livelihood for his
family, in preference to riches.


