A SERMON PREACHED AT THE Parish Church of St. Anne, Westminster, On Thursday,
May the 10th, 1758. BEFORE THE GOVERNORS OF THE MIDDLESEX-HOSPITAL, FOR Sick
and Lame; and for Lying-in Married Women.

By THOMAS FRANCKLIN, A. M. Minister of Queen Street Chapel,
Lincoln's-Inn-Fields, and Fellow of Trinity-College, Cambridge.

Published at the Request of the SOCIETY.

LONDON: Printed in the Year MDCCLVIII.

May the 10th, 1758. Ordered,
That the Thanks of this Society be given to the Rev. Mr. Francklin, for his
Sermon preached before Us this Day; and that he be desired to print the same.

Northumberland President.

To the Right Honorable HUGH, Earl of NORTHUMBERLAND, President, The Right
Hon. Earl Gower, Vice President. Sir William Beauchamp Proctor, Bart.
Vice President. Sir Kenrick Clayton, Bart. Vice President. The Hon. General
Cornwallis, Vice President.
And the Rest of the Governors and Contributors TO THE MIDDLESEX-HOSPITAL, THIS
SERMON Preached and Published at their Request Is Dedicated by Their Obedient
Humble Servant THOMAS FRANCKLIN.

LUKE. X. v. 37. Go, and do thou likewise.


WHEN we seriously consider the frail, corrupt, and distressful State of Human
Nature; when we reflect on the general Lot and Portion of Mortality; when we
call to Mind to what Variety of Evils we are subject, to how many Diseases our
Bodies are exposed, and by how many Anxieties our Minds may be depressed and
tormented, we are naturally led to imagine that it must be the Business,
Concern and Interest of every Individual to lighten as much as possible the
general Burden; that every Office of Tenderness and Humanity to our
Fellow Creatures would of Course be duly and punctually performed by every one
of us, as well knowing that all the poor Aid and Assistance which each
particular could lend, would still be much too little and insignificant
Preservatives against the universal Calamity; that the most we can do is to
soften the Distress which we cannot prevent, to sooth those Sorrows which we
cannot remove, and to pour Balm into those Wounds which we cannot heal.

To diffuse this Spirit of Love and Tenderness, to increase this Philanthropy,
to make Man sociable to Man, God, the Father, has implanted in every Breast a
Principle of Benevolence, and God, the Son, has in his holy Religion
strengthened, dignifyed and improved it. This Principle shines forth with
distinguished Luster in every Page of the Gospel of Christ; it is taught by his
Precepts and enforced by his Example: and there is not perhaps any part of Holy
Writ, wherein it is more visibly or more warmly inculcated, than in the short
and beautiful Parable before us, wherein the Virtue of Humanity toward the
distressed is painted in the liveliest Colors, and proposed to us as an Object
of our Applause and of our Imitation also.

As the following Discourse therefore is intended to enforce this Principle, I
cannot I think more surely engage your Attention to it, than by

FIRST, Running over, as briefly as possible, the principal Circumstances of
this affecting Narration.

AND Secondly, applying them to the present similar Occasion.

A certain Man, says the Parable, went down from Jerusalem to Jericho;
unfortunately for him, his Journey lay through a lonesome and melancholy Desert;
a Place, as we are informed by those who were well acquainted with its
Situation, so remarkable for the frequent Murders and Robberies committed
there as to be called, the bloody Way; perpetually infested by the Sons of
Rapine and Violence. By some of these our unhappy Traveller was beset; and
being unable and probably unwilling to resist, was quickly overpowered by them.
They attacked and plundered Him, and not content with their Spoil, to their
Injustice added Inhumanity also, they stripped and wounded him, and left him
half dead. In this miserable and distressed Condition he remained, we may
suppose, a long Time, expecting with Impatience the Arrival of some charitable
Traveller to assist him; when at last, as the sacred Historian relates it,
there came down a certain Priest that way; a Sight no doubt inexpressibly
agreeable to a Man in so dreadful a Condition; a Person of his own Religion,
and a Teacher of it also; One who; besides the common Ties of Humanity, was in
a more especial Manner bound by his Order and Profession to Acts of Charity and
Beneficence; such a one, he had Reason to expect, would have gladly embraced
the Opportunity of doing good, and flown with Pleasure to his Assistance; how
great then must have been his Grief and Disappointment when the Priest passed
by on the other Side! The unfeeling Man must doubtless have heard his Groans
and seen his Distress; but he purposely avoided crossing over that he might not
be obliged to stop and relieve him; he redoubled his Speed therefore, and,
without the least Regard to the Distress of an unhappy Brother, proceeded on
his Journey. To add to the Calamity of the poor Traveller, we are told that a
Levite likewise, when he was at the Place, came and looked on him, and passed
by on the other Side! It is impossible perhaps to read this Account without
making the following reflection. How does every one, who hears the
Circumstances of this melancholy Relation, detest such Behavior, and abhor
such Inhumanity! and yet at the same Time how many amongst us are guilty of it!
Do we not, almost every Day and every Hour, meet with Objects worthy of our
Compassion and Relief, and yet are we not too apt, with the Priest and the
Levite, to pass by on the other Side? But to proceed. What the disappointed
Traveller did not find, where he had Reason to hope, he met with, where he had
no Expectation of it. A certain Samaritan, as he journeyed, came where he was,
and when he saw him, he had Compassion on him, and went to him, and bound up
his Wounds, pouring in Oil and Wine, and set him on his own Beast, and brought
him to an Inn, and took care of him. The Samaritans, it must here be
remembered, were detested by the Jews as Corruptors of the true Religion, and
Deserters from the true Worship: The Traveller therefore, who had already been
neglected by the Priest and the Levite, Men who embraced the same religious
Principles as himself, could not rationally expect that his avowed Enemy, the
Samaritan, would take the least notice of him; he was notwithstanding most
agreeably deceived; for the Samaritan, as we have seen, performed every Office
of Friendship, every Act of Charity, necessary on the Occasion; not content
with softening his past Evils and Misfortunes, he endeavored to provide
against his future Wants; when he departed, says the Parable, he took out Two
pence, and gave them to the Host, and said unto him, take care of him, and
whatsoever thou spendest more, when I come again, I will repay thee.

THUS generously and beneficently did the good Samaritan behave toward the
truly worthy Object of his Compassion; no Wonder therefore that our Blessed
Savior should propose this Example to the young Lawyer, and dismiss him in the
Words of my Text with Go, and do thou likewise; that is, " See the present
Bishop of London's excellent Sermon, on this Parable. Vol. 4. Ser. 14.
Since you commend the Samaritan for acting like a Neighbor to the Jew, do you
learn to act like a Neighbor to the Samaritan." and to every other
Fellow Creature in Distress.

THE Maxim inculcated in the Parable (and which indeed seems to have been the
chief Scope and Design of it) has been often, but cannot be too often, repeated
and enforced to us: Namely, that no national or religious Prejudices, no
Difference of Party, ^ect, or Opinion, no private Jealousy, Pique, or Animosity
should ever be suffered to diminish, weaken, or counteract the noble, universal
Principles of Benevolence and Humanity toward each other. The good Samaritan,
we see, extended his Bounty and Compassion to the distressed Traveller, without
any Regard to his opposite Opinions; he considered him not as a Jew, whom he as
a Samaritan was at Enmity with, but as a Man and a Fellow Creature, whom he
therefore, as Man and Fellow Creature, was bound to relieve.

THE Words of the Text therefore may very properly be considered as spoken with
a View not only to instruct the inquisitive Lawyer, to whom they were
immediately addressed, but as written for our Learning also, as conveying an
useful Admonition to all Mankind, and exhorting them to the Imitation of this
illustrious Example; happy are those who have the Virtue and the Resolution to
follow it!

PERMIT me then to apply the Circumstances of the Parable to the present solemn
Occasion.

THANKS be to God, our own Times, heedless and unwary as they are, cannot be
condemned as insensible to the Feelings of Compassion, or Strangers to the
Virtues of Humanity; we behold with Pleasure and Satisfaction the Spirit of
Mercy and Tenderness diffusing itself on every Side. That Poverty, which our
Extravagance produces, our Pity relieves, and we at least endeavor to heal the
Wounds which we have made, Hospitals, Schools, and Foundations rise up,
flourish, and increase amongst us; and public Vice and Folly is, in same
Measure, covered and extenuated by public Generosity and Beneficence.

See Dr, Brown's Estimate of the Manners, and Principles of the Times. Vol. 2.
p 40.
A certain superficial and declamatory but fashionable Writer of the present Age
has indeed lately endeavored (though we hope in vain endeavored) to make Virtue
ashamed, and put Charity out of countenance, to degrade our Pity into Weakness,
and melt away our Humanity and Compassion into Fear, Cowardice, and Effeminacy:
But surely Waters thus sweet and salutary can never flow from so sordid and
corrupt a Fountain. Our Charity, I am satisfied, arises from a nobler Motive.
I would fain persuade myself (and, if it be an Error, it is at least an amiable
one) that it proceeds from that generous benevolent Principle, which
distinguishes and naturally springs from the Religion which we profess, the
Religion of Jesus Christ, the good, the charitable, the righteous; from that
Beneficence which his example taught, and which only his divine Precepts could
inspire. This is the leading, strong, and actuating Principle that directs the
Heart even in this otherwise degenerate Age; it is this, which has already
raised in so many the Ambition to become good Samaritans, the Ambition of
using, like him, their Liberty to release the Captive, their Health to support
the Sick, their Abundance to relieve the Indigent.

AND amongst all the fair Copies of this noble Picture, industriously drawn by
various Hands, there is not perhaps one which comes so near to the Original, as
that Charity which we are here met to countenance and recommend; a Charity so
extensive in its Nature, so useful in its Effects, and so highly conducive to
the Good of the Community, as to deserve all the Approbation we can give, and
all the Assistance we can bestow.

THE Almighty Creator of all things has of his infinite Mercy ordained that
Man shall not in this Vale of Sorrow be afflicted beyond what he is able to
bear. The Misfortunes incident to Mortality seldom press too hard and too
closely upon each other, and where they are permitted to accumulate, Power and
Opportunity are given to Men to divide, and by dividing to lessen the Weight of
them. Evils indeed, which when separate may be overpowered, when united become
intolerable.

POVERTY, whilst she is strengthened by Health, can struggle with Misfortune;
but if she is oppressed by Sickness, she sinks down, and is unequal to the
Conflict; Sickness, on the other hand, whilst she is relieved and supported by
the lenient Hand of Affluence, lifts up her Head, and smiles on the Bed of
Anguish; but if Penury enters into the Chamber, her Wounds bleed afresh, her
Pains increase, and she drops into Despair, and Death. What Praise then, what
Admiration is due to that Hand which brings a Remedy for this complicated
Disorder! Behold a Hand is stretched out; a Building is raised to receive the
Sick, the Poor and the Miserable. This noble Charity has provided every
Mitigation of these dreadful Evils which Humanity could suggest.

BUT this Hospital opens its charitable Arms to receive not only the Sick, but
the Lame also.

THE greater Part of the Poor in this Metropolis, it is well known, live by the
Work of their Hands; they are obliged ^o earn their daily Bread by the Sweat of
their Brows; their Support and Maintenance therefore must depend on the Health
of their Bodies, the unimpaired Vigor and Activity of their Limbs; and when,
by any unfortunate Accident, these are hurt or weakened they are left entirely
destitute. In so large and populous a City innumerable Accidents must
inevitably happen, which no human Foresight could prevent, no human Prudence
could guard against. Here, if Assistance is not immediately given, it can be of
no Service; if the Remedy is not at hand to be administered, it may as well not
be administered at all. Before the Erection of this and other Edifices of the
same kind, the Poor in such distressful Situations were left to perish in the
Streets: The Levite perhaps only looked at them; the Priest, without regarding
them, passed by on the other Side. Their Pains were either finished by Death,
or cruelly protracted by the Ignorance of Empirics, who lay hold of every
Occasion to try wanton Experiments on the Poor, and play with the Lives of
their Fellow Creatures. How noble then, how necessary, and how beneficial is
the Institution which can prevent such Evils, relieve such Distress, and soften
such Calamities!

WHEN the good Samaritan saw the poor Traveller, lame, wounded, and stripped,
he did not, before he relieved him, ask what Sect, Nation, or Profession he was
of, Pharisee, or Sadducee, Jew or Samaritan, but flew immediately to his
Assistance. To the Honor of the Middlesex Hospital be it remembered, that the
Example before us has in this Particular been closely copyed by it. The
Generality of Patients are not admitted into this Place without Letters of
Recommendation, that so the Merit and Condition of the Object to be relieved
may be more fully and thoroughly known; a Precaution highly proper and
commendable; but at the same Time all Accidents are admitted without
Recommendation: In these Circumstances no Recommendation indeed is necessary
but what the Afflicted carry with them; at such a Time, but to look up for
Releif is to demand it of us, and but to want Assistance is to deserve it.

BUT the chief Pride and Glory of this extensive Charity is still behind; and
that is, the Relief which this Hospital bestows on the weaker and more helpless
Sex, when they are most weak, and unable to help themselves; when the Snares of
Death compass them round about, and the Pains of Hell get hold upon them. Need
I represent to you, that in this dangerous and distressful Hour all the
Assistances, all the Conveniences, all the Superfluities of Affluence united
are frequently found insufficient; the Powers of Medicine are too often
ineffectual; the Resources of human Art, the Improvements of human Knowledge
are all too weak to relieve the Pangs, and stop the Agonies of Nature; at this
perilous Time, all the Tenderness of officious Friendship, and all the
Endearments of Love and Affection are required to soften the Distress and
mitigate the Pains of the afflicted Sufferer. What then must their Condition
be, who at such an Hour have no Home to receive, no Friends to cherish, no
Remedies near to assist or support them! In Behalf of such Objects I need not,
I am sure, address myself to the softer Sex; there is an Advocate, I know,
within your own Breasts that will make all I can say superfluous; Nature, that
best of Orators, will plead the Cause of your afflicted Sisters with
irresistible Eloquence; she will point out to you your Duty, and direct you in
the Practice of it: If you are Women, if you are Mothers, if you are
Christians, I need not ask your Aid, Protection and Support.

HAVING thus enumerated the many Benefits and Advantages of this extensive
Charity, and dwelt with Pleasure on the several Branches of it, permit me to
draw these Rays into a Point, and show you this benignant Sun in all its Heat
and Luster: Permit me to lead your Imaginations to a Scene which your own Eyes
may at any Time see in reality.

BEHOLD a Groupe of sordid and miserable Beings, their Faces pale with
Sickness, their Bodies emaciated by Distemper, their Hearts depressed by Sorrow
and Despair; observe some of them so weak and disabled as to want the Power of
reaching to the Hand that is stretched out to relieve them: Behold others with
Limbs broken and distorted, deprived of Life and Motion, and with the Eye of
Anguish looking up for immediate Assistance; behind them advances a drooping
Train of mournful Females, oppressed at once by the Throes of Travail and the
Weight of Penury, and laboring with all their Sex's Imbecility under a double
Burden: Alas! Nature shrinks, Humanity shudders at the Prospect. But see, the
Clouds divide, a Dawn of Comfort appears to dispel the Gloom, and beautify the
Horizon; observe the fair Companion of Faith and Hope, sweet Charity,
approaching toward them; she lifts them up with benignant Hand, and conducts
them to her beloved Asylum. Pass but a little Time, and mark what succeeds to
the first melancholy Scene. Behold the same Objects that entered into the
Palace of Charity now returning from it; observe the sudden, the astonishing
Change; the Face of the Sick is lighted up with Smiles; the Roses of Health
bloom upon his Cheek; the Warmth of Gratitude glows upon his Countenance; the
Luster of Joy sparkles in his Eye. Behold the lame Man once more rejoicing in
the Activity of his Limbs, and returning with fresh Vigor and Spirit to labor
for your Service: And lastly, contemplate the happy Woman, bearing now with
Pleasure what she had so long borne with Anguish and Disquietude; she carries
in her Arms a smiling Infant, blesses her God, praises her Benefactors, and
forgets all her Pangs for joy that a Man is born into the World.

A SCENE so dreadful and so pleasing; a Contrast so striking, must surely warm
the coldest Heart to Sensibility, and open the narrowest Mind to Sentiments of
Love and Compassion, of Tenderness and Humanity. To reflect that by our little
Contributions, by setting aside our Superfluities only, we have it in our Power
to produce so astonishing a Change in the Circumstances and Condition of our
Fellow Creatures, must doubtless afford that heartfelt Pleasure which is
infinitely superior to every wordly Enjoyment: A Pleasure which the
Contributors to this noble Charity have felt, and long, I trust, will continue
to feel.

LET us not then, my Brethren, be weary of well-doing; when the Edifice is
large and spacious it must stand in need of continual Repairs to maintain and
support it: This Charity, as I have before observed to you, is in its Nature
very extensive; the Fund, therefore, raised to preserve it must be extensive
also; the Number of Patients who are perpetually applying for Admittance, show
the Necessity of punctually continuing the old, and earnestly soliciting new
Subscriptions to it. Add to which, that the Hardness of the Times, together
with the Scarcity and Dearness of Provisions of every kind, oblige many to take
Shelter in this Place, who little thought they should ever have stood in need
of it.

LEAVE not therefore, my Brethren, this Labor of Love unfinished: Let each
Person, already concerned in the Support of this Hospital, consider the Whole
as one miserable and helpless Individual whom he has taken under his
Protection. The good Samaritan, we may remember, not only bound up the
Traveller's Wounds and poured Oil into them, but set him upon his Horse, lodged
and paid for him, and when at last he left him, provided in some Measure for
his future Wants. If it would be cruel to neglect an Individual whom we had
taken under our Care, so would it likewise be, but in a much higher Degree,
with regard to the whole Charity. To withdraw the Aid we had once given, would
cancel at once all the Merit of the Obligation; nor would it excuse those, who
acted in this Manner, that what they subtracted from one Charity was bestowed
on another, that it was the same Stream of Beneficence directed to a different
Channel. This is the Child whom we have adopted, we are not to transfer our
parental Affection to any other, but to consider ourselves as bound in Honor
and Conscience to feed and maintain it. I mention this, because Charities, God
be thanked, are daily increasing amongst us; and the Fickleness of Men's
Dispositions may dispose some to change the Objects of their Bounty: In this
Case, as the Seeds of Benevolence sprouted up and blossomed in one Place they
would wither and decay in another; Charity would by degrees defeat its own End
and Purpose, and, like the Suicides of our Age, finally destroy itself.

To conclude, let us all devoutly entreat the Lord and Father of Mercies, that
he would pour into our Hearts the Spirit of Mercy; that he would imprint
strongly on our Minds the Image of the good Samaritan, and teach us to go, and
do likewise. Let us entreat him that our Charity may increase, our Humanity and
Compassion be daily strengthened and improved; that he will permit them to
cover from his Eyes the multitude of our Sins, and that in kind Regard to the
Poor and Afflicted whom he loves, he will not be extreme to mark what we have
done amiss; but, in the last and great Day, will suffer those whom we have
relieved to plead in our Behalf; that so, howsoever we may have offended him,
he may yet look upon us with Eyes of Compassion; and say unto us, because we
have considered the Poor and Miserable, well have ye done, my good and faithful
Servants, enter ye into the Joy of your Lord.

FINIS.
An Account of the MIDDLESEX-HOSPITAL, for the Reception of Sick and Lame; and
for Lying-in Married-Women, in Marybone-Fields, Oxford-Road.
THE happy Effects arising from the several Hospitals, erected about these two
great Cities, for the Reception of diseased Poor will sufficiently justify the
Institution of this.

Nature and Religion patronize every Instance of Distress; but they most
powerfully befriend that deepest of all Distresses, Sickness in Poverty.
Sickness itself will excite Compassion, though alleviated by every Comfort and
Advantage of Wealth. How much stronger a Sympathy then must arise at the Sight
or Idea of Sickness embittered by Poverty! Or, considered in another View, how
affecting is the Condition of Poverty disabled by Sickness! This Affliction,
extreme as it is, is known to be very frequent. Most Men are inclined, but few,
very few in Comparison, have the Power to relieve it. Public Contributions,
therefore, seemed the most likely Means to effect what the private Bounty of
Individuals could not: This gave Rise, in the present charitable Age, to
Infirmaries; and the Continuance and Increase of the voluntary Subscriptions,
by which they are supported, are the strongest Argument that they have answered
their End. But as there are some populous Parts of the Town, which on Account
of their Distance, and the Number of their Poor, receive little Benefit from
these noble Designs, it is hoped, that the Situation of this Hospital, and its
extensive Use in providing for the Distresses of poor married Women with Child,
will recommend it to the Assistance and Contribution of those whom Humanity or
Religion inspire with Benevolence.

The Qualification of a Governor of this Charity is an annual Subscription of
three Guineas; which also entitles the Subscriber to recommend, and have in the
House at one Time, either one Sick or Lame Patient, or one Lying-in Woman, and
to recommend Out-Patients. A Subscription of five Guineas per Annum entitles
the Subscriber to recommend one Sick or Lame In-Patient, Out-Patients, and one
Lying-in Woman. A Subscription of thirty Guineas at one Payment, constitutes
the Subscriber a Governor for Life, with the last mentioned Privileges.
Contributions of lesser Sums than three Guineas per Annum are thankfully
received, and entitle the Contributors to recommend one Sick or Lame
In-Patient, and one Out-Patient at the same Time.

A Committee of the Governors (appointed quarterly) meet at the Hospital every
Tuesday, at Ten of the Clock, to receive and discharge Patients, and to
transact the other necessary Business of the House; where every Governor,
though not of the Committee, has a Right to be present, and his Attendance is
received as a Favor. A Report of their Proceedings is made to the General
Court held every Quarter, when the Resolutions of this Committee are approved
or rejected.

The Physicians visit the Patients every Tuesday, Thursday, and Saturday, and
on intermediate Days, when particular Cases require it. The Surgeons attend
every Day.

Patients are admitted on a Letter of Recommendation from a Governor or
Contributor, who may recommend In-Patients, and have Out-Patients on the Books,
according to the Regulation abovementioned: And when In-Patients are
recommended, and there is not Room in the House to receive them, they are put
on the List to be admitted on the first Vacancy, and in the mean Time are
prescribed for as Out-Patients. No Security is required for Burials. All
Accidents are admitted without Recommendation. Tuesday being the Day appointed
for the Admission of Patients, they are expected to be at the Hospital, with
their Recommendations at TEN of the Clock. The Physicians and Surgeons meet
every Saturday at Twelve of the Clock, at the Hospital, where they give Advice
gratis to all such diseased Poor who shall come, though unrecommended, and
require it.

The charitable Designs of this Hospital were carried on for several Years in
two convenient Houses adjoining to each other in Windmill-Street,
Tottenham-Court-Road, where the first Institution in August 1745, was intended
only for the Relief of the indigent Sick and Lame: But in July 1747, the
Governors willing to render it more worthy of the Notice of the Public, by
making it still more useful, resolved to extend their Plan to the Relief of the
pregnant Wives of the industrious Poor: The first Example of this sort of
Charity within this Kingdom.

The great Increase of Patients, occasioned by the Reputation of this twofold
Charity, obliged the Governors to think of enlarging their Edifice, as well as
their Plan, and the kind Benevolence of the Public by Donations, Legacies, etc.
enabled them in 1755, to erect a much larger and more convenient Building, in a
high and airy Part of Marybone-Fields, near Oxford-Road, wherein the Apartments
for the Reception of the Lying-in, are in a separate Part of the Building,
remote from the Sick and Lame; and that Ladies may conveniently visit the
Lying-in Patients, without being incommoded by the Sick and Lame, distinct
Stair-Cases lead to each, the Lying-in Wards having no Communication with the
Sick and Lame. -- Married Women only are admitted (in the last Month of their
Pregnancy) after they have been examined by the weekly Board, and on their
producing an Affidavit made before a Justice of the Peace, of the Time and
Place of their Marriage, and of the Settlement of the Husband, with the Manner
the said Settlement was obtained, whether by Birth, Servitude or otherwise. And
that this useful Branch of the Charity, the Midwifry Ward, may be made every
Way beneficial, and not liable to any Objection, no Pupils will be admitted;
the Whole being under the Direction of Dr. Brudenell Exton, Physician and
Man-Midwife: And no Woman whatsoever, who has been able to prove her Marriage,
and her Husband's Settlement, so as to avoid burthening the Parish wherein the
Hospital stands, has been refused Admittance.

The Number of Beds at present are Sixty-Four.

For Sick and Lame, In-Patients 26 Accidents 6 Lying in Married-Women 23
Servants 9 64 The Servants of the House are forbid to take any Gratuity of the
Patients or their Friends, on any Pretense whatsoever, on Pain of Expulsion.

The Patients of this Hospital are attended, without Fee or Reward, by the
following Gentlemen.
PHYSICIANS. Dr. Richard Warren, Pall Mall. Dr. Hugh Smith, Mincing-Lane. Dr.
John Brisbane, Holbourn.
MAN-MIDWIFE. Dr. Brudenell Exton, Frith-Street, Soho.
SURGEONS. Mr. William Young, Soho-Square. Mr. Henry Watson, Great
Malborough-Street, St. James's. Mr. Isaac Minors, Chancery Lane. The Rev. Mr.
George Davis, M. A. CHAPLAIN.

Such Persons who are inclined to favor this charitable Design, are desired to
send their Subscriptions, with their Names and Places of Abode to the
Treasurers, at the Weekly Committee, held every Tuesday in the Forenoon at the
Hospital; and in order to supply the current Expense of this Charity the
Subscribers are requested to CONTINUE to pay their Yearly Subscriptions in
ADVANCE.

Subscriptions and Benefactions are likewise taken in at Messrs. Honywood,
Fuller, and Co. Bankers in Birchin-Lane; and at Mr. Gislingham Cooper's, Banker
in the Strand.

As every Governor has a Right to act at all Boards, and to enquire into the
Affairs of the Society, they are hereby earnestly entreated to make frequent
Use of this Power, especially by attending at the Weekly Board; and they may be
assured that their doing so will be deemed a confiderable Addition to their
Charity, and a very great Service to the Hospital.

Those who are disposed to be Benefactors, by their last Will, have the
following Form of a Legacy recommended to them,

Item, I Give and bequeath unto A. B. and C. D. the Sum of (...) upon Trust,
and to the Intent that they or one of them do pay to the Treasurer or
Treasurers, for the Time being, of a Society, who now call themselves the
Governors of the Middlesex-Hospital for the Reception of Sick and Lame; and for
Lying-in Married-Women; which said Sum of (...) I desire may be paid out of my
personal Estate, and be applied toward carrying on the charitable Designs of
the said Society.

The Charges of erecting this new Building, together with Furniture and
convenient Sewers, amount to near 3000l. which by the charitable Assistance of
the Nobility, Gentry and others, the Governors have been enabled to pay: But
there are yet wanting proper Paving and a Wall to enclose their Ground and
Building, and render it as convenient as possible for the Uses of the Charity;
toward which useful and necessary Purpose the Governors, ever relying on the
Director of all Charities, entertain lively Hopes that this laudable Design
will still continue to merit the Favor and Protection of the Public.

An Abstract of the Accounts of the Hospital from the 30th of April, 1756, to
the 30th of April, 1758.
RECEIPTS.
l. s. d. Balance of the last Account 176 17 11 Subscriptions 940 8 0
BENEFACTIONS.
Lady Germain 42 0 0 Several Persons unknown 15 2 6 Mr. Savage 1 1 0 Mr. John
Story 5 5 0 Mr. George Hill 5 5 0 Collected at St. Ann's Church May 26, 1757,
82 12 6 Ditto after Dinner 50 18 6 One Year's Dividend upon 400l. to Christmas
12 0 0 Poor's Box 15 14 0 Fixtures at the old House 11 11 0 House Pupils
Admission for one Year 15 15 0 Building Subscriptions 865 10 0 Interest on
ditto 27 0 0 Neat Produce of the Benefit Play given by John Rich, Esquire Dec. 5,
1755. 215 19 5 Interest one Year and ten Months on the same 19 16 0 Produce of
the Benefit Play Given by Mess. Garrick and Lacy, Dec. 21, 1757 158 17 0 Sale
of 1700l. 3 per Cents. 1526 7 6 L 4188 0 4 PAYMENTS.
l. s. d. Housekeeping, Washing, etc. 595 8 10 Drugs, Medicines, etc. 194 17 6
House-Bent and Taxes 46 7 2 Wages and Gratuities to the Secretary, Apothecary,
Matron, Messenger, Nurses, Menial Servants, etc. 278 15 5 Household Furniture
and Linen 91 5 10 Books, Stationary-Ware, and Printing. 50 3 10 Workmens Bills
and Repairs 22 6 8 Charge of the Music at the Anniversary Sermon May 26, 1757
48 7 0 Burials 19 9 0 Toward Furniture for the new Building, from the Produce
of the Play given by John Rich, Esquire and Interest thereon 235 15 5 To Mr. Gray
as per Contract for Building the new Hospital 2250 0 0 To Overseer of the said
Work 50 0 0 Petty Charges on Building Account 5 9 6 To making Sewers, paving
and coping the Area, and levelling the Ground before the Hospital 100 0 0 To
altering the Roof 48 10 0 Balance in Mr. John Horne's Hands 151 4 3 L 4188 0 4

Mr. John Horne's Account from April 30, 1758, to June 1, 1758.
To Balance in Mr. Horne's Hands as by the Account above 151 4 0 Received by
Mr. Horn from Aprpil 30, 1758, to June 1, 1758. 25 14 6 L 176 18 9 Paid Mr
Goodge half Year's Rent due at Michaelmas, 1757 15 0 0 Paid William Berners,
Esquire 2 Years Ground Rent due at Lady Day, 1758 30 0 0 Paid sundry Bills, etc.
105 19 7 Balance paid by Mr. Horn to John Machin, Esquire and Mr. Wm. Wright,
joint Treasurers 25 19 2 L 176 18 9

An Account of Patients admitted from the first Institution of this Hospital in
August, 1745, to the 30th of April, 1756.
In-Patients 1471 Out-Patients 8875 10346 Lying in Women 1085

Admitted from the 30th of April, 1756, to the 1st of June, 1758.
In-Patients, 358. Cured 274 Discharged for Irregularity 5 Incurable 5 Died 43
In the House under Cure 27 Never came in 3 Discharged for an Impostor 1 358
Out-Patients, 2910. Whereof have returned Thanks as cured 1119 Of such as have
not returned Thanks, thought most of them believed to be cured 1484 Incurable 1
On the Books 297 Discharged for Irregularity 8 Ditto for an Impostor 1 2910
Lying-in Women, 340. Delivered, whereof 5 had Twins 308 Have not come in 17 To
come in when they think proper 15 340

TOTAL ADMITTED.
In-Patients 1829 Out-Patients 11785 13614 Lying-in Women 1425

A LIST OF THE GOVERNORS and CONTRIBUTORS TO THE Middlesex HOSPITAL.
** The Right Hon. the Earl of NORTHUMBERLAND, PRESIDENT. ** The Right Hon.
Earl Gower, ** Sir William Beauchamp Proctor, Bart. ** Sir Kenrick Clayton,
Bart. ** The Hon. Genesis Cornwallis, VICE-PRESIDENTS. * John Machin, Esquire
Treasurers. * Mr. William Wright, Treasurers.


A
*** Mr. John Arthur * Mr. William Almond Mr. Stephen Amiot Mr. Daniel Aveline
Rt. Honorable Countess of Ashburnham


B
* Rt. Hon. Earl of Bristol *** Jacob Bosanquet, Esquire * Sackville Bale, Esquire *
Richard Bathurst, M. D. * John Brisbane, M. D. * Bertie Burgh, Esquire * Edmund
Byron, Esquire * Mr. William Baker * Mr. Thomas Barton * Mr. John Bedford * Mr.
John Bennet * Mr. Thomas Bibby * Mr. William Boozsher * Mr. Paul Bouillard *
Mr. Marven Bowls * Mr. John Briand * Mr. Rene Briand * Mr. Henry Burnet Mr.
Paul Barbot Mr. John Bill Mr. Daniel Billon Mr. Thomas Birchall Mr. James Booth
Mr. John Francis Bourrillier Mr. John Britten Mr. Joshua Brogden Mr. Thomas
Brooksbank Mr. Archibald Brown Mr. Charles Brown Mr. Jonathan Buttall, Jun, Mr.
Isaac Butterfield Mr. Francis Broadhead Hon. Lady Dow. Barrington Mrs. Diana
Blake Mrs. Elizabeth Byerley


C
** Rt. Hon. Ld. Visc. Chetwynd ** Sir John Cross, Bart. *** Benj. Mendes Da
Costa, Esquire * William Clayton, Esquire * John Chase, Esquire ** Francis Clerk, Esquire
*John Cox, Esquire * Mr. Richard Carter * James Chamness, Esquire * Mr. Francis
Chassereau * Mr. Paul Crespin * Mr. John Crutchfield Mr. John Cane Mr. Henry
Canham Mr. Robert Carless Mr. Peter Caron Mr. Lawrence Castle Mr. Isaac Chadwin
Mr. William Chapman Mr. Henry Clarke Mr. Benj. Colborne, Surgeon Mr. Henry
Coals Mr. John Coney Mr. Thomas Coulson Mr. Allen Cowper Mr. John Crine Mr.
John Cuenot Mr. Richard Curson Lady Clayton Mrs. Mary Clayton Miss Chudleigh
Mrs. Sarah Claxton Mrs. Theodosia Crowley Mrs. Esther Capper Mrs. Jane Crow


D
** Rt. Hon. Earl of Dartmouth ** Rt. Hon. Ld. Visc. Duncannon ** Richard
Davis, Esquire * Mr. William Deards * Mr. Peter Deschamps * Mr. Francis Deschamps *
Mr. Benjamin Dorset * Mr. Charles Drew * Mr. James Duberley * Mr. Peter Dutens
Rev. John Dalton, D. D. Mr. Robert Davis Mr. Thomas Davies Mr. Bernard Daulede
Mr. William De L'Etang Mr. John Drew Mr. Robert Dudley Mrs. Mary Dubisson


E
* Rt. Hon. Earl of Essex * John Edwards, Esquire * Walter Edwards, Esquire ** Col.
William Elliot * Dr. Brudenell Exton, Man-Midwife * Mr. William Edwards Mr.
Daniel Eastmond Mr. Thomas Edwards Mr. John Edwards Allen Evans, Esquire Rt. Hon.
Countess of Effingham


F
* William Fauquier, Esquire *** William Far, Esquire * John Fielding, Esquire * Mr. John
Fell * Mr. James Filewood * Mr. William Francis * Mr. William Franks * Mr. John
Frime Mr. William Faden Mr. Hugh Fagan Mr. William Fallowfield Mr. Thomas Figg
Mr. Edward Fitz Mr. James Fitzhenry Mr. Henry Flanigan Mr. Samuel Foyster Mr.
John Friday Mr. Robert Frost Rt. Hon. Lady Caroline Fox Mrs. Mary de Fonvive


G
*** David Garrick, Esquire * Mr. Francis Goodge * Mr. William Goodge * Mr. Thomas
Grantham Mr. George Daniel Gaab Mr. Thomas Gaff Joseph de Gennes, Esquire Mr.
Thomas Gilbert Mr. Henry Godde Mr. Thomas Goodwin Mr. Stephen Goujon Mr.
Charles Grant Mr. Henry Green Mr. John Grimes Mr. Reynold Grignion Mr. Thomas
Grove Rt. Honorable Lady Betty Germain Mrs. Mary de Gennes Mrs. Louisa
Margaretta Groteste


H
** Rt. Hon. Earl of Halifax * Sir Thomas Heathcote, Bart. ** Rev. John Heylyn,
D. D. * Pennell Hawkins, Esquire * William Hallet, Sen. Esquire * William Hallet, Jun.
Esquire * Thomas Hayes, Esquire *** Fraser Honywood, Esquire * Mr. John Harrold * Mr.
William Hayne * Mr. Peter Hemet *** Mr. George Hill * Mr. Robert Hodgson * Mr.
Richard Holmes * Mr. Grundy Hooper * Mr. John Horn * Mr. John Huddle * Mr.
Andrew Hunter Mr. Patrick Halfpenny Mr. Francis Hallmarke Mr. Charles Handford
Mr. Thomas Harris Mr. George Hawkins Mr. George Heathman Mr. John Heaven Mr.
Reynold Hedley Mr. Nicholas Henin Mr. John Herrick Mr. James Hitchcock Mr.
Samuel Hoggins Mr. Henry Holderness Mr. Caston Homaster Mr. Thomas Huddle Mrs.
Mary Hucks Rt. Hon. Countess of Home Mrs. Margaret Hussy


I
* George Jennings, Esquire * Mr. John Jackson ** Mr. Caleb Jeacocke * Mr. William
Jellico, Jun. * Mr. Benjamin Jones Francis Jackman, Esquire Mr. Leonard Jennings
Mr. William Jones


K
* Sir Francis Knollys, Bart. * Ralph Knight, Esquire * Mr. William Kitchen Mr.
Isaac Kemp Mr. William Kendrick Mr. Daniel King Mr. Henry Kitchen Mr. Richard
Kitchen Mr. Jacob Kruger


L
** Rt. Hon. Earl of Lauderdale ** Sir James Lowther, Bart. *** James Lacy, Esquire
** Mr. Stephen Le Bas * Mr. William Lewis * Mr. John Little * Mr. Henry Long *
Mr. Robert Low Mr. Robert Landall Mr. Jacob Lawrence Mr. Thomas Lewis Mr.
James Lillyman Mr. William Lyster Mrs. Martha Law Mrs. Mary L'homme Dieu


M
* Sir William Meredith, Bart. * Sir William Milner, Bart. *** Capt. William
Miles * Mr. John Madders * Mr. John Martin * Mr. Robert Matthews * Mr. John
Mekerrell * Mr. William Methuen * Mr. Isaac Minors, Surgeon * Mr. John Morton
Lomax Martyn, Esquire Rev. John James Majendie Mr. William Malin Mr. John Marsh Mr.
Edward Marshall Mr. Robert Mason Mr. Daniel Moffett Mr. John Morgan Mr. James
Moss Mrs. Ann Maynard


N.
* Mr. William Nicholl * Mr. Adam Nuttall Mr. David Newton Mr. Richard Newton
Mr. James Newton.


P.
** Rt. Hon. Earl of Plymouth *** Lucas Pepys, Esquire: * Mr. John Parker * Mr.
Francis Parker * Mr. George Peavey * Mr. Lewis Perier * Mr. William Potier *
Mr. Henry Pujolas Mr. William Palmer Mr. Francis Partrick Mr. William Paul Mr.
William Phillips Mrs. Hannah Pettit Mrs. Gentille Petit Mrs. J. Pit Mrs.
Elizabeth Peavey Mrs. Mary Pratt


R.
* Rt. Hon. Earl of Rochford *** John Rich, Esquire * Mr. Elias Regnaud * Mr. Roe
Rotheram * Mr. John Roper Mr. Daniel Read Henry Reveley Mr. George Reid Mr.
Thomas Reiley Mr. William Ringstead Mr. Isaac Roberts * Mrs. Elizabeth Russel
Mrs. Celeste Regnier


S.
* John Ld. Bp. of Salisbury * Rt. Hon. Earl of Scarborough * Henry de
Saunieres, Esquire * Hugh Smith, M. D. *** John Spencer, Esquire * Charles Spooner, Esquire
* John Stevenson, Esquire * Mr. James Scrafton * Mr. Robert Sherman * Mr. John
Sherman * Mr. John Story * Mr. George Stubbs Rev. Samuel Squire, D. D. Mr. Paul
Saunders Mr. John Sewel Mr. Gerard Shaw Mr. Bernard Shellhase Mr. Richard
Sherman Mr. Samuel Slade Mr. Joan Smart Mr. John Smith Mr. Arthur Smith Mr.
William Smith Mr. Cuthbert Softley Mr. Richard Spencer Mr. Richard Spycer Mr.
Morris Spurling Mr, George Squire Mr. George Stevens Mr. Francis Sutton Her
Grace Charlotte Duchess Dowager of Somerset Mrs. Mary Spinnage Mrs. Elizabeth
Stukeley Mrs. Judith Stoll


T.
Rev. Dr. John Thomas *** John Thornton, Esquire *** James Tillard, Esquire * Mr.
Daniel Tabart * Mr. James Tanquevay * Mr. Edward Trant Robert Thompson, Esquire Mr.
John Tredwell Mr. Thomas Treslove Mrs. Mary Tuttle


V.
* Mr. James Varnier Mr. Ferdinand Vigne


W.
* John Ward, Esquire * Richard Warren, M. D. * Saunders Welsh, Esquire * Mr. Elmes
Walter * Mr. Henry Watson, Surgeon * Mr. Thomas Wildman * Mr. Joseph Wilton *
Charlton Wollaston, M. D. * Mr. Obadiah Wright Mr. Francis Walkingame Mr. James
Ward. Mr. Thomas Watts Mr. James Webb Mr. Jeremiah Wells Mr. Jonathan Wharton
Mr. James Wills Mr. Thomas Wooddeson Mr. Thomas Woodward Mr. James Whittle Mr.
John Wife Mr. William Wright, Rose-street Mrs. Mary Warburton Mrs. Mary
Wollaston Mrs. Margaret Wharton Mrs. Mary Woodman


Y.
* Rev. Edward Yardley, B. D. Archdeacon of Cardigan * William Young, Esquire *
Robert Young, Esquire * Mr. William Young, Surgeon.


Note, Those Gentlemen in the above List marked thus *** are perpetual
Governors. Those marked thus ** are annual Governors of five Guineas and
upwards. Those marked thus * are annual Governors of three Guineas each; and
are thereby entitled to recommend Sick and Lame Patients, and Lying-in Women,
according to the Regulation in the Account of the Hospital preceding this List.

Those Ladies marked thus are Benefactors of thirty Guineas; and are thereby
entitled to the Privileges of a perpetual Governor. Those marked thus are
annual Subscribers of five Guineas and upwards. Those marked thus are annual
Subscribers of three Guineas; and are thereby entitled to the Privileges in the
foregoing Account.


