SELECT LETTERS. IN TWO VOLUMES. VOL. II.

SELECT LETTERS BETWEEN THE LATE DUCHESS OF SOMERSET, LADY LUXBOROUGH, MISS
DOLMAN, MR. WHISTLER, MR. R. DODSLEY, WILLIAM SHENSTONE, ESQUIRE. AND OTHERS;
INCLUDING A SKETCH OF THE MANNERS, LAWS, etc. OF THE REPUBLIC OF VENICE, AND
SOME POETICAL PIECES; THE WHOLE NOW FIRST PUBLISHED FROM ORIGINAL COPIES,

By Mr. HULL.

IN TWO VOLUMES. VOL. II.

LONDON: PRINTED FOR J. DODSLEY, PALL MALL. MDCCLXXVIII.

CONTENTS To VOLUME II.
LET. I. WILLIAM Shenstone, Esquire. to Mr. --, accounting for a Delay of Writing;
a Describing Lord Foley's Seat, etc. Nov. 20, 1762. Page 1 LET. II. W.
Shenstone, Esquire. to Mr. G --, on familiar Topics. No Date. 8 LET. III. W.
Shenstone, Esquire. to Mr. Jago, on familiar Topics. No Date. 12 LET. IV. The same
to Mr. Whistler, on familiar Topics. No Date. 15 LET. V. The same to --. No
Date. 20 LET. VI. Mr. Whistler to W. Shenstone, Esquire. Sentiment on Friendship.
No Date. 22 LET. VII. The same to the same, on familiar Topics Sept. 8. 25
LET. VIII. The same to the same, containing an Anecdote of the Princess
Amelia, etc. Sept. 9. 28 LET. IX. The same to the same, on familiar Topics,
with an Encomium on Mr. Garrick. April 13. 31 LET. X. The same to the same,
requesting an Interview at Oxford. No Date. 35 LET. XI. The same to the same,
on familiar Topics. No Date. 37 LET. XII. The same to the same, complaining of
bad Health and Spirits. Aug. 4. 40 LET. XIII. The same to the same, on
familiar Topics. Sept. 8. 42 LET. XIV. The same to the same; Sentiments on the
Leasowes, old Songs, etc. Nov. 8. 46 LET. XV. The same to the same, on
familiar Topics. Nov. 24. 50 LET. XVI. The same to the same, on Enjoyments by
Reflection, the Pleasure of reading Authors, in Society, etc. April 13. 53
LET. XVII. The same to the same, on the refined Sensations of Friendship. No
Date. 59 LET. XVIII. W. Shenstone, Esquire. to Miss Low, on familiar Topics. 63
LET. XIX. W. Shenstone, Esquire. to Mrs. A --. Anecdote of a Hat given for a
Sermon, with Sentiments on the scanty Incomes of Curacies, etc. No Date. 65
LET. XX. W. Shenstone, Esquire. to Miss Carter, on familiar Matters. No Date. 68
LET. XXI. S. D --, Esquire. to W. Shenstone, Esquire. inviting his Return to Oxford.
Jan. 20. 72 LET. XXII. The same to the same, on familiar Matters. No Date. 74
LET. XXIII. A. B --, Esquire. to the same, on the like. No Date. 77 LET. XXIV.
Mr. J. Whistler to W. Shenstone, Esquire. giving an Account of his Brother's Death.
May 26. 81 LET. XXV. A. B --, Esquire. to W. Shenstone, Esquire. on familiar Matters.
Jan. 21. 84 LET. XXVI. The same to the same, with Remarks on the Amusements in
London. Feb. 9. 87 LET. XXVII. The same to the same, on familiar Matters. No
Date. 90 LET. XXVIII. The same to the same, on the like Matters. 93 LET.
XXIX. The same to the same, on being solicited to revise and correct some
Writings. No Date. 97 LET. XXX. Mr. Dodsley to W. Shenstone, Esquire. inviting him
to London, etc. Dec. 30. 100 LET. XXXI. The same to the same, on the
Indisposition of the latter. Feb. 12. 102 LET. XXXII. The same to the same, on
the Publication of his Fables, an Exchange of Portraits, etc. No Date. 103
LET. XXXIII. The same to the same, on familiar Matters. June 17. 107 LET.
XXXIV. The same to the same, on the intended Essay to his Fables, etc. June 24.
LET. XXXV. The same to the same, acknowledging the Receipt of his Portrait,
etc. No Date. 112 LET. XXXVI. W. Shenstone, Esquire. to Mr. Hull, at Birmingham,
recommending a dramatic Plan for the Story of Rosamond; with some subjoined
Stanzas on the Obelisk on Landsdowne, near Bath. Aug. 29, 1761. 115 LET.
XXXVII. The same to the same, at Covent Garden Theater; relating an Event at
the Leasowes, with some Observations on our Laws, and a Ballad in the ancient
Style. Oct. 18, 1761. 120 LET. XXXVIII. The same to the same; Remarks on the
Writings of Dr. Lancaster and Mr. Griffith. Nov. 26, 1761. 132 LET. XXXIX. The
same to the same, with Thoughts on Ballad-Writing, and two Ballads.
Christmas-Eve, 1761. 135 LET. XL. The same to Miss M --; Reflections on
frequent Parties of Pleasure, two Anecdotes and Cadwal, a legendary Tale, in
two Parts. Dec. 8, 1761. 143 LET. XLI. Mr. M. G -- to W. Shenstone, Esquire.
enclosing an Extract from LET. XLII. Another Letter, and a poetical Fragment.
June 21, 1760. 167 LET. XLIII. R. G --, Esquire. to Mr. Hull, with Remarks on the
Instances of cruelty toward Animals in London Streets. June 16. 183 LET.
XLIV. Mrs. -- to Mr. Hull, at Covent Garden Theater, with an original Poem, by
W. Shenstone, Esquire. Dec. 28, 1774. 190 LET. XLV. Mrs. W -- to Mr. Hull, with
Remarks on the foregoing Poem, the Diamond, and a tributary Inscription and
Elegy to the Memory of W. Shenstone, Esquire. Jan. 16, 1775. 214 LET. LVI. This
and the following Letters are mis-numbered by Mistake.
R. G --, Esquire. to the same, on the Profession of an Actor. 218 LET. LVII. Miss
N -- to Mr. Hull, from Venice, describing her Journey across Mount Cenis,
concise Account of Venice on her Arrival, and various Events there, viz. a Nun
taking the Veil, etc. Oct. 25, 1765. 223 LET. LVIII. The same to the same;
Description of the Diversions, etc. in Venice. Dec. 25, 1765. 232 LET. LIX.
The same to the same, which commences an Account of the political State of the
Venetian Republic. April 3, 1766. 239 LET. LX. The same; to the same;
political State of Venice continued. April 9, 1766. 249 LET. LXI. The same to
the same; political State of Venice continued. April 12, 1766. 256 LET. LXII.
The same to the same; political State of Venice continued. April 15, 1766. 265
LET. LXIII. The same to the same; political State of Venice continued. April
9, 1766. 276 LET. LXIV. The same to the same; political State of Venice
continued. May 1, 1766. 286 LET. LXV. The same to the same; political State of
Venice continued. May 6, 1766. 296 LET. LXVI. The same to the same;
Description of a Retirement at Palluello, etc. June 20. 306 LET. LXVII. The
same to the same; Description of Bridgnorth, etc. July 5. 309 LET. LXVIII. The
same to the same; Description of Dunkeld. July 22. 314 LET. LXIX. The same to
the same; Sketch of Atholl House; Anecdote of the Lord of Foignes, etc. Sept.
10, 1764. 319 LET. LXX. The same to the same, describing her Arrival at
Kimbolton Castle, with a Sketch of the Place. Nov. 22. 324 LET. LXXI. The same
to the same; short Description of Paris and the Environs. July 31. 329 LET.
LXXII. The same to the same. Oct. 13, 1771. 336 LET. LXXIII. The same to the
same; Sketch of Switzerland, and the Carnival Time at Venice. Jan. 26, 1772.
341
SELECT LETTERS.
LETTER I. W. SHENSTONE, Esquire. to --.
The Leasowes, Nov. 20, 1762. My dearest Friend,
IT is a very surprising and a cruel Thing, that you will not suppose me to
have been out of Order, after such a Neglect of writing, as can hardly be
excused on any other Score. I cannot, indeed, lay Claim to what the Doctors
call an acute Disease: but Dizziness of Head, and Depression of Spirits are at
best no trivial Maladies, and great Discouragements to writing. There is a
lethargic State of Mind that deserves your Pity, not your Anger; though it may
require the Hellebore of sharp Reproof. Why then did you not apply this pungent
Remedy, before the Disease was gone so far? But seriously, I pass too much of
that Sort of Time, wherein I am neither well nor ill; and being unable to
express myself at large, am averse to do so by Halves. From the strange
Laconicism of your Letter, I am really in Doubt, whether you are not angry at
me; and yet had rather this were owing to Anger that may subside, than to any
persevering Fondness you may have for such unusual Brevity. Should the latter
become habitual, I shall see the Letters of a Genius dwindle to " per first
will advise the Needful." God forbid such a Transformation!

Your former Letter, to my great Confusion, was dated Sept. 18. Let me speak
first to some few Parts of it -- The Lampreys arrived safe, and were as good as
I ever tasted; but every Time I tasted them, I wanted you; and you are
mistaken, if you imagine, I can half relish such Cates alone: however, I return
you Thanks.

You gave me no Account how far the Bath Waters, etc. were judged expedient for
you. A charitable Action called you up to Town; and you, in the Benevolence of
your Heart, presume, that this accounts for the Neglect of every Advantage that
concerned yourself. Pray let me know whether the Bath was proper for you at the
same Time inform me, whether you were able to serve Mrs. H --. I shall be sorry
for you, as well as her, if you should miss the Gratification you would derive
from the Success of such an Endeavor.

Were I rich, I would erect a Temple to Simplicity and Grace; or, as the latter
Word would be equivocal, to Simplicity and Elegance. I am glad to hear that Mr.
W -- has undertaken to deify the former; as he will produce better Grounds for
such a Consecration than was ever done by Pagans, or by Papists, on any such
Occasion. By the Way, I take that Goddess to be a remarkable Friend to Ease and
Indolence. There is another well-deserving Personage, Delicacy, whose Cause has
been strangely deserted, by either Mr. MELMOTH, or Dr. LANCASTER.

Will it make better for me, or worse, to say, I Have not yet written to Mr.
GRAVES? But I will positively write, within this Week, if it cost me a Dose of
Salts to clear my Brain. As to what he says about my printing immediately, he
may be right, and I am sure he is friendly: but more of this in a little Time.

Since the Receipt of your last Letter, Mr. PERCY and his Wife came and spent a
good Part of the Week here; and he, also, would needs write a Description of
the Leasowes. During the latter Part of his Circuit, my Friend JAGO and I
accompanied him; and what was produced on that Occasion, you will go near to
know in a little Time. Mean while I am more and more convinced, that no
Description of this Place can make any Figure in Print, unless some Strictures
upon Gardening, and other Embellishments be superadded.

Mr. JAGO has been with me twice, having written a Poem in blank Verse, which
he leaves here for my Revisal. It Is a descriptive Poem, called Edgehill, and
admits an Account of the Battle fought there, together with many legendary
Tales and Episodes.

About a Week ago, I paid a Visit of two or three Days, which I had long
promised, to Lord FOLEY. His Table, for a Constancy, is the most magnificent of
any I ever saw: eighteen or twenty elegant Dishes; a continual Succession of
Company; his Behavior, perfectly hospitable, and his Conversation really
entertaining. I most readily own myself to have been under a Mistake, with
Regard to his companionable Character. My Reception was as agreeable as it
could possibly be. As to the rest, he has a most admirable House and Furniture;
but without any Room or Utensil that would stand the Test of modern Criticism.
The Views around him, wild and great; and the Park capable of being rendered
fine; twice as striking as it is at present, if he would fell some Oaks, under
the Value of a Crown, and some Hawthorns, under the Value of a Halfpenny: but
it is possible, at his Time of Life, etc. nothing of this Sort will be
undertaken. The two Things at present remarkable are, his Lodge and his Chapel.
The Portico of the former, (designed by FLEETCROFT) affords three different and
striking Prospects. The Chapel is so very superb and elegant, that Mrs. GATAKER
has nothing to do but send you and me thither, to say our Prayers in it. In
reality, it is perfect Luxury; as I truly thought it, last Sunday Se'en-night;
his Pew is a Room with an handsome Fireplace; the Ceiling carved, painted in
Compartments, and the Remainder enriched with gilt Stucco-Ornaments; the Walls
enriched in the same Manner; the best painted Windows I ever saw; the Monument
to his Father, Mother, and Brothers, cost, he said, 2000 l. the middle Aisle
rendered comfortable by Iron Stoves, in the Shape of Urns; the Organ perfectly
neat, and good, in Proportion to its Size: and to this Chapel you are led
through a Gallery of Paintings seventy Feet long -- And what would you more?
You Will say, a good Sermon -- I really think his Parson is able to preach one.

And now I come, lastly, to speak of your Letter I received on Monday. What an
uncommon Man you are! to take so much Thought for those, who never took any for
themselves! -- I have enquired after Mr. WEDDERBURNE, and it seems he is a very
clever and a very rising Lawyer; to whom I am the more obliged for mentioning
me, as I fear I have not the Honor of being the least known to him.

Pray write to me as soon as possible, and I will make you Amends (if Writing
will make Amends) for the scandalous Omissions of which I have been guilty. I
have somewhat to tell you of Lord L -- 's usual great Kindness, when the Lords
D -- and W -- were last at Hagley; but I have not Time, and must conclude, my
dearest, worthiest Friend!

your ever obliged W. SHENSTONE.

LETTER II. W. SHENSTONE, Esquire. to Mr. G --.
Dear Sir,
I DID indeed give you up for lost, as a Correspondent, and find by your Letter
that I am to expect very few future ones. I will endeavor all I can, to avoid
any Suspicion of your Indifference for my own Satisfaction; but I don't know
for certain, that I shall be able, unless you assist my Endeavors, like my
good Genius, by a Course of suitable Epistles, at certain Distances. I myself
correspond but very little now, so you will meet with the more Indulgence. I
don't find by your Letter that you have much more Philosophy than me. I cannot
tell, indeed, what the Situation of your House is; I own, mine gives me Offense
on no other Consideration, than that it does not receive a sufficient Number of
polite Friends, or that it is not fit to receive them, were they so disposed; I
would else cultivate an Acquaintance with about three or four in my
Neighborhood, that are of a Degree of Elegance and Station superior to the
common run. But I make it a certain Rule, " Arcere profanum Vulgus". To banish
the profane Vulgar.
-- Persons who will despise you for the Want of a good Set of Chairs, or an
uncouth Fire-Shovel, at the same Time that they cannot taste any Excellence in a
Mind that overlooks those Things; or (to make a Conceit of this Sentiment) with
whom it is in vain that your Mind is furnished, if the Walls are naked; indeed,
one loses much of one's Acquisitions in Virtue, by an Hour's Converse with such
as judge of Merit by Money, etc. yet I am now and then impelled by the social
Passion to sit half an Hour in my Kitchen.

I was all along an Admirer of Sir THOMAS HEAD's Humor and Wit, and I beg you
will represent me in that Light, if Occasion happens. It Is not impossible that
I may penetrate this Winter as far as your Neighborhood, connecting a Set of
Visits which I have in my Eye. Tell Mr. WHISTLER, when you see him, that if he
must have some Distemper, I cannot but be pleased that it is one which is the
Forerunner of Longevity -- Don't tell him so neither, for the Compliment is
trite. From the Birmingham Gazette, "We hear that on Thursday last was married,
at Hales Owen, in Shropshire, Mr. J --, an eminent Gunsmith of this Town, to a
Sister of the Right Hon. F -- Lord D --." I was yesterday at the Grange, where
his old Father, with a Number of People, were celebrating the Nuptials of his
Son; when in the Midst of his Feastings, high Jollity, and grand Alliance, the
old Fellow bethought him of a Piece of Timber in the Neighborhood, that was
convertible into good Gun-Stocks, and had some of it sent for into the Room, by
Way of Specimen. " Animae nil magnae Laudis egentes!" Souls that are desirous
of little Praise.


Pray is your Sister at Smelkwick? for I have not heard. You said you would
give me your Picture, which I long earnestly for; could not you contrive to
have it sent me directly? I am quite in your Debt, with Regard to downright
Goods and Movables, and what is the proper Subject of an Inventory; I will,
however, endeavor to be more upon a Par with you, with Regard to Presents,
though I never can, with Regard to the Pleasures I have received from your
Conversation.

I make People wonder at my Exploits in pulling down Walls, Hovels, Cow-Houses,
etc. and my Place is not the same. I am, that is with Regard to you,

a faithful Friend, and humble Servant, W. SHENSTONE.
Mr. WHISTLER, and you, and I, and Sir T. HEAD, (whom I should name first,
speaking after the Manner of Men) have just Variety enough, and not too much,
in our Characters, to make an Interview, whenever it happens, entertaining -- I
mean, though we were not old Friends and Acquaintance.



LETTER III. W. SHENSTONE, Esquire. to Mr. JAGO.
Dear Mr. JAGO,
THOUGH I have not yet troubled you with a Letter, I have not been void of all
Enquiry, or Information concerning your Situation and Mr. HARDY's Health;
indeed, it is now many Weeks since I collected some Particulars from your
Brother, and I am now impatient for some further Intelligence. As to the
Particulars of our friendly Reception at Wroxhall, Mr. JOHN JAGO has very
probably acquainted you; he would, however, persuade me to give you a distinct
Account; being assured, he says, it must be a good Subject for Drollery. I
don't know how far this would be proper: but I think, when I write again to my
Friend W --, to give him a Sketch of his own Character, just as it appeared
during the Time of our Visit. I do not mean to give Offense, so I shall
intermix many good Parts of his Character, together with his Oddities. I
believe the whole will take up a Sheet of Paper, for I have already considered
it. He has Good-Sense, and Goodnature at the Bottom; pity he should disguise
the former by one continued Air of Buffoonry, and the latter by a total Neglect
of common Decorum.

Since I came home, I have done little else but plant Bushes, Hazel, Hawthorn,
Crab-Tree, Elder, etc. together with some few flowering Shrubs that I have had
given me. I think nothing remarkable has occurred; only one miserable
tempestuous Day, I had the Earl of STAMFORD called to see my Walks, together
with Mr. DOVEY, of Birmingham, and two other Gentlemen. My Lord promised to
come again in Summer, and invited me to Enville. By the Way, he is now building
a Gothic Green-House, by Mr. M -- 's Direction; and by all Accounts, the Place
is worth your seeing, when you come into this Country; it is but about six Miles
distant from hence. Pray do not you embroil me with Mr. M --, in Regard to the
Observations I made in his Walks. Remember there were not a few Things with
which I was greatly delighted; and if there were a few that I less appeared to
admire, it was owing to a Consciousness, that I was amongst Friends only, and
that I thought it foolish to regulate my Expressions by the same Rules of
Complaisance, which I ought to observe in different Places. I say, ought, for
he has been exceeding favorable to me, in his Representations of the Leasowes.
I hope to see Mr. FANCOURT with you here this Spring, and why not your Brother?
He can spend half a Week now and then at Wroxall. The Duke of S -- was treated
with Cruelty by his Father till he was sixty-five, and afterward scarce
survived him, to enjoy one Year's Profit of the Estate. Such is the Tenure by
which we hold our earthly Tenements!

LETTER IV. W. SHENSTONE, Esquire. to Mr. WHISTLER.
Dear Mr. WHISTLER,
THIS is the first Evening I have had to myself since I left Cheltenham; and as
one wants some very favorite Subject to engross one's Thoughts a little, after
a long Dissipation, I could think of nothing more effectual than a Letter to
one who has so large a Share in them; beside, they have given me your Letter
from Bradfield, and I am in Pain till I have acknowledged so affectionate and
polite a Present. People, whose very Foibles are so many Elegancies, can scarce
write any Thing more agreeable than a plain, unaffected Account of them. I
remember, I used to think this a Kind of Distinction between Mr. GRAVES and
you; that the one had the Knack of making his Virtues unenvied, and the other
of rendering (what I perhaps unjustly termed) his Weaknesses enviable. I am
almost afraid of inserting this, lest it should seem to injure the superlative
Esteem I have of you: but I must add, that I consider a Mixture of Weaknesses,
and an ingenuous Confession of them, as the most engaging and sociable Part of
any Character; if I did not, I could not allot them you, whose Manner is so
distinguishedly amiable.

Since I left Cheltenham, I have been at Mr. B -- 's, in Bishop's-Castle. I
rode one Morning with him about three Miles, that I might say, I had been in
Wales, and seen Brecon, Caderidis, and Plinlimmon, with an extensive Chain of
other Mountains. I called at a small Alehouse, where the People lived all the
Winter without any Glass in their Windows. I was wondering how they could live
so, in a more cold Country than you have, perhaps, experienced. The Wife said,
"True it was, she could like Glass very well." "Yes," says the Husband, "Glass
is very genteel, that it is." "Nay, says the Wife, "not for the Gentleelness
neither, though it is very genteel, that is the Truth on it." This Circumstance
struck me a good deal, that they should discover the genteelness of Glazing,
and never once think of its Expediency. Mr. B -- is a Man you would like upon
Acquaintance, though, as I remember, you had some Objection to the Superfluity
of his Wit. We shall, in all Probability, have frequent Interviews with him at
Bath, London, etc. He would fain have seduced me to have traveled into
Portugal, etc. with himself, and one Mr. MOORE, his Neighbor; an agreeable,
modest Man, and late Member for Bishop's-Castle. I declined it for two Reasons;
first, on Account of the Expense, and secondly, that I could not think of
spending two Years in this Part of my Life abroad; dead to one's own Country,
and procuring, at best, very perishable, and useless Friendships in another. If
I could have staid, I was to have gone with him to a Welsh Sessions, fraught
with Irascibility. He is a Justice of Peace there.

As to good Acquaintance, though I much desire it, I have as literally a Genius
for avoiding, as any one ever had for procuring it. I cannot approach within
fifty Yards of Servility for fear of it.

I want sadly to talk to you about a thousand Things. I have some Notion of
spending a Week at Mr. D -- 's. Act sublimely, and give me the Meeting then,
notwithstanding.

Though I was enamoured with the Politeness of Mr. W -- 's Conversation, I
should not, perhaps, have been very forward to express my Sentiments, if you
had not intimated, that he made favorable mention of me. I begin to grow a
little pleased with Prudence, and I think it a Debt one owes her, to reserve
one's Encomiums till one knows any one's mutual Sentiments; for certainly, he
that happens to commend an Enemy, happens to condemn himself. I beg my
Compliments.

I believe poor J. D -- is alive -- Farther I c^nnot learn.

I did not think it possible, I could have (...) so much engaged by love as I
have been (...) ^ate. -- Poor Miss C --!

It must necessarily be an Honor to a Girl, to have pleased a Man of Sense, (I
know not but I am vain in supposing myself of that Number) let his Station be
how low soever. Now it must be a Disgraee to captivate a Fool, however high it
be; the former is the strongest Evidence of Merit, the latter of the Want of it.

Now I talk of Vanity, I beseech you never check yourself in your Letters -- I
don't purpose it; and I think it makes as pretty a Figure in the Letters of a
Man of Taste, as it does in the Embroidery of a Beau. I am as much yours, as
human Nature will admit of.

Adieu! W. SHENSTONE.

LETTER V. W. SHENSTONE, Esquire. to --.
Dear Sir,
WHEN I promised you some Poetry for Mr. S --, I am afraid that, through my
Desire of recommending myself to his Family, my Tongue outrun my Wit. If I
laid any Sort of Stress upon what I was to send, I am very sure it did so; and
when you have read the Trifles enclosed, you will be of the same Opinion.

It is probable, however, that I had an Eye to a larger Ode of mine, upon the
Subject of rural Elegance, which I have not now Time either to correct or to
transcribe; but which I will not fail to communicate to them upon some future
Occasion.

Or if my Promise regarded a Translation of the Mottos here, I shall have the
best Opportunity of performing it, when I take the Freedoms you have allowed
me, with your polite Description of my Farm.

Am I wrong in detaining that Paper? -- For positively, these last few Days I
have found myself a good deal feverish, and my Head has been so much confused,
that I was almost tempted to omit this Message. In this Case, I think your
Goodnature would have acquitted me of Disrespect: but I could not suffer you
to leave the Country with so bad an Opinion of my punctuality.

It remains, that I present my best Respects to Dr. TURTON and his Lady, and
that I wish you an agreeable Journey to Oxford. I purpose, in a few Weeks, that
you shall be enabled to say something more particular, in Regard to M -- 's
Poetry; in the mean Time, I desire that he would accept my Compliments, and my
Thanks for the Pleasure his Verses have afforded me. Above all Things, assure
Mr. ARNOLD of my most unfeigned Esteem; and if he discovers any Partiality for
my Place or me, encourage it, that it may induce him, on a proper Occasion, to
favor me once more with his Company. You see, I am availing myself of your
Interest, to make all your Friends my own; and to atone for this Piece of
Selfishness, it shall not be my Fault, if every Friend I have be not yours, at
least, with some Share of that Regard with which I am,

dear Sir, your most faithful, humble Servant, W. SHENSTONE.

LETTER VI. Mr. WHISTLER to W. SHENSTONE, Esquire.
Dear Sir,
I Received your agreeable Letter; read all the fine Things your (I fear
prejudiced) Goodnature made you say; at first distrusted them: but when I
reflected on the Person who said them, I found a strong Inclination rise in me
to believe them; but how to be convinced I was still at a Loss; for I know it
is in your Power, either to make Flattery pass for Sincerity, or Sincerity (so
justly dreaded from the Unskilful) pleasing. But be it as it will, I shall be a
Gainer by it; for if it is Flattery, it will give me a fair Reputation, though
undeserved, with all who hear it; but if it is true, it will assure me, I
deserve one from all who can like you bestow one.

You enquired after Mr. D --. He, and his Lady, and Miss B -- s, have drank Tea
with me twice within this Fortnight. We went to Christ-Church Prayers together,
from thence, arrayed in Gold and Silver, we rushed into St. John's-Chapel,
where we stood, knelt and sat, (I will not say prayed) the whole Service-Time;
for you know it is usual there for Strangers to sit in the Choir, which we did,
to the great Advantage both of the Fan and the Snuff Box, which were neither of
them long unemployed, during Divine Service. You know they are great Helps to
Devotion: Snuff certainly composes, and a Fan may waft a Soul to Heaven before
it is aware.

Mrs. L -- still perseveres. She gave it out before she had seen her, that Miss
B -- was like a Cat, which when she found Miss B -- had heard, she wrote a
Letter to excuse herself, and concluded most emphatically with these Words,
"No, Madam, I am not quite so unbred; it was not I, but Common-Fame, said you
were like a Cat." I really think here, that Mrs. L -- topt Mrs. L -- 's Part.
Mr. G -- is still a Prude; I see him sometimes, but should be glad to see him
oftener. I know no one Circumstance, but Breach of Sincerity, that can ever be
a Reason with me to slight my Friends. If a Friend of mine had broke all Laws,
both human and divine, yet had conspicuously preserved his Integrity to me, I
should only think myself the more obliged to him, and though I pitied him,
would never forsake him first; I should think he had a higher Notion of
Friendship, and that that was the only Tie which he dared not violate, for
which Reason I would not dare to be a greater Villain than he. I don't know how
this Thought came into my Head, but you see I was willing to spin it to its
full Length; if I have gone too far, you must impute it to that Rapture of
Friendship with which I am yours eternally,

A. WHISTLER.
Oxford. Do write!



LETTER VII. Mr. WHISTLER to W. SHENSTONE, Esquire.
Dear Sir,
I HAVE waited thus long upon a dilatory Lawyer, called, I suppose, in Hebrew,
Beelzebub; at least, I am confident, Lawyer is but a synonimous Term for the
Devil. I have stayed, and must stay, to sign some Parchments, which cannot be
done without me; and his Delay has caused mine, in not answering your kind
Letter before. I must likewise go to Winchester on the same Business, so that,
to put you out of a disagreeable Expectation, I pluck up Resolution to tell
you, I am afraid I cannot wait upon you this Summer; at once to resist your
Kindness, and my own Inclination, in my Opinion, is a great Act of Resolution,
at least would be so, if I had any Degree of Choice left me: but as it is, I
think the enduring my Disappointment a great Trial of my Patience. Mr. GRAVES
will witness the Truth of my Misfortune, who has been at Whitchurch lately, and
who intended to see you soon. I suppose he told you his Errand into these
Parts, a providential Thing for me, and one of the happiest Revolutions in my
Life, if it succeed, as I hope it will. My Spirits are quite grown rusty, with
long and fruitless Expectations of Happiness, and no Tools are fine enough to
polish, or, as the Artists say, to touch them, but yourself or Mr. GRAVES. I
knew nothing of his coming till I saw him, for which Reason I looked upon him
as miraculous Manna or Food from Heaven.

I lament very much that you don't design to be in London next Winter: I shall
be there for about six Weeks, toward the Middle of it. The Winter we met
there, I thought a pleasant one, and enough to encourage a second Meeting in
the same Place -- The only Place for Whims, practicable there without Reproach,
or falling from that Dignity which it is necessary for a Gentleman to maintain
in the Country. I should like mightily to indulge my Fancy in some innocent,
private, romantic Expeditions; I know not what -- But all Things as I said, are
possible there.

Mr. GRAVES tells me you are a great Oeconomist. If so, I hope London will be
the richer for it, and you the finer, as Luxury is the Daughter of Industry,
and Industry again the Mother of Luxury, each reigning by Turns, and so the
World goes on. If you should go to London this Winter, you will call at
Whitchurch by the Way, and we'll go together, which will prevent any
Disappointment. You will always be received here, with Acknowledgment of the
Favor you do us; so say we all, and present our Compliments in one Garland to
you, which I beg you will accept, though it is but coarsely put together, and
you will oblige

Your sincere Friend, and most obedient Servant, A. WHISTLER.
Whitchurch, Sept. 8.
LETTER VIII. Mr. WHISTLER to W. SHENSTONE, Esquire.
Dear Sir,
I Received your kind Letter, and, in Spite of all you have said, I must still
think that the Obligation is entirely on my Side, and you have only, in my
Opinion, laid a greater Stress upon it by so generously disclaiming it. I am
resolved to be pleased with every Thing you say or do, and if I were not, you
are resolved I shall. I am very glad you intend me a Visit; but am likewise
very sorry, I must beg you to defer it for some Time; our Family talk of going
to Bristol very soon, and as I have no where else to go, must go with them. If
it was in my Power to defer the Journey, I would gladly do it, to wait on Mr.
SHENSTONE, at Whitchurch; or if I could command the House in their Absence,
their Absence and his Presence would be to me a double Happiness. But as it is,
I must, at present, be without a Pleasure, which I hope will not always thus
fly from me; I hope the lat-End of this Summer, and Mr. SHENSTONE, will be both
more favorable to me, and if so, I shall reckon that the Spring of the Year is
yet to come; I, who place the Seasons entirely in my own Fancy.

I forgot to tell you in my last, that the Princess AMELIA did us the Honor of
a Visit at Whitchurch, though we were obliged to the Stag for it, who seemed to
fly from the Honor she designed him, and had not Ambition enough (as LEE says)
to meet the Blow half Way, or be pleased with Death, though in the Royal
Presence. It was a terrible Day, and the Princess was wet through; she had rode
thirty Miles when I saw her, and she rode thirty Miles after that, which was
six o'Clock at Night, in her wet Clothes, and appeared at the Drawing Room at
St. James's, the next Day, which was a Birthday.

The Princess (with Submission be it spoke) gave me no Satisfaction, not
through any Deficiency in her Demeanor -- but from the dissatisfied State of
Mind. I could be contented with nothing less than you; and I hope you will be
so good, as not to let this Disappointment, which I assure you is a great
Disappointment to me, be any Objection to my having the Pleasure of your
Company another Time. With my Service, which waits on you, I am yours, as much
as, I hope, you would have me, viz.

Your sincere Friend and humble Servant, A. WHISTLER.
Excuse me, if I desire to be remembered to good Mrs. ARNOLD, whom I look upon
to be an Example of the simple Force of moral Beauty.

Sept. 9.


LETTER IX. Mr. WHISTLER to W. SHENSTONE, Esquire.
Dear Sir,
I HAVE not received your Letter above a Week ago, being but lately come to
Town, which is the true Reason why I have not answered it. Few Reasons, and
none but good ones shall ever prevent me from presenting my Heart to you: but
my Journey hither has been prevented, partly by ill Health, and partly by
little, ill-natured, impertinent Accidents -- This Suspense had had an equal
Effect on my writing to you. I here end my most sincere Apology.

Now for News -- I am in London; for which Reason, I suppose I must not be
excused; though I hate it, remember very little, and am most likely to blunder in
the Recital of that little. The House of Commons have addressed the King to try
MATTHEWS and LESTOCK, and six Captains, by a Court Martial, and it is thought,
some of them will be condemned. -- Poor GARRICK has been dangerously ill of a
Fever this Week: but now, to my great Satisfaction, there are Hopes of his
Recovery; nay, it is noticed in the Daily Advertiser, that he will perform a
Part next Wednesday Night.

I have been to wait on Lord D --. He was very civil, and would fain have kept
me till he had opened his Heart with a Bottle of Wine; at least, I imagined his
forwarding the Bottle was with that Design; but I was engaged. I am to call
upon him to go to Ranelagh -- a Lord would be a pretty Nosegay in one's Hand,
if he had the least Variety of Colors; nay, if he resembled any one Flower of
a single Color, except the Fustus. Mr. F -- I see sometimes, but he is not
very attractive. I always did envy you the Power of Laughing at a Fool by
yourself: but you are a World within yourself. Mr. P -- K, I spent an Evening
with lately very agreeably: but he lives so far off, at the Court-End of the
Town, as separates us very much. Mr. P -- N I often see, and find him a very
useful Person. But if you were here, both agreeable and useful would vanish,
and a far superior Enjoyment take Place. Mr. GRAVES promised to be in London
for a Week, but his little Politics are, you know, very uncertain. I have
struck a bold Stroke since I have been in Town; I mean a laced Coat, for really
Waistcoats cost as much, and are no Mark of Distinction after all. Sir T. HEAD
comes to Town this Week; but I believe, I shall not stay above a Week longer,
so would have you direct to me at Whitchurch. I design to go to Court one
Night. I must, as you see, write short, my Paper drawing to an End. It is with
Pleasure I hear, that old People confess a Play is now worth seeing, and that
GARRICK excels BETTERTON, etc. In the Diversity of his Genius, he must far
exceed him; when we see him alternately in a Richard and Scrub, in a Lear, and
Abel Drugger, he is truly astonishing. This Excellence of our dramatic
Representations is another Reason to wish you here. CAMPIONI is a charming new
Dancer. The Messiah was performed last Night, but I could not go. -- But I must
write no more Tattle. I have just been with Mr. SHUGBOROUGH, and gave him your
Orders about the Pamphlets, and have picked out some myself, viz. the Odes, the
new Play, and the Poem on Sickness.

I wish there had been any better Prints to have enclosed in this Letter; I
should have been glad to have sent them. The Pamphlets I have ordered to be
sent immediately, directed to be left at Mr. AUDLEY's, in Birmingham. The
Regret I always feel for your Absence will ever instruct me how to value you,
that is beyond what the elaborate Conclusion of a Letter can express; therefore
I will not endeavor to say how much, but in an unlimited Manner be fond to
remain

yours, A. WHISTLER.
April 13. George's Coffee-house. I have no gilt Paper at Hand, which is a
Fault; pray excuse it. Mr. PEMBERTON is with me, and begs his Service.



LETTER X. Mr. WHISTLER to W. SHENSTONE, Esquire.
Dear Mr. SHENSTONE,
I Generally write to you, because I want to hear from you; but having lately
wrote to you, I now write because I want to see you. In short the Case is this:
I shall be at Oxford in about three Weeks Time, or sooner, and I have Reason to
think it will be the last Time I shall be there, I mean in my Gown. Now as I am
willing still to retain an agreeable Image of the Place where I have spent so
many happy Hours, I make this Request, that you would stamp the last Impression
upon my Mind. I beg you would meet me there, and give me the Confirmation of
your Friendship, which I shall esteem a greater Honor than all the Degrees the
formal Convocation can bestow; and I think of you, as JUBA does of CATO, and
declare, I would rather have your Praise, than Worlds for my Admirers. I have
forgot the Measure, but this is directly my Sentiment.

I lately wrote you a long Letter, as you were so kind to desire; and in so
very lazy unintellectual a Manner, that I am sure half the Mortals, who only
understand with their Eyes and by the Grammar, could never have comprehended:
but I would converse with you Soul to Soul, have a Hint understood by you, and
not be obliged to a tedious Period to communicate a Thought to you; I would
have my Soul stand naked before you, and shiver at the least Breath of Kindness
your most distant Meaning shall breathe on it -- Oh, happy State, when Souls
each other draw, etc.
Mr. POPE. This I am sure your quick Apprehension is capable of; and by a
Desire of the strictest Union with you, I am fond to believe as well of myself.
You see I am proposing every Scheme which may unite you more closely to me,
therefore I beg you will not refuse me the Request I made at the Beginning of
my Letter. I will say no more now, but when I am with you, design to talk away
as you shall inspire. In the mean Time, I boast, that it is the most sagacious
Instinct which pushes me on to subscribe myself

your most affectionate Friend and humble Servant, A. WHISTLER.

LETTER XI. Mr. WHISTLER to W. SHENSTONE, Esquire.
Dear Sir,
AS Hope is the chief Spring of all our Actions, and as Pleasure is the sole
Object of that Hope, you must not wonder if the Style of this Letter appears
more languid than usual. How quickly is the Transition often made from Hope to
Despair! But a little While, and I thought I already saw you; and now I am
presently fallen into the Desperation of I know not when. The Smallpox, which
generally frightens away every Thing that is agreeable, has made it impossible
for me to see you as yet -- The last Sentence seems a Compliment to myself; but
as I am too lazy to alter it, I beg you would think with me, and interpret
every Thing I say in your own Favor. But thus the Devil will have it; the
Smallpox is all over Oxford, in every Part of the Town, in most of the
Colleges to my Knowledge, and is lately broke out in Pembroke. If it had not
been for this last Article, I could gladly have confined myself within the
Compass of those Walls with you; but as it is, I am forced, like good Men, to
submit for a While to human Miseries, and comfort myself with the Thought of my
Heaven, though at a Distance; like them too, I have this Satisfaction, that in
the mean Time neither the base Moth, or Rust of the World, can corrupt that
Part of you in which my Pleasure is situated.

I have a very bad Piece of News to tell you; Mr. G -- lies dangerously ill at
London of a Fever: I am informed his Life is despaired of -- I am now in the
utmost Concern at it. This Letter is a mere Medley: disagreeable to myself, I
don't propose it to be agreeable to you. I only wrote it, to tell you what you
must know, and if you can understand it, it is very well. I am not only in the
lowest Spirits, but they are also very much confused. I will not now moralize;
but this I am sure, we shall both dearly miss Mr. G --. When I hear more, you
shall know more. It is now one o'Clock in the Morning, and, as I told you, I
wrote this out of Necessity. I cannot be in Oxford, though I long to see you.
If poor Mr. G -- should die, pray be still more kind to me. I am sure, I shall
then find a Vacancy in my Breast, which you alone can fill up to my
Satisfaction.

Adieu, dear Mr. SHENSTONE! A. WHISTLER.
Pray write.

I received a Letter from you just after I sent you my last, and my Thoughs are
at present too confused to answer your last particularly, nor, indeed, will my
Time allow it. Only I heartily thank you for it.

Whitchurch, near Reading, Berks.


LETTER XII. Mr WHISTLER to W. SHENSTONE, Esquire.
August 4. Dear Sir,
YOUR last kind Letter has for a long Time upbraided me with Negligence,
Ingratitude and Stupidity. To the last Part of the Accusation, I plead guilty;
for I think I never found myself more stupid than I have been for this Month
past, and what I write now, proceeds, not from any Flow of Fancy, but merely
from Respect and Esteem. I have been very much taken up of late, by our Family
being at Home: but that Excuse I lay no Stress upon; for I shall never let any,
either Business or Pleasure hurry you from my Thoughts. Ill Health can be my
only just Apology; and though I cannot say I have been sick, I can assure you,
I have not been well for some Time past. Put my Condition in the best Light, I
am very much in the Vapors, and so much, as that you or Mr. GRAVES alone can
cure me: a Letter from you will go a great deal toward it; though I long for
one, I can hardly go on with this Letter, which is the Means to procure it;
like one sinking into a fainting Fit, who cannot collect Strength of Mind or
Body, to reach so much as the Hartshorn to his Nose, which stands at his Elbow.
I shall be at Oxford in a short Time, and spend as many Days there as I can
pass agreeably, and then take my Leave of it. If the Town be healthy, I shall
go to London the Beginning of the Winter, and stay there just as long as it
smiles on me. But all Things seem to frown in the Absence of my Friends, and I
wish I don't think the Smiles of the Town impertinent without them. I wish I
could be sometimes pleased with less than you, without I could have you always.
Pray write soon, and raise my Spirits, for I really am forced now to conclude
for Want of them,

Dear Sir, yours, etc. etc. A. WHISTLER.
Service to Mr. D --. I sincerely hope he is well.



LETTER XIII. Mr. WHISTLER to W. SHENSTONE, Esquire.
Dear Sir,
IF you remember, in your last Letter but one, you advised me to read History:
accordingly, as I am always proud to follow your Advice, I pitched upon
BURNET's History of his own Times. I was over Head and Ears engaged in the
Disputes between Cavaliers, Protesters, Resolutioners, and God knows who, when
I received your last. Though BURNET values himself particularly on private
Intelligence, I had a greater Curiosity, and entertained far greater Hopes of
Pleasure, in breaking open your Letter; nor was I at all deceived: I think you
wrote, if possible, more agreeably than usual; it raised my Spirits, and at the
same Time did more than all King CHARLES's Statesmen could do: set up an
absolute Monarchy in my Breast in a Moment, and made you Sovereign there.

Mr. POWYS had a Child christened yesterday; it was attended to Church by half
a Dozen Coaches. The great Mr. POINTZ was one of the Godfathers, and Mrs.
TOWNSHEND, now an Inhabitant of your Parts, the Godmother, by Proxy. Mrs. POWYS
went out on Pleasure to the last, and if her Horses had not been good, and her
Coachman dexterous to ply them with the Whip, she had been brought to Bed in
her Coach, as once before she had like to have been at the Playhouse. Alas!
for our poor Friend COB!
Who shall now sit with Countenance serene,
The inoffensive Judge of sacred Song,
At once becalmed with Port and Poetry,
While the great SOMERVILLE attunes his Lays?


As to what you mentioned about your Poem; you cannot think me such a Barbarian,
as that I should expect you should follow my Advice in every Particular; I
rather think you did me an Honor in doing it at all. I know the great Critics
have been long endeavoring to be absolute; but I think it very unreasonable
even in them -- and I believe you, as well as myself, have too much Spirit to
submit to it. If I can any Ways assist you, by any little Observations, you
shall have my Thoughts, and make use of them at your Pleasure, for I am very
fond of that Rule, of doing as one would be done by. -- Little Miss L --
out-does TOM TINSELL's Widow.

If the Town is not vastly unhealthy indeed, (for I must not regard little
Discouragements, as my Affairs are at present) I shall spend most Part of the
next Winter at London. You are very friendly, to propose to me the most
agreeable Scheme in the World: but I cannot possibly see the Leasowes this
Summer. I believe it is you, not Mrs. ARNOLD, who have all the Wit of your
Country; and if all Things naturally attract there alike, in that Respect you
will prove a very dangerous Neighbor. I long to see you as much as you can do
to see me: but all I can do now, is to tell you so, and that I am, by Honor,
Friendship, and every other Obligation,

Yours sincerely, A. WHISTLER.
Sept. 8.
LETTER XIV. Mr. WHISTLER to W. SHENSTONE, Esquire.
Whitchurch, Nov. 8. Dear Sir,
I Received you Packet, fraught with every Thing that could delight me. I
believe more Wit was never conveyed under the Title of a Peer before; not even
excepting your own, which, indeed, you generally export by wholesale in the
same Method. Your Letter led me through an Elysian Scene, which delighted me
so, that I must beg Leave to take another Turn with you at present therein.
There is no Subject I can treat of with so much Pleasure, and, of Consequence,
with so much Advantage to myself. In the first Place, Dick J --, in the Point
of Light you set him, diverts me; yet Humanity teaches me to feel a Kind of
Pity, as for an Animal that sings and hops about the Cage that has just
deprived him of his Liberty. Lady LUXBOROUGH I have seen, but not in her
Sanctuary, where she delivers her Oracles, and displays her Eloquence and
Elegancies at full. This is what my Soul is a-thirst after; the holy Land of a
future Pilgrimage. You have raised a Devotion in me toward her; for we always
judge of the Divinity by the Merits of the Priest. By your Description of Mr.
THOMSON, I admire him, and rejoice in your Acquaintance with him. I beg you
would cultivate it, for it seems like the Dawning of your Fame, whose Merit the
stupid World only wants to be awakened to see. If ever you get your due Share
of Fame, I insist that you be not a Niggard of it, as many are, but do your
utmost Endeavor to communicate it to your Friends -- You see I speak in Time.

As for Mr. L -- N's Civility, I have no great Faith in it; I fear he has only
some private End to serve, as an Election or so: but, however, I would have you
nourish it, for it may breed something by Chance -- It will be a Credit to you
at worst -- Chance often promotes Lingerers at Court, who have otherwise very
little Hope. It may fall out, that by serving you, he may serve himself. I
should like to have seen Signor OUTING, poor Man.

I think the Leasowes a charming Place in itself; but not knowing how in my
Imagination at any Time to separate the Work from the Architect, I believe I
give the former infinitely more Adoration than its due, even with all its
Improvements. You would often see me gliding across the Glades, if the Soul was
visible. You, indeed, have contrived to make your Soul, as it were, visible;
and a very beautiful Soul it is; particularly in its last Dress, which became
it exceedingly, I mean Elegy -- It was mighty well fancied, and diffused a
tender, languishing Air, its highest Character: I am much indebted to it for
this splendid Visit; spendid I mean in Beauty. The two old Songs likewise were
very agreeable to me: but chiefly Giles Collins. As for the Song of the Cat, I
am much obliged to you for it: but I think the Author sunk quite beneath
himself toward the End. The Conclusion was too sudden, and not worked up
enough, and besides was exceeding dirty; however, it was improved by your
Alterations: upon the whole, I like it, and out of my Devotion for the five
first Stanzas, I have added six more, which I submit to your Judgment, whether
I have supported the true Spirit of the Fragment. Pray excuse that I have
presumed to omit any of your Alterations; because I thought in this new Scheme
the Context required it.

I live in Hopes of seeing you at Whitchurch this Winter, and of hearing the
happy Tidings when; I beg you will let me know some Time before you come, that
I may get your Bed in order; I have but one; (it was given me, and is none of
the largest; indeed, small, which at present I lament) otherwise I should now
give more Invitations; I can entertain but one Friend at a Time: but all my
Friends will be sincerely welcome severally. Again I say, I lament the
Unsociableness of this Scheme, but it is not in my Power to alter it. Mr. G --
's Affair goes on, I am afraid, unhappily. As for my own Situation, I shall say
little, but leave you to take a Survey of it, which I hope you will do soon. I
think it is calculated for Happiness, if a Person of the least Delicatesse can
be so. I rejoice in all you have rejoiced in, and pray for all you pray for, as
becomes

Your most affectionate Friend and humble Servant, A. WHISTLER.
Pray write.

My Idea of Miss FLETCHERS is, that they are easy without Impertinence; a high
Idea in my Opinion. Pray give my Compliments to Lord D --, if in the Country.



LETTER XV. Mr. WHISTLER to W. SHENSTONE, Esquire.
Whitchurch, Nov. 24. Dear Sir,
I AM very much obliged to you for your last kind Letter, and received your
Absolution with a very contrite Heart, though I assure you my Sin was not
wilful; however, it was such as I sincerely lamented, even in the Commission; I
should rather say Omission. I am exceeding sorry to find you have so great a
Quarrel with London. I speak sincerely, when I say, I propose little Pleasure
there without you. I said in my last Letter, we might contrive to meet there,
as hitherto; I think we have contrived not to do it, and if we were to meet, I
cannot but fancy we might make it agreeable to each other. I shall go thither
immediately after Christmas, and should be glad to wait on you at Whitchurch,
and from thence to London. You certainly conclude me happy, in having Mr.
GRAVES so near me, and with Reason. I should think my Scheme of Friendship
complete, if you was as near; but without that Circumstance, it is far from
being so. Sir T. HEAD and Mr. GRAVES spent three Days with me last Week to my
great Satisfaction.

I have had a Swelling in my Foot, which they tell me is the Gout -- God
forbid! -- but it is certainly like it. I intend to go into a Milk Diet
immediately, for I am terribly alarmed. If it should prove so, I shall think it
a very hard Fate, having been no Drinker, and even Multitudes of those escape
it: but Fortune favors the Brutes.

It was not our Mr. POWYS's Landau, for he was at Home, and besides has never a
one. I believe Mr. GRAVES and I shall return Sir G -- 's Favor soon, and spend
about a Week with him. How shall we all wish for you to be with us! That I
shall, I can be upon my Bible Oath; and for the rest, I think I can answer in
the affirmative. My Brother is at Whitchurch at present, who is a constant
Companion to me while he stays, but I fear that will not be long: but Mr.
GRAVES I design to see often, both for Health and Pleasure.

What with going to London this Winter, and Bristol in the Summer, as I have
laid my Scheme for the future, I shall make Whitchurch not quite so tedious to
me; and above all, the Thought of waiting upon you, both in Oxfordshire, and at
the Leasowes, vastly brightens my future Prospect. My Father and Mother desire
to join with me in all Civilities to you -- But I beg you would believe I
surpass most People (notwithstanding your apparent Merit) in the extreme Regard
I have for you, when I subscribe myself,

Your most sincere Friend, and humble Servant, A. WHISTLER.
My Duty to Lord D --. I wish his Lordship would favor me with some Franks. I
should look upon it as an Honor, and a Piece of Goodnature. A Frank, you
know, would convey them.



LETTER XVI. Mr. WHISTLER to W. SHENSTONE, Esquire.
Dear Sir,
I HAVE been extremely busy of late in new modelling my little Habitation; and
the more so, to bring it to some Kind of Perfection, in Order to receive you. I
have been building up, pulling down, planting, rooting up, turning Round to
Square, and Square to Round. In short, I don't know, but some prudent People
would say, I have been playing the Devil. Indeed, (as in other Things in Life)
my Fancy is so confined by the Smallness of my Possessions, that my Scheme is
not very expensive: it is all in the Lilliputian Style, and must be so. Though I
have tried to give it what Air of Magnificence it is capable of, I suppose it
will strut like many of those unfortunate Heroes who happen not to be four Feet
and a Half high.

Did Lady LUXBOROUGH approve my Sentiment of enjoying Things best by
Reflection? I still maintain my Opinion, and endeavor to justify it thus: What
we enjoy by Reflection we have pure, nay, heightened by our own Fancy, at the
same Time no Inconvenience attends it; on the contrary, the Pleasure is more
poignant by the Contrast. The Thought of an Ice-House in the Summer is
refreshing, and the Imagination of July is a Cordial in Frost and Snow;
besides, you well know Hope is the very Hartshorn of Life, that enlivens every
Thing, and particularly attends imaginary Pleasures, but vanishes whenever they
become real -- By Reflection, I mean Imagination in general.

I have sent you Stanzas on Flowers. If Lady LUXBOROUGH likes them, I shall be
proud of hitting the Palate of a Lady of so high a Taste. I have likewise
enclosed another Copy of Verses -- though I am in Doubt, whether I did not send
them to you last Summer; they were done then. I know you don't love
Translations, but I have nothing new besides. I set about them merely as an
Exercise one Night, when I was dull and alone, not intending any Thing but
tearing them afterward, for I knew it was a worn-out Subject -- But a fatherly
Affection took Place, and I did not care for murdering it, though it was a
Bastard produced unawares.

N. B. I beg that nothing of mine may appear in Print.

I admire those two Lines of Lady WORTLEY's very much. It is a natural yet
uncommon and agreeable Thought. I am pleased with the Compliment you make me,
in saying you always wish me with you to partake any Pleasure, and imagine how
any Thing extraordinary would strike me: I like it, because I know it is a
natural, and thereby, a sincere Thought by my own Heart. I am so far gone that
Way, that I can hardly enjoy any Thing extraordinary, without my Friends are
with me, especially those whom I know it would particularly strike: but next to
gratifying a Friend, is the observing, how new and extraordinary Objects work
upon a natural Genius; I Will suppose it a Genius; I think it is one of the
highest Entertainments in Life; when I can meet with such, and have an
Opportunity, I love to read a Play to them, though I know I run the Hazard of
being laughed at for my Pains; but I don't care, the Pleasure pays me for all
the malicious foolish People can say, and you know the natural Criticisms of
Sir ROGER DE COVERLEY were not thought unworthy the Notice of the British
Spectator. For my Part, I have often thought that it is one of the Amusements
of the Supreme Being, who planted first the Passions in us, to observe the
Workings and Effects of them. A public Audience gives me Pleasure upon Trust,
for though I know no one there, I always conclude there are some Geniusses.

I am of your Opinion, with Regard to Mrs. --, at present, for I think, if her
Heart be really engaged, which I very much doubt, Dishonor in Love is the
blackest of all dishonest Actions, and of the worst Consequence -- But his
precursive Steps were the Extremity of Folly, conducted with the Extremity of
Folly; but he may be happy (and I wish he may be happy) in any State of Life. I
think our Visits to DICK J -- are fatal; his own Mother lay a dying when we
were at Henley. I am very glad to hear you have had so many Amusements. It is
always agreeable to me, whenever I hear you have met with a flowery Meadow in
your sublunary Walk. If I have any Taste, your Hercules is an elegant and truly
poetical Poem, and superior to L -- 's: if it is not, I resign my Taste, for
I Will pin it upon your Poem. I don't pretend to Criticism; but my Passion for
SHAKESPEARE, MILTON, POPE, etc. has made me believe, that I have some natural
Taste for Beauty. I am much obliged to you for the two genteel Copies of
Verses; they are very pretty, and much to my Fancy. As for Odes, you have
expressed my Sense of them all on that of Dr. AKENSIDE; they perplex and fret
one more than they please, and may be described by the Title of one of
SHAKESPEARE's Plays, viz. Much Ado about Nothing.

I have no News to send you from hence, that will be in the least entertaining
to you. I am in Hopes Mr. GRAVES will settle at Whitchurch about Whitsuntide. I
have been much out of Order for this Week, by a Cold that I caught in attending
my Works; and my Foot gives me ugly Apprehensions at present. I continually
please myself with the Thoughts of seeing you at Whitchurch; but would never
have you make an Inconvenience of what I would have be a Pleasure to you -- I Would
have you choose your own Time, that you may be quite unembarrassed: for my
Part, I think the sooner the better; only I would beg the Favor of one Line to
prevent all ill Accidents. I think it is a Method which should ever be used; and
I wonder at my own Imprudence, and my own Good Fortune last Time I came to the
Leasowes. I long to see you, and shall be all this Summer at Whitchurch, ready
to receive you. Indeed, if I should have the Gout, as I something fear it, I
would let you know, for that would interrupt all our Pleasure. I beg my
Compliments to Mr. DOLMAN: you have likewise the Compliments of this Place.
With Wishes to see you, and Compliments grounded upon the utmost Sincerity, I
am,

Dear Sir, yours to an Excess, A. WHISTLER.
Whitchurch, April 13.
LETTER XVII. Mr. WHISTLER to W. SHENSTONE, Esquire.
Dear Mr. SHENSTONE,
YOU see that I am as eager to answer your Letter as you was to answer mine,
and if my Letter gave you Pain, I assure you, that yours has equally perplexed
me. I am in great Hopes, you have misinterpreted my Sense, in Regard to Mr. G
--; and by as much as I can recollect, I believe you have. He always speaks of
you with the utmost Respect in your Absence, and is much less severe even upon
what he calls your little Faults, than when you are present: all that I hinted
at, was some little Shyness he lately showed to me, on the Account which you
and I have often mentioned. I have heard you say, you have experienced the same
from him on the like Score. But you could not possibly be now included, being
absent; no, I assure you, I only spoke of myself; and his Fault toward me
would have been imperceptible, but to the Delicacy of Friendship; nor been have
worth communicating, but to one whom my Love would animate against the like
Failing. I declare to you, the Sentence which included Mr. G -- 's Name, was
the only one which regarded him; what followed, though I confess that gave Rise
to it, was only to show my different Sentiments, and I own my Esteem for
Friendship carried me a great Length. I have been very particular to satisfy
you, as well as to justify Mr. G --, and by that Means to justify myself. I
should have never have forgiven myself, if I had been the Cause, though
inadvertently, of dividing so much Worth as I have always discovered in you
both, and which though separated, it might still continue to bless me, yet when
united, like most other Things, it has a more powerful Effect. I would not have
Mr. G -- know a Word of this, for the most trifling Reflection, when told
again, is offensive; nor should I have said what I did, but to a common Friend;
in Truth, it is not everybody who possibly might feel it so acutely as myself;
but you know my Disposition. I have a Sensibility in my Friendships, that
arises even to a Soreness, and the slightest Air of Coolness makes me wince.
This, though in its Consequences sometimes it may render me unpleasing to my
Intimates, certainly has its Source in a Merit, namely, in the Ardour of my
Attachments; and therefore I should hope is easily pardonable. You remember the
elegant Line in COTTON's beautiful Vision of Friendship; "Cold is the only Ill
they fear."

After I had sealed my last, I was afraid it had rather an Air of Compliment
than Sincerity; if it had, I assure you, it was only the Air, and what the
Good Humor, I am always in when I write to you, might inspire me with. You see
the Esteem I have for you, by turning Critic on myself in your Behalf. I am now
going to mention, what there is no Occasion at all to say, but Friendship is
the most incontinent Thing in the World; I have long been sensible of your
Worth; that is, ever since I knew you; but I must say, I think it was our last
Meeting which entirely united me to you; every Letter of yours since has
heightened my Affection for you. I look upon this as my first Absence from you;
your Letters are now necessary to supply your Presence; you yourself taught me
this Taste of Luxury, therefore it is but reasonable you should support the
Expense. In short, I beg you would write soon. I am afraid I shall tire you by
so frequent a Correspondence, but I particularly long to know the Success of
this Letter.

Dear Mr. SHENSTONE, I am yours, etc. A. WHISTLER.

LETTER XVIII. W. SHENSTONE, Esquire. to Miss LOW.
Madam,
I Fancy I Have been condemned a Thousand Times, on Account of not sending the
Tunes. One of them was lent out, and I had not an Opportunity of fetching it
till last Week. I don't know whether this Reason will prove sufficient, but I
assure you it was the real one. I tore them out of my Book, and on that Account
you have some others with them. I was willing you should have them in the best
Shape possible, and dare say, you will improve as much upon them, as I have
degenerated from them.

I want exceedingly to hear from you; but you will scarce think it consistent
with a rural Reputation to write yourself. It Is, indeed, scarce worth while to
hazard it, to give me ever so great a Pleasure, but I could wish you would here
remember the Character of a Town-Lady. -- Lord! How does Miss UTY? I did not
wonder you should mutually envy each other, since you are both so great Objects
of Envy: more particularly, as Modesty has taught you to think your own Merit
small in Comparison with that of others. Voila la seule Source de toute Envy!
-- I Am surely vastly impertinent, for I Am not positive you understand French:
but I guessed that a Lady, so accomplished in all other Particulars, might. I
fancy you have enjoyed a vast deal of agreeable Gaiety since I left you, whilst I
have been wandering about Harborough's gloomy Walks and Pools, like a Shepherd
"despairing beside a clear Stream." -- Oh! I want to know, whether or no, for
the common Good of our Society in particular, as of our Country in general, it
is, and may be lawful to admit, without the usual Number of Members being
present at the Solemnity; for I judge it better to lay aside some Part of the
Ceremony, than that any one should die uninitiated -- Whether or no as in
Baptism -- I was truly going too far. -- I am safe enough, let me go what
Lengths I will, in subscribing myself

the humblest of your humble Servants, W. SHENSTONE.

LETTER XIX. W. SHENSTONE, Esquire. to Mrs. A --
Dear Madam,
I Promised to give you some Account what became of Cheltenham, after Mr. A --
had pillaged it of all that was most valuable. Possibly before this Time, you
may have forgot both my Promise and me, and it may not be extremely political
to renew your Remembrance of a Person who has been so long seemingly
neglectful. The Truth is, I can no more bear to be forgot by those I esteem,
than I can be censured of Forgetfulness with Regard to them, and I know no Way
but Writing, by which I can evade both.

Some Sort of Apology I ought to make, that I did not write before; you will
therefore please to observe, that I am but just arrived at Home, though I left
Cheltenham the Day after you. I stayed, indeed, to hear Mr. B -- preach a
Morning Sermon; for which I find Mrs. C -- has allotted him the Hat, preferably
to Mr. C --. Perhaps you may not remember, nor did I hear till very lately,
that there is a Hat given annually at Cheltenham, for the Use of the best
foreign Preacher, of which the Disposal is assigned to Mrs. C --, to her and
her Heirs for ever. I remember (though I knew nothing of this whilst I was upon
the Place) I used to be a little misdeemful, that all who preached there had
some such Premium in their Eye. This Hat, it is true, is not quite so valuable
as that of a Cardinal, but while it is made a Retribution for Excellence in so
(if properly considered) sublime a Function, it is an Object for a Preacher in
any Degree. I am sorry, at the same Time, to say, that as a common Hat, merely
for its Uses, it would be an Object to too many Country Curates, whose
Situations and slender Incomes too often excite our Blushes, as well as
Compassion. There should be no such Thing as a Journeyman Parson; it is beneath
the Dignity of the Profession. If we had fewer Pluralities in the Church, this
Indecorum might, in a great Measure, be abolished.

Mr. N -- ( Squire N --) I hear is fitting up his Castle at L -- for the
Reception of the little Widow; and the Mercer at Cheltenham has completed his
grand Arcade, for the better Disposition of his Crapes and Callimancos.

I am an ill Relater of Matters of Fact, and as I said before, did not continue
above four and twenty Hours and some odd Minutes upon the Place longer than you
that enquire after it: but I survived long enough to hear very frequent Mention
of Mrs. A --, Miss CARTER, etc. and such Mention, as has confirmed me in an
Opinion, that Persons of real Merit, without any Expense of Airs, etc. will by
Degrees engross the Admiration of any Place they come into. But this is a Kind
of Language you would never indulge me in; you might very securely; for I
should never be able to express half the sincere Esteem and Respect with which
I am,

Madam, your most obedient, humble Servant, W. SHENSTONE.

LETTER XX. W. SHENSTONE, Esquire. to Miss CARTER.
Dear Miss CARTER,
PERHAPS you may remember to have seen an odd Kind of Fellow when you were at
Cheltenham, who threatened you with a Letter, and who is now endeavoring to be
as bad as his Word; however he hopes for some little Partiality on his Behalf,
having delayed the Execution of his Menaces for a considerable Time, and even
now promising to say as few Things in your Favor as the real Sentiments of his
Heart will admit of.

But Peace to Buffoonery. -- After I parted from you, Mr. M -- N, with great
Simplicity, endeavored to keep up my Spirits, by speaking in Praise of the
Family we had left, as though that was not the ready Method to aggravate the
Sense of one's Loss; and yet to aggravate it was utterly impossible in the
Opinion of a Person already so sensible of it. But he mentioned one Article
which was more successful, and that was a Proposal to accompany me to Stoke,
and to let me know when it suited his Convenience.

When I came to Cheltenham, I was not unmindful of that solemn Vow that I had
made, not to survive your Family there a single Hour: but I found it near five
o'Clock, and my Conscience said, that as I had made it so late, by my
Attendance upon you, though I did stay another Night, I hoped I might be
excused.

I have been, since leaving this Town, at Mr. BROWN's, who lives upon the
Borders of Wales. -- Poor Man! He has been the most obliging Person in the
World to the most stupid of Companions. It Is hardly possible to determine which
was greater, the Zeal with which he showed me his Fossils, Plants, Poetry, etc.
or the stupid Inattention with which I observed them. He commends you and Mrs.
AUBREY highly; so, indeed, do all I know, or I would soon forget that I had
ever seen their Faces. He had found out a Method at last of seducing me to
talk, by frequent Mention of your Merits, and it was a good While before I
discovered his Artifice; and even when I had discovered it, I was ill able to
elude the Force of it.

I am now just returned Home, which is my Apology for not writing to you about
Cheltenham as I promised. I really scarce recollect any Circumstance belonging
to it, except that you and Mrs. AUBREY were there the most favorable,
agreeable, and praiseworthy.

What, does Mr. M -- boast of the glorious Absurdity he committed at parting,
in mistaking my Horse for his? When I see him next, I will produce a Hundred I
have been lately guilty of, to no one of which his is able to compare. His, you
know, commenced in the very Moment of parting, and consequently was little
wonderful, in Comparison of those I have since committed; besides, his Horse
had a Spot or two of Brown on him, and was therefore easily mistaken at such a
Time for one that was Sorrel all over.

After all, you are a very wicked Lady -- you defrauded me of the Croslet you
promised me, putting me off with a single Bead; but it was yours, and that is
enough. The most trivial Donation from a Person we esteem, has a large Value. I
acknowledge to have a great Penchant for what the Vulgar call Keep-Sakes. The
French are notably practiced in these little Elegancies; we are not so much so,
as, I think, a polished People ought to be.

I am, dear Miss CARTER, Your most sincere Admirer, and humble Servant, W.
SHENSTONE.
Don't expose the Nonsense-Verses I gave you, I entreat you.



LETTER XXI. S. D --, Esquire. to W. SHENSTONE, Esquire.
Dear Sir,
I WAS some Time since at Mr. WHISTLER's Chamber, when he received a Letter
from you, the Sight of which revived in my Mind the pleasing Correspondence you
once favored me with; the Loss of which I much regret. -- Do you never think
of returning to Oxford? Have you left nothing there that may give us Leave once
more to expect you? I will not be so poetically complaisant, as to say every Thing
appears grieved at your Absence, but I assure you, Sir, there are some that
seem sincerely to lament it. I cannot compare those little People that have
sometimes censured you, to any Thing but Ants, who are generally most
troublesome in the finest Season. I cannot hope, that even a short Stay at C --
could be made agreeable, but Novelty is sometimes pleasing; descend then, and
see the new Acquaintance I have made, which is like to prove a very lasting
one: may yours be no less so! -- Mr. GRAVES is in Gloucestershire, and Mr.
WHISTLER, God knows where, and you unkindly conceal from me the Place of your
Residence. I shall direct this wandering Epistle as usual, but imagine, if it
is so fortunate as to find you, it will be in your Hermitage, where I presume
you are before this retired. Were I Mr. WHISTLER, with what Pleasure should I
leave the World, and all its Vanities, for Mr. SHENSTONE and a Cell -- Though I
must own, your Intention of making Mr. L -- N immortal, by a Dedication, and
singing the Praises and Virtues of the Court, seem to cherish gayer Thoughts
than suit that peaceful Station. Whether Hermit or Courtier, be assured that
whatever conduces to your Happiness is sincerely wished by me

S. D --.
C --, January 20.
LETTER XXII. S. D --, Esquire. to W. SHENSTONE, Esquire.
Dear Sir,
I CAN omit no Opportunity of showing my Desire of continuing a Correspondence
that has always given me so much Pleasure. I wrote you a Letter some Time ago,
and should have used so little Ceremony, as to have troubled you with another,
had I known in what Part of the World you was. If you know any Thing of Mr. G
--, I should be glad to hear something of him; I am informed that he is a
Curate in some Village very remote -- It is a great Pity, so much Merit should
be no better rewarded. We have been returned from London about three Weeks: if
I had known you were in Town, I should have left it with much more Reluctance.
If you come into Oxfordshire this Summer, I hope you will favor me with a
Visit at C --, which will be a very great Pleasure to us all.

You cannot imagine how happy you have made me, in giving me Hopes of enjoying
a Sight of your Poems; from which I am sure of reaping a Pleasure which can
admit of no Addition, but by receiving them from your own Hands. I am glad to
hear that Mr. G -- is settled so much to his Satisfaction: if he is at All
Souls, I hope I shall see him before he leaves Oxford.

I have lately lost a very agreeable Relation and sincere Friend. Perhaps you
have heard Mr. WHISTLER mention Miss B --: she died at C -- about three Months
since, after a short Illness of two Days; which added so much to the melancholy
Situation here, that we were obliged to fly to Town for Amusements. I came down
ten Days since, and shall return again tomorrow, for about a Week longer. May
I hope, dear Sir, to find a Letter here from you? I am sure the reading of it
will give me more real Pleasure than any Company or Diversion I can propose to
find in London. I am sorry to send you any News that will give you Concern; but
cannot help telling you, that I hear poor Mr. R. G -- is dangerously ill of a
Fever in Town. Mr. WHISTLER has left Oxford, on Account of the Smallpox, which
is very much there, and at present in Pembroke College.

Notwithstanding this unseasonable Weather, I must beg leave to put you in Mind
of your Promise, and enquire when it is you design us the Pleasure of your
Company in Oxfordshire; where you will meet with a great many who will rejoice
much to see you, and none more than your

affectionate Friend and humble Servant, S. D --.

LETTER XXIII. A. B. Esquire. to W. SHENSTONE, Esquire.
FOR the Soul's Food, strengthened by the more substantial bodily Food, I have
for these nine Days past imbibed at your Villa, the Leasowes, I am much obliged
to my dear Mr. SHENSTONE: Time will not, however, at present, allow me to
bestow more of my Eloquence on you for it; you must therefore be satisfied with
"the Altar of Gratitude," I have it in my Head hereafter to erect to your
Honor.

We are invited to stay at Hagley on Monday next -- Dinner at two o'Clock --
May I expect the Pleasure of meeting you there? If you have had a Card let me
know, per Bearer, that I may not, as I do now, groan with Apprehensions of the
Day. His most excellent of Excellencies, the Governor, and Mistress HESTER,
stay till the latter End of September, so you will certainly be honored with
them at the Leasowes.

My best, and I think I may say, my only dear Lord, Lord D --, was here on
Friday last, with Intent to dine and spend the Day; but as I was from Home,
went to Hagley, and dined with the Lord LYTTELTON, at the worthy Admiral
SMITH's.

Oblige me with desiring DODSLEY to bid his Brother send me the Annual
Registers, bound, as we agreed on this Morning, and lettered, when he sends me
The World, etc.

Did I not know you above even the least Degree of Policy to your Friends, I
should suspect, that you sent me Lady LUXBOROUGH's Letters to intimate to me,
what so dull a Correspondent, and insipid a Friend as myself, must expect, when
you could bear Accusations of Negligence, in answering such agreeable and
sprightly Letters, as those of her Ladyship; and I could almost wish, though
the Perusal of them gave me the greatest Pleasure, that you had not favored me
with a Sight of them; as I cannot help drawing Omens from them to myself the
most dreadful: if you did not then mean me ill, in your obliging Compliment of
the Sight of them, let me see or hear from you soon; and tell me, that though
you have heretofore slighted a Lady's Favors, you will not neglect a sincere
Friend, who admires and esteems you more than (from what I think I have heard
you say of her Ladyship) she could. But to wave this, and leave you to your own
Generosity; I must thank you for yours of March 26th; had I not depended on
your Promise in it, I should have again troubled you ever this: but I must now
tell you, that I hope the Week after Easter Week, for the Pleasure of your
Company here, and if convenient, to take a Bed with us. In the Holidays, I
apprehend we shall have Holiday Company, which will be neither agreeable to you
nor us; as we shall not by such Interruption be able to pay the Attention we
ought, and are ever desirous of paying to so agreeable a Friend as Mr.
SHENSTONE.

I like the Binding of your MILTON much; but not to compliment, dislike the
Cuts as much, for I really think the Engraver has made our first Parents
frightful Figures, and the Angels and Devils almost equally lovely -- Could you
get mine bound as yours, without the Cuts, should be much obliged to you.

I have retired from Company, we have in the House, to write this Scrawl; this,
I hope, will be an Excuse for it, and convince you, that I am resolved never to
lose any Opportunity of assuring dear Mr. SHENSTONE, that I am

most sincerely, his affectionate Friend, A. B --.
Have taken the Liberty of keeping Lady LUXBOROUGH's Letters some Time longer
for Mrs. B -- 's Perusal; who joins with all here in best Compliments to the
Leasowes.

Wednesday Evening. I should be glad if you could procure me half a Ream of Mr.
BASKERVILLE's best plain thin writing Paper; I mean gilt, but not bordered.





LETTER XXIV. Mr. J. WHISTLER to W. SHENSTONE, Esquire.
Whitchurch, May 26. SIR,
I MAKE no Doubt, but you will be much surprised at the Receipt of this, and
like wise greatly concerned at the melancholy Occasion of it. As the Friendship
subsisting between you and my Brother has been of so long standing, I should be
glad to communicate its Contents to you more gently by some other Hand; but for
Want of a Friend in your Neighborhood, who has the Honor of your
Acquaintance, must do it myself in the least affecting Manner I am capable.

The Beginning of this Month, my Brother was taken ill of a sore Throat, which
continued for some Days, without any apparent Symptoms of Danger; indeed,
toward the last it was judged the Disorder was throwing itself off: but to the
great Surprise of every one, a Mortification in his Inside was then begun, and
came on so fast, that it was out of the Power of Art, to stop it, of which he
expired the 10th. In April, I had the Pleasure of his Company at Bristol for a
few Days, with my Father, when amongst other agreeable Schemes for this
Summer's Amusement, he proposed to himself very great Pleasure, from paying Mr.
SHENSTONE a Visit -- But Man proposes and God disposes. I have lost a very good
kind Brother; therefore hope those who were his Friends will continue their
Friendship to me for his Sake, which I shall always endeavor to deserve. To
give you this melancholy Information is a painful Duty; but it is what I am
compelled to pay. I can, in some Measure, conceive the many afflicting
Recollections which will arise in your humane Mind, on this Event! Your
Friendship and Correspondence subsisted a considerable Time, and with
reciprocal Satisfaction. He was unquestionably endowed with natural good Sense,
well improved by Education and Reading, of a lively pleasing Fancy, and a
benevolent Heart. He was, in short, what your Pen might most exquisitely
describe, but what mine is unequal to.

I beg your Acceptance of a Ring, in Remembrance of him, which shall be
conveyed to Birmingham the first Opportunity. My Father desires his Service. My
Wife likewise joins with me in Compliments. I am, Sir,

your obedient, humble Servant, J. WHISTLER. The Editor can give no precise
Account of the Dates of Mr. WHISTLER's Letters. This last, however, from his
Brother must have been written in the Year 1754; that being the Year which
deprived him of so valuable a Brother, and Mr. SHENSTONE of such an amiable
Friend and Correspondent. According to this Calculation, these Letters of Mr.
WHISTLER should have come earlier in this Collection, but they did not come
Time enough into the Editor's Hands. The same Reason must also be advanced for
some other Letters being misplaced in Point of Time; but as the several
Subjects are independent of each other, it is an Error (the Editor presumes)
which the Reader will more readily excuse.


LETTER XXV. A. B. Esquire. to W. SHENSTONE, Esquire.
Dear Mr. SHENSTONE,
I Should with Pleasure have obeyed your kind Command, and troubled you with a
Letter before this, but that I waited to give you some Account of your Friends
here. I saw Mr. DODSLEY soon after I came to Town; he seems a very good Sort of
Man, and I like him much; I believe he is quite satisfied with the Success of
his Play, for he is in good Health and Spirits. The Tragedy of Cleone, produced
at Covent Garden Theater.
Mr. WREN I could not meet with, till Friday last, when I found him very busy
with half a Dozen young Anatomists, (for such I presume they were) and Pen,
Ink, and a Ream of Paper before them; had I been free enough with your Friend,
I should certainly have enquired, what weighty Discoveries they had been
engaged in, for they all looked prodigious wise when I entered the Room; but I
was soon left Tete-a-Tete with Mr. W --, and then Subjects of still greater
Importance, such as Plays, Operas, etc. etc. were to be discussed. Without a
Compliment, I think our Friend improves upon Acquaintance much; but I wish him,
as you tell him, less volatile: to say the Truth, when you brought him to W --
with K --, he was so very alert, that I was not (but that he came with you)
much prejudiced in his Favor; however, I find he has more Merit than those
over-lively young Gentlemen generally have; and I doubt not, but when you have
pruned the Luxuriancy of his Sprightliness, he will make a very good Figure.

I am sincerely sorry, my Congratulations on your having a Place under
Government were premature; but I cannot say, I wish you, as your Friend
GRIFFITH terms it, Polaury, though I know it could not have the Effect on you,
it so evidently has had on --: but what any one could think due to CIBBER's
Merit, Mr. SHENSTONE ought to think beneath him.

I have not the Book you enquired for in yours, nor any one that I can
recollect, from you. The Letters you were so good as to send me, are safe
locked up in my Bureau, and shall be returned when we meet; I took the Liberty
of keeping them, as I had no Opportunity of sending to the Leasowes before I
set out for London: if you have any Commands here, I hope you will oblige me
with them, and when you are at Leisure, let me hear from you: but DODSLEY tells
me, you are re-perusing your Elegies, (he hopes for the Press) and I would not
interrupt you from such Engagements for the World, as you have too long
deprived the Learned and Tasteful the Pleasure of admiring them.

Adieu, dear Mr. SHENSTONE; believe me yours most sincerely, A. B.
The Hurry of London to a Man who purposes spending but seven Weeks in it,
will, I hope, plead excuse for this Scrawl.

Sunday, Jan. 21.


LETTER XXVI. A. B --, Esquire. to W. SHENSTONE, Esquire.
I Cannot but think you wrong, my dear SHENSTONE, though placed, as you seem to
think now, Far from all Resort of Mirth,
Save the Cricket on the Hearth;
you, who have in your Mind such an inexhaustible Fund of Amusement, refined
Amusement, in envying so inferior an Animal as your Friend A. B --, whose chief
Happiness, even in London, ought (I shrewdly suspect) to be that he can call
you, and one more worthy Man, (you know who I mean) his Friends. The Pleasures
of London, I think I may say, the innocent ones, lose much of their Power to
please, unless participated with those who have refined Sense enough to enjoy
and partake those delicate Feelings with a Friend -- few such are ever to be
found here, and without such, where is the Society? Dissipation, my Friend, is
the general or chief Amusement of this Town, to the Generality of People; and
though it abounds with Amusements and Pleasures truly rational, yet by a too
frequent, if not corrupted Use, these very Pleasures become irrational; such
they are to the Generality of my Acquaintance, and though I hope I do not
pretend to be wiser than they, yet I cannot feel a Pleasure in going with them
to Entertainments of the noblest Kind, where I must not attend, but join with
them in endeavoring to draw off the Attention of others, to my Companion or
self; for this Reason then, I generally go to a Play, etc. by myself, and by
this very Means, lose much of the Pleasure I should otherwise receive from it.
I wish, "with all my Heart," as the true Englishman's Phrase is, that you
could, with Convenience to yourself, come to Town; but I will not pity you, who
can so well divert yourself in any Place, because you cannot come. Let Wretches
unblessed with a Mind rich as yours, with a Sensibility capable of receiving
Delight, from every common Occurrence, be sincerely pitied, pitied without the
ungenerous Contempt, that you intimate is so generally its Attendant: but be
you, my Friend, the Envy of all who are meanly capable of so low a Passion, and
the Admiration of every honestly-distinguishing Heart. Your Mind, my Friend, is
rightly formed for true Happiness; be yourself, and be happy -- but I grow
impertinently officious; could you look into my Heart, such Officiousness
would, from your Goodnature, meet with the Pardon I think I might say it
deserves; for that I am so, is that I can with the greatest Sincerity subscribe
myself

your faithful and affectionate Friend, A. B --.
Saturday Night, Feb. 9. Excuse this Scrawl; and if a great deal of Nonsense,
excuse that too, for I have not Time to peruse it, the Post-Bell now ringing.

I purpose leaving London, Monday Se'en-night; oblige me with a Line in Answer
to this before I set out, if you can conveniently.



LETTER XXVII. A. B --, Esquire. to W. SHENSTONE, Esquire.
Dear Mr. SHENSTONE,
TO answer your kind Letter as I wish is not in my Power; let it suffice then,
to remind you, that where the Heart really feels most, Silence is the only
Eloquence she can use.

Why will you not agree with me in the Want I complained of? Had I not felt it,
I should not have troubled you with it. What Answer can you make, when I tell
you, that my choicest Friend, Lord D --, from a Tenderness of Sentiment, never
frequents the Amusements you and I admire, and think innocent ones? Find me
another Friend like him capable of delicately feeling, and participating every
rational Pleasure, (yourself excepted) to be the Companion I wished for, and
I Will grant your Plea of "Indecision;" till you can do that, come over to my
Side of the Question.

As to Affairs in Town, I will not utter a Syllable concerning them till I see
you here; only I must tell you, that London daily walks nearer Mary-le-Bone
than you or I could have believed so corpulent a Lady able to do.

The Ramblers and World I read this last Summer, and was much entertained with
both, though I think the former greatly the Superior; and had I not thought it
Presumption in me to recommend any Author to you, I perhaps might, in worse
Language, have urged your reading them, as you have so kindly mine.

I have sent your Pencils per Bearer; but must beg to keep La Pompadour some
Time longer, as I have not quite done with her; nor, indeed, is it fit so great
a Lady should travel but in a Carriage; come and fetch her then in your Chaise,
or we shall be reckoned greater Boors, by the polite Countrymen, than we
already are. -- Adieu; be Happiness ever yours!

Your affectionate Friend, A. B --.
All here join in best Compliments to the Leasowes.

March 7. P. S. The underwritten Quotation from THOMSON struck Mr. B -- so
strongly as he passed by the Leasowes some Time ago, that he hopes Mr.
SHENSTONE will excuse his troubling him with it. As nearer to this Farm you
made approach,
He polished Nature with a finer Hand;
Yet on her Beauties durst not Art encroach,
It Is Art's alone these Beauties to expand;
In graceful Dance immingled over the Land,
Pan, Pales, Flora and Pomona played:
An happy Place!






LETTER XXVIII. A. B --, Esquire. to W. SHENSTONE, Esquire.
Dear Mr. SHENSTONE,
YOU make me very happy, by the kind Turn you give to the unfashionable Reserve
I told you in my last I labor under. I am sincerely desirous of being dear to
you; and if the " eadem velle atque eadem nolle" is a good Omen of a lasting
Friendship, I have good Reasons to hope, that the Names of W. SHENSTONE and A.
B -- will ever be mutually esteemed by each other; for without meaning a
Compliment, but to my own Judgment, I really think, to know what you like or
dislike, some few Persons excepted, is sufficient to make me do the same: but I
beg for the future, when you mention the Valuables London robs the Country of,
at this Season, you will not immediately add, that Lord P -- is just set out
from N -- on his Way here.

A-propos! You tell me you are busy in regulating your Library; will not you
laugh at me, if I draw a Comparison, and tell you that I am engaged at present
in a similar Affair? Regulating the Friends I henceforward design admitting
into my Heart's inmost Recess. You, I dare say, even in your Library have
admitted some Rubbish, you will now throw out; how much then must I, who from a
very Child have been a Kind of Enthusiast in Friendship, have to cleanse from
my Esteem? Indeed, I find upon Examination, I have been much out in my
Collection, and have ranked many fugacious Pamphlets, as JOHNSON calls them, as
Firstrate Authors; but I shall make a total Rummage, and hope, for the future,
my Taste will be more refined; indeed, I do not fear it, for I have chosen your
Worship sole Librarian of the Place; and to say the Truth, I find you so
delicate a Gentleman, that you have routed every other living Soul, (my own
nearest Relations excepted) nor can I find that you will admit any one else to
enter the poor Cell you have the Charge of but Lord D --: well, well, you are
quite right; I shall have enough to do to value you two as I ought; you two
shall be my Study, and if I don't improve enough from reading you, it will be
my Fault: for the Pamphlets, I shall dip into them occasionally, at an idle
Hour, unless a female one demands my closer Application; but I promise you, I
shall be very cautious in my Choice of her.

I am much obliged to you, for offering to introduce me to the Acquaintance of
Dr. G --. I should eagerly lay hold of the Favor, but that I purpose leaving
London on Monday the 26th of this Month, and shall not have Time to pay him the
Attention I owe every Friend of Mr. SHENSTONE's.

I have from your Recommendation read the History of La Pompadour, and like it
very well; it seems authentic, though not much to the Honor of the Dame or
Louis le Grand.

I shall expect two Letters from your Worship, in answer to my last Nonsense
and this, and pray, good Sir, do be not so very concise. Mr. SHENSTONE, believe
me, is worse Company than any Man, when he is silent; most People know how
agreeable every Word he says is, and when he is pleased to be mute, cannot but
be uneasy. According to this, you will say, your Friend wishes you to kill
yourself with talking; not so -- but he refers the Whole to your better
Judgment, who knows best (when your modest Humility does not too much
interfere) how to do every Thing with the best Grace.

If you have by you your Ode on Autumn, or Damon's Bower, and care to trust
them by the Bearer, you will do me a great Favor in sending them. If you can
venture out of your agreeable Shell at the Leasowes, and (provided you are
preparing your Elegies for the Press) will bring them with you, not letting the
Favor you do us delay the Pleasure you will give the polite World in
publishing them, we shall think ourselves happy in accommodating you with a
warm Room, Pen, Ink and Paper, in this Part of the World.

I return the Duchess of SOMERSET's Letters, which I have perused with great
Pleasure, particularly those which give the Honor due to my Friend, Mr.
SHENSTONE.

You have the joint good Wishes of our present contracted Fireside.

Believe me, dear Sir, Your very affectionate, A. B --.

LETTER XXIX. A. B --, Esquire. to W. SHENSTONE, Esquire.
Dear Sir,
THE Compliment you make me, of desiring me to correct, abridge, etc. etc. the
Sheets you have so obligingly sent me, puts me so much in Mind of MOLIERE's
reading his Plays to his old Woman, before he produced them to the Stage, that
I can hardly persuade myself, though I am but just turned twenty-seven, and
have a good Pair of Mr. DEHENNIC's favorite Lambskin Breeches on, that I am
not of the other Sex, and at least seventy: as such I have presumed to give you
my Opinion freely, (which you will find first interspersed on little Bits of
Paper, among your Proof-Sheets) and I desire you will not esteem it in any
other Light. I am vain enough of the Friendship you have distinguished me with,
and I desire you will not let your kind Partiality make me more unworthy of it
than I am, by adding to my Vanity. As a Poet I admire, and as a Friend I love
you: but you must not apply to me, for what I am not able, with any Credit to
myself, to oblige you in. I am glad you sent DODSLEY's fourth Volume, as I
parted with my Set of his Poems this Summer to a Friend, who begged them of me.
Am much obliged to you, for the Print of your Grove, and though I think it
makes not near the Figure on Paper so lovely a Scene would be imagined to do,
shall value it much.

I ought to make many Apologies for keeping the Books you were so kind as to
lend me, so long; but in such Estimation do I hold every Thing that comes from
the Leasowes, that a common Attention to it will not satisfy me, and I cannot
readily part with it in haste; this then must excuse me to you, and I flatter
myself it will, as I know you are my Friend.

Adieu, dear Mr. SHENSTONE. The sooner you favor us with your Company, the
more you will oblige us all.

Your very faithful and affectionate, A. B --.

LETTER XXX. Mr. DODSLEY to W. SHENSTONE, Esquire.
Dec. 30. Dear Mr. SHENSTONE,
I Am very sorry you have been so much indisposed since I left you. Bleeding,
Vomiting, Purging, the Doctor, and the Disease, are too many Enemies for a Man
to struggle with at once; and I heartily wish you Joy of your Victory against
such apparent Odds. I am sure, I have very little Reason to suppose, you make
Sickness a Plea for Laziness, since you have taken infinitely more Pains on my
Account, than you seem disposed to take on your own. Pray think of this, and
learn to love yourself as well as you do your Friends; pay as much Regard to
your own Fame as you do to theirs, and the World will be obliged to you.

I received a Letter from Mr. EAVES; he tells me, the Fables are finished, and
that they will come up to Town this Week. I shall be very glad of it; for I
find even then, that I shall not be able to publish before February. You tell
me the Portrait is only delayed till you can see ALCOCK -- Can it be delayed to
a more uncertain Time? You do not imagine how many Friends are longing to see
it; and here the Winter is passing away, and I am losing the Pleasure of
obliging your Friends as well as my own. I hope I shall see Mr. H -- when he
comes to Town. I expect Mr. D -- soon after New Year's Day -- Would to God you
would come with him! Now is your Time to make Interest for Preferment, as Merit
seems, at present, the best Recommendation to Favor. Come, and give the
Ministry an Opportunity of doing themselves Credit. With the Compliments of the
Season, and my best Wishes in all Seasons, I conclude, and am,

Dear Sir, ever affectionately yours, R. DODSLEY.

LETTER XXXI. Mr. DODSLEY to W. SHENSTONE, Esquire.
Dear Mr. SHENSTONE,
HOPING by this Time you are in a fair Way of Recovery, I venture to write to
you. Indeed, I was extremely alarmed by the Account Dr. ASH gave me of you in
his first Letter, and also by a Line from Miss H --: but by a second Letter
from the Doctor, and by a Note afterward from Mr. BASKERVILLE, I received some
Hopes of your Recovery, though not enough to encourage me to write to yourself,
for fear of the worst. I have been extremely uneasy indeed, and still continue
so. Pray let MOLLY, or somebody, give me a Line, to satisfy me how you are.
Don't offer to write yourself, if it be the least uneasy to you: I will be
satisfied with hearing from any Hand that you are better, and when you are able
to write yourself, I shall be happy. Lord S -- is come to Town, and in a Day or
two I purpose to wait on him. I have not yet seen Sir H. E --: I think I had
better see Lord S -- first. God preserve you, and send you a speedy Recovery.

I am ever most affectionately yours, R. DODSLEY.
Feb. 12.
LETTER XXXII. Mr. DODSLEY to W. SHENSTONE, Esquire.
Dear Sir,
I AM sorry I hurried my Essay out of your Hands, before you had done with it;
but if I think of publishing my Fables next October or November, it is high
Time I should put both to Press now, that the Printer may have good Weather to
print in, and that the Work may have Time to dry, after it is finished, before
the Books are bound. But as it happens, I cannot begin till the latter End of
this Month, as the Printer is not at Leisure; however, I have put my Plates in
Hand, and they are going on as fast as possible. I never received Mr. ALCOCK's
Drawings; so I have got two others executed, of somewhat a different Design. I
will not put the Essay in Hand till the last, which may, perhaps, be about
July, as I shall be very desirous of its having the Advantage of your
Corrections. But am I not to hope for a new Fable or two from you? You see how
I dwindle in my Expectations: but pray don't let me be quite disappointed. I
propose, if possible, to finish the Printing of my Fables before I set out on
my northern Expedition. Mr. M --, and his Lady, will be at Nottingham about the
latter End of August; they have wished I would meet them there, and in their
Return to Town, bring them round by the Leasowes. Mr. BURKE Author of the
Sublime and Beautiful.
has also a strong Inclination to meet us there; so that possibly we may be
happy enough to spend a Day with you; another must be spent at Lord
LYTTELTON's, (as they are both acquainted with him) and a third at Birmingham.
I shall hate the Name of D -- as long as I live: he is crooked in all his Ways;
but the Devil will set strait with him one Day or other. I have not seen a Page
of Mr. PERCY's Novel, and therefore cannot at all explain it to you; but I
suppose he makes no Secret of it. I wish Mr. GRAVES would finish his. -- And
will you really consent to an Exchange of Pictures? Upon my Word, you make but
a sorry Bargain for yourself: however, to give you as little Reason as may be
to regret your Compliance, I will sit to one of our best Artists; and to supply
the Want of Merit in the Original, will endeavor to give as much as I can to
the Copy. If you have any Thing to suggest on this Subject, (as you seem to
hint) you will be so good as to let me have a Line, because, as soon as I am
able to get abroad, which I hope will be in a few Days, I intend to consult
with REYNOLDS The present Sir JOSHUA REYNOLDS.
about it. Ay, I forgot to tell you, that I have been confined this Month with
the Gout; every Man has his D -- N; that is mine. I am glad your Likeness is a
strong one; and I think the Attitude, you are drawn in, is a good one: pray, is
that the Picture you intend for me? The Writer of Tristram Shandy is a Mr.
STERN, one of the Prebendaries of York. As to Mr. BASKERVILLE's Bible, he will
easily be dissuaded from the marginal Ornaments; but the Title Page is a
Favorite, and for my Part, I have not much Objection to it. Mr. WEBB's Book,
on Painting and Painters, is reckoned ingenious, and if you like the Subject,
will be worth your Perusal. Ancient and Modern Rome, I also think a good Poem.
My Compliments to Mr. HYLTON, and all Friends.

I am ever, Dear Sir, most faithfully yours, R. DODSLEY.

LETTER XXXIII. Mr. DODSLEY to W. SHENSTONE, Esquire.
June 17. Dear Mr. SHENSTONE,
I WAS yesterday searching for Figures for your two Niches -- I have found
three Pair, the Figures good, that will do as to Size, viz. the ANTINOUS I
mentioned, and the APOLLO with his Arm over his Head; a FLORA and a CERES; and
a HOMER and VIRGIL. The ANTINOUS and APOLLO are two Feet high, FLORA and CERES
twenty-three Inches, and HOMER and VIRGIL twenty-one. These last are each of
them leaning upon a Pedestal; on one of which, in Basso Relievo, is Troy in
Flames; on the other, ROMULUS and REMUS sucking a Wolf. These are both pretty
Figures; and don't you think them better Ornaments for a Library, and more
suitable Companions for SAPPHO, than either of the others? A Line by the Return
of the Post, will just give me Time to get which of them you choose finished,
and sent to you, before I set off for Nottingham, for I find I must go thither
before I come to the Leasowes; but I shall stay only a few Days. I had a Letter
from my Friend Mr. M --, by the last Post, who is at Nottingham, and I find him
wavering in his Resolutions, about coming by the Leasowes. I am glad you like
my Design for the Picture: and how agreeably you have contrived to flatter me
about it! But say what you will, I shall have a Picture of Mr. SHENSTONE; you
will have one only of DODSLEY; and a SHENSTONE by ALCOCK, will certainly be
more valuable than a DODSLEY even by REYNOLDS. I read to him that Part of your
Letter which related to him; he desires his Compliments, and would be glad, if
you came to Town, that you sat to him. I hope I shall be able to send the
Picture to you, before I set out on my Journey; but it is not yet finished.

I am, affectionately yours, R. DODSLEY.

LETTER XXXIV. Mr. DODSLEY to W. SHENSTONE, Esquire.
June 24. Dear Mr. SHENSTONE,
HOW much am I obliged to you for the Pains you have taken in translating LA
MOTTE's Discourse on Fable! and though I fancy you will find, upon comparing
the two, that I have made a good Deal of Use of it, I shall be very glad to
have more of it interwoven, if you shall think I have not sufficiently
extracted the Essence of it. I must must own, my Pride (or call it my Folly, if
you please) would rather choose to prefix somewhat of my own on that Subject,
than servilely adopt the Thoughts of a Frenchman, though I acknowledge them to
be very ingenious. Besides, I have had the Hardiness to differ with him in some
Respects, which makes it still more improper to take his whole Discourse.
Proceed, therefore, if you please, in correcting my Essay; and interweave with
it as much more of LA MOTTE as you may think proper. If you defer this till I
come down, which I wish you would not, pray in the mean Time think of half a
Dozen new Fables, that we may not have too much to embarrass us when together.
My Face is quite finished, and I believe very like. I fancy I shall send it,
together with the Figures, on Monday Se'ennight; but I shall not be able to set
out myself till Monday Fortnight, and staying a Week or ten Days at Nottingham
and Mansfield, will detain me from the Leasowes till the latter End of next
Month. If the Picture should be turned yellowish, by being packed up, Mr.
REYNOLDS advises, that it be set in the Sun for two Hours, which will quite
recover it. Why did you leave the Choice of your two Figures to me? How could
you put me under such a Difficulty? If I have done wrong, you will suffer for
it; and say what you will, I have not sufficient Firmness of Taste to direct me
right; besides, I do not exactly remember the Niches: it is therefore your
Fault to trust me; and if I have erred, your Duty to forgive me. I have ordered
the HOMER and VIRGIL to be bronzed: they are very pretty Figures; and if you
have, as you say, no other Objection to them, but the Want of two or three
Inches more of Height, I hope some Means may be found to obviate so small a
Deficiency. I should not, however, have ventured to send them, but that you
seemed, at last, to acquiesce in their being sent. I think, however, I have
been somewhat happy in my Urns; and I am not without Hopes, that you will
approve the whole Cargo. The Folio-VIRGIL will come in the same Package. I feel
myself very happy in the Thoughts of seeing you soon, and will hasten the Day
as much as is in my Power. I hope Mr. BASKERVILLE will be quite ready for me; I
shall send him the Paper in a Fortnight. I am

faithfully yours, R. DODSLEY.

LETTER XXXV. Mr. DODSLEY to W. SHENSTONE, Esquire.
June 25. Dear Sir,
YOUR Picture really affords me many pleasing Reflections, and I have ordered
the Frame to be full gilt, whilst I am out of Town, that it may not give you
any unpleasing ones. I am going to Derby and Nottingham for three Weeks or a
Month: I cannot stay longer, as I must attend to the Press, having put my Fables
in Hand for a new Edition. I have last Monday sent you PERCY's Novel; I sent it
unbound, as we had not Time to bind it: it will not be published till the
Beginning of next Winter. I have sent you the Fables, bound in Morocco, and the
common Edition in Boards, for your future Corrections: but I would not have you
begin till you see the next Edition, as I hope you will find it altered
somewhat for the better; I will send you one of them as soon as it is printed.
You will find, likewise, in the Parcel, SOAME JENNYNS's Works, and a Pamphlet
or two; also the Fables, with your Drawings in them, many of which I like
extremely; that at the Head of the second I approve the least: but those that
are placed in the Life, I think should be transferred to the Head and
Tail-Pieces of the Fables -- but there will be Time enough to talk of this
hereafter. As to Italics, I believe I shall steer a middle Course, and make Use
only of a few. I send you a List of some Statues, about the same Size with that
Pair you have; DEMOSTHENES and CICERO, LOCK and NEWTON, CHAUCER and SPENCER,
SHAKESPEARE and MILTON.
When you have fixed upon which Pair you will have, you will let me know
whether you will have them white or bronzed, and what Kind of a Bronze.

I really don't know how to appease Mr. W --. I told him, I was very sorry I
had pretended to meddle with his Ode, and begged his Pardon. He is still
unappeased, writes me another angry Letter, and desires me to give him my
Reasons for every Alteration; this it is impossible for me to do, as I have
forgot how it originally was; and I really think it of very little Consequence,
as no Name appears to it.

Mr. STUART is just now with me, and desires his Compliments. He thinks of
seeing your Place the latter End of the Summer, and believes the
Attorney General, Mr. PRATT, will be with him. I have just been struck with the
bad News, that Mr. -- has lost his Wife. You will perceive I write in a Hurry;
Mr. STUART sits by me.

I am ever affectionately yours, R. DODSLEY.

LETTER XXXVI. W. SHENSTONE, Esquire. to Mr. HULL, at Birmingham.
I DESIRE my Compliments to Mr. HULL and Miss MORRISON, with many Thanks for
the Pleasure I received from last Night's Play. A hasty and imperfect
Compilation of some Scenes, on the Subject of ROSAMOND, which, however, laid
the Groundwork of the present Tragedy, acted at Covent Garden Theater. The
Public may easily discern how fully the Author has availed himself of the kind
and judicious Hints contained in the Letter before us.
It was, indeed, acted with great Spirit, and as far as I could judge, afforded
the Audience no small Satisfaction -- not, perhaps, equal to what they derived
from the Appearance of the Dun Cow, etc. Introduced in a Pantomime performed
the same Evening.
for that is hardly to be expected.

I think the Play has now so much good in it, that it may be worth Mr. HULL's
while to give it a few more finishing Touches. Suppose a Confessor or Friar,
either out of Hatred to the Queen, view to his own Advancement, or any selfish
Motive (which he might explain in a short Soliloquy) persuaded ROSAMOND to
aspire to the Throne, and to urge the King to a Divorce; that ROSAMOND should
avow her Abhorrence of such Injustice to the Queen, intimating, that her Love
had no other Object than the King's Person and heroic Virtues; that this
Refusal should affront the Friar, who in Revenge should inform the Queen, that
ROSAMOND actually had those very Intentions with which he had been endeavoring
to inspire her, etc. This would throw more Plot into the Play, (which it wants)
would more sufficiently account for the Queen's sudden Change from a mild
Character to a revengeful one, and, as Mr. HULL thinks the Play too short,
would add two new Scenes. Some further Improvements I would recommend in the
Close, and a few more Places; but Mr. HULL's further Attention to the Play,
will render it needless to point them out to him.

If you should ever complete this Undertaking to your Liking, and produce the
Piece on a London-Stage, I would recommend, that you should by all Means give
it a double Title in the printed Bills; namely, HENRY the Second, or the Fall
of ROSAMOND.

I should esteem it as a Favor, if Mr. HULL would send me down a Copy of the
Prologue and Epilogue as they were spoken; which I will not communicate without
his Permission. Either his or Miss MORRISON's Muse seems to favor them at a
Minute's Warning.

Mr. HODGETTS, with whom I am at present, would be glad that Mr. HULL would
dine here, about two; and so should I, if it be no way inconvenient to him.

I had almost forgot to thank you for the Stanzas you left at the Leasowes,
when I was on a Visit to Hagley. They are well constructed for the Occasion,
and the Idea seems to arise from humane Sensibility, warmed with honest
Indignation.

I am very affectionately yours, W. SHENSTONE.
Snow-Hill, Birmingham, Aug. 29, 1761.
STANZAS (Alluded to in the foregoing Letter)
Written underneath the Monument on Landsdown, near Bath, which was erected by
the late Lord LANDSDOWN, to perpetuate the noble Exploits and Death of his
Grandfather, Sir BEVILLE GRANVILLE, who was slain on the Spot, in the civil
Wars, in the Reign of CHARLES I.
Dignum laud virum
Musa vetat mori.
HOR.
AH! What availed the stately Pile,
The Base so eminently placed,
If now a Prey to conquering Time,
Or barbarous Hands, it shows defaced!
In vain the polished LANSDOWNE raised,
And graced the monumental Stone,
If what the Muse recorded there
To future Time shall be unknown;
The sculptured Heraldry destroyed,
That spoke his noble Ancestry;
The Verse effaced, that aimed to give
The Soldier Immortality. Alluding to two poetical Inscriptions; the one by
WILLIAM CARTWRIGHT, the other by MARTIN LLEWELLIN, in the Year 1643.

And scarce one Trophy now remains
The great Memorial to supply,
To grace with decent Pride the Sod
Where GRANVILLE's hallowed Ashes lie.
And does no living GRANVILLE now
His Blood from BEVIL's Veins derive,
Who will this injured Base repair,
And bid the Muse's Record live?
Come then, (in Bravery allied,
Though not in Blood) ye Sons of Fame;
Ye, who in Feats of Arms have shone,
And thence revere a Soldier's Name;
And ye, bright Sons of genuine Taste,
Who honor LANSDOWN's polished Song,
In sacred Sympathy unite,
And round this ruined Trophy throng;
Haste, haste, the Structure to repair,
Haste, the Eulogium to supply;
Oh! as ye wish your Names should live,
And your good Deeds should never die.
LETTER XXXVII. W. SHENSTONE, Esquire. to Mr. HULL, at Covent Garden Theater,
London.
The Leasowes, Oct. 18, 1761. Dear Mr. HULL,
IF I recollect aright, both you and NED ALCOCK were here this last Autumn, on
the Evening when my Fish Ponds had been robbed, and the Fish destroyed. You
were an Eyewitness of the Circumstances, therefore cannot but retain them in
your Memory. I find I have been arraigned of Lenity, by several
conscientiously-upright Neighbors. " I have screened a Robber from Justice;"
-- " I have given Encouragement to future Thefts," etc. Such are the Aspersions
wherewith I have been loaded. I make a material Distinction between a Robber
and a Pilferer; nor can I assign the former Appellation to a poor Wretch, who,
in his Hunger, has taken two or three Fishes, or as many Loaves. It is true, I
would rather have given more than the Value of them, to have prevented my finny
Friends being disturbed in, or taken away, from their elemental Habitation; it
is also as true, that, in my first Warmth, on the Report that the Fellow had
bruised the poor Creatures to Death against the Stumps and Roots of Trees, I
could not only have delivered him over to Justice, but have been almost induced
to become myself his Punisher; but when that Warmth submitted to cool
Reflection, I felt it impossible to resist his Argument, of having a Wife with
five Children at Home, and not a Doit to procure them a Meal. I verily believe
too he spoke the Truth. Poverty and Affliction seemed to work and plead within
him, and his Words were the Words of Nature.

I cannot be so severe against these petty Misdemeanors as many are; nor can
I, though I revere the Call of Justice, be a rigorous Supporter of its Claims,
except in atrocious Cases. Beside, what had it availed me, to have consigned
the Offender to the Power of a Magistrate? Rather say, what Pain and
Inconvenience should I not have entailed on myself? I should have had the
Trouble of attending the Examination; have had the Fellow imprisoned many Days;
and the additional Mortification of traveling, perhaps to Warwick, or
Worcester, in order to convict him. And after all, no Restitution is made for
my Loss, though it were ten Times more valuable than a whole Draught of Fishes.
There is surely something deficient in our Laws, concerning the Meum and Tuum;
the Person robbed not only abides the Loss without Amends, but is even put to
Expense, as well as Inconvenience, to get the Robber punished.

Then again, the Wife and five Children! -- The poor Fellow subsists, chief
Part of the Year, only by carrying Newspapers round the Country. Had He been
shut up, what was to have supported the ragged Family meanwhile? I am beside
inclined to think, that half a Crown, and a little wholesome Admonition, that
is, if he be not a practiced and stubborn Offender, might go as far toward
amending his Morals, as an Acquaintance with the Inside of a Prison, and the
Conversation of such Associates as he might find there.

I have suffered myself sometimes to doubt the Excellence of our Laws, relative
to Life and Death, notwithstanding I know it has been asserted by many People,
that they are wiser than those of any other Nation. What then? Is the Man who
takes a few Guineas from you on the Highway, on a Level with him who commits a
deliberate Murder? And is there no Punishment to be found more adequate to the
first Transgression, than taking away the Life? Surely, one Example made by a
visible Brand, a Mark of Disgrace, which could never be washed away, would more
avail toward the Prevention of future Crimes, than half the Executions in the
Kingdom, which have now, from two great Frequency, lost the chief Part of their
Purpose and Terror. The Punishment which was inflicted by a Regent in some Part
of the East, (I think the Circumstance is related in the Arabian Nights
Entertainments) on a Judge who had been induced, by Gold, to give an unjust
Decision, is admirable. The Brand, placed on his Habitation, in legible
Characters, " Here lives a corrupt Judge," was, in the highest Degree,
consonant to Justice, inasmuch as it made the Crime its own Punishment.

I have been led into these Reflections by finding how severely I have been
arraigned, only for having been an innocent Defrauder of the Law: so have
troubled you with them; but here I come to a Conclusion. You are at Liberty to
draw what Inferences you please from, or make what Objections you like to, my
Opinion.

I am now to thank you for the Anecdotes you have given me, as well as for the
Perusal of the enclosed Ballad. I am particularly pleased with the Image,
"Appear they not as drizling Dews
Fresh'ning some faded Flower?"


I am, dear Sir, very faithfully, Your Friend and Servant, W. SHENSTONE.

THE BITTER FRUITS OF JEALOUSY: A BALLADE, IN THE ANCIENT STYLE.
"GO, shut the Door, my EDWARD dear,
"Shut close the Door, I pray;
"Let nae keen Search my Treadinge trace,
"Ne listene what I say;
"Let nane my subtle Entrance know,
"My troubled Motion spy,
"Ne smallest Sunne-Beame penetrate
"The Tell-Tale of mine Eye."
So ALLEYNE spoke, as Guilt-bestain'd
Some Nooke he did explore,
When Instincte led his pathlesse Foot
To EDWARDE's friendly Door.
'Tween horrid Dreede, and conscious Shame,
Fu' mighty was the Strife,
While from his now-enfeebled Hands
Down dropped a reekinge Knife.
What means that Steel? What means that Glow,
Wherewith thy Visage burns?
Now ghastly Pale, alack, succeeds,
And now the Red returns.
"Say, will ye plighte your Promise dear,
"And will ye plighte your Faye,
"That what I now entruste to ye
"Your Tongue shall never betraye?"
Yea, I will plighte my Promise dear,
And I will plight my Faye,
That what ye shall entruste to me
My Tongue shall never betraye.
"Ah! was she not the fairest Fair,
"More dear than Life to me?
"Yet never shall I again behold
"My LUCIE sweet to see."
Yea, she was fairest of the Fair,
Dear as thy Life to thee --
And have thou scath'd with deadly Stroke
Thy LUCIE sweet to see?
"Wae worth the Day! -- That very Wreathe,
"Which with a lovinge Vow
"This Morn I gave her, I beheld,
"Ere Noone, on EDWIN's Brow.
"When as she took it sweet she smiled,
"Yet could she from it part?
"Sae proud, methought, he taunted me,
"Fu' deep it irk'd my Heart.
"And irk'd be stille this cruel Heart! --
"Oh! had ye seen the Wound,
"And had ye seen the streaminge Blude,
"How fast it stained the Ground!
"And had ye seen her sickninge Eye,
"How sore it sought Relief!
"And had ye seen her Body sink,
"You would have dyed for Grief!
"And irk'd be stille this cruel Heart,
"When as she there did lie,
"That could not with my LUCIE dear
"A Moment stay, and dye!"
ALLEYNE, my Friend, ye grieve my Soul,
Your Flighte, I ween, was just,
Sine she is gone, that fairest Fair,
And sunken into Duste.
But who alonge yon Cypresse-Pathe
Is led sae heavilie?
Ah! me! my ALLEYNE dear, it is --
How sad she eyeth thee!
And, ah! how sad yon Virgins look,
Who lead her to my Boure?
Appear they not as drizlinge Dewes,
Freshninge some faded Flower?
With such a Look as Mothers aft
Rebuke a darlinge Child,
Sae eyed she her ALLEYNE dear,
Sae ruthe, sae sweet, sae mild!
'I marvelle not,' she faintlie cried,
'Yee seem a Man of Stone! --
'The Well of Life is nae yet dry,
'My Days are nae yet done.
'Sette, set your troubled Mind at Ease,
'My Heart ye did nae touch;
'Yee struck too short to reach my Life,
'Whereat I gladdene much.
'Could ye, such Vows as I have vowed,
'Deeme I could faithless be? --
'The Blossom to the Breathe of Spring
'Was scant sae true as me.
'That Wreathe, which ye this Morn did see
'Sae trim on EDWYN's Browe,
'EDWYN's ain spitefu' Hand had wroughte,
'And EDWIN wears it now.
'When Love ye breathe, ye fickle Men
'Been smoothe as Summer-Wave;
'But when with Jealousy ye swelle,
'As Winter-Storme ye rave.
'Rashe Manne! ah! how by Jealousy
'Have ye your Fortunes croste!
'As true a Maid as ever loved
'Yee have for ever lost.
'To hie to this your Friend's Abode,
'Here breathe my Prayres for ye,
'For Life, for Health, for Ease of Mind,
'Was a' was left for me.'
Can ye not pardon the high Fault
Which Love did gar me do?
'Yes, I can pardon a' the Fault,
'And stille to Love be true.'
And shall the Bridal-Knotte be tied,
And shall we happy be?
'The Bridal-Knotte can never be tied,
'Ne can I stay with thee;
'For I to CHRIST a Vow have made,
'And kept that Vow shall be,
'That Manne naie mair shall vex my Heart,
'Nae mair shall trouble me.
'That strait I will mysel betake
'Unto a Nunnerie,
'In Fast and Prayre to end my Days,
'And kept that Vow shall be.
'Go ye, and seek a fairer Bride,
'And live in Pleasaunce gaye,
'While to the House of Godliness
'I take mysel away.'
Nay, do nae wend ye quite away,
List, list, my piercinge Ca'!
Return! and for your broken Vow,
On me the Pain be a'!
" She Is gane." -- He heaved a deepe-drawne Sighe,
As brast his Heart in twain,
Sine to the Ground fast-falled he,
And never rose again.
THE END.
LETTER XXXVIII. W. SHENSTONE, Esquire. to Mr. HULL.
The Leasowes, Nov. 26, 1761. Dear Mr. HULL,
I ESTEEM myself beholden to you, for having made me acquainted with the
Reality of the two Writers, Dr. LANCASTER and HENRY. I have admired them both
in their Pages, but knew only their Names. In fact, when I first read the Essay
on Delicacy, I imagined the Name of LANCASTER to be fictitious, and that the
Work might be the Production of the Author of Sir Thomas Fitz-Oshorne's
Letters. There is great Spirit, fine Sentiment, and true Elegance of Style
throughout; and my Friend DODSLEY's preserving it in his Fugitive Pieces is
truly meritorious. It well deserves to be rescued from Oblivion. But what a
Pity that your Uncle does not make a more frequent Use of his Pen! the World
does not abound too much in such Writers. How much likewise is it to be
lamented, that a Man of such Abilities should lie concealed in an obscure Part
of Essex! He should have remained in the World -- that is, I mean, for the Sake
of the World; to his own Happiness, probably, Retirement was most conducive. It
is most certain, that no Men are fit for Solitude, but those who find the
Source of Amusement and Employment in themselves. Fancy, Reflection, and a Love
of Reading, are indispensably necessary for such a Situation. It is downright
Lunacy for a Man who has passed his Life in a Compting-House, or a Shop; who
possesses, possibly, but a moderate Share of natural Understanding, that
Understanding too not cultivated by Education, and who has never known what it
is was to look into a Book -- It is, I repeat, downright Lunacy, for such a Man
to think of retiring. He knows not, the Fatigue he is going to encounter: he
will want Employment for his Hours; most probably, may shorten his Existence,
and while he retains it, it will be one continued State of Apathy, if not
Disorder.

HENRY, you say, is a Mr. GRIFFITH, of the County of Kilkenny in Ireland. A
Friend brought me over the Letters of HENRY and FRANCES, when they were first
published in Dublin; they are most admirably clever and comprehensive; I have
enjoyed and re-enjoyed them; and while I have admired the Writings, have loved
the Writers. In the private Character you have given me of this amiable Pair, I
feel as if I were acquainted with them. Before the Information received from
you, I have sometimes suffered myself to think, and even communicated to an
intimate Friend or two, that there was a Similitude of Disposition between
HENRY and myself; but when I look on your Description of him, I entertain much
Doubt. In the active Parts of his Philosophy, his Perseverance, and Resolution,
I fear I am far behind him. He is a Man qualified for any State or Situation;
Business or Amusement, Solitude or a Crowd. -- And you have spent Months with
him at Kilkenny! -- I give you Joy of such an Happiness.

Again I thank you for the Enclosures you are ever and anon sending, and am,

Dear Mr. HULL, yours very affectionately, W. SHENSTONE.

LETTER XXXIX. W. SHENSTONE, Esquire. to Mr. HULL, at Covent Garden Theater.
SIR,
I AM greatly obliged both to you and Miss MORRISON, for the Ballads you were
so good as to enclose to me. The Speed you have used in sending them, testifies
the Reality of that Delight you seemed to express at the Leasowes, when I first
communicated my Friend Dr. PERCY's Design. I sent them directly to him; he has
begun to print off his venerable Collection, Ancient Poetry, now published in
three Volumes; the universal Estimation and Encouragement of which Work,
sufficiently testifies its Excellence.
with an Eye to the Publication of it sometime next Winter. One of your Ballads
is truly beautily and extremely proper for his Purpose. It has that Naivete,
which is so very essential in Ballads of all Kind; and which requires no more
than, that sublime, or elegant, or tender Sentiments be expressed in a simple
and unaffected Manner -- Sentimental Language would be no ill Term for it; or,
perhaps, the Essay before DODSLEY's Fables does not improperly style it, the
Voice of Sentiment, in Opposition to the Language of Reflection.

As to the other, Miss M -- well distinguishes, that the Merit of it is almost
wholly confined to the Sentiment at last. This is both natural and tender; and
would she take the Pains to new-write the whole on this Account, (for even this
Sentiment is not expressed so very simply as one could wish it) I dare say it
is in her Power to render it very pleasing. I know not how far I am singular;
but as I love to avail myself of different Words, to bundle up Ideas in
different Parcels, it is become habitual to me, to call that a Ballad which
describes or implies some Action; on the other Hand, I term that a Song, which
contains only an Expression of Sentiment. According to this Account, I believe
one of your Pieces would appear a Ballad, and the other a Song.

The Playhouse Coronations answer the Purpose of all those who choose to
compound the Matter betwixt Indolence and Curiosity. Mr. GARRICK has given a
very genteel Turn to this Taste among the Citizens, in his Epilogue to the new
Play. Epilogue to the Tragedy of Hecuba, produced that Year at Drury Lane
Theater.
I have not yet seen this Performance; and should be glad if you would give me
some Account of its Appearance on the Stage. Why does not your Dr. LANCASTER
The Editor's Uncle.
complete his Essay upon Delicacy? I read it, since I wrote last, in DODSLEY's
Fugitive Pieces, and think it mighty well deserves the Labor necessary to its
Continuation.

It Is true, that Specimens of Wit or Humor have been dispensed this Winter but
sparingly from the Press; and even there in political Pamphlets, where I am
least inclined to seek them. But we must swim with the Tide, if we would
collect the Shells and Corals that it leaves behind; accordingly I have read
two or three of these Pamphlets which have answered my Expectations. Should any
other appear that strikes you, be so good as to enclose it to me in a Frank. As
to Lavinia, or other dramatic Schemes, I must defer them till I see you again
at the Leasowes, which whenever it happens, will afford me Pleasure, being very
faithfully and affectionately

your most obedient Servant, W. SHENSTONE.
Christmas-Eve, 1761.
BALLAD I. Referred to in the above Letter.
THE Bells they rang all in the Morn,
And ALLEN he rose full soon,
Sad Tidings were heard for ALLEN to hear,
That MARY would wed 'ere Noon.
Then ALLEN he called on THOMAS's Name,
And THOMAS came at his call;
"Make ready a Coffin and winding Shroud,
"For MARY shall see my Fall.
"When last we parted with brimful Eye,
"Right-loving she made a Vow;
"But RICHARD has twice as many Sheep,
"And MARY forgets me now.
"Then bear me to the Green-Grass-Bank,
"Where we did kiss and play,
"And tell her the Rain that made it so green,
"Has washed my Kisses away."
The Bridegroom led the Bride so fair,
The Priest he came anon;
But THOMAS he brought his dear Friend's Corse,
Or 'ere the Wedding was done.
He laid him on the Green-Grass-Bank,
Where they did kiss and play,
And told her, the Rain that made it so green,
Had washed his Kisses away.
When she beheld poor ALLEN's dead Corse,
Her maiden Blush was lost,
She faded, as though on April Morn
A Primrose nipt by a frost.
Then all beneath one fatal Stone
Together they buried were.
False Maidens, who break your plighted Vow,
Take heed ye come not there!
BALLAD II. Referred to in the foregoing Letter.
ONE April Evening, when the Sun
Had journey'd down the Sky,
Sad MARIAN, with Looks of Woe,
Walked forth full heavily.
Tears trickled down her faded Cheek,
Soft Sighs her Bosom heaved;
Soft Sighs revealed her inward Woe;
Alas! she would been deceived.
"Oh! what a Wretch am I become,
"A luckless Lass, (said she)
"The Cowslip, and the Violet blue,
"Have now no Charms for me.
"The golden Sun that daily shines,
"And glittering decks the Sky,
"Brings no Relief to my Distress,
"Or Pleasure to my Eye.
"This little River when I dressed
"Has served me for a Glass;
"But now it only shows how Love
"Has ruined this poor Face.
"What Charms could happy LUCY boast,
"To fix thy wavering Mind?
"What Charms in LUCY more than me,
"Ungrateful, could thou find?
"Have thou forgot the tender Vows
"Which at my Feet were made?
"Yet I Will not spend my dying Hour
"Thy falsehood to upbraid.
"But what remaining Breath I have
"Shall intercede with Heaven;
"That all those broken Vows to me,
"At last may be forgiven.
"Yet one poor Boon before I die,
"I would of thee require;
"And do not thou refuse to grant
"A Wretch's last Desire!
"When you with LUCY shall affix
"The happy Marriage-Day,
"Oh! do not over my Green-Grass-Grave
"Inhuman take thy Way."
LETTER XL. W. SHENSTONE, Esquire. to Miss M --.
The Leasowes, Dec. 8, 1761. Dear Miss M --,
I OUGHT to have returned Thanks for your agreeable Account of the Excursion to
Chepstow, some Time ago; but these are Duties which I do not always perform so
soon as I ought -- you know I don't -- Neither will I waste my Time and Paper
in apologizing for a Failing which you are so ready to forgive, convinced that
I am not less grateful on that Account.

I have great Joy in reading these little pleasurable Travels, in a private
Letter, related, as yours are, without Formality, describing, with Ease and
Simplicity, every little Occurrence as it falls out. I can journey with you in
Imagination, and partake every trivial Difficulty and every Delight. You are
fond of these little Parties of Pleasure, as they are called, and in you it is,
by no Means, reprovable; but in general, they are very dangerous to young
Folks. You have Means and Time, at your own Disposal; your Party is small and
select, both in Point of Reputation and Understanding; you likewise turn your
Excursion to some Advantage; you make Observations on all you see, form nice
Distinctions between different Places, Points, and Characters, and draw just
Conclusions from them -- But, as I said before, these Parties too often are
hazardous; the Mind once indulged in them, is apt to covet them too often; they
are sometimes the Means of drawing a Female into improper Company; they
encroach on Means and Time, neither of which, probably, can with Propriety be
bestowed; they have their Source in Dissipation, are continually attended with
Hazard, and too often end in the Worst of Mischiefs. In short, I would wish all
young Folks, who have neither Leisure nor Money at Command, to shut their Ears
against the very Name of a Party of Pleasure.

More than once in my Life, I have been solicited by Friends to visit foreign
Climes. I had an Invitation of this Kind lately; but it is now too late; at
least, I think so -- Besides, why should a Man go so far for Objects of
Curiosity, who has seen too little of his own Country? Many Parts of England,
Wales and Scotland equally (I should think) deserve our Admiration, and we need
not risque Winds and Waves, to which I feel some Objection. Numbers of our
traveling Gentry peregrinate too early in Life, before the Mind is
sufficiently formed to make proper Observations on what they see and hear.

A Friend once related an Anecdote, which is apposite to my Subject. A very
young Man, of good natural Understanding, and Heir to an affluent Fortune,
would needs be one of these inconsiderate Travelers. In the Course of his
Adventures, he fell into Company, in Naples, with some well-travelled, and
well-informed Foreigners. They were conversing on what they had seen in
England; and some little Difference in Opinion arising about the Architecture
of Windsor-Castle, they naturally referred themselves to the young Englishman
for Decision. With much Confusion and Hesitation he was compelled to confess,
he had never seen the Building in Question. The Company, with true foreign
Politeness, only testified their Admiration in a silent Smile -- but the
Reflection instantly struck, and pained the young Gentleman. The Result was,
that he returned for England within two Days, rationally determined to instruct
himself in the Knowledge of his own Country, before he pryed into those afar
off. His Reflection and Determination did equal Credit to his Understanding.

Our Friend HULL has, as usual, been amusing us with as good a Drama, as our
neighboring Town can give Encouragement to; but says, he returns no more. I
know many who will be sorry on this Account. He has not departed, however,
without having excited Curiosity in a very peculiar Way; on a small Plan,
indeed, but to a very commendable Purpose. He enticed with him his two
principal Actresses, Miss MORRISON and Miss IBBOT, (both possessed of great
Merit in their Profession) some few of his Band, two Voices, and gave an
Evening's Entertainment of Singing and Reading, at the little Town of
Stourbridge, some few Miles off; the Profits devoted to the Assistance of a
Tradesman, who had suffered under repeated Misfortunes. The Success, I hear,
more than answered his Expectations; the little Assembly-Room was crowded, and
with much good Company. A slight Cold made me fearful of being out late, but
the Particulars were given me by a neighboring Clergyman who was present. The
Pieces selected for Reading were well-chosen. I do not remember the whole
Number, but I recollect that Miss CARTER 's Ode to Wisdom, PRIOR 's Henry and
Emma, and GRAY's Elegy in a Country Churchyard were amongst them. The latter
gave particular Satisfaction, my Friend told me, to the Gentlemen of the
Pulpit, of whom he counted seven. The whole was received with great
Approbation. You are to observe that HULL and his Party, so far from proposing
any Emolument to themselves, declined even to be re-imbursed the Expenses they
were at in going, and the Master of the Assembly-Room gave the Use of it. From
this confined Instance of such a Scheme, I am apt to think an Union of Poetry
and Music, executed on a larger Plan, would be an admirable
Two-Hours-Entertainment, either in a public Room or private Family.

I enclose a Piece of Writing, which a Friend of mine sent me in a Frank last
Week. I think the Subject calculated for your Liking. It was planned, and
partly written, in Mr. HOARE's lovely Grounds, at Stourton in Wiltshire; and
the Thought suggested by surveying, from an Eminence there, a woody Vale,
wherein ALFRED is reported to have once concealed himself from the Danes. Send
it back, when you have done with it.

Adieu, dear Miss M --. Yours very faithfully, W. SHENSTONE.

CADWAL: A LEGENDARY TALE; IN TWO PARTS.
PART I.
DARK December was the Month,
The Air was dank and chill,
When CADWAL's weary Foot had reached
The Summit of the Hill,
Beneath whose ample Verge he wont
To labor at the Plough,
And, to relieve his Father's Age,
Bedew his infant Brow.
When eighteen Years had over him passed,
He left his rustic Home,
(Sore-smote with Grief) in distant Grounds,
And Stranger-Fields to roam.
Twelve Winters had his Exile seen,
When lo! his Bosom burns,
Again to clasp his Father's Knees,
And homeward he returns.
And now descending to the Vale,
With slow and trembling Feet,
At this new Sight, his native Soil,
The Pulses fluttering beat.
And now, with penetrating Eye,
He pierces the close Dell,
Where in his Thatch-beshelter'd Cot
His Sire did whilom dwell.
Yet in his sad and troubled Look,
Such Terror might ye see,
As when we almost wish to shun
The Thing, we wish should be.
He pryed here, he pryed there,
No Cottage could he spy,
Nor smallest Trace of human Tread
Appeared to his Eye.
No Monarch of the feathered Brood
Was heard aloud to crow,
Nor labored Ox the vocal Air
Awaken with his Low.
In strange Amazement and Suspense
Awhile benumbed he stood,
Then fell, despairing on the Earth,
And wept, and wail'd aloud.
His bitter Cries an Hermit drew
Forth from his lonely Cell,
Whose plyant Sense was quick to feel
Affliction's poignant Yell.
Compassion held him mute at first,
While as he pondered him
With fixed Eye, where Nature's Floods
Up-swelled to the Brim;
Then thus -- "My Son, your Plaints I heard,
"They smote me to the Heart;
"To me, without Reserve or Fear,
"The weighty Cause impart.
"Deep-vers'd in Sorrow's heavy Task
"Full many a weary Hour,
"Right well I know what aggravates,
"And what abates its Power.
"Close-pent within restraining Bounds,
"The River foams and roars,
"Tumultuous boils with mighty Heaves,
"And wounds its kindred Shores;
"The Load removed, that choked its Course,
"The Violence subsides,
"The Tumult lessens by Degrees,
"And smooth the Current glides.
"Give, then, the struggling Griefs to flow,
"Which thy clogged Heart oppress,
"Each Word will take a Part away,
"And make the Burden less."
Old CADWAL here distraught I seek,
Here CADWAL dwelt of yore,
Here, here, his quiet Cottage rose,
But now is here no more.
"Old CADWAL seek'st thou? Hapless Man!
"New Torments must thou have --
"Beneath this venerable Elm,
"Behold the Rustic's Grave!"
Oh! I Wretch accursed! I was the Cause,
I reft him of his Breath,
I robbed these Fields of CADWAL 's Worth,
I brought him to his Death.
Was he not to his various Kin,
(Unworthy I alone!)
Was he not Guardian, Comforter,
Friend, Father, all in one?
What honest Hind, that near him toiled,
But of his Store partook?
Was he not to the needy Swain,
As to the Mead the Brook?
Did he not deal to all around,
His Smile as well as Care?
Not even the Sparrow of the Hedge,
But in his Love had Share.
And Wretch accursed! I was the Cause,
I 'reft him of his Breath,
I robbed these Fields of CADWAL 's Worth,
I brought him to his Death.
"Too rigidly, perchance, my Son
"Thyself thou do accuse,
"And heapest on thy burdened Heart
"Unnecessary Woes.
"Ah! how severe the Punishment,
"When we ourselves arraign!
"And Hatred often, and Malice' self
"Inflict a milder Pain.
"Less harshly censure thy Offense,
"(Some youthful Warmth, I ween!)
"And give it to mine Ears in Terms
"Soft, candid, and serene.
"Here on this Bank repose awhile,
"And bid these Tumults cease;
"With thine I Will mix my social Tears,
"And sooth returning Peace."
Ah, Father! this thine holy Love
Embitters what I feel;
Unwittingly thou add'st a Sting
To Sorrows thou would heal.
Here on this Bank, what precious Hours
I Have known in Days of Youth,
Listening the Precepts that he gave
Of Wisdom and of Truth!
Here in the sweetly-tranquil Eve,
(Day's rugged Labor done)
He Would tell how good and glorious Men
Life's arduous Race had run;
What Tides of Blood had washed these Lands,
Which we in Peace had tilled,
And how the faithful Rustic once
Great ALFRED here concealed.
But, Oh! my Grief-bewilder'd Mind
From Reason wanders far,
And with vague Fancies idly mocks
Thy kind, thy pious Care.
"Heed not, my Son -- Use any Means
"That may assuage thy Pain;
"It is the Privilege of Woe
"At Random to complain,
"And who of patient Sympathy
"The liberal Largess scant,
"Withold a Bounty dear, I ween
"As Wealth can shower on Want.
CADWAL. PART II.
OLD CADWAL here distraught I seek --
Ah, me! this wayward Heart!
That dared oppose a Father's Power,
That dared his Counsel thwart!
But EMMA 's Charms had won my Love,
And made it all her own;
I sought not copious Flocks and Meads,
I sought Content alone;
And, Oh! so sweetly she conformed
To all I wished or said,
You would have sworn our Hearts, as Twins,
Were for each other made.
And was it, holy Father, say,
Was it a Crime to Love;
Or to my early-plighted Vows
Unchanged and steady prove?
MATILDA 's lofty Friends in Store
Of Fleeces did abound,
And ample Sheaves enriched their Fields,
And Orchards rose around;
And these Possessions every Hour
Were poured into mine Ear;
To count them over, my Father made
His Morn and Evening Care.
Sure if he any Failing had,
'Twas too fond Love for me;
Hence sprung the Wish, that of her Flocks
I might the Master be;
And as he willed, and as he bade,
Oh! that I could have done!
But EMMA 's Charms had won my Love,
And made it all her own.
Say, Father, ought I, at the Church
Have joined MATILDA 's Hand,
When Love and Truth, that should attend,
Were not at my Command?
Her spacious Granaries -- to me
They no Allurement were;
My EMMA 's low-roof'd Dairy-Hut
To me was dearer far.
Why after large Possessions seek?
My Father did not want;
Of copious Tributes from the Field
His Barns were nothing scant;
But 'twas his Will -- and Oh! that I
Could have that Will obeyed,
Without the Guilt of broken Vows,
Or EMMA 's Peace betrayed!
Now that my Frowardness of Heart
Has brought him to his End,
For this, before yon hallowed Spot
In duteous Wise I Will bend;
For this, will daily wet the Sod
With my repentant Eye,
Nor ever from this Solitude
To fairer Refuge hie.
"Son," quoth the Sire -- and cast a Look
As chilled the Youth all over --
(While Minutes passed ere vital Warmth,
His Senses did restore --)
"Son," quoth the Sage, "thy Doubts suspend,
"Their rising Tumult check --
"It is thy Father, clasps thee close,
"And weeps upon thy Neck.
"Long have I held thee in Discourse
"With pent-up Agony,
"Now let my gushing Tears have Way,
"They Are Blessings show'r'd on thee.
"Charmed with thy duteous Excellence,
"Thy Strength of filial Love,
"My full Forgiveness, let these Streams
"And warm Embraces prove!
"And, Oh! might thou forgive the Cause
"That drove thee from thy Home,
"Sore-smote with Grief, in distant Grounds,
"And Stranger-Fields to roam!"
Might I forgive! -- Oh, Father, such
Unseemly Terms restrain;
Might I forgive! -- It is enough,
I see thee once again.
But, said thou not, beneath yon Elm --
"My dearest Son, I did;
"There have I marked the chosen Spot,
"There made my latest Bed.
"Of thee bereft, what booted it
"To feed the furrowed Plain;
"Or what, from Autumn's fruitful Lap
"To heap the ripened Grain?
"Whom had I then to cheer my Steps
"In Summer's sultry Rays?
"For whom should then the social Hearth
"In Winter-Ev'ning blaze?
"My House, my Barns, I left at large
"To moulder and decay;
"Yon humble Tenement I raised,
"My Age's only Stay.
"Enough for me, who meant forlorn
"To pass Life's lagging Eve;
"My Task to meditate and pray,
"My Punishment to grieve.
"For, Oh! my Son, too late I felt
"This Truth within my Heart,
"That to compel the filial Mind
"Is not a Parent's Part.
"And hence this penitential Garb,
"And hence these silver Hairs,
"Whose hoary Length the sad Recluse
"Or pensive Hermit wears."
Dear, honored Father, droop no more,
This on my bended Knee
I crave -- I claim -- Resign thy Griefs;
Oh! cast them all on me;
With unremitting Love and Care,
Thy Sorrows I Will assuage,
And with obsequious Duty tend
The Remnant of thy Age.
"Arise, my Son, and to my Cell
"Together let us wend;
"Let us beneath one Roof embrace,
"Ere yet my Days shall end.
"And shall the Thought of EMMA's Love
"No more suffuse thine Eye,
"Nor chide thy Father for her Loss?" --
She Is buried in that Sigh.
"What wondrous Bliss to virtuous Minds
"Will Heaven not deign to lend?
"Within my homely Hut, my Son,
"There all thy Sorrows end.
"There, there, once more still sweetly-fair
"Thy EMMA shall thou see;
"Within my homely Hut she dwells,
"My Age's Comfort she!
"Her Father dead, I filled his Place,
"The Guardian of her Youth;
"I now restore her to thy Love,
"Thy Constancy and Truth."
Young CADWAL waited not for more,
But to his EMMA flew,
Where locked awhile in close Embrace
Each to the other grew.
From incoherent Words and Sighs,
Such wondrous Transports brake,
Far more than honey'd Eloquence
With all her Tongues could speak.
And now with strong enquiring Look
They search each other's Eye,
And ask if what they see be true,
And doubt the real Joy.
And now the Father's quickened Steps
They greet with bended Grace,
And with up-lifted Eyes adore,
And bless his reverend Face.
"Now, by this hallowed Eve, I vow, Probably Christmas-Eve, as December is
mentioned in the Opening of the Tale.

"Soon as the Mass be done,
"The next ensuing Holy Day
"The Priest shall make ye one,
"And ye shall live (so Heaven permit!)
"To cast one Gleam of Light
"Athwart your Father's gathering Eve,
"Or ere he sink in Night;
"Or ere beneath yon aged Elm
"He Is numbered with the dead,
"The chosen Spot where his own Hands
"Have made his latest Bed.
"But while some Hours of Life are lent,
"By Gratitude and Prayer,
"And Memory of my Errors past,
"Those Errors I Will repair:
"And often as I recount them over
"Thy steady Faith I Will praise,
"And for my dearest Boy once more
"The social Hearth shall blaze.
"Age, even as Youth, thou see, my Son,
"Is liable to fall,
"And Self-reproof, and Penitence,
"Alike beseem us all."
LETTER XLI. Mr. M -- G -- to W. SHENSTONE, Esquire. with Fragments of Ancient
Poetry, printed at Edinburgh, in the Year 1760.
Edinburgh, June 21, 1760. Dear Sir,
IT gives me the greatest Pleasure, that I have an Opportunity of conveying to
a Person of your Taste, the enclosed Fragments of ancient Caledonian Poesy --
"Full many a Gem of purest Ray serene,
"The dark unfathomed Caves of Ocean bear,
"Full many a Rose is born to blush unseen,
"And waste its Sweetness on the desert Air." See GRAY's Elegy in a Country
Churchyard.

But Thanks to the Taste and Care of the ingenious Translator, that we have not
to lament the utter Loss of those Pieces, which reflect so much Luster on the
Memory of the original Bards. Here we see Poets framed by the Hand of Nature;
their Manners rude and uncultivated, as the Wilds they inhabited; unacquainted
with ARISTOTLE and HORACE, but pouring the (I had almost said) involuntary
Effusions of Minds filled with true poetic Fire, deeply interested in the
Themes they sung, devoid of all Rules, they attach and warm the Heart, by an
amazing though secret Power, the constant Effect of copying Nature, but copying
her justly; to which the languid Efforts of Art bear scarce so interesting a
Proportion, as the Shadow to the Substance.

From the general Structure of the Poetry, from the Names of the Persons
celebrated in it, and the Hints of the Costume scattered here and there, it
would appear, that these Poems were composed about the Time that the ancient
Bards of Iceland, and the other northern Countries, made so great a Figure in
Poetry; or, perhaps, their Date may reach back beyond the Time of Christianity
being preached in our Islands; hence it will follow, that our Ancestors were
rising by surprising Efforts to catch the fairest Flowers of Parnassus, while
the polite Regions of Europe resounded with polemic Theology and monkish
Nonsense: this becomes the more probable, when we reflect, that scarce any
Trace of Christianity is to be found in these Pieces, and no Trace of the Names
that prevailed after the ninth Century, instead of which, the Names appear
entirely Pagan; and numberless Hints are taken from the predatory Life our
Ancestors (particularly those of the Islands and north-west Coasts of Scotland)
led before, and at the first preaching of the Gospel among them. A critical
Examination of the original Language would help to throw some Light on this
Conjecture, as well as the Publication of Pieces of greater Length, which may
follow these first Specimens. It is not, however, to be doubted, that the many
Fragments still preserved amongst our Highlanders of their ancient Poetry, may
be of great Use in settling the History, and ascertaining the Meaning of
several Antiquities dispersed over the mountainous Parts of Scotland, while the
Man of Taste must be agreeably surprised to find a Beauty and Force of Diction,
a Warmth of Fancy, a chaste and truly noble Simplicy united, where hitherto no
Person has ever looked for it. If these Specimens are well received by the
Public, and if suitable Encouragement were given to the ingenious Translator,
he would oblige the World with the Translation of the Epic Poem mentioned in
the Preface, which consists of upwards of nine thousand Lines: but the
dependant Situation of a Tutor cannot afford him Leisure to undertake so great
a Work.

Your Friends in this Corner of the World were much disappointed, in not having
the Happiness of seeing you last Summer along with Lord LYTTELTON; and without
Flattery I can assure, that the Number of your Friends in Scotland is greater
than, perhaps, you think of, and every one of them would be happy to have an
Opportunity of seeing and obliging you. Lord ALEMOOR, Dr. ROEBUCK and his
Spouse desire to be remembered; and I shall take it as a particular Favor,
that you would, at a leisure Hour, write me your Opinion of the enclosed
Specimens, and allow me to be with Esteem, truly, dear Sir,

Your very obedient, and most humble Servant, J. M -- G --.
Two frank'd Covers will bring the two first Divisions of the Fragment. Please,
address for me at Edingburgh.



LETTER XLII. Extract from a Letter of Mr. B -- (Lord E -- 's Brother) to Mr. T
--.
May 15.
I KNOW no Way so good of making up for my long Silence to you, as sending you
the enclosed Poem, which if it gives you as much Pleasure as it did me, you
will give me no small Thanks for: it is translated from an old Highland Poem,
by one Mr. M' PHERSON, a Minister in the Highlands. There are great Numbers of
these Elegies all over the Highlands, which they sing to mournful Tunes in the
Evening over their Fires. Mr. M' PHERSON has, I hear, translated ten more of
them, which I fancy will soon be published; if they are not, I shall endeavor
to get them, and send them to you. It will be needless to say any Thing in
Praise of the Poem, as I think it can sufficiently recommend itself. The
Translation has a great deal of Merit; I think it is one of the best I ever
saw. I fancy SHENSTONE will be much pleased with the Poem, which I shall be
obliged to you if you will present to him with my Compliments.

A FRAGMENT. This exquisite little Fragment is already published among the
Notes in the first Volume of OSSIAN's Works; but as, in Mr. SHENSTONE's
Manuscript, the Expression of many of the Passages varied from the printed
Poem, the Editor of this Work presumed an Insertion of his Copy might not be
unwelcome to the Curious.

THE following descriptive Poem (though very old) is of much later Date than
the foregoing Fragments.

Five Bards, who are the Guests of a Chief, (himself an excellent Poet) go
severally out to make their Observations on the Night, and return each with an
extemporary Description of it, to which the Chief adds one of his own. The Time
is supposed to be in October, the Harvest Month in the Highlands; when the Face
of Nature is as various, and its Changes as sudden, as they are here
represented.

FIRST BARD.
NIGHT is dull and dark,
The Clouds rest on the Hills;
No Star with twinkling Beam,
No Moon looks from the Skies.
I hear the Blast in the Wood,
But distant and dull I hear it.
The Stream of the Valley murmurs,
Low is its Murmur too.
From the Tree, at the Grave of the Dead,
The lonely Screech-Owl groans.
I see a dim Form on the Plain,
It Is a Ghost! It fades, it flies;
Some dead shall pass this Way.
From the lowly Hut of the Hill
The distant Dog is howling;
The Stag lies by the Mountain-Well,
The Hind is at his Side;
She hears the Wind in his Horns,
She starts, but lies again.
The Roe is in the Cleft of the Rock:
The Heath-Cock's Head beneath his Wing.
No Beast, no Bird is abroad,
But the Owl, and the howling Fox^
She on the leafless Tree,
He on the cloudy Hill.
Dark, panting, trembling, sad,
The Traveller has lost his Way;
Through Shrubs, through Thorns he goes,
Beside the gurgling Rills;
He fears the Rock and the Pool,
He fears the Ghost of the Night.
The old Tree groans to the Blast,
The falling Branch resounds,
The Wind drives the clung Thorn,
Along the sighing Grass,
He shakes amid the Night.
Dark, dusky, howling is Night,
Cloudy, windy, and full of Ghosts;
The dead are abroad; my Friends,
Receive me from the Night.
SECOND BARD.
THE Wind is upon the Mountain,
The Shower of the Hill descends.
Woods groan and Windows clap,
The growing River roars:
The Traveller attempts the Ford,
He falls, he shrieks, he dies.
The Storm drives the Horse from the Hill,
The Goat and the lowing Cow;
They tremble as drives the Shower,
And look for the Shade of the Stall.
The Hunter starts from Sleep in his lone Hut,
And wakes the Fire decayed;
His wet Dogs smoke around him:
He stops the Chink with Heath.
Loud roar two Mountain Streams,
Which meet beside his Booth;
Sad on the Side of the Hill
The wandering Shepherd sits,
The Tree resounds above him,
The Stream roars down the Rock;
He waits the rising Moon
To lead him to his Home;
Ghosts ride on the Storm tonight.
Sweet is their Voice between the Gusts of Wind,
Their Songs are of other Worlds.
The Rain is past -- the dry Winds blow,
Streams roar and Windows clap;
Cold Drops fall from the Roof.
I see the starry Sky --
But the Shower gathers again!
Dark, dark, is the western Sky!
Night is stormy, dismal, dark;
Receive me, my Friends, from the Night.
THIRD BARD.
THE Winds still sound between the Hills,
And groan on the riven Rocks:
The Firs fall from their Place on high,
The turfy Hut is torn.
The Clouds divided fly over the Sky,
And show the burning Stars.
The Meteor (Token of Death)
Flies sparkling through the Gloom;
It rests on the Hills, it burns -- I see the Fern,
The dark Rock, and fallen Oak.
What dead is that in his Shroud? --
Beneath the Tree by the Stream
The Waves dark tumble on the Lake,
And lash the rocky Sides.
The Boat is brim-full in the Cove;
The Oars on the rocky Tide.
Sad sits a Maid beneath a Rock,
And eyes the rolling Stream:
Her Lover promised to come,
She saw his Boat, when it was light, on the Lake.
Is this his broken Boat on the Shore?
Are these his Groans in the Wind?
Hark! the Hail rattles around,
The Flakes of Snow descend. --
The Tops of the Hills are white,
The stormy Winds abate,
Various is Night and cold;
Receive me, my Friends, from the Night.
FOURTH BARD.
NIGHT is calm and fair,
Blue, starry, and settled is Night;
The Winds with the Clouds are gone:
They descend behind the Hill.
The Moon is upon the Mountains;
Trees glister, Streams shine on the Rocks,
Bright rolls the settling Lake,
Bright the Stream of the Vale.
I see the Trees o'erturned;
The Shocks of Corn on the Plain;
The wakeful Peasant rebuilds the Sheaves,
Or drives the Beasts of the Hills away.
Calm, settled, and fair is Night.
Who comes from the Place of the Dead?
That Form in the Robe of Snow,
These white Arms, that Hair of Gold;
The Daughter of the Chief of the People,
She that lately fell!
Come, let us view thee, Maid;
Thou that were the Desire of Heroes!
The Blast drives the Phantom away,
White and without Form it ascends the Hill.
The Breezes drive the blue Mist
Over the narrow Vale:
Gray on the Hill it ascends,
And joins itself to the Sky.
Night is settled and calm,
Blue, starry, bright, with the Moon.
Receive me not, my Friends,
For lovely is the Night.
FIFTH BARD.
NIGHT is calm, but dreary;
The Moon in a Cloud in the West,
Slow moves that feeble Beam
Along the shady Hill.
The distant Wave is heard;
The Stream dull murmurs on the Rock.
The Cock is heard from the Booth;
More than half the Night is passed.
The Housewife groping in the Gloom
Rekindles the settled Fire.
The Hunter thinks it Day,
And calls his nimble Dog:
He ascends the Hill,
And whistles the Road away:
A Blast removes the Cloud;
He sees the starry Plough of the North:
Much of the Night is to pass;
He nods by the mossy Stone.
Hark, the Whirlwind is in the Wood;
Low Murmurs on the Plain.
It Is the Army of the mighty Dead
Returning from the Air!
The Moon rests behind the Hill;
The Beam is still on the lofty Rock;
Long are the Shades of the Trees:
But now it is dark over all.
Night's dreary, silent and dark!
Receive me, my Friends, from the Night.
SIXTH BARD. (The Chief himself.)
LET Clouds rest on the Hill,
Spirits fly, and Travelers fear;
Let the Winds of the Wood arise,
The sounding Storm descend;
Roar Streams and Windows clap,
And green-winged Meteors fly;
Rise the pale Moon on the Mountain,
Or enclose her Head in Clouds,
Night is alike to me,
Blue, gloomy, or stormy the Sky.
Night flies, and her goblin Crew,
When Morn is poured on the Hills;
Light returns from the Gloom:
But we return no more!
Where are our Chiefs of old?
Where our Kings of modern Name?
The Fields whereon they fought are silent;
Scarce their mossy Tombs remain.
We too shall be forgot;
This lofty House shall fall:
Our Sons shall scarce see its Ruins on the Grass,
And shall ask, Where dwelt our Fathers?
Raise the Song, strike the Harp,
Send around the Shell They drank out of a Shell, as great Numbers do still.
of Joy;
Suspend a hundred Tapers on high,
Maids and Youths begin the Dance.
Some grey-lock'd Bard be near,
And sing the Deeds of other Times;
Of Kings renowned in Albion,
Of Chiefs we see no more.
Thus pass the Night,
Till Morn is gray in our Hall;
Then be the Bow in Hand,
The Dogs and Youth of the Chase;
We ascend the Hill with Day,
And rouse the flying Deer.
LETTER XLIII. R. G --, Esquire. to Mr. HULL.
June 16. Dear HULL,
I SAFE arrived in Somersetshire, after two pleasant and easy Days Journey, and
am now set down to write to you, according to my Promise, and to note what
Alterations or Innovations I had observed upon, in the Modes and Manners of
London, since I had not been there so long before.

This Chapter is reduced to so few Heads, from the several Conversations we had
together in Town, upon the taking down the Signs, the rooting up the Posts, the
paving and lighting of Oxford-Road, Holborn, Monmouth-Street, and St. Giles's,
the constructing of Black-Friars-Bridge, etc. that I cannot recollect any other
Remark I made worth mentioning, at present, except the introducing of Asses in
the City, for the Use of Milkmen, Fruiterers, Hawkers, etc.

This I thought a great Improvement, as it serves to lessen the Number of
Barrows that used to interrupt Walkers on the broad Pavements; but this
Consideration was damped again at seeing the barbarous Treatment these poor
Animals often suffer from their brutal Guides or Riders. I often thought of
STERN upon these Occasions. See a Passage about an Ass in his Sentimental
Journey.
An Ass is a dull, slow Creature, that will not mend its Pace for Whip or Spur
-- This these Wretches call Obstinacy, and so punish it for a Defect of Nature,
as they would for a moral Vice: for if they reason at all, you may be sure they
reason thus, because it is wrong.

This has renewed a Reflection in my Mind, that has often occurred to me
before, upon the unaccountable Disposition toward Cruelty exercised against
the Brute-Creation, which is too frequently observed among the general Classes
of Mankind, who have not been restrained by natural Sentiment, or refined by a
liberal Education.

If Sympathy, as modern Philosophers assert, be the ultimate Cause of our being
affected for others, that of Pain, one would think, should be the strongest.
All Men do not feel Misfortunes, or suffer Grief, alike. One Person may resent
a Mortification, or a Loss, to Madness; while his more temperate Friend can
afford his Pity or Compassion no higher or further than his own Passions or
Sentiments would have extended in the same Circumstances. Here Sympathy is at
an End. But all Persons and Animals too are alike sensible of Pain -- Ergo --

We have from hence Reason to conclude, that it is more from Want of Thought,
than of Humanity, that the contrary is so apparent; and this Argument, I think,
is fully proved by the Observation, that Children and Fools are the most guilty
of it.

Besides which, there is a great deal in Custom, that may take off from the
natural Feelings of Compassion, with Regard to the Brute-Creation, among
Numbers of People, such as Butchers, Surgeons, Soldiers, etc. A Fishwoman being
reprehended for the Barbarity of fleaing Eels alive, answered, that it was no
Cruelty, as they were so much used to it; which was plainly transferring the
Insensibility she had herself acquired, through Habit, to the poor suffering
Reptile. This puts me in Mind of the Blunder of an Irish Parliament once, that
framed an Act to punish Forgery with the Loss of both Ears, and so toties
quoties.

There is also, I apprehend, a Sort of Notion resting in uninstructed Minds,
that Morality has nothing to do with our Actions toward Brutes, any more than
it has with Regard to inanimate Nature; so that many Folks, from such a strange
Misconception, torture an Animal with as little Remorse as they would lop off
the Branch of a Tree. Such People must never have read the Sentence of SOLOMON,
that a good Man is merciful to his Beast; nor that of SHAKESPEARE, "The poor
Beetle that we tread upon,
"In corp'ral Suff'rance feels a Pang as great
"As when a Giant dies."


I remember I was once sitting with a Friend, and seeing his Son tormenting a
poor Dog, by making him suffer great Pain, I spoke to the Father, to reprove
him for it; to which he coolly answered, that as he designed the Boy for the
Army, he did not care to inspire him with too tender Feelings. "Your Idea might
not be much amiss," I replied, "if you meant to breed him a Butcher, or a
Hangman." What a Gothic Notion, that Bravery and Humanity were incompatible!

OVID seems to have been of my Opinion in the above Reproof, by making Priests,
who were the first Butchers, or Sacrificers, to have led the Way to Cruelty and
Slaughter -- Primoque a caede Ferarum
Incaluisse putem maculatum sanguine Ferrum.
I will not say, however, that this may be the Reason why Parsons and Butchers
are equally excluded from being on Juries of Life and Death, because there
would be a Sort of pert Dullness in the Remark -- Asking Pardon for the
Tautology -- No; the true Reason for these Exclusions is, that the latter are
rendered callous, from being too familiar with Slaughter; and with Regard to
the former, that the Ministers of Peace should keep clear of Blood.

A Thought has just occurred to me. I have not Leisure both to examine and to
write it too, so I shall only sport it for the present. Perhaps, the Injunction
in the Levitical Law, to abstain from Blood, might not have been meant in
Derogation of Black-Puddings in the least, but only as a figurative Manner of
repeating the Sixth Commandment, "Thou shall do no Murder."

A Comment upon the Inhibition of PYTHAGORAS, Abstine a Fabis, Abstain from
Beans.
has hinted this Notion to me; for the learned BACON, which Name, you know,
accords very well with Beans, says, that what the Sage intended by the
Prohibition was, to forbid meddling with the Contentions and Strife of
Electioneering, where the Votes or Suffrages were given, pro and con, by black
and white Beans.

And this Interpretation ought certainly to appear the true Sense of the
Precept, from this Consideration; for as that Philosopher had before restricted
his Disciples from the Use of all animal Food, on Account of the transmigratory
Notions he had picked up in India, he could not possibly have been so
unconscionable, as to have laid any Manner of Restraint on the vegetable
Product of the Earth.

Yours, etc. R. G --.

LETTER XLIV. Mrs. -- to Mr. HULL, of Covent Garden Theater.
THE great Respect you, Sir, have shown to Mr. SHENSTONE, in dedicating your
Tragedy of ROSAMOND to his Memory, added to the Pleasure I have received from
some of your other Publications, will, I trust, plead an Excuse for an
Intrusion from a Stranger, and especially as it is to beg your Acceptance of
the enclosed Poem; it was written by that Friend whose Death you so feelingly
lament; it has been in my Possession ever since, or before that Period: of its
Merits I am no Judge; but from its Author, should imagine it not destitute, and
have long regretted its remaining in Hands so little capable of making it
appear as it ought. The sincere Pleasure I received, in seeing Mr. SHENSTONE's
Name so respectfully and publicly revived, induced me to wish to make the
Author some Acknowledgment, and this appears to be the only Way; for should not
the Diamond have Brilliancy enough for the Public, yet it may not be an
unwelcome Amusement to a private Friend, to remove the Dimness.

I should much sooner have made this Acknowledgment, but from a Diffidence of
its being accepted; however, I hope the best, and that you will be kind enough
to accept it as it is meant. Should it prove worthy of Notice, and acceptable
to so partial a Friend, I shall hope, (as I have no Copy) to receive your
Opinion; and must request it as a particular Favor, that to any Friend you
choose to show it, my Name may not be mentioned; on that Account I decline
saying any Thing of myself. My Address is, etc.

Permit me to hope you will excuse the Errors of a weak Pen, and believe me,
Sir,

Your obliged humble Servant, M. --.
Dec. 28, 1774.
THE DIAMOND: A POEM.
CANTO I.
CUPID over human Breasts resistless reigns,
Fierce in his Joys, unrivaled in his Pains;
Not JOVE, when Hypocrites his Shrine adore;
Not JUNO, when her Altars smoke no more;
Not PHOEBUS, when from POPE's encircled Brows
DENNIS would rend the Bays himself bestows,
Resolve such Vengeance, or such Pangs decree,
As owe their Rise, relentless Boy, to thee!
By thee enslaved, MYRTILLO long had known
His Passion lasting, when his Hopes were flown;
MYRTILLO, framed to make even Toasts adore,
And blessed by Fortune much, by Nature more;
Swift over the Spinnet-Keys his Fingers flew,
And, Love except, to quell each Passion knew.
Such human Art, with Joy APOLLO viewed,
And with some Graces from his own endu'd;
From him, when lost ADONIS caused her Grief,
Even Cytherea might have heard Relief:
But, ah! to every Charm, to every Grace,
That decked his Words, or sparkled in his Face,
Endeared his Person, or his Thoughts refined,
The Nymph alone, he loved, alone was blind.
Each other Belle the slighted Charms admired,
Each other Belle the slighted Heart desired;
With practiced Airs they strove to please the Swain,
With practiced Airs they purchased fresh Disdain.
No bright enamored Fair could ever incline
The Heart LAMIRA fired without Design.
Where could he fly? From whence his Anguish ease?
The Play, the Park, the Ring, no more could please;
Each radiant Beau, with jealous Fury fired,
And Solitude and Sounds, with Love conspired.
To CUPID thus, while Music's tuneful Aid
Sadden'd each Note, the Boy in Anguish prayed:
"Harmonious Power! Accept these mournful Strains,
"Reward my Passion, or remove my Pains;
"If ever thy Praise with early Care I sing,
"If ever thy Praise inspire my Evening String,
"Oh! grant the Arts which make thy Glory known,
"May move LAMIRA's Breast, or ease my own."
APOLLO heard, and listening to his Grief,
Sent MAIA's nimble Son to bring Relief;
His Message known, he cleaves the yielding Skies,
And quick as Lightning to the Suppliant flies;
Ruffled with Winds, he shakes his azure Plumes,
And round the Place diffused divine Perfumes;
Then thus begins -- "MYRTILLO cease to grieve,
"And from the Delphian Power these Notes receive;
"Think not by Sounds thy Passion to remove,
"The Breath of Music fans the Fires of Love;
"Think not to Music bends a female Ear;
"(Flattery, the only Sound the Fair can hear!)
"With Flattery charm her, or with Pomp assail,
"Those last dear Arts with Females to prevail.
"Nursed by APOLLO long, with genial Care,
"This powerful Present from the God I bear;
"These he prescribes, with these he bids pursue,
"No mortal Female these untouched shall view."
Thus ends the God, and in a Moment flies,
Whilst on the Board a Shagreen Casket lies.
Long Fragrance fills the Room, the sable Box
The Maid with pious, trembling Hand unlocks;
She opes, out fly ten thousand glittering Rays,
And hide the Substance, through a mingled Blaze;
The Radiance charms; but when with raptured Eyes,
And nearer View, she pierced the bright Disguise;
When the gay Brilliant's Luster shone confessed,
She closed the Box, and joyous thought the rest.
A Joy like this, harmonious ORPHEUS knew,
When, wondrous Husband! to the Shades he flew,
And wandering 'long the Gloom, with glad Surprise
Perceived at last, his Consort's sparkling Eyes.
Ah! dear BRILLANTE! few thy Story know,
Whose Beauties in this Gem eternal glow;
Yet shall the pious Muse the Tale relate,
And with her Verse adorn BRILLANTE's Fate.
Of humble Birth the bright Enchanter came,
Unequal to her Beauty, Wit, or Fame;
Deep in a lonely Vale she shone retired,
Few saw the Maid, but all who saw admired;
She shunned no Virtue, though she sought no Praise,
And passed in quiet unexpos'd her Days;
Much had she heard the various Toils that wait
The Pride of Riches, and the Pomp of State;
Much her fond Mother taught, with pious Care,
And latest Breath, 'twas dangerous to be fair.
"BRILLY," she cried, "my tender Child, farewell,
"Shun the gay Court, and grace this humble Cell;
"There various Arts for Innocence are laid,
"To ruin Youth, and trap the unwary Maid;
"Charms in an humble State may prove a Snare,
"But placed on high, they cheat the nicest Care.
"Let every Rule my living Care supplied,
"When I Am unheard of, be thy Virtue's Guide;
"And every Maxim given preserve in Store
"To guard those Charms I now must view no more. --
"Adieu -- If ever the Wiles of Courts you see,
"And weak'ning Virtue faulter, think of me."
Fresh Charms adorned her, as more Years she knew,
Her Fame extended as her Beauties grew;
A rigid Sternness all her Beauties armed,
Which every faint minute Approach alarmed.
The opening Rose shone in her Cheeks refined,
And, like its guardian Thorn, her Virtue joined.
The wondering Prince received at length her Fame,
And to the Court conveyed the unwilling Dame;
The unwilling Dame to please he vainly strove,
Too soon she raised, but never returned his Love.
Here long she shone untainted and the same,
And as her Virtue, spotless was her Fame;
By Arts unsoften'd, though by Arts improved,
Her Charms moved all, by Charms herself unmoved.
APOLLO burned -- But since the Fair could prove
In courts uninjur'd, still restrained his Love,
And wondering, swore, a Nymph so fair, so chaste,
In Fame's Memorial, by the Power should last;
Hence, when to Dust dissolved, his shining Frame
Contracting, soon a glittering Gem became;
Charms not inferior still the Stone retains,
And wounding all, itself untouched remains.
These signal Honors LOVE indignant bore,
And vowed to raze them, or his own restore.
"If thus," he cried, "BRILLANTE void of Pain,
"Could all my Arrows, all my Arts sustain,
"Yet shall her Fate assist my slighted Bow,
"And raise those Joys, she never deserved to know;
"For me her Gem its Luster shall employ,
"For me her Patron's hourly Rays enjoy,
"For me over yielding Panes victorious move,
"And paint in amorous Lines the immortal Feats of LOVE."
THE DIAMOND. CANTO II.
NOW Sol to western Climes directs his Blaze,
And gilds LAMIRA's Couch with parting Rays,
The Hour, when Nymphs on airy Substance prey,
And thinly feed on Scandal and on Tea.
The Moment comes -- the Visitants are seen,
With Tales replete, and grossly filled with Spleen;
The powdered Valet trips in neat Array;
Bright on the Tea-Board shines the glittering Clay;
There artful China, pictured Grots and Bowers,
Hills, Rivers, Valleys, Turrets, Meads and Flowers.
Bright azure Pastures, deep impervious Shades,
Deserving Swains, and not ungrateful Maids;
Beneath a clouded Beach a Shepherd lay,
And with blue Fingers played, or seemed to play,
The generous Nymphs forsook the neighboring Plains,
To court his Passion, or admire his Strains;
The eager Painter formed too quick the Glance,
And Thirst of Gain had spoiled the mimic Dance,
(Oh, hateful Avarice! ever doomed to prove
The Bane of Arts, and much unkind to Love)
The gazing Flocks, and softly-treading Fawns,
With Ears up-lifted seem to skim the Lawns:
Full twice a Day can this LAMIRA view,
Yet hear unmoved her Swain his Notes renew?
The impartial Pot streams equal Shares around,
Scarce on the Bench is greater Justice found;
The Sugar sinks, like Zembla's Hills of Snow,
Whenever decending Tides their Tops overflow,
The soft Imperial breaths a fragrant Fume,
And from each Check calls forth reviving Bloom;
But chief LAMIRA, doubly formed to please,
Shone Beauty's Queen, amidst her infant Seas.
Hail, favorite Plant! whose fragrant Scent inspires
The Statesman's Projects, and the Poet's Fires.
Hail, ever-lov'd! and though sometimes you flow
A Friend to Scandal, never to Wit a Foe.
A beauteous Nymph (Oh, had she been but free
From Scandal's Taint) eternal breathes in thee:
Ah! let the Muse (what Female can contain
A Secret known) poor THEA's Fate explain.
THEA a Nymph, whom ENVY, wandering over
This nether World, to artful MOMUS bore;
Too soon she knew no Scandal to conceal,
And learnt to raise it, or when raised reveal;
Her stamm'ring Tongue was framed to lisp Disgrace;
But when she spoke, all Merit left the Place!
Her careful Parents as she grew displayed
Each various Branch of Slander's mystic Trade;
The Look sincere, the deep persuasive Wile,
The Frown tremendous, and more dreadful Smile,
The Wink, which more than real Blame instills,
Pity that murders, and Concern that kills,
Malicious Whisp'rings, ever fatal found,
Which, like retiring Parthians, doubly wound,
Wit to invent, and Malice to declare
Disgrace on all the Witty, Chaste or Fair.
All these they taught, and what they taught enjoined,
And viewed themselves in THEA more refined.
Ah, thoughtless Pair! your fatal Kindness leave,
Nor bless those Arts for which you once must grieve.
The Nymph with these, and Arts like these, endu'd,
Charms, Virtue, Wit, with artful Spite pursued.
From Earth's Abodes, at length exiled the Fair,
To Heaven confined and persecuted there;
There, blending Vice with Virtue, Truth with Lies,
Left not one Virgin to adorn the Skies.
She told why Deities admire Perfumes,
And traced the heavenly Rise of Black-Lead Combs;
Gave Hints, what Stays mechanic PALLAS wore,
And why DIANA chased the sylvan Boar;
What Muse forgot her Eye-brow Box she showed,
And why AURORA's Face with Crimson glowed;
She knew that Virgin Vestal was no Saint,
And JUNO's Toilette shone with Floods of Paint;
That VENUS sure from Nature never would swerve,
But for Ambrosia, Ivory Teeth might serve.
Revenge and Rage the offended Powers alarms,
For heavenly Breasts terrestrial Fury warms;
Conscious of Virtue some with Rage o'erflow'd;
Of Guilt the most with deeper Crimson glowed.
As once, DIANA chased along the Glade
Her usual Prey, she spied the ill-fated Maid,
"And, take," she cried, "from CYNTHIA's Bow the Fate,
"Which injured Fame exacts, alas! too late!"
She said -- the Javelin pierced her tender Side,
And the moist Turf with guilty Crimson died;
Quick on the Turf a rising Plant was seen,
Which bears her Name, and blooms for ever green.
Now Tea and Coffee spire in Steams no more,
And Cups inverted show the Banquet over;
Not so the Slander -- SILVIA's Hand sustains
A Cup enriched with nine important Grains;
From hence the Fair the Fall of Modes discerns,
And Life's Events in typic Visions learns;
The Fair's important Annals hence relates,
And with soft ruby Lips unfolds the Fates;
Yet now her own for Fortune's Will displays,
And guides those Laws which JOVE himself obeys:
For gay SELINDA, Visits, Journeys, News,
And one poor Lover at a Distance views;
In CHLOE's hapless Dish, more deeply brown,
The sable Honors of a Parson's Gown;
LIVONIA's yields Groves, Meadows, Fields and Lawns,
And in her own, a Star obscurely dawns.
"Tell me," she cries, "why that small Meteor shines,
"Which with the Dishes azure Circle joins;"
But, ah! what Pen, LAMIRA, shall explain
Thy Anger, Scorn, Resentment and Disdain,
When she, too partial to the States Decree,
Consigned MYRTILLO, hapless Maid, to thee?
"Revenge, revenge," she cries, "insulting Dame!
"Shall Charms like mine, inferior Vot'rys claim?
"I too might boast" -- The vaunting Females rise,
And each loud Voice united, rends the Skies.
Their Vict'ries, Spoils, and Triumphs, each avers,
Earnest in vain! for none is heard or hears.
So in those Days, when JOVE in frantic Mirth,
Vouchsafed to comfort humble Maids on Earth,
If one ambitious made her Conquest known,
Each vaunting Female bragged the Case her own.
Parting, they vow Revenge; they vow in vain,
The Fair's Diversions soon unite again.
CUPID mean Time had from MYRTILLO flew,
And on the Table drops a Billet-doux.
Thither to seek the Glass's timely Aid,
For ruffled Features, hy'd the abandoned Maid:
But soon her Charms their usual Force renewed,
When on the Board the well-known Shape she viewed;
She eyes the Wax, adorned with rubric Darts,
And in the Opening, breaks three flaming Hearts.
"A Ticket -- hum -- the Name concealed I find;
"'It Is much in vain -- his Lordship's wondrous kind.
"Dear Music! Well! -- If Bliss above be given,
"And Nymphs have Souls -- sure Music is our Heaven."
Ah, thoughtless Maid! to seek the fatal Place,
So long decreed MYRTILLO's Power to raise;
There first thine Eyes devoured the treacherous Blaze,
There first thine Eyes occurred with rival Rays;
At every Chord the fatal Luster streams,
And the gay Ring re-gilds un-number'd Beams.
How killing every Sound when Splendor fires!
How powerful every Ray when Sound conspires!
No more, frail Nymph, unmoved she sees or hears,
But drinks deep Poison in at Eyes and Ears.
THE DIAMOND. CANTO III.
NOW from Earth's Surface pearly Spangles rise,
The Morning Star no more adorns the Skies,
And PHOEBUS issuing in unclouded Bloom,
Had woke a brighter to supply its Room,
LAMIRA rose -- but different far her Mien,
Far changed her Looks, from what they late were seen;
Uneasy Thoughts each altered Feature showed,
And her dear Cheek with fev'rish Crimson glowed,
The Looks of Care yet lovely still she bore,
And Grief but changed the Charms revealed before.
"DORIS, she cried," "what anxious Cares infest,
"What Doubts disquiet my ill-fated Breast?
"Were not my Pride superior to my Pain,
"I could not slight the Boy with mere Disdain;
"With such high Raptures every Gesture fired,
"Such more than usual Bliss his Strains inspired,
"Some heavenly Power -- nor let vain Tongues deny
"The serious Truth -- invests the favorite Boy.
"When soothing Accents lulled the Lover's Pains,
"And ARIADNE closed the dying Strains,
"The Loves and Graces joined in wanton Play,
"And with the softening Thrills I died away.
"How cursed this lingering live-long Night has flown
"In sleepless Hours, or Sleep to Rest unknown.
"Perplexed awake, in vain I Sleep implored,
"Sleep to my Eyes the fatal Form restored;
"Through shapeless Ways fatigued, by Fancy borne,
"In frantic Rage I cursed the loit'ring Morn;
"Over pathless Downs methought he wildly flew,
"Still as he ran, my eager Passion grew.
"In vain, with Toil successless, I pursued;
"In vain, with eager Hope, the Chase renewed.
"How wild are Dreams! -- the Brilliant's silver Ray
"Seemed from his Hand to point the wished for Way;
"Still with repeated Strife I seek the Chase,
"Still the swift Boy eludes my sought Embrace:
"Sometimes I heard some faint imperfect Strains
"Divinely warble over the echoing Plains;
"Moved by the Winds, his Tresses sweetly flowed,
"And more than mortal in each Feature glowed.
"Tell me, whence spring the Tortures I endure;
"If this be Love, or if it be, to cure.
"Fate sure these Charms for other Flames designed,
"For other Flames the Cyprian Queen refined.
"To shine the first at Park, at Ring and Ball,
"To see laced Valets wait in Crowds one's Call;
"Still to be envied, to whom this is given --
"Ye Gods! how nearly Earth resembles Heaven!
"Ah, fickle Females! how shall I display
"The Revolutions of one female Day?
"Such numerous Changes in one Hour abound,
"Such the Succession in a Moment found,
"When balanced Passions their short Reign divide,
"And Vanity and Love by Turns subside."
Thus passed the doubtful Day the fault'ring Dame,
Till in Love's favorite Hour MYRTILLO came,
His radiant Buckles now their Charms display,
And set in Sable, shine profusely gay.
But when he danced, she gazed with raptured Eyes,
And raptured Love unreal Charms supplies;
No longer now unmoved she slights his Pains,
But every Look, her yielding Soul explains,
Each tender Glance her fluttering Heart alarms,
Each Action fires her, and each Motion charms.
This erring Nymphs an Air, a Grace may call --
Oh, blind to Truth! -- The Brilliant forms it all. This was written before the
Snuff Box, at the Time I lived at Harborough, perhaps about the Year 1734, and
has a more simple Plan than the other; but has little or nothing to recommend
it besides. W. SHENSTONE.

LETTER XLV. Mrs. W -- to Mr. HULL.
PERMIT me, Sir, to assure you, that to me your Manner of receiving what I
thought only a due Acknowledgment to your disinterested Friendship, more than
even acquits a real Obligation, as well as gives me a sincere Pleasure in
reflecting, that what I esteemed is at last in the Hands of one who will
equally value its intrinsic Worth, and is so much more capable of introducing
it properly to the public Inspection; such I imagine is your Intention, and I
most willingly receive the Favor you offer, of letting me know your
Determination; for why may I not look upon the Friend of a Gentleman, whose
Memory I esteem, in the Number of my own? Give me leave so to do, and as such
to present the Compliments of the Season to you and Mrs. HULL, with cordial
Wishes for your seeing many happy Returns.

The Manner of the Diamond is similar to the Poem you mention; POPE's Rape of
the Lock.
but if I may, without exposing my Judgment, speak the Truth, I give the former
the Preference, even against POPE, and this because I think there is greater
Delicacy of Sentiment: but what else could be expected from a Mind, the
Characteristics of which were refined Sensibility, and unbounded Benevolence?
Though, as I cannot express more than I believe you think, I will stop my Pen,
by saying, that I trust you will allow your own Wish, relative to the
Snuff Box, as a Plea for my so soon troubling you with another Letter, and that
I remain, with due Respect,

SIR, Your obliged and obedient humble Servant, Mrs. W --.
Monday Night, Jan. 16, 1775. P. S. I thank you for the two Inscriptions to the
Memory of our amiable Friend. They would have been agreeable Companions to some
of the same Turn already printed at the End of his Works, by Mr. DODSLEY. That
which was wrote by CUNNINGHAM is possessed of genuine Elegance and Sensibility.
I dare say you think so. Those you have sent, affect me in the same Manner;
particularly the Prose-Tribute, which you tell me came from a female Pen. I
think I can guess the Writer, and would, when next I see her, challenge a
Confession, were I sure I could do it without wounding her Delicacy of Feeling.

The Elegy I also admire much. The Thoughts of the Author are equally tender
and benevolent with those of the Friend, whose Memory he so pathetically
laments. The last Lines of the second Stanza particularly please me.



INSCRIPTION Alluded to in the foregoing Letter.
On the left Side Monument thereby-dignified Owner.

M. M --.

ELEGY Referred to in the foregoing Postscript.
WHEN Music awakens the Grove,
Soft-breathing the pastoral Note,
Ye Shepherds, who know how to love,
Be CORYDON never forgot!
Of Swains the most tender and kind,
Now low in the Dust is he laid --
Ye, who knew not his elegant Mind,
Ah, me! -- What a Loss have ye had!
His Feelings were mild as the Air,
That pants on the Bosom of May;
His Truth as the Sunbeam was clear,
And his Heart was as open as Day:
When a neighboring Swain was in Grief,
His Wants he would gladly supply;
If his Acres denied the Relief,
Like him would he sadden and sigh.
His Verse was the Pride of the Grove,
His Song to the Valley was dear,
And the Shepherd, who knows how to Love,
Still hallows his Name with a Tear.
When the Village is folded in Sleep,
And Midnight invelopes the Skies,
The Muses still cluster, still weep,
Over the Turf where our CORYDON lies.
LETTER LVI. R. G --, Esquire. to Mr. HULL.
Dear, etc.
I Received your Letter, and it has astonished me, that you can be in the least
Degree hurt by the Opinion of narrow Minds. With Regard to the Grievance you
complain of; let it be always a Matter of Consolation to you, that the
illiberal Treatment Actors may sometimes meet with, on Account of their
Profession, can never proceed from any but illiberal Minds; it is the Censurers
themselves who become Objects of Contempt, when they would render you so, from
that Consideration merely: and this Reflection ought therefore to make you as
indifferent to such Instances of Ignorance and Ill-breeding, as you would be to
a Billingsgate Scold, or a St. Giles's Abuse.

An Actor is a respectable Character, while he properly considers, and
endeavors to preserve the original Design of his Profession; and I have ever
been of Opinion, and am convinced of the Truth of the Maxim, that acting should
unquestionably be accepted among the Liberal Arts, even with this Advantage
over Poetry and Painting, that it superadds Example to Document and Delight.
It Is the living Moral, while the others are but the dead Letter. The Stage is a
School, and may be an useful one too -- As such it was patronized and cherished
by the wisest and most virtuous States of Greece and Rome; and it has been the
Fault of Managers, not of Actors, whenever Theaters have ceased to afford
either Precept or Example.

There are so many Requisites of Talents, Assiduity, and Person, to form a
complete Actor, that even a moderate Degree of Excellence should be deemed
sufficient Merit to entitle a Performer to the public Favor and Indulgence: to
which, if an honest, decent and unexceptionable Repute be joined, I can see no
Sort of Reason, in the Nature or Distinction of Things, why the Sock and Buskin
should not be admitted ad eundem with the Goif and Cowl; so that it must be the
personal Character, and not the Dramatis Personae, that can ever debase your
Profession; in which Predicament, both the Parson and the Lawyer stand equally
with you.

But, indeed, the World, that illiberal Part of it which you hint at, are apt
to consider us Authors, also, in the same inferior Light they do Actors. I
remember a Friend of mine, sometime ago, was cast off by his Father, for having
published a very ingenious Poem, while he was a Student at the Temple; and
another Acquaintance was severely reproved by his Relations, for having married
a Lady, every other Way worthy of his Choice, because she had written a Book.

Such curious Censors, I suppose, would despise the Meanness of my Spirit now,
if I should declare to them, that I would rather have been HOMER or VIRGIL,
than ALEXANDER or AUGUSTUS; and ROSCIUS the Actor, than the Tribune of the same
Name; though the latter was a Sort of Manager, as may be proved by his having
framed the Lex Roscia, for the Regulation of the Theater at Rome. But it might
possibly reconcile them to me again, if I should confess this common Foible of
human Nature, at the same Time, that fond as I am of Fame, I would yet rather
be even what I am myself now, than the best of them all then. This is some Sort
of Qualification to the former Sentiment.

I shall here conclude my Letter to you, with entreating, that you will
continue to defeat the Malice of such ignorant Censors, by an uniform Attention
to the Spirit and Utility of that Walk in Life, which either Fortune, or your
own Choice, has led you into. Elevate your Crest; take (...), for your Motto,
and study the following Lines which this Subject has just brought to my Mind.

Pro Libitu imponunt peragendas Numina Parts.
Tu pulchre peragas; caetera mitte Deo.
Si recte tractes, Laus est tractare secundas;
Summa etiam parvis gloria Rebus inest.
Explodam, CAESAR, male si mandata loqueris,
Atque idem plaudam, si been DAVUS agit.
Et vitam dubitamus adhuc extendere factis!
Tu meritis, si non Tempore, vive diu.
Ni facinus dignum tam Longo admisseris Aevo,
Dicetur, NESTOR, vel tua Vita brevis.
Quandocunque exis, sit Cura exire decenter,
Et plausu exactum Turba coronet Opus.
UNDE NESCIO. Farewell -- Despise low-minded Censurers. The Drama subsists for
the Propagation and Improvement of moral Virtue. Wise Men know this. Your
Profession has to you answered the dearest and best Purposes -- (You know
whereto I allude) -- Be grateful for the Benefits, and do not let Fools put you
out of Conceit with it.

Yours affectionately, R. G --.

LETTER LVII. This Letter (like some others in this Collection) is purposely
misplaced in Point of Date, in Order to connect Matter rather than Periods --
the ensuing being wholly from one Correspondent, and comprehending, among them,
Observations on the Venetian Republic.
Miss N -- to Mr. HULL.
Venice, Oct. 10, 1765. Dear Sir,
WHEN you undertook to be the Amanuensis, as well as the Receiver-General to
the agreeable Society I have left with so much Regret, I remember you charged
me to write as soon as I should reach this Place; I accordingly begin my Task,
and am very happy to have an Opportunity of writing to you a good long Letter,
without the Expense of Postage, which I have not the Vanity to suppose my
Epistles deserve; I send this by a pretty Sort of Man, whose Name is --, and
who, I should suppose, has some strong Attachment in your County, which induces
him to take so long a Journey at this rude Season of the Year.

We were very fortunate in Weather, and found the Roads as good as the Nature
of the Country will allow them to be. Some Parts of Savoy is frightfully wild
and dreary, other Parts very romantic and beautiful. I was vastly amused with
the Manner of crossing Mount Cenis: the Chair we are carried in, or rather on,
resemble a good deal a Chinese Palanquin, only they want a Canopy over them;
the Chairmen are certainly the best in the World, or it would be both dangerous
and frightful; it seems to me, that they have the Strength of Mules, and the
Agility of Goats, for they run down the Precipices, and bound from Rock to
Rock, in a most astonishing Manner. The Ascent of the Mountain is three Miles,
on the Side of Savoy, the Plain on the Top, six Miles in Length, and the
Descent on the Turin Side, six Miles more; we had four Men to each of the
Ladies' Chairs, and six to the Gentlemen's, and after carrying us these fifteen
dreadful Miles, they were quite delighted that our Party took them on from
Novalese (a small Town at the Foot of Mount Cenis) to Susa, which is nine Miles
further, and they carried us the last three Leagues in an Hour and a Half,
laughing and jesting with each other all the Way, as if they had been doing a
Thing merely for Sport and Amusement; so you see, my dear Sir, how visible the
Goodness of Providence is to all Creatures; these poor Souls, who spend all
their Lives in the utmost Indigence, and inhabit a Country that seems only fit
for Savages, if they are denied the Luxuries of Life, are amply repaid, in the
Enjoyment of a double Portion of Health and Strength.

We stopped a few Days at Lions, Turin, Milan and Verona, and saw every Thing
worthy a Stranger's Curiosity, in each of these fine Cities; nothing amused me
more, than seeing a Parcel of Angels walking about the Streets of Milan, they
were fine Cherry-cheek'd Boys, ready dressed for a grand Procession that was
preparing for the Day following, in Honor of the Virgin Mary's Birthday.
Venice is a very magnificent Place, and possesses the Charm of Novelty in a
much higher Degree than any of the other Places I have named; it is impossible
to give a stronger Idea of it, it is in a Style so peculiar to itself. The
Masking is begun, which is extremely entertaining: I should be excessively
happy to pop in amongst your dear Society some Day, when you are all assembled;
I assure you, it would be no small Surprise to see me in a Venetian Dress; it
consists of a long black silk Cloak, called here a Tabora, a Baouta, which is
made of black Lace, three Quarters of a Yard long, and five Times as wide, and
hangs about the Shoulders like a Petticoat; it has a Hood to it, which, when
you choose to be concealed, covers the bottom Part of the Face to the upper
Lip, the rest is hid by a white Mask, and the Women wear on their Heads a Man's
Hat smartly cocked; the Venetian Women, who are rather masculine in their
Manner, look still more so in this Dress.

We have had the Prince of Brunswick here for ten Days, which made the Town all
alive. I will describe to you one of the Entertainments made for him, and that
will serve as a Specimen of all the Rest. Our Resident had not got then into
his Palace, (as it is justly called, for it is indeed a noble one) so that he
could not make any Entertainments for the Prince, but he gave him some
excellent Music one Morning in a private Manner, which he seemed to enjoy the
more for being so. The Night after his Highness's Arrival, Count DURAZZO, the
Imperial Ambassador, invited all the English, the foreign Nobility that don't
belong to Venice, and all the foreign Ministers, to meet the Prince at Supper.
The Ambassadress received her Guests with mingled Grace and Dignity, she is
really a fine Woman, and her Beauty was heightened by all the Elegance of
Dress; soon after the Company were assembled, a most delightful Serenade began
upon the Water, which was not only delightful to the Ear, but formed a very
beautiful Object to the Sight, for the Musicians were placed in a large open
Barge finely illuminated; the Harmony drew around them an infinite Number of
Gondolas belonging to the noble Venetians, who could no otherwise partake of
this Feast; for by their Laws they are secluded from all Commerce with
Strangers that are in a public Character. At proper Intervals of the Music, all
Sorts of Refreshments, of Ices, Fruits, Sweat-meats, Lemonades, etc. etc. were
presented to the Company, who, when they had listened to the Serenade for some
Time, changed the Scene, either sat down to Cards, or formed little chatting
Parties. When the Card-Tables broke up, a very elegant Concert, composed of a
few choice Pieces of Music, performed by the very best Hands, agreeably filled
up Time, till a most magnificent Supper was served. When the Company rose from
Table, Coffee was brought, which is the Custom here after Supper, as well as
after Dinner; when this was over, a superb Barge attended, in which the Prince,
and all the Ladies, and a suitable Number of Gentlemen were placed, and rowed
to St. Mark's (which is the only public Place here for walking) followed by the
Music, the rest of the Company in their Gondolas, and those of the noble
Venetians which the Harmony had attracted. After walking for some Time to enjoy
the cool Air, the Company retired to a very elegant Apartment, which the
Ambassadress has on the Place of St. Mark, where she receives her Company, when
she chooses to be in private. When we had chatted here for Half an Hour, it was
found to be a proper Time to retire, as it was three o'Clock in the Morning;
and so ended this agreeable Even, every Part of which was employed in some
innocent Amusement, without any Thing being hurried or confused. I have been
the more particular in this Account, that you may see, my good Friend, that
Taste and Elegance is no more wanting in Venice, than it is in the gay
Metropolis of Britain.

I hope you will soon indulge me with a Letter, and that it will bring me a
good Account of yourself, and every worthy Individual of our Friends in
Friendship assembled; send it in a Frank to Mr. L --, in -- Street, London, and
he will put it in his Excellency's Packet: it must be but a single Letter, but
I hope it will contain a good deal. I long to hear that your good Mother is
well re-established in her Health, she is a worthy Soul, and one cannot help
wishing such People to live for ever; I hope, my dear Friend, though such a
cruel Distance divides us, that I am not esteemed the less a Member of the
friendly Society, than if I was with you; I find the same Warmth of Affection
toward the happy Circle, as if I was not an Absentee, therefore beg you will
give my best Affections to all the happy Members.

I went the other Day to see the Ceremony of a Nun taking the last Veil, and
it is very awful and melancholy, and, to speak honestly and unprudishly, does
not inspire me with the least Desire to be a Nun: first, the divine Service is
performed with very fine Music, both vocal and instrumental, in the Church of
the Convent; then a little Door is opened in the Grate of the private Chapel,
before which the Nun is seated on a Chair of State under a Canopy, with a
Prayer Book in her Hand, till the Service is finished; she then comes forward,
and kneeling at the Grate, repeats to a Priest the Vows of the Order, and
promises Obedience to the Abbess; she then rises, and the Nuns take off her
white Veil, and put on a black one, after which she kneels and says some
Prayers: then six of the Sisters advance, and hold over her a purple Pall,
whilst Part of the Funeral-Service is read, during which Time she is supposed
to be dead; they then take away the purple Cloth, and the Abbess places on her
Head a Crown richly ornamented with Jewels, to signify that she dies to the
World and rises again to Glory; she then receives from the Priest a Tablet,
with the Rules of the Order, which she reads over and kisses; then, with the
Tablet in one Hand, and a long wax Taper, ornamented with Wreaths of Flowers,
in the other, she walks slowly round the Chapel, followed by the rest of the
Nuns, and deposits the Tablet on the Altar. Thus ends the melancholy Ceremony.
This young Lady was very pretty, and not above seventeen; we all thought she
had an Appearance of great Constraint in her Cheerfulness, but we were assured,
it was entirely her Choice, that she had a large Fortune, had buried her
Father, and was Mistress of herself; perhaps it may be the Taste of the Family,
for another Sister professed last Year in the same Convent.

As we are but just got to our new Habitation, you will easily suppose nobody
is idle the House, however I was determined I would not lose so fair an
Opportunity of writing to you, so hope you will excuse so vile a Scrawl, and
believe me, when I assure you, there is nothing more true, than that I am, my
good Sir, ever most sincerely and affectionately yours and the Society's,

S. N --.

LETTER LVIII. Miss N --, to Mr. HULL.
Venice, Dec. 25, 1765.
MAY every Blessing of this cheerful Season await you, and every Individual of
the happy Family and Friends you are with! May your Pleasures be unmixed with
Pain, and your Years numerous and happy! -- Receive these fervent Wishes of an
exiled Member of your worthy Society, and be assured, that though you are all
Absent from my Sight, you are ever present to my Mind. I wrote you a long
Letter, near three Months ago, by an Irish Gentleman, who assured me, he should
be in your Part of the World as soon as the Post; when lo, and behold! three
Weeks ago I heard of him at Sienna, where, I suppose, he will stay the Winter;
therefore, as I am quite in the Dark, in Regard to the Fate of my unfortunate
Epistle, I could not be easy till I had again set Pen to Paper, to request you
will all continue to love me as I do you, which I assure you, my dear Sir, is
with undiminished Truth. I believe I told you in my last, how to forward a
Letter to me, but for fear you have never received it, I will repeat it; if you
can send it to any Friend in London, and get them to forward it by the Penny
Post to Mr. L --, in -- Street, he will enclose it in the Secretary of State's
Packet, by which Means, I shall be more certain of getting it safe, than by the
Post, as well as that I shall receive it free.

I have a great Favor, my dear Sir, to beg of you, which is, that you will
procure me a Piece of Information for the Use of our Resident, in Regard to a
young Gentleman who has been at Venice for some Time, and seems in no Hurry to
leave it, owing, as we imagine, to an Attachment to a fair Venetian Lady; his
Name is --, his Family, he says, is settled near F -- in Somersetshire; he
makes a genteel Appearance in Point of Fortune, and seems to be a modest,
pretty behaved young Man, upon which Account, his Excellency wishes to show him
any Civility in his Power; but, at the same Time, would be glad to be rightly
informed, as to his Character and Family, before he receives him in an intimate
Manner. I thought it was very probable, Mr. D -- might know his Father. I have
some Notion, I have heard the Name mentioned at Mr. B -- 's; if, my dear Sir,
you can procure me a particular Account of this young Hero, I shall esteem it
as a great Favor.

I am become wonderfully fond of the masquing Dress, and am told, I wear it
just as well as a Venetian; it is the most comfortable, warm, Walking-Dress that
can be conceived; I have kept House these last nine Days, because it was
prohibited, but tomorrow Masquing begins again, and continues till Lent. I am
told we had an Earthquake, but, thank God, I did not perceive it: since that,
there had been very tempestuous Weather, and violent Snow and Rain, which,
added to a high Tide, overflowed all the Canals, and I cannot but say, at that
Time Venice gave me a strong Idea of the universal Deluge.

There have been five Theaters open till within these nine Days, and I am told,
in the Carnival there will be no less than seven. The comic Opera was very
pleasing, in Point of Music, and always crowded; but the serious Opera nobody
could bear, though MANZOLI sung in it, and TIBALDI, who is reckoned one of the
best tenor Voices, if not the very best, now living. By this you will perceive
how the English and Italian Taste for Music differs; though I must say, I
believe the greatest Admirers of MANZOLI would allow he is much altered for the
worse; for my own Part, had I not remembered his Person, I should not have had
the least Recollection of him from his Voice. The Theater, he performed at, was
entirely fitted up with Glass, both the Stage and all the Boxes, which, when
well lighted, had a fine Effect. There was a Change of the Scenes for one of
the Dances, that was, I think one of the most beautiful Things I ever beheld.

The Italian Comedy does not delight me much, for I do not understand the
Language well enough yet, to be amused with the Bonmots of HARLEQUIN, and to
laugh at him because he has a black Face, and at PANTALOON, merely for having a
long Beard; it is not what I feel myself much disposed to do. I understand the
Italian Tragedies better than the Comedies, but I find the Actors infinitely
below ours. I intend to be very studious, and when all the Family are gadding
to the Opera and the Play, I shall sit at home and drudge at the Italian, and
this for many good Reasons, but chiefly to acquit myself of my chief Promise to
you.

We have, at present, a second Edition of the Prince of Brunswick, who has been
at Venice a Week, but on Monday next he leaves us entirely. This Time he has
spent most of his leisure Hours with our Resident, and expresses great Pleasure
in being received on an intimate and easy Footing; he is really a very sensible
and agreeable Man, and as far as can be judged from outward Appearance, is very
amiable: he has with him two young German Barons, who are also very pretty Kind
of Men, and speak English so well, that it is a Comfort to hear them.

My Brother desires me to present his best Respects to you, and I hope my dear
nominal Uncle will always be mindful to say for me to the dear Society every
Thing that is kind, grateful, and affectionate.

My Vanity will not suffer me to pass over in Silence a Conquest that I am told
I have certainly made, of an Italian Count, who is here in a public Character;
he is not quite sixty, his Figure and Complexion exactly resembles a very bad,
long, thin Tallow-Candle; he is much bedaubed with Spanish Snuff, and on meagre
Days so overcomes one with Garlic, that it is dreadful; except these little
Accidents, he is a most agreeable Companion, for he is very sensible, very
religious, very philosophic, extremely polite, and his Conversation is both
instructive and amusing. Now, my good Friend, from the Picture I have drawn,
would you not think I was in some Danger of losing my Heart, but that luckily
my amiable Count is a bigoted Roman Catholic, and I an obstinate Heretic?

We may give ourselves what Airs we please about our English Liberty, but for
the Ladies, Italy is undoubtedly the Land of perfect Freedom; to all public
Places, they constantly go in Pairs, with their Cavalier Serventes, and put me
much in Mind of the clean and unclean Beasts going into the Ark. What would
become of the Reputation of a miserable English Woman, if she was to go to the
Play with a Man tete-a-tete? And yet that is constantly done here without
Imputation of Wrong -- In short, if a Woman has any Mind to be wicked, Venice
seems to be the last Place in the World to give her better Sentiments.

How delighted should I be to surprise the dear Society, some Night or other,
when you are over your sober Game of Quadrille, in my white Masque and Man's
Hat; you have no Notion with what an Air I have learnt to put it over my right
Eye. I will not despair but that we may again meet happily under that
hospitable Roof, where for some Weeks, in the Enjoyment of such friendly
Conversation, I tasted more real Happiness and Peace than I ever experienced
before or since in my whole Life. I did not know, before I had the melancholy
Experience of it, how very irksome and painful a Feel it is, to be so very far
from those we truly regard. Adieu! my dear Friends, may Heaven shower upon you
all its choicest Blessings, is the sincere and constant Prayer of your ever
faithful and affectionate

S. N --.

LETTER LIX. Miss N -- to Mr. HULL.
Venice, April 3, 1766.
THE only Task you enjoined me on leaving England, is, perhaps, the most
difficult you could have exacted from me; nevertheless, I am resolved to
attempt it; for, however you may be disappointed in my Performance, I shall, at
least, have the Satisfaction of proving, that I cheerfully obey any Command of
yours, and though surrounded with Difficulties, I enter upon the Performance of
my Promise with Courage; well knowing, from the Candor of your Disposition,
that you will accept of an earnest Desire on my Part to gratify your laudable
Curiosity, in Lieu of greater Abilities for such an Undertaking.

I am not surprised, that a Person of your speculative Turn should feel an
earnest Desire to be made acquainted with some Particulars relative to the wise
and complicated Government of the Republic of Venice; it justly merits the
Attention of the sensible and curious Part of Mankind, were it only to discover
by what Means it has been preserved nearly in the same State, for such a Number
of Ages; but it is hardly possible to arrive with Certainty at this Knowledge;
for there is no Subject the Venetians are so tenacious of conversing upon as
Politics, profound Secrecy being the great Engine on which this very singular
Government turns. I find one must not depend too much on the Accounts of those
who have written upon the Subject, for after allowing the utmost to their
Integrity and Industry, they must have been often liable to Misinformation,
besides the unavoidable Change that Time naturally produces in all sublunary
Things. I have now lying before me a History of the Republic, by AMELOT DE LA
HOUSSAI, one by ST. DISDIER, and another by the ABBEE LANGIER, of a much later
Date; and I shall freely transcribe from these Authors, in as succinct a Manner
as possible, all such Passages as coincide with the present State of Things:
but the most pleasing Assistant I promise myself is, Mr. SMITH, who has been
settled in this City a great Number of Years, and was formerly the British
Consul; he is now retired from Business, and devotes his Time to the Study and
Encouragement of the polite Arts, of which he is a liberal Protector; he is, at
present, appointed Charge d'Affaires, by our Court, till the Arrival of Sir
JAMES WRIGHT, who succeeds the present Ambassador at Constantinople in the
Residentship of Venice. I am sorry the new Minister is not expected during my
Stay here, for, as I am told, he has spent some Time in this Capital, when upon
his Travels in a private Character. Under his Auspices, I might, perhaps, with
more Ease, have pursued my Researches. Mr. SMITH is an intelligent, sensible
Man, and preserves, in a very advanced Age, a Degree of Politeness, Vivacity
and Good Humor, rarely to be met with, which renders his Conversation as
pleasing as it is instructive. This Gentleman is married to the Sister of Mr.
MURRAY, the late Resident, a very amiable Woman; their House is open every
Evening to the English, in the most easy, agreeable Manner, where I have
infinite Pleasure in talking over, in a polite cheerful Circle, the Virtu that
has engaged my Attention in the Morning; but through this Correspondence, I
shall not profane my favorite Subject, by introducing it with the dry one,
your Curiosity has led me to.

As ST. DISDIER is my favorite Writer on the State of Venice, I shall begin
with his Account of the Origin of this City, but must first endeavor to make
you acquainted with the Lagunes, (or Lakes) which I look upon to be the great
Sources of Health and Pleasure, to the Venetians, as well as the Means by which
all their Wants are supplied; nothing can be more delicious, than the Airings
the Nobility take on these Lakes during the Summer Season, sometimes attended
with a Barge filled with Musicians, and often tete-a-tete with their Cicisbeo,
in a Gondola, which is an easy and luxurious Conveyance. The Lagunes are formed
by a strong Bank of Sand, at the Entrance of the Gulf, which extends from
South to West about thirty-six Miles, and is about six Hundred Feet in Breadth;
the Sea, having broke through the Bank in six different Places, has covered
with Water all the low Land for seven or eight Miles, leaving a Number of small
Islands, upon which are built the Towns of the Lagunes. The six Passages
abovementioned, are the only Ports by which Vessels can approach to Venice.
First, that of Brondolo, to the South; secondly, Chiosa, (an episcopal City;)
thirdly, Malamocco; fourthly, Lido, (opposite to the East Point of Venice;)
fifthly, St. Erasmus, and sixthly, the three Ports; by this last, only the
small fishing Barks can pass.

In the Year 407, the Goths, under the Command of RADAGAISUS, having broke like
a Torrent into Italy, put all the Inhabitants to the Sword, who attempted to
oppose their Fury; the People who were situated near the Lagunes (I have above
described) found no Asylum so secure as those maritime Isles, the most Part of
which were only inhabited by Fishermen: here the Fugitives remained in Safety,
until the Generals, sent by the Emperor HONORIUS, (having defeated the
Barbarians) left the affrighted Wanderers at Liberty to return to the Terra
Firma. In the Year 413, the horrible Ravages committed by the Visigoths, under
ALARICK, made the same People a second Time seek their former Retreat; and as
these Invaders staid longer in Italy than those led by RADAGAISUS, the
Fugitives began to build themselves comfortable Habitations on these Islands.
The Paduans, to whom these Isles belonged, had a Port at that of Rialto, (now
called Venice) and the Senate having resolved to make it a considerable Place,
not only by Way of Asylum for their Subjects, but also to secure their Trade by
Sea, sent, in the Year 441, three Consuls, who proclaimed it a free Port, so
that in a short Time it was peopled, not only by those who retired to the
Islands for Safety, but by many Persons of all Ranks, who left the Terra Firma
to settle there. The third Undertaking of the Barbarians, under ATTILA, King of
the Huns, threatened Italy with total Desolation; that Scourge of the Almighty,
as he was justly denominated, having caused Germany, France, and Italy, to be
laid Waste, returned in the Year 453 a second Time into the last-named Country,
and destroyed Pavia, Milan, Padua, Aquilea, and many other great Towns, the
miserable Remains of whose Inhabitants finished the Peopling not only of
Rialto, but all the other Isles of the Lagunes; and entertaining no Hope of
returning to their ruined Cities, they caused to be transported from the Terra
Firma, Marble, and other Materials of their demolished Palaces; so that, in the
Space of about fifty Years, not only the People of Rank, but even the Artizans,
were conveniently lodged. Padua being at length re-established, and seeing
Rialto become considerable, by the Number of its Inhabitants, the Senate
thought proper to send Consuls to govern the People, with some Appearance of
Authority; but in Time the richest and most powerful of the Inhabitants of
these Isles got themselves declared Protectors of the People, with the Title of
Tribunes. In the Year 709, the Tribunes of the twelve most considerable Islands
of the Lagunes, judging it necessary to have a better Form of Government,
resolved to compose a Republic, and to elect a proper Person from among
themselves to be their Chief or Prince; but as they knew they had no Right to
take this Step against the Will of the Paduans, to whom they were indebted for
the Place of their Residence, they sent an Ambassy to the Emperor LEO, who was
Sovereign of the whole Country, and to Pope JOHN the Fifth, to obtain their
Permission to elect a Prince, to whom they gave the Title of Doge. PAOLO LUCE
ANAFESTE, the first Duke of Venice, was elected 288 Years after Rialto was
proclaimed a free Port by the Paduans. This Election was made at Ereclea, a
Town of the Lagunes, in the Year 709; at this Place, the first three Doges
resided. These Princes ruled with absolute Power till 1172, when, upon the
Election of SEBASTIAN ZIANI, the Form of Government became democratical, and
continued so till 1289, when the Doge, PIETRO GRADENIGO, found Means to change
it to an Aristocracy; this he effected by getting a Decree passed in the
Quarantia Criminale, that all those who had composed the great Council for four
Years, should be ballotted for in that Chamber of Justice, and such of them who
had twelve Balls in their Favor, and who attended the Council on a certain
Day, at an appointed Hour, should have their Names written in a Book, called Il
Libro d'Oro, and that they and their Descendants should form the great Council
forever. As this Intrigue was managed with much Secrecy, none had Notice to
attend, but those whom the Doge and his Party approved of, or who had Friends
in the Quarantia. When this chosen Number were assembled, at the Ringing of a
Bell, the Doors were locked, and no more suffered to enter. This the Venetians
call " Il Serrar del Cansiglio," and is one of the most remarkable Epochas of
their Government: though this Step wrested all Share of the Administration out
of the Hands of the Citizens, and unjustly deprived some Families of their
Title to Nobility, yet it was owing to this Event, that the Republic
established a more perfect Form of Government than she before enjoyed, and
which continues, with very little Change, to this Day. BAYAMONTE TIEPOLI, the
Head of one of the most ancient Families of the Republic, joined the Quirini,
and some other illustrious Persons, in a Conspiracy to sacrifice the Doge to
their Resentment, for this Innovation; but all the Conspirators perished in the
Enterprise, and this Attempt only occasioned fresh Regulations, which more
securely established the new Form of Government.

Accept of thus much, by Way of Introduction to a Sketch of the present State
of the Republic of Venice, and in my next, I shall have the Honor to introduce
you to SUA SERENITA, the Doge, but at present the Post will only allow me Time
to assure you how sincerely I am

Yours, etc. etc.

LETTER LX. Miss N -- to Mr. HULL.
April 9, 1766.
I Promised in my last to introduce you to the Doge of Venice, and I think you
will agree with me, that his Serenity is a very uncomfortable Being. Since the
Period of Il Serrar del Consiglio, his Power has gradually decreased. A
Procurator of St. Mark is generally elected Prince, who has served the Republic
in expensive Embassies, or in the first Offices of the State. Although he has
the Name of Sovereign, the Power remains with the Senate; and having little
Influence in the Affairs of the State, great Wisdom is by no Means an essential
Recommendation to this high Rank; an advanced Age, an easy Disposition, and
illustrious Birth, are the Qualifications chiefly sought for in the Doge; his
Children, Grandchildren, and Brothers are disqualified from holding any
considerable Employment connected with Government during his Reign. His Wife
was formerly treated en Princess, and crowned with great Magnificence, but
that custom is now exploded; however, she still retains the Title of Dogeressa.
Though the Doge presides at all the Councils, he is only acknowledged Head of
the Senate, at the Tribunals, and in the Palace of St. Mark. He cannot leave
the City without the previous Leave of his Counselors; he is allowed no Marks
of Distinction in his Dress or Equipage when he makes private Visits, or leaves
the City, except that his Family are suffered to use Gold or Silver Lace on
their Liveries, and in the Ornaments of their Box at the Theater; and the
Ladies wear rich colored Clothes at public Festivals, when the Pragmatica
obliges the other noble Venetians to appear in black. Upon public Occasions,
his Serenity generally wears a Vest and Ducal Mantle of Brocade of Gold or
Silver, lined with Ermine, a Cap of Crimson Velvet, with a Border of Gold, to
represent the Diadem, and under it a short Hood of Gauze, and Shoes of Crimson
Damask. The Sword of State is carried after the Prince, and at the Head of the
Seignory, to show where the real Power is lodged. A folding Chair, with a gilt
Frame, and a Seat of Brocade, with a Stool of the same to set his Foot on, and
a large Parisole of Gold Stuff, are carried with the Doge in all public
Processions, and they pretend that this Regalia was presented to the famous
SEBASTIAN ZIANI by Pope ALEXANDER the Third, in acknowledgment of the
Protection he received from the Republic, when oppressed by the Emperor
FREDERICK the Second. The Doge has the Title of Serenity and Serene Prince, but
to show that they are not attached to his Person alone, Ambassadors use them in
his Absence in addressing the College. Though all Dispatches are written in the
Name of the Prince, and the Answers addressed to him, yet he cannot open them
without the Members of the College being present, whereas they can open, and
even answer them, without his being present; and to show that his Power and
Influence is merely imaginary, the Senate neither propose any Question, or take
any Resolution, till he and his Counselors are withdrawn; they then examine
the Affairs under Debate, take the Advice of the Savi, and prepare their
Deliberations in Writing, to be carried to the first Meeting of the Senate,
where the Doge and his Counselors are present, who have a Voice to approve or
disapprove in common with the other Senators. The Venetian Money bears the Name
of the Doge, and was formerly stamped as his Coin, when the Power of the Prince
was absolute; at present is substituted the Figure of a Man in the Ducal Habit
on his Knees before St. Mark, to show that the Doge is subject to the Republic,
of which St. Mark is the Hieroglyphic. The Income of the Prince is fourteen
thousand Ducats per Annum, (which amounts to about two thousand Pounds
sterling) to maintain his Family, and to defray the Expense of treating the
Seignory four Times a Year. The foreign Ambassadors, who have made their public
Entry, have a Right to be at these Feasts. The Republic pay all the Officers
who attend the Prince on public Occasions: he has the Power of selling the
different Employments of the Palace, in which, and collating the Benefices of
St. Mark, consist the principal Emoluments of his Dignity.

When the Doge dies, his Body is embalmed, and exposed for three Days on a Bed
of State, in an Apartment of the Palace destined for that Purpose. This
Exposition is not only to give the People an Opportunity to pay the last
Honors to their Prince, but also to give the Senate Time to receive any
Complaints against his Administration, and to give his Creditors Leisure to
make their Demands on his Heirs, which if they refuse to satisfy, he is
deprived of funeral Honors at the Expense of the Republic: for this Reason, on
the Death of a Doge, three Inquisitors are appointed to search into his past
Conduct, to hear all Complaints, and to satisfy all Demands at the Expense of
the Succession. The Nobles who assist at the Funeral, are dressed in Scarlet
Robes, to show that it is not the Government of the Prince that causes the
Happiness of the State, and that the Republic being free, ought not to show any
Marks of Affliction at his Death. The Obsequies are no sooner over, than all
the Nobles, who are more than thirty Years of Age, assemble in the great
Council Chamger, and elect five Correctors, who inspect the Book of Statutes
that the Doge, on his Election, swears to observe. These five Noblemen have a
Right to add to, or to retrench from these Statutes, whatever they think
necessary for the Good of the State. The Ballotation upon this Occasion is
managed with so much Caution, that it is impossible for any Thing but Chance to
decide which shall be the forty-one Senators chose out of the whole Number to
elect a Successor to the deceased Prince. When these Electors have been
approved by the general Council, they are shut up in the Palace of St. Mark,
and not suffered to stir out until the Election is over; twenty-five of the
forty-one Voices must be in Favor of the Person that is chosen. The first
Thing required of the Doge is, to swear to the Observance of the Book of
Statutes. He then shows himself to the People, and in going out of the Palace
for that Purpose, passes through the Chamber in which his Body is to be exposed
after his Death, and there he receives from the Grand Chancellor the first
Compliments on his new Dignity. He then gets into a Machine, not unlike a great
Tub, and two hundred Men, who belong to the Arsenal, carry him by Turns round
the Place of St. Mark on their Shoulders. The Doge thus seated, one of his
Children, or some near Relation, stands behind him, holding two Basins filled
with Money, which he distributes among the Populace.

Having killed one Prince, and proclaimed another, I think I may decently take
my Leave for the present; and should you be as tired with reading, as I am with
writing, you will wish you had never heard of his Serenity. I hope you will
think my next more interesting, which will treat of the different Councils of
Venice.

Addio sempre suo, etc.

LETTER LXI. Miss N -- to Mr. HULL.
Venice, April 12, 1766.
HAVING in my last dispatched his Serenity the Doge, I now proceed with
Alacrity to give you an Account of the Councils, of which, according to AMELOT
DE LA HOUSSAIE, there are three principal; the great one, which comprehends all
the Nobility; the College, which gives Audience to Ambassadors; and the
Pregadi, which is the Senate. The Great-Council meets every Sunday and Holiday
to choose Magistrates, which is done by Ballotation. The Nobles have no Right to
enter into it, until they are twenty-five Years old, but the Seignory dispense
sometimes with their being under Age. This Assembly has a Right of confirming
or annulling the Decrees of the Senate, and to make or repeal Laws. The most
remarkable standing Laws are these, viz. that all Ecclesiastics are excluded
from every civil Employment and public Assembly. The Nobles cannot arrive at
the principal Offices, but by Gradation; nor can they hold more than one Office
at once, be it ever so small. Those who refuse any Employment, are fined two
thousand Ducats, and banished for two Years from the Great Council and Broglio;
(this Name they give to an Apartment under the Procuratia Nuova, where the
Noblemen meet in a Morning, and those who are trying to attain any Place in the
Government, use this Opportunity to solicit the Votes of their Friends for
their Ballotation in the Great Council.) No Magistrate can resign, or leave the
City. All the Sons of the Nobility have equal Portions: if a Daughter has more
than five thousand Ducats, (about six hundred Pounds sterling) she receives the
Income of the Overplus for her own separate Use, and if she dies without
Children, it returns to her Family. All Subjects of the Republic (the Doge not
excepted) pay Taxes in Proportion to their Fortune. The Magistrates in civil
Causes can receive no Visits or Recommendation of the Parties, but may in
criminal ones, if they are not State Affairs. No Nobleman can enter into Trade.
The Great Council corrects all public Errors, and redresses all Grievances
imposed by those who use their Authority unlawfully, so that this may be called
the first Tribunal, and the Basis, as well as Support of the Republic.

To gratify the young Nobility, they admit thirty by Lot every Year into the
Great Council, who are only twenty Years of Age, and allow them the same
Privileges as those who are twenty-five; these young ones are called Barbarini,
because they are chosen on the Day of St. BARBARA. This Assembly sits from
eight in the Morning until Noon; it is held in the largest Room of the Palace:
at the upper End are raised Seats, on which the Doge and his Counselors are
placed. The Chief of the Council of Ten, the Avogadores and the Censors are
seated round the Hall, upon raised Benches. The Counselors of the Doge can
convoke, at Pleasure, the Great Council, and for this Purpose they cause the
Bells of the principal Churches in the six Quarters of the Town to be rung, and
at this Signal, the Nobles attend the Council without Arms, which they are
forbid to carry there on Pain of Death.

When AMELOT DE LA HOUSSAIE wrote his History of the Republic of Venice, the
Nobles were computed at five and twenty Hundred; but they now fall very short
of that Calculation. The Great Council usually consists of about eight hundred,
and nearly the same Number is supposed to be employed in the Provinces, on
Embassies, and other public Services; or, for private Reasons, are not in a
Situation to attend in Council.

THE COLLEGE.

THE College is formed of twenty-six Members, viz. The Doge and his six
Counselors, three of the Quarantia Criminale, (who are changed every two
Months) six Savi Grandi, five of the Savi of the Terra Firma, and the five Savi
of Order. The College has the Right of assembling the Senate, and proposing
what is to be debated therein; but yet they must obey its Resolutions, and act
in Concert with it. At this Tribunal the Majesty of the Prince may be said to
reside, for here the Ambassadors have their Audience, all Letters upon foreign
Affairs are read, all Memorials are presented, and all Privileges, in Regard to
Benefices, Prelates, etc. etc. are pleaded. In short, this is the Committee of
Ways and Means, where all Business is first planned, in order to be laid before
the Senate for their Concurrence.

THE SENATE.

THE Senate had formerly the Name of Pregadi given to it, because it then never
assembled but upon extraordinary Occasions; and the Magistrates were obliged to
request the Attendance of the principal Citizens, when any important Affair
required their Advice. This Assembly now meets every Wednesday and Friday, and,
upon an Emergency, the Savi for the Week can call an extraordinary Pregadi.
This Tribunal possesses all the Authority of the Republic, for here all
Resolutions concerning Peace and War are taken, all Leagues and Alliances are
made, Ambassadors and also Officers who have considerable Rank in the Army are
nominated, and all Taxes are imposed according to the Exigency of Affairs. The
Consultations of the College are here examined and determined by a Plurality of
Voices. This Institution in its Commencement was only composed of sixty
Senators, called an ordinary Pregadi; but being often obliged, in Cases of
Importance, to add to the Number, sixty more were created, called the Junto:
these hundred and twenty Senators are always Noblemen of advanced Age and
approved Merit. The Members of the College, the Council of Ten, the Quarantia
Criminale, the Procurators of St. Mark, with most Part of the Magistrates,
enter also into the Pregadi, so that it now consists of near three hundred
Members, one Part whereof have a Right to vote, the rest can only hearken and
learn the Rules of Government. The Doge and his Counselors are the only
Persons whose Advice can be ballotted, to prevent the Confusion that would
probably arise from a Diversity of Opinions, as half the Votes must be in
Favor of the Question before it can pass. Those who have no Right to vote, may
harangue and contradict the Opinions proposed. The hundred and twenty, who
compose the ordinary Pregadi and Junto, are ballotted every Year in the Great
Council, to be changed or continued, as shall be determined in the said
Council. The Senate is particularly attentive in maintaining Harmony among the
Nobles; well knowing, that a contrary Behavior might be productive of fatal
Consequences to the Liberty of the Country, as was formerly the Case with
Florence and Verona.

The COUNSELORS of the DOGE.

THE Counselors of the Doge (or more properly of the Signory) are six in
Number, they are chosen from amongst the oldest Senators of the first Rank;
though they are Counselors for a Year, they only assist in the College eight
Months; the other four Months they preside in the Quarantia Criminale, in the
same Manner as the Chiefs of that Chamber have places in the College during two
Months. These six Counselors have more Power than the Doge; their Employment
is twofold: first, they are obliged to consult with the Doge upon all Matters
that are to be proposed in the Councils, to open all Letters directed to the
Signory, to receive Petitions, and to appoint Judges to settle any Dispute
which may arise about Jurisdiction; and secondly, to preside at all Councils,
and, during an Interregnum, to dispatch Orders to all the Officers of the
State. When the Doge is ill, the most ancient of the Counselors represent him
in the College, and at all public Functions: but he is neither allowed to sit
in the ducal Chair, or wear the Habit of the Prince, and is only distinguished
by a Cap which he never takes off, no more than the Doge does his ducal Crown.
The Counselors, whilst in Office, wear scarlet Gowns.

As I shall, in my next, introduce you to a Tribunal so awful, that the bare
Name makes thousands tremble, I shall allow myself some Respite for the
present, and endeavor to lose the Idea of these dry intricate Subjects in the
more pleasing ones of Virtu.

You will excuse my breaking off thus, when I tell you, that my Gondola now
waits to carry me to a dilletanti Party, with whom I am going to examine the
famous Marriage of PAOLO VERONESE, at the Convent of St. George. It so rarely
happens, that our Pleasures in the Enjoyment equal the Vivacity of our
Expectation, I almost fear I promise myself too much on this Occasion; but if
this celebrated Piece deserves half the Encomiums that are bestowed upon it, my
Delight will be exquisite: I heartily wish you could be a Partaker of it.

Farewell.
LETTER LXII. Miss N -- to Mr. HULL.
April 15, 1766.
I Promised, in my last, to introduce you to the most tremendous Tribunal,
that, perhaps, ever poor Culprits trembled before, if we view it in its
original State: but I think all the sensible People, I have conversed with in
Venice, agree, that it is somewhat relaxed, from its primitive Severity, though
still to be dreaded for the Extent of Power, the Inquisitors of State are
entrusted with.

The INQUISITION.

THIS Tribunal is composed of two of the Council of Ten, and one of the
Counselors of the Doge. As the Affairs, that fall under the Cognizance thereof
are of the utmost Consequence to the State, depending chiefly upon certain
Intelligences collected by Spies, so all their Proceedings are managed with the
deepest Secrecy; and, in some Cases, they are obliged to use Severity, and to
punish Offenders in a very exemplary Manner, The Life of the Doge, the Nobles,
and all the Subjects of the State, lie at the Mercy of this Tribunal, provided
the three Inquisitors entirely concur in Opinion; and in this Case, they are
not obliged to give an Account of their Actions to any one, or even communicate
them to the Council of Ten. The Execution of the Sentences pronounced by these
Judges is not less secret than their Judgments, except when the Crime is of a
public Nature: in private Cases, to prevent Exclamations against such seeming
Severity, as often punishes with Death an unguarded Expression against so
rigorous a Government, (it is said) they send in the Night, and have the
Offender seized, and pronounce his Doom, without any other Ceremony, than
confronting him with two Witnesses, if there are any, or else, on the bare
Report of Spies. As many Inconveniences have arisen from this despotic Method
of Proceeding, a Law has been provided, that the Inquisitors shall not put to
Death a noble Venetian, without first hearing his Defense. If a Stranger of any
Consequence becomes suspected by this Tribunal, he must expect to lose his
Papers, and receive an Order, signed by one of the Inquisitors, requiring him
to leave the State within a limited Time, on Pain of Death. As the Venetian
Nobility, of every Class, are forbid to hold any Sort of Correspondence with
Ambassadors, or foreign Ministers, or even with the meanest Person in their
Families, it is for this Intent, that the Spies of the Inquisitors are
particularly vigilant in collecting Matter of Complaint.

Harsh as the Proceedings of this Tribunal must appear to Englishmen, who are
blessed with the happiest Form of Government, the sensible and unprejudiced
MONTESQUIEU asserts, that it has often saved the Republic of Venice from total
Destruction.

The COUNCIL OF TEN.

THIS was orignally, a mere temporary Chamber of Justice, appointed to enquire
into the famous Conspiracy of TIEPOLI: but was soon after made perpetual, and
is now one of the most respectable Tribunals of the Republic; it takes
Cognizance of all the criminal Affairs among the Nobility, that happen in the
City, or State of Venice, and judges Crimes of Leze Majeste, and all other
attrocious Offenses. This Council has the Care of the public Tranquillity, and
their Power is as much to be dreaded by the Nobles, as by the common People.
The Doge and his Counselors have a Right to enter this Chamber of Justice; but
the ten Senators, of whom it is composed, have not less Power in the Absence of
the Doge, than when he is present: they are chosen out of different Families,
and are elected in the Great Council every Year; they then elect three among
themselves to be the Head of the Councils; these rule Week about, and are
changed every three Months. The Chief in Office receives all Informations from
Spies, and reports them to his Colleagues, who, upon the Deposition of
Witnesses, and the Answers of the accused, proceed against them before the
Council, where the Offender is not allowed to plead for himself personally, or
by Lawyer. The armed Galley that always lies at St. Mark's Place, and some
Cannon and Galleys at the Arsenal, are under the Command of the Council of Ten.
They meet only once a Week, unless some Affair of Importance calls them oftener
together.

The QUARANTIA CRIMINALE.

THERE are three Courts of Justice, that consist each of forty Judges; the
first of these is the most ancient Tribunal of the Republic, but it has
suffered a great Diminution of Power by the Establishment of the Council of
Ten. The forty Judges of the upper Chamber have a Right to vote in the Senate;
and the three Chiefs, who are Presidents, have likewise Seats in the College,
during the two last Months they are in Office; and three of the Counselors of
the Doge preside in the Quarantia Criminale, the four last Months of their
Year, to show the Connection there is between this Chamber and the College. This
Office is generally filled by Noblemen who are not rich; they receive thirty
Ducats per Month by it, and acquire Consideration among the Nobility. To arrive
at this Chamber, they must pass through the other Quarantias first, which are
much inferior in Authority. Besides these, there are many other lower Courts of
Justice that take Cognizance of mercantile Affairs, Bankruptcies, etc. etc. It
is worthy of Observation, in this wise and intricate Government, how all the
superior Tribunals are interwoven with, and, if I may use the Expression,
germinate from, each other.

SAVI GRANDI.

THESE Magistrates are six in Number; they are chosen from among the wisest of
the Senators, and, during the Time they are in office, manage all political
Affairs of Importance, and are, properly speaking, prime Ministers: they are
elected by the Senate, and changed every six Months, three at a Time, by which
Means, there remain three old Senators in Office, who are able to inform the
new elected ones, of what happened during their Administration, and serves as a
model for the future Conduct of the new Ministers.

SAVI of the TERRA FIRMA.

THESE five Officers of the State have little less Authority in the College
than the Savi Grandi; they are the same Length of Time in Office, are chosen of
a less advanced Age, and are preferred according to their Application, and the
Abilities they have shown in the Offices they must necessarily have passed
through to arrive at this. The first, or Savi Cashier, is Play Master; the
second, Savi degli Scritura, Secretary at War, and the third, Savi of the
Ordinance, has the Direction of the Military of the Terra Firma; the other two
are only to assist the three first. They are elected by the Senate, as the Savi
Grandi, and have a Right to vote on every Motion, which may be proposed by
them; but, to preserve a Subordination between the two Offices, have no Right
to vote in the Senate.

SAVI of ORDER.

THIS Magistracy is the same in Number as the Savi of the Terra Firma, but is
without Jurisdiction, and is only a School, as it were, wherein the young
Nobility may learn the Art of Government. These Noblemen, during the six Months
they are in Office, assist at all the Consultations of the College, and
consequently have a Share in the Secrets of State; they have no Right to vote
either in the College or Senate, but may give their Opinion at the
Consultations of the Savi, always speaking uncovered and standing. They are
allowed to see all the Dispatches that are sent to Ambassadors, and the
Registers of the Affairs of State. This Employment is looked upon by the
Republic, as the Touchstone of the Character and Genius of their young Nobility.

PROCURATORS of ST. MARK.

THIS Honor is generally bestowed on such of the Nobility who have been of
essential Service to their Country in expensive Embassies, in a naval Command,
or for having gone through the most important Employments of the State with
Honor and Integrity. The Procurators take Place of all the other Nobility;
they have the Disposal of all pious Legacies, are the Guardians of Orphans, and
Protectors of Widows. The Number was formerly confined to nine, but is now
increased to eleven. In pressing Necessities of the Republic, this Dignity has
been sold for immense Sums; but, except in Cases of public Distress, it can
only be disposed of by Merit; and those who purchase it never have any
Successors appointed when they die. Their Dress is a purple Robe. The
magnificent Buildings on each Side of St. Mark's Place, were originally
destined for the Habitation of the Procurators, and from thence called
Procuratias; but they are now chiefly rented to Strangers and foreign
Ministers, by Way of Casinos.

The GRAND CHANCELLOR.

THIS Dignity can only be enjoyed by a Person of the Rank of Citizen; he takes
Place of all the other Magistrates, and wears a purple Robe, like the
Procurators of St. Mark. All the Councils are open to him; he holds the Seal of
the Republic, and assists at reading and answering the Dispatches from
Ambassadors, and every Thing else material that is treated of in the Senate. He
has the Title of Excellenza, and is the Head of the People, as the Doge is of
the Nobility. His Income is about nine thousand Ducats per Annum. He is buried
with great Pomp, at the Expense of the Republic.

The AVOGADORES.

THIS Office resembles, in Part, that of Attorney General in England, but is
divided among three People; the greatest Instance of its Power is, being able,
for the Space of three Days, to suspend the Judgment of all the other Courts of
Justice, when the Crime is not clearly proved upon the Culprit. In this
Particular, the Avogador resembles the Roman Tribunes of the People. They are
elected by the Senate, but the Choice must be confirmed by the Grand Council,
where all Proceedings would be null, if one of the Avogadores did not assist.
Their Dress, when in Office, is a purple Robe.

The TWO CENSORS.

THE Jurisdiction of the Censors extends principally to the Manners of
particular Persons; to the Intrigues of the Nobles in the Broglio; to the
Condemnation and Fining of those who violate the Statutes of the Great Council;
to the Payment of Wages, Pilfering of Servants, and Correction of Gondaliers.
They are sixteen Months in Office; during which Term, they have a Right to vote
in the Pregadi, and wear purple Gowns.

I have extended this beyond the common Bounds of a Letter, and find that by so
doing, I have lost Half an Hour of an agreeable Conversation, where I am
engaged this Evening, so shall only add, that I am sincerely

Yours, etc.
P. S. I am obliged to one of my Gondaliers, a clever, intelligent Fellow, for
reminding me, that it is past the Hour of my Engagement; and here let me do
Justice to this numerous Body of People, by saying, they are one of the most
respectable Societies I have any where heard of, for their Honesty and Fidelity
to the Master they engage themselves to.



LETTER LXIII. Miss N --, to Mr. HULL.
Venice, April 19, 1766.
WITH your Leave, my good Friend, I am going to engage you in a little Trip to
the Terra Firma, in Order to introduce you to the Podestas and Capitanios, a
Set of Gentlemen of no small Consequence, I assure you, in their respective
Governments.

To the greater Towns of the Terra Firma, the Senate send two Noblemen, with
the Titles of Podesta and Capitanio; these equally represent the Republic, the
first in the Administration of civil Justice, the second in the Command of
Military Affairs. The Podesta is the principal Person, as he takes Cognizance
of all that regards the Police, and the good Order of the People. The
Capitanio, besides the Command of the Troops, has Power to punish the
Inhabitants for any Crime committed in the Streets, during the Course of the
Night. He has also the Care of the public Money, which is collected by
Receivers, who are accountable to him for it. The Podestas and Capitanios are
obliged to report to the Senate every Measure they take. To the Capitals of
Provinces are generally sent both the abovementioned Officers; but in Towns of
small Importance, the two Offices are united in the Person of the Podesta, who
holds his Employment sixteen Months. The Appointments allowed them by the
Republic are very small, in Comparison to what they are obliged to spend in the
Capitals, therefore to them the Senate generally sends rich Noblemen, and poor
ones to the small Towns, where, not being obliged to make an expensive
Appearance, they may, if they please, gain a comfortable Subsistence by their
Post, during the Time they are employed in it.

A Nobleman of the first Rank is always sent into the Frioul, with the Title of
Proveditore-General of Palma Nova; this Place is of great Consequence to the
Venetians, as it serves for a Frontier to the Emperor's Dominions, and is a
strong Barrier against the Incursions of the Turks. At Udeney, where the
Patriarch of Aquilia resides, the Republic employs only a Lieutenant and some
Subalterns. In Istria are four episcopal Towns, with five others not so
considerable, each of them governed by a Podesta. The Commanding-Officers of
these Places, as well as those of the Levant and Dalmatia, are changed only
once in two Years. The Senate gives the Title of Counts, Governors, and
Captains, to the Noblemen who are sent into Dalmatia to administer Justice. The
Magistrates of the principal Towns, (for Example, the Counts of Spalatro and
Gara, who are likewise Archbishops) have appointed to them a Council of three
noble Venetians, without whom they cannot determine on any Thing; but all these
Officers are subject to the Proveditore-General, who has full Authority in all
Affairs civil and military. The Isles of Corfuzant and Cephalonia, are each
governed by a Proveditore, assisted by a Council of three noble Venetians.
Corfu is a Place of great Importance, as it commands the Entrance of the Gulf,
and is the Repository of the Venetian Merchandise brought from the Levant; this
Place is regarded by the Turks with a jealous Eye. There is also a General of
these three Isles, to whom the particular Proveditores render Obedience, as the
Magistrates of the Towns in Dalmatia do to the Proveditore-General.

INQUISITORS of the TERRA FIRMA.

EVERY five Years, Inquisitors are sent to hold Courts in the several Provinces
of the Terra Firma; their Business is to inspect into the Conduct of Podestas
and Capitanios, and to receive all Complaints of Mal-administration of Justice.
Their Censures are seldom severe, but when there are Proofs of Embezzlement of
the public Money, and in that Case, their Office obliges them to act with the
utmost Rigor. They are attended by a Company of Cavalry, and an Executioner,
that they may punish on the Spot all Offenses that are clearly proved. This
gives the Provincials a very high Idea of the Justice of the Venetian
Government.

The MAGISTRATES of POMP.

Gli Sopre Proveditore all Pomp, are Senators, who by strict Ordinances
suppress all outward Marks of Luxury, and preserve an exact Equality, in the
exterior Appearance of the Nobility. At public Feasts, the Dress of the Ladies
is always black, except on some Occasions, when they are allowed to wear a rich
gold or silver Stuff Petticoat with their black Gowns. The noble Venetians are
not suffered to use gold or silver Lace on their Boatmen's Liveries, or in
their Boxes at the Theaters, except the Doge's Family and the Grand
Chancellor's. In Masking-Time, the Ladies may wear rich colored Clothes, which
is about six Months in the Year; and when they are at their Estates on the
Terra Firma, they may give as rich Liveries as they choose, but the Servants
who wear them never attend them at Venice, but in their own Houses.

REVENUES and EXPENSES of the STATE.

THE settled Revenue of the Republic is supposed, at present, according to the
best Calculation, to amount to about a Million and a Half sterling per Annum;
this is raised by Imports and Exports, and Taxes upon all the Provisions
consumed in the City of Venice, and upon all Sorts of Merchandises, and by
other Duties raised in the Isles of the Lagunes, and upon all the Estates
situated near Venice, called the Dogado or Duchy. Another Part of the Revenue
is raised in the same Manner from the Towns and Provinces of the Terra Firma,
and also from Istria, Dalmatia, and the Isles of Corfu, Zant, and Cephalonia. A
large Portion likewise arises from the Salt made at Corfu and Chiosa; and to
this may be added, twenty thousand Ducats per Month, that are paid into the
Coffers of the Republic from a Lottery, on the same Plan as those of Rome and
Naples, which has been established within these thirty Years. In Time of War,
the Senate finds great Resources by ennobling rich Families, making
supernumerary Procurators of St. Mark; by renewing old Taxes, and imposing new
ones. The yearly Expenses of Government do not require above half the Income of
the State, so that in Time of Peace the Republic can lay up vast Sums; by which
Means, the Venetians are enabled to negotiate all their Affairs with foreign
Powers by the Force of Money instead of Arms.

The FORCES of the REPUBLIC.

IN Time of Peace, the Venetians are supposed to pay about twenty-five thousand
Men; but there is strong Reason to believe, that not above one third of them
are effective, owing to the Abuses of the Proveditores in Dalmatia. The
Infantry are chiefly Sclavonians, Morlaques, and Albanians; they are esteemed
brave Soldiers, and are firmly attached to the Venetians, from an inveterate
Hatred to the Turks, who are their natural Enemies. The Cavalry are partly
composed of the same Nations, and partly of Ultramontanes. The General in Chief
must always be a Foreigner, and his Power is so overruled by the
Proveditore-General, that he has only the Name of Commander of the Forces. The
chief Attention of the Senate is paid to the Marine. They have no regular naval
Force in Time of Peace; but upon an Emergency, can arm thirty Galleys, able to
act against their Enemies, in a very expeditious Manner. They always keep some
Galleys in the Levant, with other Vessels, to guard the Provinces situated near
the Sea; these are under the Command of the Proveditore-General. A Squadron of
six Galleys, and several other Vessels, are likewise employed to cruize about
the Mouth of the Gulf, to secure the Traders from the Corsairs, and to make
the Merchants pay their proper Duties. The Nobleman who commands this Squadron
has the Title of General of the Gulf, his Command continues for three Years.
The Republic, in Peace as well as in War, creates a Proveditore General, who
commands both the Fleet and Army; he has an absolute Power to punish with Death
all Officers, Soldiers, and Sailors, and to dispose of all Posts in the Army
and Navy; he resides at Corfu the first three Years he is in Office, and when
that Time is expired, he is obliged to render an Account of his Administration
to the Senate.

SPIES and INFORMERS.

SPIES have ever been looked upon as infamous Ministers of Tyranny; but the
Senate of Venice have found Means to conceal the Shame of such Miscreants, by
making Mouths of Stone speak for them; for in many Parts of the Palace of St.
Mark, and in all the Parts of the City near the public Tribunals, Heads are cut
in the Walls with gaping Mouths, into which they cast the Notes of Information.
If the Informer has no Scruple to declare himself, he goes in Person to receive
the Reward allowed by Law on this Occasion; if he does not choose to be known,
he sends a Friend, with a Piece of Paper that has been torn from that on which
the Information was written, and the Money is paid without any other Formality
than comparing the two Pieces of Paper together. As the great Maxim of the
Venetians is, that the Safety of the State depends upon their having exact
Intelligence of every Thing that passes, especially in the Families of
Ambassadors and foreign Ministers, it is incredible what a Number of Spies of
all Ranks they keep in constant Pay. That the Venetians are often branded with
the ridiculous Epithet of Pantaloons, for this apparent Mysteriousness in their
System of Politics, we very well know; but how far they are right or wrong in
it, I leave to better Judgments than mine to determine: this however we must
allow, that their Government has subsisted under a republican Form, without any
material Alteration, for a much longer Period of Time than any other Republic
that History furnishes us with an Account of, at least that I can recollect. I
had a great Curiosity, when I came to Venice, to learn the Etymology of the
Name of Pantaloon, and why it is so particularly applied to the Venetians; I am
told it comes from Pianta Leone, and was first appropriated to them for their
great Eagerness to plant the Standard of Venice, which you know is a Lion,
wherever they could by Force or Fraud obtain a Bit of Ground large enough to
contain it. How far this etymological Account of honest Pantaloon may satisfy
you, I know not; but, remember, I do not vouch for the Reality of it, I only
offer it to you as I have received it. I propose by the next Post to send you a
succinct Account of the Method of proceeding at Venice in criminal Cases, and
am, in the mean Time,

faithfully yours, etc.

LETTER LXIV. Miss N -- to Mr. HULL.
Venice, May 1, 1766.
AN agreeable Excursion for a few Days into the Country has prevented my being
so punctual in my literary Engagement as I have hitherto been; but I make no
Aplogy, for I know you never meant it should interfere with my Amusements. Now
to proceed with my historical Anecdotes.

PROCEEDINGS in CRIMINAL CASES at VENICE.

WHEN a Crime is supposed to have been committed at Venice, the Courts of
Justice are more solicitous to be ascertained of the Fact, than to secure the
Offender; and when they have obtained the necessary Proofs, they send an
Officer to enter publicly the House of the Criminal; and on the Report of this
Officer, that he is not be found, (which is generally the Case) they summon him
to appear in a longer or shorter Space of Time, according to the Enormity of
the Crime committed, to answer for the Offense, and till that Period is
elapsed, the Offender is safe from any Molestation, provided he does not appear
on the Place of St. Mark, or on the Rialto; and he may also demand three
Delays, and if he thinks he cannot find Means to prevent the Affair coming to a
fatal Issue, he may avoid a Trial, by getting a Nobleman's Boat to convey him
to some Part of the Terra Firma, from whence he may easily escape out of the
State. Hence it proceeds, that most Criminals at Venice are judged by
Contumacy, which they call Bandire: but this Judgment is always accompanied
with Conditions proportionable to the Crime; for example, that the condemned
Person shall never be able to purchase his Pardon; that whoever kills him in
the Venetian State shall receive a considerable Reward, and double the Sum, if
they kill him in any other Territory. If the Crime sensibly touches the
Republic, they add to the Reward, the Liberty of delivering a State-Prisoner:
but notwithstanding this apparent great Rigor, there have been Instances of
Noblemen who have been guilty of atrocious Crimes making their Peace, by Means
of great Interest. When the Criminal is secured, and the Process formed, the
Avogador names his own Day, and, conducting the Culprit before his Judges,
pleads strongly against him, exaggerates every Particular of his Crime, and
concludes with advising a severe Punishment. The Advocate of the Party accused
answers all the chief Points of the Accusation; and when he has performed his
Part, the Auditors retire, and the Opinion of the Avogador is balloted against
that of the Chiefs of the Quarantia, which is always the most gentle, and the
Plurality of Balls determine the Fate of the Offender. By this Means the Judges
decide without giving the Reason of their Opinion, and it is consequently
unknown who is for, and who is against the Criminal. The Lawyers are obliged to
plead in the Venetian Dialect, that the most ignorant Auditor may understand
what passes, as well as the more learned Part of the Assembly. The severest
Hardship, in the Course of Justice at Venice, is the Length of Time it takes to
terminate an Affair, owing to the Courts of Justice being so closely connected,
and, if I may be allowed the Expression, playing into each others Hands; so
that a poor Wretch is often suffered to lie in Gaol for two or three Years,
before he can obtain an hearing, to expiate, as they pretend, by this
Punishment, part of his Crime. The frequent Sentences that are passed upon
Criminals, condemning them to an horrid obscure Prison for eight or ten Years,
and often for Life, (where in Winter they suffer all the Rigor of extreme
Cold, and in Summer of excessive Heat) are certainly more cruel Punishments
than Death at once.

Now in my usual abrupt Manner, I shall conduct you at one Step from temporal
to spiritual Affairs, and say a few Words of the Church, whose Power is very
limited in this Republic.

The STATE of the CHURCH.

THE Republic of Venice has ever been careful to exclude the Clergy from their
Councils, and from all political Employments, even those who are noble
Venetians. The Head of the Church is styled Patriarch of Venice, and Primate of
Dalmatia; he is always a Nobleman, enjoys a good Revenue, makes a respectable
Appearance in public Processions, but has no Power, even in ecclesiastical
Affairs; at all religious Functions, where the Pope's Nuncio is present, the
Patriarch is obliged to send the Master of the Ceremonies to ask his Permission
to give the Blessing. An Office of Inquisition is allowed at Venice, but under
such Restrictions, as render it as dependent on the political Government as any
of the secular Tribunals are. The Holy-Office is composed of the Patriarch, the
Nuncio, and a Friar, who has the Title of Father Inquisitor, and two
experienced Senators, without whose Presence and Consent, all Proceedings are
null; by this Means, and under this Pretext, that Matters brought before the
Inquisition are contrary to the Laws and Interest of the Republic, the greatest
Affairs of this Tribunal are reduced to a mere Trifle. The Convents in Venice
were formerly so ill regulated, that it occasioned much Scandal; but at
present, they are under better Discipline, for three Magistrates are appointed
by the Senate, with an extensive Authority, to take Cognizance of all that
passes in the female Monasteries; and though the Patriarch himself allows a
Priest to say Mass in one of their Churches, he is obliged to obtain a
Permission from one of these Magistrates besides, who limits this License to
what Time he thinks proper. All the Women likewise who perform any Commissions
for the Nuns, are obliged, under Penalty of corporal Punishment, to have Leave
in Writing to execute them, signed by one of the aforesaid Magistrates. The
Senate has, within these few Years, made many wise and useful Reformations in
the regular Convents of Friars also; and have transferred from the Superiors of
those Houses to the Senate, the Power of inflicting capital Punishments and
Imprisonment upon the Monks, and only allow them for the future to impose
Penances of Fasting, Prayers, and such like conventual Exercises.

Now we must return from spiritual to temporal Affairs again, that I may have
the Honor to introduce you to the Venetian Noblesse, who are not a little vain
of the great Antiquity of their Nobility, which they can certainly, many of
them at least, authenticate for several Ages past, better than any other Nation
we are acquainted with.

NOBILITY of the FIRST CLASS.

THE noble Venetians, who compose the first Class, comprehend the Families of
the twelve Tribunes who elected the first Doge in 709: the Contarini, Morosini,
Poli, Badovari, Tiepoli, Michele, Sanudi, Gradenigo, Memo, Falier, Dondolo, and
Barozzi. The four Families next to these in Point of Antiquity, date their
Nobility from the Year 800, when they signed the Contract for the Abbey of St.
George the Great; these are the Justiniani, Cornaro, Bragadini, and Bembo. The
first are popularly called the twelve Apostles, and the last the four
Evangelists. To this Class may be added also, eight Families who look upon
themselves as equal to the first, because long before il Serral del Consiglio,
which happened in 1289, they were very considerable; these are the Delphini,
Quirini, Soranzo, Zorzi, and Marcello; the other three, by Reason of extreme
Poverty, are fallen into total Obscurity, or perhaps are extinct: in this Class
too, may be placed some illustrious Families, who retired to Venice, from the
Town of Acre in Syria, when it was destroyed by the Venetian General TIEPOLI,
for having revolted from its Obedience to the Republic after the first Conquest
of it. The greatest Advantage these Families derive from their Antiquity is
being more considered in the Disposal of public Employments that reflect Honor
on the Possessors; in Point of Precedence, all the Nobility of Venice rank
alike.

NOBILITY of the SECOND CLASS.

THIS Class is composed of those who can produce no authentic Proof of their
Nobility earlier than 1289, when their Names were written in the Libro d'Oro,
which now contains more than five hundred Families. It was at that memorable
Event, il Serrar del Consiglio, that this List of the Nobles was first made
out, and a Law enacted, that if the Names of their Children were not written in
this Book within a certain Time after their Birth, they should forfeit their
Title to Nobility; and this also happens, if the Contract of their Parents'
Marriage does not legally pass the Senate, which it cannot do, if a noble
Venetian marries a public Performer, either in the Drama, or Music, one who has
been in a State of Servitude, or one whose Father is of any Profession or
Trade, excepting a Physician, a Manufacturer of gold or silver Silks, or a
Maker of Glass. As it is now upwards of four hundred Years since il Serrar del
Consiglio, this Class of Nobles is highly esteemed. The most considerable of
these Families that still exist, are the Moncenigo, the Capello, Foscarini,
Foscari, Grimani, Gritti, Garzoni, Lovedan, Dona, Nani, Malipiero, Pesoro,
Pisani, Priuli, Ruzzini, Sagredo, Valier, Venier, Bassadona, etc. etc. most of
these have given Doges to the Republic, and the reigning one at present is a
Moncenigo. In this Rank are also placed thirty Families that were ennobled
ninety-one Years later, on the Termination of the Genoese War, as a Reward for
assisting the State with vast Sums of Momey; the most considerable of these
that are remaining are the Trevisan, Vendramin, Renier, Justi, and Pasqualighi.

After having introduced you to so much good Company, I think you will not be
sorry if I take my Leave for the present; but I cannot do that, without first
assuring you, that I am, with Truth, etc. etc.

LETTER LXV. Miss N -- to Mr. HULL.
Venice, May 6, 1766.
TO proceed with my Subject where I left it in my last Letter, I must now talk
to you a little of a younger Branch of the Venetian Nobility, whom I shall
style the third Class, and even these are respectable for their Antiquity.

NOBILITY of the THIRD CLASS.

IN this Class are comprehended about eighty Families, who purchased their
Nobility for an hundred thousand Ducats each, during the last War of Candia;
some of these have remained poor and distressed ever since, by that Instance of
their Vanity: the following are still considerable for their Wealth and
Alliances, the Videman, Labia, Zenobia, Fini, Manini, Gambara, etc. etc. The
Savorgnan gave to the Republic some Fortresses of great Importance, for
guarding the Venetitian Territories from the Encroachments of the Turks; and
the Benzoni made the State a Present of the Province of Crema, of which they
possessed the Seignory; and for these free Gifts the two Families received the
Honor of being ennobled. Though the noble Venetians can authenicate the
Antiquity of their Nobility better than any People perhaps in Europe, yet not
content with this Advantage, they are fond of deriving their Families from
fabulous Originals: thus the Contarini, from a Similitude of Name, pretend to
be descended from ancient German Princes, who were styled Counts of the Rhine;
the Justiniani, who give for their Arms a Spread Eagle, from thence claim their
Descent from an Emperor of the East of their Name. I have been told a curious
Anecdote of this noble Family, that I will relate for your Amusement: some
Centuries past, they fitted out a Vessel, under the Doge VITAL MICHELE, to
fight against the Emperor EMANUEL; (who had ill treated the Venetians in the
Levant) the Justiniani were all cut to Pieces, and the only surviving Male was
a Benedictine Friar, for whom the Doge obtained a Dispensation of his Vows from
the Pope, and married him to his Daughter, and from this Couple are descended
the present Family, according to this Legend, which whether true or false I
shall not take upon me to determine. One Branch of the Cornaro Family style
themselves Cornaro della Regina, from one of their House having been Queen of
Candia; but this Alliance is rather a Blot in their Escutcheon, if a certain
evil Fame may be relied on, who says, that the Husband of this Lady was an
Usurper, whom she poisoned, and treacherously betrayed the Candians to the
Venetians. A Gentleman has promised to introduce me to a Lady of this Name, who
is a very agreeable, sensible Woman, and who, he says, will show me the
complete Ornaments of the Toilette of the Queen abovementioned, which is still
in the Possession of the Family, and valued by them at many thousand Ducats.

The CITIZENS, or ORDER of SECRETARIES.

THE Citizens had formerly a large Share in the Government, and Venice would
probably have always remained in a State of Democracy, had not the Resentment
of PIETRO GRADENIGO against many of the Class, who opposed his being chosen
Doge, determined him to transfer the Power entirely from the People into the
Hands of the Nobility, which he fully effected by Means of the Serrar del
Consiglio; at which Period, several of the Nobles lost their Rank, by not being
admitted into the Secret; and at present, by the Word Citizen, (at Venice) is
meant the Families thus excluded from the Grand Council, many of whom bear the
same Name and Arms of the old Nobility; and to these may be added many who by
Merit or Money have obtained the same Privileges in the Republic: they rank
with the Nobility of the Terra Firma, and one at least of every Family wears
the Vest, the same as the noble Venetians: it has been thought, this is allowed
them to prevent the People from observing how small a Number of Men they are
governed by. Though, by a standing Law, every noble Venetian is forbid to enter
into Trade, yet they often join privately in Commerce with the wealthy
Citizens, which the Senate winks at, because when they are become opulent, they
can make it turn to the Advantage of the State, by employing them in expensive
Embassies. From among the Citizens are chosen the Secretaries of the Senate,
Secretaries of Embassies, and also Residents at foreign Courts, for a noble
Venetian can accept of no Employment of that kind, but with the Title of
Ambassador; and, for the same Reason, the Republic receives no foreign Minister
in any intermediate Character between a Resident and an Ambassador. The Dignity
of Grand Chancellor is always conferred on one of this Class; and as it is the
highest Honor that can be attained by a Person who is not noble, it is
generally given as a Reward to one who has served the Republic well in
expensive Residencies. The Subjects of the Venetian State are by some rated, at
present, at about 2,655,448; but those who have made very accurate Enquiries
upon this Head affirm, that they are over-rated by one million.

Thus, my Friend, I have obeyed your Commands, and, in as concise a Manner as I
possibly could, have endeavored to give you a just Idea of the very
extraordinary Government of the Republic of Venice; I flatter myself, that by
offering you this at one View, I have saved you the Trouble of turning over
some Books which, besides being very dry reading, you might not easily have met
with: but was this little Extract (or whatever you are pleased to call it) to
fall under the Observation of a less indulgent Judgment than yours, I should,
with great Reason, fear being charged with having given it in a slovenly
incorrect Manner. I shall only advance, in my Defense, that you well know how
limited my Time is at Venice, and how strongly my natural Inclination leads me
to a much more entertaining Study than that of History; but to such a Friend as
yourself, I could not refuse a Gratification that it was in my Power to procure
you, at the trifling Expense of putting myself, for a few Hours, out of my Way;
I only wish you may find my Attempt satisfactory. However, before I entirely
quit this Subject, I cannot forbear communicating to you a few Reflections into
which it has naturally led me; it is melancholy to observe, that in a
Government so wise in many of its Parts, such gross Errors should be suffered
to pass uncorrected, as must in Time most certainly destroy the whole System. A
total Neglect evidently appears in the Education of the young Nobility, which
gives them an Ignorance, I had almost said Brutality, that renders them very
disagreeable in civil Society, and must prove an Obstacle to their becoming
wise and prudent Magistrates; and, added to this, the Licentiousness not only
permitted, but even encouraged, among the Clergy, has produced such a shameful
Neglect in Matters of true Religion, that Vice and Immorality seem to prevail
among all Ranks of People, which must in Time infallibly bring to a final
Dissolution this once flourishing and powerful Republic. How amazingly must the
Manners of the Venetians have been corrupted since their first Establishment,
if the Abbate LANGIER has drawn a true Character of them in his Storia Veneta,
P. 130, Libro 1. He says, Esigevansi Costumi puri, Condotta semplice, una Vita
laboriosia per Ottenere da Lei la Qualita di Cittadino. The same Author quotes
a Letter, written by CASSIODORUS, who was Minister from King THEODORICK to the
Tribunes of the maritime Isles, which contains these Words, Piu di sussante
piccole Isole essendo state Abitate successivamente intorno Rialto per
componere al fire questa Cita prodigiosa. P. 160. Libro 2. I have transcribed
this only by Way of observing how very early Rialto (now called Venice) became
a considerable Place. LANGIER places the Election of PAOLO LUCIO ANAFESTE, the
first Doge, in 697, which is twelve Years earlier than St. DISDIER's Account,
who says, this Prince was elected in 709. AMELOT DE LA HOUSSAI, in his History
of the Republic of Venice, says, The Government of Venice by Consuls and
Tribunes, which lasted 270 Years, may be called her Infancy; the despotic Reign
of the Doges, from PAOLO LUCIO ANAFESTE to SEBASTIAN RIANI, (which comprehends
463 Years) her Childhood; the Democracy, (which lasted above a Century) her
Youth, which, says he, was robust and vigorous; but, as it often happens in
similar Cases, it was disturbed and agitated by dangerous Paroxisms of Wars and
Revolts. Her Virility, he adds, began with il Serrar del Consiglio, and lasted
till the War of the League of Cambray, in 1309, which may be called the
Beginning of her old Age.

The Republic liberally rewarded SANAZAR for the following very flattering
Epigram: Viderat Adriacis Venetum NEPTUNUS in Undis
Stare Urbem and toto dicere Jura Mari.
I nunc Tarpeias, quantum vis, JUPITER, arces
Objice, and illa tui Maenia MARTIS, ait:
Si Tiberim Pelago confers, Urbem aspice utramque,
Illam Homines dices, hanc possuisse Deos.


Thus hastily translated by a Gentleman of my Acquaintance: NEPTUNE within the
Adriatic Seas
Beheld fair Venice her rich Turrets raise,
And seem over all the Main to issue her Decrees --
JOVE, quoth the God, on all thy Power I call
To equal this -- bring thine own MARS's Wall --
Tarpeian Cliffs -- immortal Tyber's Waves,
Where mighty Rome her deep Foundations laves,
Compare the Cities, and reluctant own,
Thy proudest Toils by what I guard outdone;
Works but of human Skill thy Bulwarks stand,
Mine boast the Touch of an immortal Hand.


As I am very partial to this famous Republic, even in her present faulty
State, I cannot do better than to take my Leave of her, after paying her so
high a Compliment; and at the same Time shall bid you, my dear Friend, adieu
for some Time, as I propose leaving Venice in a few Days, and from what Place I
shall next write to you, I cannot at present foresee. Farewell, believe me, etc.
etc.

LETTER LXVI. Miss N --, to Mr. HULL.
Palluello, June 20. My dearest Friend,
THE kind Expressions in your welcome Epistle, and superabundant Thanks for my
Venetian Extract, were, I assure you, a Cordial to my Heart. I am rejoiced that
our worthy Patroness has passed so good a Winter, and hope the Summer will be
still more propitious to her.

You will see by the Date of this Letter, we have changed our Situation, and
are got to a sweet Retirement, on the Banks of the Brenta; the House is large,
convenient, clean and cheerful; the Gardens spacious, and in good Order; and
the whole Atmosphere perfumed with Roses, Jasmines and Orange Flowers, which we
have in great Profusion. The River, which is in the Front of the House, affords
a continual moving Picture of large Barges, passing to and fro from Venice to
Padua, from either of which Places we can have any Thing brought by Water to
the very Door. The north Side of the River is planted with Forest Trees, and
the south Side with Vines that hang in beautiful Festoons, supported by other
Trees: in short, we want nothing but a few liberal Souls (such as distinguish
the Party you are with) in this Neighborhood, to render this delicious Spot an
absolute terrestrial Paradise; yet, I am sure, whilst you have the Advantage of
such a Society, you would not exchange your retired Spot for all I have been
describing; and in this Preference, I join with you most cordially, and beg my
best Love to all the dear Members that are so happy to be collected within the
magic Circle.

A hasty Summons (on Account of the Departure of the Packet that contains this
Trifle) obliges me to use more Brevity than I am either accustomed or inclined
to. I cannot, however, send it off without enclosing a Piece of News, that I
flatter myself is not quite indifferent to you; namely, that, please God no
unforeseen Accident intervenes, in a twelve-month's Time, at farthest, I may
probably be so happy as to salute you all in your usual dear Assembly-Room. Be
persuaded, however, of this simple Truth, that whether the Time I am absent
from you all is long or short, or the Distance great or small, I am ever, and
shall always remain, with the same Affection and Sincerity,

your ever faithful and obliged S. N --.
Pray let me have the Pleasure to hear from you soon.

P. S. By the Bye, I have a Favor in the Transcript-Way to entreat of you. You
do not forget, I am sure, that, previous to my setting off for Venice, I was
hurried about (my usual Fate) from Spot to Spot, and sent you occasional
Accounts of such Places and Events as I thought best worth your Notice. A dear
Friend here wishes to see them: now, as some Time is elapsed, it would save my
Head as well as Hand much Trouble, if you would oblige me with Copies of those
Letters, provided you have thought them worth preserving: I mean only (as you
may imagine) the descriptive Parts of them.



LETTER LXVII. This and the ensuing Letters are the Transcripts desired in the
foregoing, which, the Editor presumes, are not an unwelcome Addition.
Miss N -- to Mr. HULL.
Bridgenorth, July 5. Dear Sir,
I THINK myself so much obliged to you, for you taking so much Notice of my
insignificant Scrawl, that I am not the least inclined to find fault with the
Length of Time you have taken in answering my last; and to show my Sincerity in
this Particular, I am sat down to acknowledge your Favor, though I have not
had it in my Possession longer than this Afternoon, for it has lain some Time
in London. I have been on a Visit to a worthy Friend of ours, at this Place,
for a Month past, and I assure you, I have all the Reason in the World to be
satisfied with my Journey. Pray, good Sir, did you ever see Bridgenorth? I
believe not -- Very well; then I must give you some little Description of this
Place, (as I am habituated to do of every new Spot I tread upon, whether large
or small) for I think Bridgenorth is, in Point of Situation, by much the
prettiest I ever saw; it is divided into two Parishes, distinguished by the
Names of the Upper and Lower Town. I was, the other Day, on a Visit to the
Rector of the upper Parish; the Parsonage-House is a truly Gothic Structure,
which overlooks the Churchyard, and though I cannot say, this is the most
pleasant, yet it certainly is not the least useful Prospect in the World, to a
speculative Mind. The upper Town is situated on a Cliff, which renders it very
wholesome, both from its Height, and the Clearness of the Air. The View from our
back Windows is more beautiful than any Thing you can imagine: at the Foot of
the Hill, the Severn rolls its crystal Waves, in a charming serpentine Stream,
down to the Banks whereof, is a Succession of sloping Gardens, that vie with
each other in Beauty, Fragrance, and Order. On the opposite Side, in a Vale,
lies the lower Town, and above that are delightful Fields and Meadows,
interspersed with fine Plantations of Trees of a long Growth. The Grounds, by
an easy Ascent, terminate at last in a Common, fifteen Miles long, on which is
a very good Horse-Course; to the left, the Prospect is bounded by a very high
Rock, and on the right, as far as the Eye can stretch, is a fine open fertile
Country; this strong Contrast has a most happy Effect. A noble Object in this
inimitable Landscape is the Ruin of an old Castle, which, from the Position
wherein it has been left by a Cannon-Ball, is, perhaps, one of the greatest
Curiosities in Europe; it strikes us with Admiration and Awe, while we
contemplate its nodding Towers, which look as if they meant to overwhelm the
heedless Passenger in sudden Destruction; yet the Mathematicians affirm, that
nothing less than an Earthquake can move this immense Pile of Building. Round
it is a delightful Walk, where we often repair when the Weather is inviting;
but when this happens not to be the Case, we have for our Amusement, in the
House, a Microscope, a reflecting Tellescope, and a Camera Obscura: the first
of these is my Favorite; Mr. L --, by the help of it, the other Day, detected
a Beau of an Humble Be, in the very Act of scratching a Louse (Oh, shameful
Truth!) off the downy Part of his Neck, and this little Animal, though scarcely
perceptible to the naked Eye, is a most tremendous Figure, much resembling a
Hog, in the Glass; for my Part, though I am not apt to be attracted by gaudy
Colors, I am absolutely in love with the radiant Armor of a green Beetle,
richly gilded, with a Sunbeam. I own to you, my good Friend, I have a hearty
Contempt for the Coxcombs of the human Race, who place all their Happiness in
Dress, when I consider that an humble Moth, in the simple Habit which Nature
has given it, far outshines them in all the Glitter of Lace and Embroidery.

Whenever we amuse ourselves with these Sort of Contemplations, our worthy
Neighbor the Pastor, never fails to make Improvement go Hand in Hand with
Amusement, by taking Occasion to expatiate on the Wisdom and bounteous Goodness
of our great Creator, exemplified in the most minute, as well as in the
greatest Objects of Nature. This excellent Man edifies his Parishioners as much
by the exemplary Life he leads, as by the sound and orthodox Doctrine he
delivers from the Pulpit, and he does this with the most cheerful Disposition
that can be, and totally free from the least Shadow of Ostentation; we attend
him every Morning to public Prayers in the Church.

Now, my good Friend, I have given you a very particular Account of my present
Situation, and leave it to you to judge, if it is not very agreeable. I must
add to this, that I got here Time enough for the Races, where there was a great
Appearance of Company, (for such a Place;) though Men were scarce, I got a
Partner each Night. Lord STAMFORD's Family were the first in Rank. Lady MARY
GRAY opened the Ball, and I had the Honor to dance a Minuet with Mr. GRAY, the
first Night: indeed, I have met with so much Politeness and Goodness from every
Body in this Part of the World, that I am sure I shall be grieved to leave
Bridgenorth. My first setting out from London was not so lucky, for I was
robbed and terrified almost to Death; but, thank God, my Loss was but small,
and I have entirely recovered my Spirits.

I desire my Love and best Respects to the worthy Family you are with, and am

your very faithful Friend, S. N --.

LETTER LXVIII. Miss N -- to Mr. HULL.
Dunkeld, July 22.
I HAVE been some Time without hearing from you. I hope the excellent President
of our Society is not laid up with her old Plague, the Gout. If social Worth
could ward off Malady, she would never be ill. Perhaps you have not been in the
Writing-Vein; such a Fit attacks us all at Times, and you know it is our Rule
reciprocally to allow for it. If that is the Case, do but subscribe the
Initials of your Name to a good, though short Account of yourselves, and I will
rest contented.

I know not what I said in my last, but to the best of my Rememberance, I gave
you no Account of this terestrial Paradise; but now I am more acquainted with
its Beauties, I will make an Attempt of that Sort.

The " Sweet winding Tay," which runs at the Bottom of our Garden, for upwards
of six Miles, forms the most beautiful Canal you can imagine; on the one Side
of it, for the same Extent, are delightful Walks, rising one above another, no
less than five Stages, all amply shaded with stately Trees, from around whose
Trunks the twining Woodbine and Sweet-Briar pours forth a Profusion of Sweets;
the sloping Sides of the Walks are also planted with Variety of sweet smelling
Shrubs, which being fanned by the fresh Breezes off the River, scatter Perfumes
in a plenteous and grateful Return, along the verdant Banks. At judicious
Distances are placed grassy Seats, moss-grown Cells, and flowery Arbours, all
which, in their several Turns, would invite us to sit down and indulge
Contemplation, but that the unwearied Mind, enraptured with these enchanting
Objects, urges us to proceed in Search of new Beauties, and in that Pursuit it
cannot here meet with the slightest Disappointment. The opposite Side of the
River is a deep Bank, finely fringed with Wood of a younger Growth; at
different Points of View, we see the Brawn, another beautiful River, and a
foaming Cascade; each paying the Tribute of their lucid Stores into the crystal
Bosom of the Tay, who, as if conscious of superior Merit, trips nimbly along,
in Murmurs of Self-Applause. This charming Prospect is at last closed with
Views of distant Ruins, Hills covered with Trees, fertile Vales, and Mountains
of a most venerable Appearance, covered with a Heath so beautiful, that it may
vie with the glowing Amaranthus. The Gardens are very extensive, and laid out
in the finest Taste, that is to say, with Grandeur and Simplicity united.
Nature appears here in her loveliest Attire, and Art is contented to act in her
proper Sphere, as Handmaid to the Goddess. We seldom drink Tea in the House;
sometimes an elegant Tent and Marquis is pitched at some fine Point of View;
sometimes we resort to a fine banqueting Room, and often the Shade of a large
spreading Oak has the Preference. Upon these Occasions the Duke always reads
and we work. What most attracts my Admiration here is, to perceive that in
every surrounding Object, Utility adds Merit to Beauty: the Farm-Houses on this
Estate are neat as the Hand of Industry can make them, and cheerful as the
Smiles of Content; and every Creature that breathes upon this Spot seems to
participate in the unfeigned Happiness of the excellent Possessors, whose
Goodness adds the highest Luster to Wealth and Title that they are capable of
receiving. It was well said, whoever made the Observation, that a good Action
never loses its reward; here was I sat down, full of Love and Respect to write
my dearest Friends a dutiful and loving Letter, when lo, and behold! I was made
happy by the Receipt of yours; and truly rejoiced I am to find, that my Fears
are groundless; however, I don't feel happy at the Thought of our Society's
meeting with any Interruption to its Pleasures. Believe my Assurance sincere,
when I affirm, that I think the Content which reigns therein, far excels in
Value the highest Gratifications that Show and Grandeur can bestow on its
restless Votaries. Pray have you ever read DE TOUCHE's Comedies? I am positive
such excellent Subjects, modelled for our Stage, would be of public Emolument,
and I should hope, would be productive of both Honor and Profit to the
Undertaker. I am afraid, by what you say of Dunkeld, I gave you an Account of
its Beauties in my last, if so, this will be a horrid, stupid Repetition; in
that Case, commit me to the Flames without the least Remorse of Conscience. I
hope the Sight of a Letter directed by the Pen of a fine young Gentleman, will not
give you any Alarm; I confess it has done so by me, since this new fashioned
Way of franking. Adieu! In more Haste than can be expressed, believe me ever

your very sincere Friend, S. N --.

LETTER LXIX. Miss N -- to Mr. HULL.
Dunkeld, Sept. 10, 1764.
HOW strong and wonderful, my good Friend, is the Force of Habit! I remember,
near upon my Departure from the dear Society in Somersetshire, I felt an
awkward Kind of -- I don't know what -- when it was proposed that I should
maintain a continual Correspondence with one of the other Sex, during my
Absence. I felt this, even in spite of the Conviction, that writing to you,
was, in fact, but writing to the whole Circle. How idle! -- Now that I have
done so, for some Time, I have taught myself to address you, with as little
Reserve, as if you were my real, instead of my nominal Uncle. So much the
better -- Reserve was not made for true Friendship, and liberal Minds, and with
none but such do I correspond. -- So much by Way of Digression; now, to return
to my little Travels.

We have been these six Weeks past at Atholl House, a very magnificent Seat of
the Duke's, twenty Miles higher up in the Highlands than this Place is; though
it far exceeds Dunkeld in Grandeur, yet I own the rural Beauties of the latter,
have more Charms for my humble Disposition; Providence having, no doubt,
designed me to tread the "Cool sequestered Vale of Life," has bounded my Ideas
accordingly, and I look upon this as one of the numberless Instances I have
experienced of the Divine Bounty. The Country about Atholl is very romantic and
beautiful; in some Places rather wild, in others very fertile, which forms a
fine Contrast. The House is immensely large, the Rooms are infinite in Number,
finely proportioned, and elegantly furnished throughout; it is situated in a
very extensive Vale, amply wooded, and ornamented with four beautiful Rivers,
all of which, at different Places, lose themselves in the Tay. Some of them
from the Tops of very high Mountains receive a prodigious Increase from the
finest natural Cascades you can imagine, which is a Sight extremely beautiful,
and at the same Time very tremendous. The Kitchen-Garden is the finest Thing of
the Kind that in my Life I ever saw; elegant Summer-houses, Alcoves, Octagons,
etc. etc. often tempted us to drink Tea abroad, and enjoy the fine extensive
Views at Leisure. I should have told you, that the Vale is surrounded with
Hills and Mountains, at such a Distance, that instead of confining the
Prospect, they add greatly to the Grandeur of it.

I must not omit to mention a natural Curiosity I here met with, of a very
extraordinary Kind: M' PHERSON, Lord of Foignes, two Years before the Peace,
raised eight and twenty Men to serve in America; who unanimously declared when
they came to embark, that they would not have enlisted, had they not thought
they should have served under him; the generous Lord was so struck with this
Proof of their Attachment, that he declared they should not be disappointed,
and, at the Age of seventy-two, asked Leave to serve as a Volunteer; during the
Remainder of the Campaign he was present in every Action, was always ready to
expose his Person, and never was a single Day prevented by Illness from doing
his Duty; the Government has rewarded his spirited Generosity with a
Lieutenancy, and Leave to retire upon full Pay, so that now, like the
Patriarchs of old, he wages more harmless Wars with the feathered Race and
swift-footed Stag: now, at near fourscore Years of Age, he is able to walk and
scramble amongst the Mountains, the whole Day, in Pursuit of Game. How few, my
good Friend, of our degenerate Countrymen, are at such an Age able to serve
their King and Country! Enervated by Sloth and Luxury, long before that Period
of Life, they become a Burden to themselves, and a Torment to all about them.
When I looked at the military Garb and venerable silver Locks of this northern
Hero, I fancied I saw in his single Person an Epitome of all the illustrious
Greeks that served in the Siege of Troy; and if my Heart had been inclined to
change its present Situation, I verily believe I should without Hesitation have
bestowed it upon this warlike Mountaineer.

I fear the Season is now approaching, when our friendly Association must lose
some of its agreeable Ornaments; I feel for the Mortification a sensible Mind
must suffer, at being obliged to quit the Society of a favorite few, to mix
with the unthinking many: but hope that the kind Genius of Friendship will
interpose a Gleam of Pleasure, at the Prospect of a future Meeting.

My Love to all, you know, is a constant Commission, and I am sure you will
never forget to discharge it. How is that best of good Beings, our President,
our Patroness, our Life, our Spirit, our all? Is she not the worthiest of
Heaven's Worthies? Was there ever Acquaintance who did not esteem her, Friend
who did not love her, Domestic who did not bless her, or Indigent, who came to
her Door, that did not pray for her? Long may she remain with us! and whenever
it pleases Providence to remove her from Earth, may she receive Blessings in a
future State, in as ample Portions, as she, through Life, has ever wished and
endeavored to dispense them to her Fellow Creatures.

S. N --.

LETTER LXX. Miss N -- to Mr. HULL.
Kimbolton-Castle, Nov. 22.
DID you ever expect to hear of, or from me again? Ever since I received your
last, I have lived the ^ife of a Whirlagig, but be assured that I had not a
Moment to tell you so. The dear Spot I left was always in my Thoughts, and
indeed as yet my poor Brain is far from being in a composed State; a scribbling
Moment too is the only good Thing that is scarce here. A few Days after I
received yours we left the calm Sweets of Dunkeld, and went to pay a second
Visit at Lord BREADALBANE's, where all was Mirth, Music, Masquerades, etc. etc.
From thence we set forth on our Return toward a southern Sun, and gentler
Breezes, and stopped for a few Days at the elegant and superb Seat of Lord
BINGLEY, near York; there we found a brilliant Assembly of Ladies and
Gentlemen, who had met to dine and play Cards, however, most of them went away
in the Evening, and we remained a decent Party for the rest of the Time; from
thence we bent our Course to this magnificent Castle, hoping, wishing, and
expecting, to find a quiet, peaceable Family till Christmas, when we knew a
delicious Riot was always intended; but lo, and behold! here we found his
Highness of York, Lord and Lady CHARLES SPENCER, Lady CHATHERINE, and Mr.
BEAUCLERK, Lord and Lady LUDLOW, and a World more of fine Folks; the very first
Night we were forced to join in a Ball, and every Day, whilst his Highness
stayed, we had Music in the Mornings, and Cards or Dancing at Night; I believe
every Creature was fatigued with Pleasures, and I can answer for one who was
glad when it was over; the Duke of YORK was so pleased with his Entertainment,
that it is not impossible but he may return at Christmas. We are now a sober
decent Party of ten or twelve, and, like rational Beings, read and work in the
Evenings; and, to show you that all this Dissipation does not totally banish
serious Thoughts, we have Prayers constantly every Morning in a beautiful
Chapel in the Castle. I take it for granted, that you know, all this Time, that
the Owner of this Palace is the Duke of MANCHESTER, who is a very amiable young
Nobleman, his Brother, Lord CHARLES MONTAGU, is no less so, the Duchess is
beautiful, polite, and a very good young Woman; but the Character that I could
dwell upon with Delight for Ages, is Lady CAROLINE MONTAGU, the Duke's Sister.
If ever perfect Goodness chose to dwell with mere Mortality, one may imagine it
inhabits her Breast; and I flatter myself, that you will not conceive the worse
Idea of her Ladyship, when I tell you, that she honors me with a very
particular Friendship, unworthy as I am of such a valuable Distinction. Don't
think I flatter, for I am perfectly sincere, when I assure you, that I often
think, amidst this perpetual Round of gay Amusements, with infinite Regret of
the dear social Party, wherewith I have spent some of the happiest and most
rational Moments of my Life; I gave such a Picture of it to a young Man of
great Quality and good Sense, a little while ago, that he made me pass my Word,
if ever we met at --, to introduce him to the Lady Patroness of the agreeable
Society. I beg my best Affections to all the dear Associates; I rejoice,
without the least Mixture of Envy, at my worthy Namesake's happy Prospects, and
sincerely wish she may enjoy every Felicity the holy Estate can possibly
produce. I hope I need not say, that a Letter from you always gives me
Pleasure; you will, I am sure, indulge me between this and Christmas. Pray tell
me, in your next, if Mr. QUIN is not alive; besides the Concern I should feel
for his Death, I am engaged in a Wager about it.

I am become such a wandering Vagabond over the Face of the Earth, that I
should not be a Bit surprised to find myself conveyed suddenly to the utmost
Extent of the habitable Globe: I fear, I shall be less fortunate than NOAH's
Dove; she, at last, found Rest for the Sole of her Foot, but I doubt I shall
not, till my Soul has taken its Flight to some more happy Region; I assure you
I meant no Pun, but I see one has fallen from my Pen of its own Accord. I heard
from our Friends in -- since I got here, and have the Satisfaction to find they
are all well.

I would attempt to give you some Idea of this Place, but there is a
Magnificence and Extensiveness in it, that goes far beyond the Capacity of my
Pen. The Castle is a very large and regular Building, the Connoisseurs say the
Architecture is very just; it is expensively furnished, though not in the modern
Taste; there are many good Paintings that this Duke bought in Italy. The Parks,
Lawns, etc. etc. are judiciously planted, and laid out in a good Taste; I find
the present Possessor has made many Improvements, and is making still more. The
Plate and Apparatus for the Table is more superb than any Thing of the Kind
that I have ever seen, and the Table is always elegantly covered; but I must
confess, this is the Kind of Luxury that pleases me the least, and I often
think, how much more healthy, and consequently happier, our Forefathers were,
than their degenerate Progeny, who live upon Ragouts, Fricasses, and
high-seasoned Meats.

Adieu! If you are tired with my moralizing, you will not be sorry, that both
my Time and Paper obliges me to assure you, that I am, with the sincerest
Truth, your ever obliged

S. N --.

LETTER LXXI. This and the following are evidently written on a second Trip to
Venice.
Miss N -- to Mr. HULL.
Paris, July 31. Dear Sir,
I NOW write to you from this Metropolis of Dirt and Gentility, which, owing to
the Narrowness of the Streets and Height of the Houses, puts me more in mind of
the Capital of North than of South Britain; but then the Grands Hotels are more
noble, and in greater Abundance than our Noblemen's Houses; and the Environs of
Paris are, in my Opinion, finer than those of London, which Place we left on
Thursday the 17th of this Month, and arrived here on Tuesday the 22d, without
meeting any disagreeable Accident during the Journey. We have got a very
elegant Apartment in one of the best Parts of Paris, and, you may be sure, have
lost no Time since our Arrival, in seeing every Thing that is worthy a
Stranger's Curiosity. The Thuilleries, of which French Novellists make such
frequent Mention, is a pleasant Place for the People of Fashion to take the Air
in. The Louvre, which, in outward Show, far exceeds any Palace we have, runs
along one End of it, and on the opposite Side a fine Square is building, called
the Place de Louis Quinze; there are noble shady Walks, and a charming Terrass,
that commands a fine View of Paris; but the old Taste, in which the Center of
the Garden is laid out, is frightful, and exactly resembles the Ornaments of a
Minced-Pye. There is another fashionable Rendezvous for the Evening Airings,
about a Mile out of Paris, that, I confess, pleases me still more, called the
Bois de Bullogne, where, instead of a sharp Gravel and crowded Walks, like our
Park, you may wander about at full Liberty, and tread upon a verdant Carpet all
the Time, which to tender-footed Folks makes a great Difference. We have seen
several private Collections of Paintings, and other Curiosities, that do great
Honor to the Taste and Judgment of the Possessors: but nothing charms me so
much, as a noble Collection of Pictures at the Palais Royale, which belongs to
the Duke of ORLEANS, first Prince of the Blood, and were chiefly purchased by
the famous Regent. The grand Opera here is the finest Thing to see one can
possibly imagine; the Scenes are splendid, the Dresses rich and elegant, the
Dances composed with infinite Taste, and finely executed, and the Stage much
better filled than ours: but the Music is truly detestable; it is all French,
and from the Beginning to the End like a solemn Dirge. As for the Voices, if
you will imagine a Concert composed of Cats, Owls, and Monkeys, it will give
you a tolerable Idea of the Harmony, and whoever assassinates your Ears with
the greatest Violence is most applauded. The French comic Opera is as agreeable
as the serious one is the reverse. The Songs are all sprightly Italian Airs;
the Scenery and Dresses, as at the other, excel ours, and to my Fancy, this is
the most agreeable Amusement Paris affords; their Manner of acting Plays, I
own, does not charm me, after being used to the genteel, familiar Dialogue of
our English Comedies; and even in Tragedy, I think they have too much Energy,
both of Voice and Action. I should not thus familiarly play the Critic, were I
not perfectly well acquainted with your Candor and Goodnature; for, after
all, I am talking of what I don't understand, and am as likely to be wrong as
right. So much by Way of Digression, a Liberty all modern Novellists allow
themselves; and now my Narrative proceeds to the Chapter of Fashions, for the
Sake of the female Members of your Party. The Ladies in general would, I
believe, be handsome, but for two shocking Dabs of Crimson, or Scarlet, which
some prefer, in a circular Form, directly under each Eye, which makes them look
just like so many Furies; the Hair dressed out of all Proportion, for often the
Height of the Hair is more a great Deal than the Length of the whole Face; even
I, who am quite moderate, am at least three Inches of Toupee taller than I was
when I left England; the Hoops are very small, the Ruffles very moderate, and
the Necks more covered than in England; the Gowns are made very high behind,
and pin pretty close before, and almost as wide at Bottom as at Top; the Pleats
of the Sacks behind are made narrower than ours. The married Ladies (indeed we
never see any other in public) all wear very small Caps. The Court being in
Mourning, prevents our seeing any other finery than Diamonds, in which the
Ladies seem to abound, in general, more than in England. Not a Head of any Sort
have I yet seen that is not absolutely plaistered with Pomatum and Powder,
those of the Poor as well as the Rich; I wonder the Consumption of Flower in
this Metropolis of well-dressed dirty People, does not breed a Famine: the
Streets are always so crowded with them, that you would swear Paris was the
most populous Place, and the Parisians the most idle Set of People, in the
whole World. A fashionable Custom here is, when the Comedy is finished, to
drive to what is called the Grande Boule Vert, one Side of which is shaded with
Trees, and the other filled with large Coffee-houses, finely illuminated, where
you see all Manner of Sport going forward, as Eating, Dancing, Music,
Puppet-Shows, Conjurers, Fireworks, Fire-Eaters, Giants, Lilliputians, etc.
etc. in short, you may be amused, in about the Length of the Mall, from eight
in the Evening till three in the Morning; but the genteel Way is only to drive
up and down the Walk without getting out of your Carriage. I am afraid that my
Description of Paris, and its Amusements, will tire both your Eyes and your
Patience, at least, it has done so by me, and I have scribbled in such a Hurry,
that it is not fit to send; but I flatter myself, you would rather have a
Letter ill written, than none; I am mortified though, that it will cost you a
great deal more postage than it is worth, and by the Time it reaches you, we
shall probably be pursuing our Journey, so that I cannot hope to hear a Word of
or from our dear Society till I get to Venice. In the mean Time, I beg to be
remembered in the kindest Manner, to every Member, and that you will believe me
to be, as I ever am, with Truth and Sincerity, yours and the Society's truly
affectionate and obliged

S. N --.
I hope you are able to enjoy this charming Weather, (for I hope it is such with
you as well as with us) by taking many agreeable Walks in your delightful
Meads. I assure you the Seine is nothing comparable to the Avon, and the Pont
Neuf, so much extolled by Fame and Frenchmen, is a paltry Affair, in Comparison
of Westminster-Bridge. Now I must have done, and I am sure you will be glad of
it.

I was so charmed, and so moved last Night at the Tragedy of Zayre, that I am
almost tempted to recant what I have said against the French Tragedians; but I
still feel a Partiality for our own Actors. I will not be so unreasonable to
teize you any longer with my Scrawl; once more adieu.



LETTER LXXII. Miss N -- to Mr. HULL.
Venice, Oct. 13, 1771. My dear Friend,
THE greatest Pleasure I can feel during my Exile is to hear good Accounts
frequently of those Friends in England that are most dear to me. I hope you
will answer this very soon, and be so good as to direct your Letter to me as
usual, under Cover to Mr. --, who has the Care of sending our Letters to the
Secretary of State's Office, by which Means I receive my Letters much safer,
than when they are not put in the Packet. It is not yet quite three Months
since I left England, and I declare it appears to me three Years already; we
were so fortunate, as to perform our Journey without one unlucky Accident. On
the twentieth of July, of all Days in the Year, we began our Peregrinations,
and arrived here on the twentieth of August, after stopping about five Days on
the Road, to see different Places that were worthy of Observation. We made no
small Figure, I assure you, at setting out; our Train consisting of two
Post-Coaches and two Post-Chaises: to our no small Amusement, we were mistaken
for Foreigners all the Way to Dover, which, I suppose, was owing to our wearing
large French Caps without Hats, and our Gentlemen being dressed in loose French
Coats, which are the most convenient Kind of Dress for traveling. We were not
quite three Hours crossing the Water; the Quickness of the Passage scarcely
made up for the Roughness of it, which was really frightful, even to me, who am
no despicable Sailor for a Female In short, I was the only Person well enough
to nurse, which was very necessary for the other Females in our Party. At
Calais we found two excellent Berlins waiting to conduct us to Strasbourg, in
which we proceeded with our two English Chaises. Our Route was quite different
from that by which we once went from Strasbourg to Paris, to my no small Joy,
for I think a twice-gone Road almost as bad as a twice-told Tale. I had an
Opportunity, by this Means, of seeing Beauties in Champaigne, which, till then,
I had no Idea of; for many Miles the Road formed an actual Terrass, bounded on
one Side by little Hills, interspersed with Vineyards and Corn Fields, and on
the other Side, the Eye is led, by a gentle Descent, down to the most fertile
Vales, the Verdure of which could scarcely be conceived from the Painting of
pastoral Poetry; through these, for an immense Way, meanders a most beautiful
serpentine River, whose Banks are adorned with innumerable Droves of Cattle of
every Sort, which puts one in Mind of the peaceful Reign of the Patriarchs,
since, being undivided, they appear to be the Property of one Master. You will
scarcely think, my good Friend, that these smiling Scenes could raise
melancholy Ideas, and yet they had that Effect upon my Mind; in almost every
Village we passed through, which had looked beautiful at a Distance, we found
all the Appearance of Wretchedness and Want that you see in the most dreary
Parts of Savoy, for what the Extravagance and Luxury of the Prince of CONDE
(part of whose immense Territory this is) leaves to the Peasants, is wrecked
from them by the lazy Priests, who, like Locusts, seem to be sent only to eat
up the Riches of the Land; here you see no hospitable Gentleman's Seat; no
warm, neat Cottages; those are Comforts reserved only for the English, who
would, perhaps, be more grateful for the Blessings they enjoy, if they
possessed fewer of them. But to return to our Journey; the fine Season of the
Year, good Roads, and every where tolerable Accommodations, carried us in
twelve Days to Strasbourg, where we stopped for three Days, and where you may,
if you please, suppose we shall remain till you hear from me next, as I shall
defer the Rest of my Account of our Journey for a future Letter.

The Masking is just begun, and two comic Operas, and two Play Houses opened; I
have been once at the Opera, and caught such a Cold, (partly, I suppose, a
Tribute to the Season of the Year, and partly to Change of Climate) that, for
fear of the like Accident, I shall frequent Theaters very little, unless I am
tempted by a Party.

I fear, my dear Friends, your Patience will be quite tired out before you get
to the Conclusion of this very long Letter; but as I can only send a single
Letter, I could not resist taking the largest Paper, and I cannot bear to send
it you blank.

I am just in the disagreeable Situation I was this Time two Years, when I was
so happy to be with you, almost all my worldly Goods being at the Mercy of the
Waves, and the Ship ought to have been here at least a Month ago. Adieu, my
dearest Friends; may you enjoy every earthly Good, and may we be mutually happy
in a joyful Meeting, is the earnest Wish and Prayer of

your sincerely affectionate S. N --.

LETTER LXXIII. Miss N -- to Mr. HULL.
Venice, Jan. 26, 1772.
I Received with infinite Pleasure, my dear Friends, your very kind Letter; the
good Account you give of yourselves is really and truly a Happiness to me, and
you have my sincere Prayers and good Wishes, that your Health and Spirits may
daily improve. I make no Doubt, but your Tour was a delightful one: there is
about you, our sweet Patroness, a certain Cheerfulness and Good Humor that
proceeds immediately from the Heart, that not only illuminates her own
Disposition, but inspires those about her with the most pleasing Sensations the
human Mind is capable of feeling. I beg of you to present my best Affections to
the Doctor and Mrs. W --, and assure them, that I take the sincerest Part in
their Affliction; my good Papa's filial Piety always appeared to me a shining
Part of his Character -- my Love and sincere good Wishes attend every Member of
the dear Society; would to God I could say, I had any Prospect of being soon
reunited to that best of all possible Societies: but, alas! that is not to be
hoped for: what must be, must be, and I make no Doubt it is right.

Now, my dear Friend, I must beg of you to take a Step back with me to
Strasbourg, for there, I think, we parted last; from thence we steered our
Course to Ball, (or Bazill, as it is called in the Maps) in Switzerland. This
Change in our Route delighted me,. We were induced to make this little Round,
to avoid a great Part of Swabia, where we heard the Roads were almost
impassable, the Water unwholesome, a great Scarcity of Provisions, and the
Measles raging every where; Ball is extremely well worth the Observation of
Travelers; the Situation is on a very noble Part of the Rhine, which runs
through the Town; it also merits the Attention of the Lovers of Virtu, as the
best Relict of the famous HOLBENS (known by the Name of Death's Dance) is
preserved in the public Library. From Ball we proceeded to Schafhausen, another
of the protestant Swiss Cantons; about three Miles hence is the Cataract of the
Rhine, an Object which I contemplated with a Mixture of Horror and Pleasure,
easier to be felt than described, which I beg you will tell my Papa conveyed to
me a clearer Idea of the Sublime and Beautiful, than I could ever gather even
from Mr. BURKE. We next traveled a very pleasant Road, and caught many fine
Views of the famous Lake de Constance: but upon the whole, though I like
Swisserland well enough, en-passant, there is an unpolished melancholy Air,
even in the greatest Towns, that is disgusting. When we got into the Tyrrol,
every Thing lost the Charm of Novelty to me, and I had only the mortifying
Reflection to make, that when I last passed those rugged Paths, I was going
toward England, and now, alas! was going from it. As we met with no Adventures
new or surprising, I will trouble you with no further Particulars of our
Journey, save that we arrived at Venice the twentieth of August, after being
exactly a Month on the Road, without meeting with one Overturn, broken
Axeltree, or other sinister Accident whatever.

And now let me say a few Words for myself, independent of Company. Since the
twenty sixth of December, every Creature here, that has Spirits enough to be
so, has appeared quite mad; indeed, Venice (in Carnival-Time especially) is
only fit for those who can place their Happiness in Vice, Folly, and
Dissipation; indeed, I am not only a professed, but a sincere Enemy to these
three: you will believe me, when I tell you, that I am horridly out of my
Element here, and I feel the greatest Conviction, that I shall never taste a
hearty Satisfaction, till I again enjoy our rational, dear friendly Society;
but I fear the Time is very far distant when I shall be allowed to partake of
such enviable Amusements. You know I mean, in this Declaration, only to refer
to the Customs of the Place, not to the Party wherewith I came, which is
indisputably as rational and amiable as can be enjoyed, uninterrupted with
Hurry of Place and ceremonial Visitors. I believe you have often heard me
mention a Mrs. S --, a very particular Friend of mine, who has been settled
here many Years, and now, having lost a Husband in his ninety-ninth or
hundredth Year, she is preparing to return to England; we have talked so much
and so often of you all, that she is persuaded she is acquainted with you, and
begs me to give her Compliments to you; and I verily believe, she will be
tempted when she arrives, to make you a friendly Visit.

I am ashamed to send you such a horrid Scrawl, but I have wrote it by
Snatches, with most vile Implements; the Date will faithfully show you it was
begun on the twentysixth of January, and now I am concluding it on the ninth of
February, so that you may be assured, though I seem dilatory in writing, I, by
no Means, intend to be so. I was in Hopes to have popped this into a Dispatch:
but, alas! they are grown scarce Commodities at our House.

We have no less than three Operas and four Play Houses open; and, would you
believe it! I am grown so old or so stupid, that I prefer a Book or a Pen by
the Fireside, to any of them. I am much abused for this Want of Taste; but so
hardened a Sinner am I, that it grows every Day stronger on me. Adieu, my dear
good Friend; may every Felicity and Blessing attend you all! Such is the
sincere Prayer of your ever

faithful and affectionate S. N --.

FINIS.
Books published by J. Dodsley.
N. B. The Books are to be understood as bound, except where mentioned
otherwise.

1. THE ANNUAL REGISTER, or a View of the History, Politics, and Literature of
the present Times. Commencing in the Year 1758, continued to the Year 1776, and
to be continued annually, 8vo. 5s. 6d. each Volume, half bound. 2. Polymetis;
or, an Enquiry concerning the Works of the Roman Poets, and the Remains of the
ancient Artists. Being an Attempt to illustrate them mutually from one another.
In Ten Books. By the Rev. Mr. Spence. Illustrated with a great Number of fine
Prints, folio, 2l. 12s. 6d. 3. The Works of Dr. Jonathan Swift, D. S. P. D. in
22 vols. large 8vo. 6l. 12s. 4. The same Book, in 24 vols. small 8vo. 3l. 12s.
5. The same Book, in 21 vols. 18mo. 2l. 2s. 6. The Letters of Pliny the Consul;
with occasional Remarks. By William Melmoth, Esquire. 2 vol. 8vo. 10s. 7. The
Letters of Marcus Tullius Cicero to several of his Friends; with Remarks. By
William Melmoth, Esquire. 3 vols. 8vo. 18s. 8. The Letters of Sir Thomas
Fitzosborne, Bart. by the Translator of Pliny's Letters, etc. 8vo. 5s. 9. The
Preceptor; containing a general Course of Education; wherein the first
Principles of polite Learning are laid down in a Way most suitable for trying
the Genius, and advancing the Instruction of Youth: in Twelve Parts, viz. 1. On
Reading, Speaking, and Writing Letters. 2. On Geometry. 3. On Geography and
Astronomy. 4. On Chronology and History. 5. On Rhetoric and Poetry. 6. On
Drawing. 7. On Logic. 8. On Natural History. 9. On Ethics or Morality. 10. On
Trade and Commerce. 11. On Laws and Government. 12. On Human Life and Manners.
The several Parts of this Compendium of polite Learning are executed in so
judicious a Manner, as to render them, not only necessary for Youth at Schools;
but of Service to Gentlemen also, who would either retain what they may have
formerly learned there, or acquire what has hitherto been seldom there taught.
Illustrated with Maps and other Cuts, 2 vols. 8vo. 12s.

10. A Collection of Poems by several Hands, 6 vols. small 8vo. 18s. 11. The
same Book, printed on a large Letter and Paper, in 6 vols. 1l. 16s. 12. Odes of
Pindar, with several other Pieces in Prose and Verse, translated from the
Greek. To which is prefixed, a Dissertation on the Olympic Games. By Gilbert
West, Esquire. LL.D. 4to. 12s. 13. The same Book, in 3 vol. 12mo. 9s. 14.
Observations on the History and Evidences of the Resurrection of Jesus Christ.
By Gilbert West, Esquire. LL.D. 15. The Works of the Rev. Dr. Edward Young, 4 vols.
12mo. 12s. 16. The Works of the Rev. Dr. Edward Young, vol. 5, 12mo. 3s. 17.
The Complaint; or, Night Thoughts on Life, Death, and Immortality. By Dr.
Young, 12mo. 3s. 18. The Centaur not Fabulous, in six Letters, on the Life in
Vogue. By Dr. Young, 12mo. 3s. 19. A philosophical Enquiry into the Origin of
our Ideas of the Sublime and Beautiful, 8vo. 5s. 20. The Adventurer. By John
Hawkesworth, Esquire. and others, 4 vols. 12mo. 12s. 21. Poems by Dr. Akenside,
4to. 1l. 1s. 22. The same Book, in 8vo. 6s. 23. The new Bath Guide, or Memoirs
of the B -- r -- d Family, in a Series of poetical Epistles, 2s. 6d. sewed. 24.
A comparative View of the State and Faculties of Man with those of the Animal
World, 12mo. 3s. 25. Letters from Juliet Lady Catesby to her Friend Lady
Henrietta Campley, 12mo. 3s. 26. The History of Lady Julia Mandeville. 2 vols.
12mo. 6s. 27. The History of Emily Montagu, 4 vols. 12mo. 12s. 28. The World,
by Adam Fitz-Adam, 4 vols. 12mo. 12s. 29. Visions in Verse, for the
Entertainment and Instruction of younger Minds, 12mo. 2s. 30. Poems by John
Dyer, LL.B. viz. 1. Grongar-Hill. 2. The Ruins of Rome. 3. The Fleece in four
Books. Small 8vo. 3s. 31. Fables for the Female Sex. By Edward Moore, adorned
with Cuts, 8vo. 5s. 32. Poems by Mr. Gray, with Designs by Mr. Bentley, large
4to. 10s. 6d. boards. 33. Relics of Ancient English Poetry: consisting of old
Heroic Ballads, Songs, and other Pieces of our earlier Poets (chiefly of the
Lyric Kind) together with some few of later Date, 3 vols. small 8vo. 10s. 6d.
34. The Microscope made easy; or, 1. The Nature, Uses, and magnifying Powers of
the best Kinds of Microscopes described, calculated, and explained; for the
Instruction of such particularly as desire to search into the Wonders of the
Minute Creation, though they are not acquainted with Optics; together with full
Directions how to prepare, apply, examine, and preserve, all Sorts of Objects,
and proper Cautions to be observed in viewing them. 2. An Account of what
surprising Discoveries have been already made by the Microscope; with useful
Reflections on them. And also a great Variety of new Experiments and
Observations, pointing out many uncommon Subjects for the Examination of the
Curious. By Henry Baker, F. R. S. and of the Society of Antiquaries in London,
8vo. 5s. 35. Employment for the Microscope; containing Examinations of a great
Variety of Substances, with Directions how to prepare such Substances, also
occasional Considerations on them; and an Account of various Animalcules never
before described, and many other microscopical Discoveries. By Henry Baker, F.
R. S. and of the Society of Antiquaries, 8vo. 6s. 36. An Attempt toward a
Natural History of the Polype, with a real Course of Experiments, performed by
cutting these Creatures every Way that can be easily contrived; showing the
daily Progress of each Part toward becoming a perfect Polype. By Henry Baker,
F. R. S. and of the Society of Antiquaries, 8vo. 4s. 37. The Anatomy of the
Human Body. By W. Cheselden, Surgeon to His Majesty's Royal Hospital at
Chelsea, F. R. S. and Member of the A^y of Surgeons at Paris; illustrated with
forty Copper Plates, 8vo. 6s. 38. The Operations in Surgery of Mons. Le Dran.
Translated by Mr. Gataker; with Remarks, Plates of the Operations, and a Set of
Instruments, by Mr. Cheselden, 8vo. 6s. 39. Select Fables of Aesop and other
Fabulists. In three Books; 1. Fables from the Ancients. 2. Fables from the
Moderns. 3. Fables newly invented. To which are prefixed, the Life of Aesop,
and an Essay on Fable. By R. Dodsley, with Cuts to every Fable, 12mo. 3s. 40.
The same Book, elegantly printed by Mr. Baskerville, small 8vo. 5s. 41.
Original Letters, written by Mr. Pope to a Lady, and not printed in his Works,
small 8vo. 2s.

