A LECTURE ON MUSCULAR MOTION, READ AT THE ROYAL SOCIETY, THE 13TH AND 20TH OF
NOVEMBER, 1788.

BY GILBERT BLANE, M. D. F.R.S.

LONDON: PRINTED BY JOSEPH COOPER;

AND SOLD BY J. MURRAY, No. 32, FLEET STREET; J. JOHNSON, No. 71, ST. PAUL'S
CHURCH YARD; AND J. STOCKDALE, OPPOSITE BURLINGTON HOUSE, PICCADILLY.

A LECTURE ON MUSCULAR MOTION.
Importance of the subject.
THIS Lecture was founded by Dr. Croone, who was one of the original Fellows of
this Society, having been previously a member of those private meetings which
laid the foundation of this institution. He was not only a physician of
learning and eminence, but his character for taste, as well as for mathematical
and natural knowledge, was so distinguished, that he was elected Professor of
Rhetoric in Gresham College See Ward's Lives of the Gresham Professors.
, and was appointed a member of the first council of the Royal Society. What
prompted him to perpetuate and keep alive an attention to this subject was, no
doubt, an opinion of its importance and difficulty. There are certain branches
of knowledge which, being considered as belonging to particular professions,
appear less interesting to men who entertain a taste for general science; and
this has in some measure been the case with inquiries relating to the animal
economy. But when we consider the rank which animated beings hold in the scale
of Nature, and that Muscular Motion involves some of the most important
circumstances relating to them, it cannot be denied that this is a subject
highly interesting, as a branch of natural knowledge in general, independent of
its utility as subservient to medicine. For though sensitive beings bear no
assignable proportion to the great volume of the material world, yet as man
belongs to this class of existence, and as all other existence would seem to be
created in vain, unless there were beings capable of perception and enjoyment,
the investigation of animal nature appears to be of the utmost importance, not
only as the grounds of a useful art, but as an object of philosophical
curiosity.

Extensive influence of muscular power in the animal economy.
Muscular motion is justly deemed an important and a characteristic attribute of
animated beings, not only as conferring that loco-motive faculty peculiar to
animals, and that power by which they are enabled to exercise a command over
external objects, but also as it constitutes that energy by which the motion of
the fluids and all the internal functions of the body are carried on. For we
are to consider as muscles not only those large masses of flesh which compose
so great a proportion of the whole bulk of the body, but likewise all the
minuter organs subservient to circulation, nutrition, and secretion; since not
only the heart itself, but the whole vascular system and the intestines, owe
their action to certain powers of irritability and contractility peculiar to
muscular fibers.

In investigating this subject, it seems most natural to begin by comparing the
muscles, and the motion belonging to them, to other modifications of matter and
motion that occur in nature.

Properties of a Muscle in its dead state.
A muscle, even in so far as its structure is an object of our senses in its
dead state, has characters which distinguish it from every other substance in
nature. The most striking of these, is its regular organization of parallel
fibers. The fibrous structure is, indeed, found in other parts of the body,
such as the tendons and ligaments, and also in vegetables, some of which are
even possessed of visible irritability; and a similar conformation is manifest
in some minerals, such as the asbestos; but there is a certain degree of
tenacity, elasticity, and moisture, which, joined to its fibrous organization,
distinguish it from every other form of matter. With regard to the minute
structure of muscles, though some have fancied they have seen, by the help of
glasses, the ultimate fibers, and these consisting either of hollow tubes, or
strings of vesicles, or rhomboidal articulations, according to the respective
theory with which the mind of the observer was prepossessed, it appears, from
the best microscopical observations, that the fibers are divisible beyond what
the powers of the best assisted sight can trace, and that they are to all
appearance uniform.

This regular fibrous structure of muscles, may be compared to the
crystallisation of salts, and other regular forms which inanimate bodies
assume, when passing to a solid form from a state of solution or fusion. Every
species of matter has a mode of aggregation peculiar to itself, when its
particles are at liberty to attract each other according to that tendency which
has been called their polarity. Those who first conceived this idea, seemed to
have proceeded on the supposition of the ultimate particles of matter being
solid bodies, infinitely hard, having their different sides endowed with
different powers of attraction and repulsion, so as to give various
configurations to the parts of matter, when concreting into a solid form. There
is another and later idea See Dr. Blagden's Experiments on the cooling of Water
below its freezing point. Phil. Trans. Vol. LXXVIII. page 143.
of polarity, founded on the hypothesis of the ultimate particles of matter
being combinations of attracting and repelling points, which when brought much
within the natural limits of these powers, produce unequal degrees of
attraction and repulsion at equal distances from their common center, thereby
defining what may be called the shape of the particles, and constituting
polarity. In whatever manner we conceive this to take place, some such
circumstance seems universal, and perhaps necessary to all the varieties of
solid matter; and there is in some instances a difference in the appearance and
other properties of the same substance, after passing from a fluid to a solid
form, according as its particles have been at liberty to follow more or less
freely the tendency of their polarity in the act of concretion. This may be
illustrated by the freezing of water, and the crystallisation of salts, which
are more or less regular or confused, according to the circumstances in which
they have taken place. The same may be exemplified in metals and other
substances; for it is well known, that the properties of iron and glass, in
point of cohesion and elasticity, are very much affected by the quickness or
slowness with which they pass from a state of fusion to a state of solidity. It
is probably in some circumstance of this kind that muscles differ from other
soft animal matter. We cannot trace by inspection the manner in which the fluid
nutritious matter is applied in forming solid parts; but as muscles are
composed of parts so regularly figured and endowed with contractility, it seems
probable that there is some provision made by Nature, whereby the particles
follow the exact impulse of their polarity, and constitute a more exquisite
structure than in other parts of the body.

So far with regard to the character of a Muscle, considered in its dead state.

Muscular Motion considered in relation to other motions.
The first circumstance that meets the attention in considering its living
state, is that contractile power or motion, which is properly the subject of
this Lecture; and in order to investigate its nature, it will be necessary to
compare it with that which takes place in inanimate bodies, by considering the
nature of motion in general.

Motion an original and natural property of all matter.
So far as we know, either from actual observation, or from analogy, there does
not exist in nature any such thing as absolute rest: for when we contemplate
the motions of the earth and heavenly bodies, the various complications of the
planetary revolutions in their rotation round their own axes, and in the paths
of their orbits, in the irregularities arising from the disturbances of their
mutual gravitation, and from the precession of the equinoxes, not to mention
the influence of the innumerable siderial systems upon each other See Dr.
Herschel's paper on the construction of the Heavens. Phil. Trans. Vol. LXXV.
page 231.
, it may be affirmed, on incontestible principles, that no particle of matter
ever was, or will be, for two instants of time, in the same place, and that no
particle of it ever has returned, or will return, to any one point of absolute
space which it has ever formerly occupied. Whether motion, therefore, can
strictly be called an essential property of matter or not, it is, certainly, by
the actual constitution of nature, originally and indefeasibly impressed upon
it; and as rest does not exist in nature, but may be considered, in a vulgar
sense, as a fallacy of the senses, and in a philosophical sense, as an
abstraction of the mind, it follows, that what is called the vis inertiae of
matter, is not a resistance to a change from rest to motion, or from motion to
rest, but a resistance to acceleration or retardation, or to change of
direction. If it should be alleged, that any given particle or portion of
matter is carried along by virtue of the motion of the planet to which it
belongs, it may be answered, that the earth or any other planet is nothing more
than a congeries of such particles, each of which must possess a share of the
same energy which animates the whole mass.

Farther proof of the active nature of matter.
The active nature of matter is farther proved by those attractions and
repulsions which universally take place among its parts, however near or
remote; and every instance of motion within the cognizance of our senses, in
the bodies around us, is referrible, either in itself or its cause, to some
mode of attraction or repulsion. Mechanical impulse cannot be a primary cause
of motion.
Mechanical impulse being the moil familiar cause of motion in the ordinary
events of life, is apt to be considered as the most simple and original cause
of it; but it is obvious, upon reflection, that it cannot originate in itself,
and that all collisions are produced either by the efficiency of living
animals, that is, by muscular action, or by means of some operation of nature,
depending on attraction or repulsion. Of the first kind, all the mechanical
operations of art are examples; and with regard to the others, they may, if
carefully investigated, be referred in every instance, either immediately or
remotely, to the abovementioned inherent energies of matter. The natural
agitation of air or water, for instance, may produce motion by impulse, or may
bring two solid bodies to impinge upon each other; but it is evident that these
motions in the atmosphere or the ocean, could not take place without
gravitation, which is one of the attractive powers of matter.

Hypothesis of attraction and repulsion constituting the essence of matter.
Attraction and repulsion may be considered as one principle, inasmuch as they
are both expressive of that active state originally inherent in matter, and
because any two particles, having affinity with each other, either attract or
repel, according to their distance, their common temperature, and other
circumstances; and it is so universal an agent in nature, that some modern
philosophers have made it absorb, as it were, every other power and property of
matter. The late Father Boscovich See this doctrine fully explained, in a work
entitled, Theoria nova Philosophiae naturalis redacta ad unicam legem, etc.
Auctore Rogerio Boscovich. Venetiis, 1763.
, of Milan, about forty years ago, advanced a very bold doctrine to this
effect, alleging, with great strength of argument, illustrated by geometrical
reasoning, that there does not exist in nature any such thing as impenetrable
extended particles; and he deduces all the phenomenon of the material world
from one principle, which supposes it constituted of points having several
spheres of attraction and repulsion, which being variously arranged and
combined, produce the different forms and properties of matter, and its several
powers, such as chemical attraction, cohesion, and gravitation. Whether this
hypothesis is founded in truth or not, it would appear from the reasonings made
use of, that all the relative properties of matter may be accounted for, though
we abstract from every other consideration but attraction and repulsion.

Muscular motion cannot depend on any mechanical cause;
It is evident, therefore, that whatever may be the cause of muscular motion, it
is not referrible to mechanism, which is itself only a secondary principle.
Some theories have had recourse to the conveyance of a fluid into the fibers of
muscles, by which they were swelled, and thereby shortened. One of the most
plausible of these hypotheses supposes this fluid to be the blood; but this is
plainly a petitio principii; for, in order to give motion to the blood, the
very power in question is necessary. Other fluids have been supposed to have
this effect, but even the existence of these has not been proved. I will not
detain this learned audience with a recital of the numerous theories of this
kind that have been invented by fanciful and ingenious men, only one of which
can be true, and the most solid objections could be urged against them all.
Other arguments, derived from the nature of irritability and sensibility,
could, if necessary, be brought to prove that Muscular Motion cannot depend on
any mechanical cause: but this part of the subject was fully treated of by the
ingenious Gentleman who delivered the Croonian Lecture last year.

But an original law of Nature.
As it has been proved that all matter is in a state of perpetual motion,
originally impressed upon it by Nature, also that attraction and repulsion are
essential to it, and the ultimate causes of all new motions that can arise in
the universe, mechanical action being only a secondary cause, it seems most
agreeable to the analogy of nature, to refer Muscular Motion to an original law
of animated matter, whereby its particles are endowed with an attractive power
for which no cause can be assigned, any more than for gravitation, cohesion, or
chemical affinity. If I understand it right, this was the doctrine laid down
and illustrated last year by Doctor Fordyce, and to which I am endeavoring to
contribute some additional proofs and illustrations, from a conviction that it
is the only rational and philosophical light in which this subject has hitherto
been viewed.

A proof of this from the increase power of cohesion.
If the shortening of a muscular fiber depends on this increased power of
attraction between its particles, the effect of it will be to add to the power
of cohesion in the fiber, and if this shall be found in fact to be the case, it
will be a farther proof of the doctrine just now advanced. Experiment.
In order to decide this, I made the following experiment upon the flexor
muscle of the thumb of a man, five hours after death, while the parts were yet
warm and flexible. All the parts of the joint having been separated, except the
tendon, a weight was hung to it, so as to act in the natural direction, and was
increased gradually till the muscle broke, which happened when twenty-six
pounds had been appended. I found that a man of the same age, and the same
apparent size and Strength, with the subject of the preceding experiment, could
with ease lift thirty-eight pounds by the voluntary exertion of the same
muscle. It is farther in proof of this fact, that in the case of a violent
strain from muscular contraction in the living body, it is the tendon that
gives way, whereas we have seen, in the experiment just now related, that in
the dead body, the muscle is the weaker of the two. It is also well known, that
in cases of over-exertion, the muscular fibers themselves do not give way,
though the strongest tendons, such as the tendo Achillis, and even bones, such
as the knee-pan, are broke by their living force There is a case related in the
Philosophical Transactions, by Mr. Amyand, wherein the os humeri was broken by
an exertion of the muscles. See Phil. Trans. Vol. XLIII. page 252. Every one
has observed or heard of fractures happening from very slight accidents. These
occur most probably from a jerk of the muscles concurring with the external
violence.
, which, in such instances, must be many times greater than the strength of the
dead fibers.

Proof from the increased hardness.
The sensible increase of hardness in a muscle, when in a state of contraction,
may also be considered as a proof of an increased attraction of its particles
to each other at that time.

Whether muscular contraction produces a change of density.
In investigating this subject farther, it is of importance to determine,
whether or not a muscle, when in a state of contraction, undergoes any change
of density. A comparison of it in this respect with dead matter, may throw some
light on the nature of muscular action.

Every homogeneous body possesses a certain degree of density, determined by
the distance of its integrant particles. The most common means in nature, by
which the density of such bodies is altered, are heat and cold; the one
universally producing expansion, the other condensation. Whether mechanical
force has the same effects is a point in natural philosophy not so well
ascertained; for though tension and collision produce in solid elastic bodies a
change of figure, which they immediately resume when the force is withdrawn, it
has not been enquired, so far as I know, whether in such cases, a change of
density takes place while the body is in the state of elongation or
compression. Two elastic balls, in the act of collision, undergo a momentary
change of figure, so that there must be an approximation of particles in the
direction in which they are flattened; and in the elongation of an elastic
chord by tension, there must be an increased distance of the particles in one
direction, but while these changes take place in one dimension of the
respective bodies, they may be compensated by contrary changes in the other
dimensions; so that the several bodies may preserve, upon the whole, the same
solid contents. In order to ascertain this in the case of tension, which is the
only case bearing analogy to Muscular Motion, I made the following experiment:
Experiment.
I took a piece of the elastic gum, or kahoutchouck, three inches square, and
about the eighth of an inch in thickness; I procured a piece of sheet-tin,
three inches broad, and six inches long, cut into sharp teeth at each end. The
gum was first weighed in air, and found to be 380.25 grains. It was then
weighed in water, along with the tin, to which it was loosely attached, and the
weight of both was then 758,75 grains. The gum was then stretched upon the tin,
by means of the teeth at each end, to a surface of about five inches square,
the tin being bent so as to leave a free space between it and the gum, in order
that when immersed in the water, no air bubbles might be entangled. In this
situation, the weight of both in water was found to be 746,75 grains. Here was
a difference of twelve grains, which could be owing only to a diminution of
specific gravity; and in order to be sure that there was no fallacy nor
inaccuracy in the experiment, the gum was immediately afterward disengaged
from one end of the tin, so as to allow it to shrink, and being again weighed
in this state in the water, it was found to have recovered exactly its former
weight. This, as well as the subsequent statical experiments, was performed by
means of the exquisite balance lately invented and constructed by Mr. Ramsden,
and belonging to Sir Joseph Banks, who politely allowed me the use of it. I was
also assisted by Mr. Gilpin, clerk of this society, who is extremely accurate
and expert in all operations of this kind.

Experiments to determine whether the density of a Muscle is affected by
contraction.
Now, does the state of relaxation and contraction make in like manner a
temporary difference in the density of muscles? When the circumstance of
decurtation only is considered, we should be tempted to think that there must
be an approximation of the particles of the fiber; but there is at the same
time a lateral swelling of the muscle, which may compensate for what is lost in
the other dimension. This point cannot be decided but by an experimental
examination. It might be determined whether a muscle occupies most space when
relaxed or when contracted, by finding its specific gravity in each of these
states by means of the hydrostatical balance. But this would be found extremely
difficult; for the state of contraction is very transitory, and the motion
itself would produce such a disturbance, as would render the result
unsatisfactory. As there is this obstacle to the experiment on a living muscle,
it occurred to me that it might be performed on the muscles of a fish, which
had undergone the operation of crimping, as it is called; for, in consequence
of dividing the muscles, by cutting them when alive, they undergo a
contraction, which continues after death It has been made a question, whether
life and its actions may not affect the absolute gravity of bodies? Though this
doubt has not arisen upon any assignable grounds that I know of, unless it be
that one unknown principle may affect another equally unknown, I thought it
might be worth while to determine it by experiment. The first trials were with
animals of warm blood enclosed in oilskin, and close tin vessels, but not being
satisfied with the accuracy of these, from the difficulty of cutting off all
communication with the external air, so as to prevent moisture from exhaling, I
enclosed live eels in flasks, and sealed them hermetically; and, in this
situation, their weight when alive being compared with their weight when dead,
there did not appear any reason to suspect that the mere circumstance of life
made any difference in regard to gravity.
; and upon comparing, by the hydrostatic balance, portions of muscle which had
been crimpt, with those of the opposite side of the same fish, which had on
purpose been saved from this operation, it did not appear that there was any
difference in the specific gravity. Two trials were made, one with the masseter
muscles of a skate, the other with the sides of a large trout.

The following experiment was also made, in order to decide the comparative
density of a contracted and relaxed muscle. I took a glass flask, into which
one half of a living eel was introduced. The mouth was immediately afterward
fused by a blow-pipe, and drawn into a tube like the stem of a thermometer. The
flask and tube were then filled with water, in order to see whether the motion
of the animal would make the fluid rife or fall. It had neither the one effect
nor the other, though there were at times strong convulsions, and if the
muscles had at any one time occupied either more space or less than at another,
a sensible fluctuation would have been produced, especially when the column of
fluid was rendered very fine, by the introduction of a steel wire to irritate
the parts. That part of the eel from the anus to the tail was made use of for
this experiment, as the other division, containing the organs of respiration
and the air-bladder, might have occasioned a fallacy, from the expansion or
condensation of an elastic fluid, by accidental changes of temperature, or
compression. This was repeated three times, with the same result. In one of the
trials, the abovementioned portion of two eels was introduced, and though they
were at times both in convulsions at once, not the least motion of the fluid in
the tube could be perceived.

Contraction produces no change of density;
I was the more desirous to be accurate in this and the preceding experiments,
as the result of them was different from my own prepossession at the time, and
different, I believe, from the opinion of most modern physiologists. It may
safely be inferred from them, that the contraction of a muscle produces no
change in its density, and that animal life differs from inanimate matter in
this respect, as well as in most of its other properties and laws. One purpose
in nature for muscles always preserving the same density may be, that as some
of them act in confined cavities, inconvenience might arise from their
occupying more space at one time than another. In the extremities of
crustaceous animals, for instance, which are filled with muscles, a change of
density would be apt to burst them. This may also be considered as a proof of
the fact itself.

Nor of temperature.
Another circumstance in which the contractions of muscles differs from simple
elasticity is, that the former, however frequent and violent, does not produce
any heat as collision and tension are known to do. This may admit of some cavil
with regard to animals of warm blood; for, one of the theories with regard to
animal heat is, that it arises from the perpetual vibration of muscular fibers,
particularly those of the vascular system; but this will not hold with respect
to animals of cold blood, in which the actions of life are equally vigorous.

Recapitulation and comparison of facts.
The principal phenomenon, therefore, of Muscular Motion, are the shortening of
the fibers, the lateral swell, the increase of cohesion and hardness, and the
unchanged density and temperature. It would appear, from the two last
circumstances, that the intimate motions of the particles in relation to each
other, must be different from what take place in the several instances of
contraction and expansion in dead bodies. In the expansion arising from the
action of heat, and the contraction from cold, the change of density shows that
in the one case, the ultimate particles must recede from each other; and in the
other case, that they must approach. The same may be said of elasticity. But as
there is no alteration of the density of a muscle in passing from relaxation to
contraction, this change cannot consist in the approximation of the integrant
parts of the fibers, but must depend on some other circumstance in the intimate
disposition of the particles. In attempting to conceive in what this consists,
the following explanation may be offered: -- A Theory of Muscular contraction.
It was formerly mentioned that the regular structure of solid bodies depended
on the polarity and shape of their integrant parts. Now all bodies, except such
as are sphaerical, must have a long and a short axis; and let us imagine the
fibers of muscles to be composed of sphaeroidal particles; we may then conceive
relaxation to consist in their being disposed with their long axis in the line
of the fibers, and contraction to consist in their short axis being disposed
more or less in that direction. This will not only account for the decurtation,
and uniform density, but for the lateral swell, and also for the increased
hardness and cohesion; for though the particles do not approach or recede, as
in bodies simply elastic, yet their power of attraction will be increased by
their centres being brought nearer, and by being applied By being applied, I do
not mean that they are actually in contact; for it is evident, from the effect
of heat in expanding bodies, and of cold in condensing them, that there can be
no such thing as contact of the ultimate particles of matter, even on the
supposition that these consist of impenetrable bodies infinitely hard.
to each other by more oblate surfaces. This hypothesis accords with what has
been before proved, concerning the unchangeable density; for what is lost in
one dimension, is gained in another; and the cause for there being no increase
of temperature, depends probably on the same circumstance by which the density
is preserved unaltered.

This account of Muscular Motion does not account for the operation of stimuli.
WHAT has been hitherto advanced on this subject, has tended only to explain
that state of a muscular fiber which renders it susceptible of contraction, and
to ascertain the nature of that change which takes place in passing from the
state of relaxation to that of contraction. It still remains a question by what
efficient power this contraction is excited. We have, indeed, referred the
cause to attraction; but of attractions some are perpetual, such as
gravitation, which exerts an equal and unremitting nisus upon every particle of
matter, which is the subject of its action; and there are others fugitive and
occasional, such as electricity and magnetism, and we may add muscular
contraction. With regard to the first kind, as it is always uniform, it seems
sufficient to say, that it exists as a part of the invariable constitution of
nature; but with regard to that which is fluctuating, it seems incumbent on
those who search into the laws of nature, to say by what mode of efficiency the
attraction is performed, so that its action should take place at one time, and
not at another. In order to answer this question, with regard to Muscular
Motion, we ought to be able to specify by what mode of operation a stimulus
excites contraction. Those theories which account for the contraction of
muscles, by the swelling of the fibers, in consequence of a conveyance of
matter, professed to account for the operation of stimuli; but upon the
principles I have adopted in this Lecture, I am obliged to confess my entire
ignorance on this subject. Perhaps it is inscrutable. Perhaps the state of
human knowledge is not ripe for such an inquiry; for we are still in the dark
with regard to most of those properties of matter which bear any analogy to
this, and the knowledge of which might tend to throw light upon it. We know
that electric attraction depends on the accumulation of a subtle fluid, but we
are ignorant of the nature of magnetism. With regard to heat, which is
universally a cause of repulsion, and the most general, powerful, and active,
as well as the most useful and familiar agent in nature, it is hardly decided
as yet whether it is a matter or a quality; and with regard to light, though it
is itself the medium by which we become acquainted with the most remote
objects, it is so obscure in its own nature, that it is still a question
whether it consists in the transmission or vibration of a subtle fluid.

As I am unable, therefore, to explain the operation of stimuli, I shall
content myself with endeavoring to enumerate them.

Enumeration of Stimuli.
Every natural cause exciting the contraction of a muscular fiber, is called a
stimulus. They may be divided into internal and external. 1. Internal stimuli.
As an example of the former, the circulation of the blood may be mentioned; as
this is kept up by an exciting influence of the blood upon the heart and
vessels which contain and impel it. The earliest perceivable instance of
Muscular motion, is the beating of the heart, as it is seen in the first
rudiments of the embryo in an egg, and called the punctum saliens. There seems
to be established by nature, a certain habitude of action between the vessels
and their fluids, whereby the former are duly stimulated to propel the latter.
This does not depend merely on the acrimony of the fluids; for if a fluid even
more mild than the blood, such as milk, be injected into the circulation, it
will produce great disturbance; and if the blood, by being deprived of the
influence of respirable air, becomes destitute of a certain property which it
would naturally acquire in the act of respiration, it does not prove a stimulus
to the heart.

All the functions of the body are carried on by specific stimuli.
The irritability of all die containing parts, is in like manner accommodated to
the nature of their respective contents. The intestines are so calculated, as
to have proper motions excited in them by the aliment, and the secretions which
are mixed with it; and there are bodies which, though perfectly mild, such as
alimentary substances of difficult digestion, yet excite more violent
commotions in the stomach than other substances which are very acrimonious. The
various effects of poisons in different parts of the body, may also be
mentioned as an illustration of the peculiar susceptibility of the several
organs of the body. The poison of a viper, for instance, is perfectly innocent,
not only in the receptacles of the animal which produces it, but it may be
taken into the stomach of any animal without the least bad effect, and only
exerts its deleterious power when brought in contact with a wounded part. Some
vegetable poisons, on the contrary, such as that of laurel water See
Experiments on Poisons, by Abbe Fontana.
, prove deadly, when taken into the mouth, or applied to any part of the
alimentary canal, but are innocent when injected into the veins. The same
principle might be illustrated by the operation of various medicines, some of
which act upon one set of organs, and some upon another. But it is meant here
more particularly to elucidate the natural internal actions of the body; and it
may be remarked, that the receptacles of the several secreted fluids, such as
the gall bladder, and bladder of urine, are so adapted to their natural
contents, by a due measure of irritability, as to bear their accumulation to a
certain degree, and then to expel them. We have here also a proof that
irritability is not in proportion to sensibility; for both these receptacles
are extremely sensible to pain and irritation, from extraneous acrimony, though
so moderately sensible to the acrimony of their natural contents. This
disposition in the several organs to perform their natural functions, in
consequence of the stimulus of the respective fluids they contain, has aptly
enough been called the natural perception of these organs This idea is well
illustrated by Mr. Hunter in his lectures; also by Mr. Mudge, in a dissertation
on the vis vitae, subjoined to a tract, entitled, "A radical and expeditious
cure for a catarrhous cough."
.

It follows from this, that the application of chemical and mechanical stimuli
to irritable parts, is not a mode of experiment likely to be productive of
useful knowledge, since the internal organs are calculated to perform their
actions in consequence of peculiar and specific stimuli, provided by nature;
Application of this in suggesting the means of restoring life in case of
strangulation, etc.
and this consideration may serve to suggest the most likely means of restoring
lost irritability and action to the vital functions, when suspended by
suffocation, strangulation, or submersion. The action of the heart depends on
the action of the lungs and the inspiration of atmospheric air; and I have
found, from repeated experiments on animals, that in such cases, all other
means of restoring circulation and life, are of little or no avail, in
comparison of inflating the lungs with atmospheric air, and by stroking and
pressing the ribs, so as to imitate the action of respiration. Neither
mechanical friction, nor any other external stimulus, nor stimulating clysters,
seemed to have any sensible effect in recalling life. The only other means,
besides those above mentioned, that seem material in attempting to restore
suspended animation, is a due attention to the external temperature. In the
case of drowning in cold water, for instance, it is of the utmost consequence
to restore the natural warmth, either by the cautious use of artificial heat,
or the application of living bedies. In the case of those who have been
suffocated by foul air, it is, on the contrary, advisable to expose them to
cool air.

And to pathology.
From what has been before advanced, concerning that habitude or mutual
influence of the solids and fluids, it would appear that they are specifically
appropriated to each other, in order to carry on not only the circulation, but
the important functions of digestion, absorption, secretion, and excretion; and
as the healthy condition of an animal consists in the maintenance of that
natural harmony, so must the state of disease depend on the derangement of
those delicate impressions and nice sensibilities, or rather irritabilities, in
which the functions of the several organs consist; and as the affections of the
solids and fluids are reciprocal, disease may depend either on some deviation
of the former, from their healthy and natural perceptions, or from some
acrimony or vitiation of the latter, or perhaps more commonly from the
concurrence of both, in consequence of their mutual influence. When the fluids
only are morbidly affected, nature alone is possessed of resources of cure; for
if the containing solids retain their natural irritability, they will be
stimulated to expel what is extraneous or vitiated. A depraved state of the
solids is therefore likely to prove a more frequent cause of morbid
derangement; and as they differ from the fluids, by possessing an inherent
activity, it is the object of medicine to incite, restrain, or alter their
diseased actions, according to the nature of the morbid affection.

It is evident, that this doctrine will admit of a much more extensive
application in pathology, than there is time here to follow out; and I shall
confine myself to the illustration of it, Exemplified in the absorbents.
in the case of the absorbent vessels. These evidently possess a power of
absorbing certain substances, and rejecting others. The lacteals, for instance,
in a state of health, take up only the nutritious part of the alimentary mass;
for there is in the fecal part substances equally soluble as the chyle. The
inner surface of the gall bladder is beset with absorbents, which, however, do
not absorb bile in the ordinary state of health, and only concentrate it by
taking up the fluid with which it is diluted. But when in consequence of the
obstruction of the gall ducts, the bladder becomes over distended, or when the
specific perception of the absorbents is depraved by disease, in these cases
the bile is absorbed and thrown into the circulation. Sometimes, such unusual
actions of the absorbents are excited as a resource of nature, either to cure
disease, or to carry on growth; for it has been shown by Mr. Hunter, that not
only soft and fluid parts, but bone, can be removed by absorption. At other
times, disease consists in affections of these vessels, either by their action
being too much retarded, as in the case of dropsy, or where the matter of an
ulcer, or in the pustules of the small pox, is prematurely absorbed, in
consequence of the depraved action of fever. It is sufficiently demonstrable,
that the whole surface of the skin and bronchiae is beset with inhaling
vessels, which absorb the fluids dissolved in the atmosphere; and it would be
contrary to the analogy of the rest of the body, to suppose that these are not
possessed of some elective power, whereby they prefer or reject such fluids as
are presented to them, according to their several qualities, and that this
power should not be various, according to the state of health or disease. But,
independent of analogy, the variable state of the human body, in respect to its
susceptibility of contagious diseases, seems to be a direct proof of this. It
is a well-known fact, that a person who has never had the small pox, will at
one time be closely exposed to their infection, and yet escape the disease, and
at another time will be affected by the slightest degree of it. If it should be
said, that the poison is inhaled in the one case as well as the other, but that
the internal state of the body is in one case disposed to be affected, and in
the other not, it may be answered, that any method by which it can certainly be
introduced, as by inoculation, will almost infallibly produce this disease in
constitutions that have never before undergone it. The superior safety of
inoculation accounted for.
And this seems to afford a solution of a much agitated question, On what does
the superior safety of the inoculated small pox depend? For, in a constitution
already morbidly disposed, the powers of life will be more apt to give way to
any disturbance that may be excited; and the same derangement of nature, which,
in this case, makes the inhalant vessels admit the noxious effluvia of disease,
will render the body less capable of counteracting it when admitted. In the
case of inoculation, the poison is not taken into the circulation by any
natural operation of the body; but being obtruded by art, there is no
particular propensity in the constitution to give way to it, unless the time of
inoculation should accidentally coincide with those moments in which the body
is naturally susceptible; and as this must sometimes happen, it is accordingly
observed, that one case in a great number of inoculated small pox, is equally
malignant as any case of the natural sort.

Analogy between motion and sensation.
The specific irritability of muscular fibers, in consequence of the peculiar
action of stimuli, has been called perception, as was mentioned before. This
term is not to be taken in a sense strictly literal, but as a metaphor,
borrowed from sensation, and applied to motion. In like manner as the senses
are fitted to convey peculiar ideas, in consequence of their respective organs
being adapted to their corresponding external impressions, so are the various
organs of motion by nature made susceptible of excitement from peculiar
impressions, either internal or external. This analogy is the more exact, that
the nerves seem to be the instruments of both; for not only the organs of
sensation and voluntary motion, but those of involuntary motion, are supplied
with nerves, and dependant upon them; for if the influence of the nerves
leading to the heart or intestines is interrupted, by cutting ligature or
palsy, the function of these parts is thereby destroyed. Thus, as there is a
peculiar sensibility belonging to the several senses, so is there a peculiar
irritability belonging to the several organs of motion. The intention of
Nature, therefore, in distributing nerves to every muscular organ, was probably
in order to constitute those peculiar perceptions on which the various vital
and natural functions depend. But I give this only as a conjecture; and though
the nervous influence may thus modify irritability, there is reason to think
that it does not bestow it.

Whether vitality is dependant on the nervous system
This leads us to consider how far vitality is dependant on the nerves. It has
been the opinion of some physiologists, who have been supposed to entertain
very rational ideas of the animal economy, that all muscular irritability
depended on a sentient principle See Whytt on the vital and involuntary motions.
; and some have even maintained, that there is an intelligent principle Vide
Opera Stahlii and Prelectio de anima medica, Auct. Doct. Nicholls.
residing in animal bodies, in order to guide their functions and operations.
From the preceding facts and reasoning, and from its being well attested that
there have been several instances of the production of foetuses, without the
brain See Phil. Trans. Vol. XIX. and XXI.
, there seems no occasion to have recourse to so violent a hypothesis. This,
however, is not the question here intended to be discussed; but it is meant to
enquire, whether or not there is a foundation in nature for an opinion broached
by Mr. Hunter, that there is a living principle, distinct from the nervous
system, and independent of sensation and consciousness. The principal fact in
support of this opinion, is the existence of animals without brain and nerves.
That there are such, was, I believe, first observed by Haller Vide Primas
Lincas Physiologiae, ccccii.
, and has been confirmed by Mr. Hunter; who maintains farther, that the stomach
is a center, or seat of life, more essential to it than the brain. That the
stomach should be an organ of so much consequence, seems natural enough, from
the importance of its function, which is that of assimilation; and life can be
more immediately and completely extinguished by an injury to it, such as a
blow, than by the same violence to any other part of the body. It is also well
known, that the muscular fibers of animals, endowed with a nervous system, will
retain their irritability for some time after their separation from the brain
and nerves. It is evident, likewise, from the phenomenon of vegetation, that
irritability may exist in nature, without sensation, consciousness, or any
suspicion of the existence of a nervous system. The facts I allude to, are not
only the perceptible motions of the sensitive plant, but more particularly
those motions which must necessarily take place in all plants, in carrying on
their growth; for there is no accounting for the accretion of solid parts, in
consequence of the conveyance of nutrition by the propulsion of the sap, but by
admitting some power, acting by laws different from those of dead matter. In
favor of this opinion, it is farther observable, that those animals which are
destitute of brain and nerves, are of the class vermes, the most simple in
nature, having only one function, to wit, that of assimilation, and therefore
not requiring that variety of action, and those peculiar perceptions which are
necessary to more complex animals. Lastly, the state of an egg before
incubation, and the condition of those animals which become torpid from cold,
and afterward revive, afford facts which favor this opinion; as they show
that there is a certain principle of self-preservation, independent not only of
the operation of the nervous system, but even of the circulation; for, in this
quiescent state, these portions of animal matter are preserved for a great
length of time from that corruption to which they would otherwise be liable,
and their fluids are prevented from freezing in a degree of cold, which would
congeal them, were they destitute of every principle of life.

The mutual dependence of simple life and nervous influence.
But though simple life may be considered as distinct from the nervous system,
which is only an accessory appendage to it, yet in those animals in which they
are conjoined, the purposes of nature render them dependant on each other. The
functions of the brain, for instance, cannot go on without the action of the
heart; for whenever the circulation of the blood is interrupted, consciousness
and sensation are destroyed, as is evident in the case of a swoon, and in the
effects of strangulation. On the other hand, as has been before observed, the
action of the heart has a dependence on the influence of the nerves, as
connected with the brain. There are also incontestible proofs of the extreme
vessels being affected by the influence of the brain; for we know that a
thought in the mind will produce partial determinations of the circulating
fluids, as in the case of blushing, and the fullness of the vessels in the
organs of generation, in consequence of certain passions. It does not, however,
follow, from all this, that irritability depends on the nerves; the influence
of which may be considered as modifying general irritability, in the manner
already mentioned; or it may be considered rather as a stimulus to the muscular
fibers, than as endowing them with irritability, as in the instances last
adduced: and though the organs essential to life, such as the heart, cannot
exert the action necessary to life, without the influence of the nerves, yet
the vessels of the extremities can exert their usual action independent of it;
for there are cases in which the natural heat and circulation continue in the
limbs, after a total deprivation both of voluntary motion and sensation This
fact is ascertained, both by the experiment of cutting the crural nerve a
living animal, and by the circumstances attending certain diseases. I lately
met with two cases of palsy, in which there was a total loss both of sensation
and voluntary motion in the lower extremities, and yet the natural warmth and
circulation remained. In one of these cases, excoriations were produced on the
feet by sinapisms; and in the other, blisters rose on the knees, but without
exciting any sensation, and the parts healed as in a healthy person. The first,
was that of a gentleman advanced in life, in whom this affection came on after
the gout in the stomach, and he died in consequence of the palsy extending to
the bladder and other viscera. The other was that of a young woman in St.
Thomas's Hospital, who had been subject to violent hysterical convulsions.
After a tedious illness, she entirely recovered the use and feeling of her
limbs.
.

Essential properties of simple life.
It may here be observed, that beside muscular irritability, the principal, if
not the only, powers of simple life, are the assimilation of aliment, and that
power in the living body, by which it preserves itself from putrefaction; and
it is strongly in proof of vitality being independent of nervous power, that
when the trunk of a nerve is out through, the limb to which it leads, though
deprived of all sensation and voluntary motion, not only continues free from
spontaneous putrefaction, but the warmth and circulation continue, even though
the nerve should not be regenerated It appears, from some experiments of Mr.
Cruikshank, that there is a process in nature, whereby nerves can be
regenerated after being cut through.
. The only visible change produced in a limb by this operation, is, that after
some time it begins to waste.

The influence of the nervous system unfriendly to simple life.
But there are circumstances that would seem to prove, that the nervous system
is not only a mere appendage to life, but that it tends to impede its
operation, and shorten its existence. Simple life will not only survive
sensation, but will survive it longer, if the animal is killed, by destroying
the nervous system, than if it had been destroyed by haemorrhage, suffocation,
or other violence. This illustrated by observations on fish,
It is a curious and well ascertained fact, that if a fish, immediately upon
being taken out of the water, is stunned by a violent blow on the head, or by
having the head crushed, the irritability and sweetness of the muscles will be
preserved much longer, than if it had been allowed to die with the organs of
sense entire. This is so well known to fishermen, that they put it in practice,
in order to make them longer susceptible of the operation called crimping. A
salmon is one of the fish least tenacious of life, insomuch, that it will lose
all signs of life in less than half an hour after it is taken out of the water,
if suffered to die without any farther injury; but if, immediately after being
caught, it receives a violent blow on the head, the muscles will show visible
irritability for more than twelve hours afterward.

On quadrupeds,
There is a circumstance observed with regard to animals of warm blood, which
seems to depend on the same principle. An excessive exertion of voluntary
motion, immediately before death, prevents the muscles from becoming rigid when
cold, and renders them more prone to putrefaction. Thus, if an ox is killed
immediately after being overdrove, the carcass will not become stiff when it
grows cold, nor is it capable of being preserved by means of salt.

And diseases of the human species.
In illustration of the same principle, it may be remarked, t there is a symptom
in certain diseases of the human species, showing that digestion, which is one
of the principal functions of simple life, will sometimes go on better, in
consequence of lesions of the brain; for in those disorders in which the
exercise of the senses is in a great measure destroyed, or suspended, as in the
hydrocephalus and apoplectic palsy, it happens not uncommonly that the appetite
and digestion are better than in health.

Every exercise of the brain produces fatigue.
From these facts we may infer, with Mr. Hunter, that the exercise of sensation
is inimical to life, and that a sort of fatigue is induced by this, as well as
by voluntary motion: so that all that intercourse carried on through the
nerves, whether toward the brain, in the case of sensation, or from the brain,
in acts of volition, tends to wea rout the animal powers There are some
ingenious remarks on the analogy of sensation and motion, in a paper on the
ocular spectra of light and colors, by Dr. Robert Waring Darwin, Phil. Trans.
Vol. LXXVI. This dissertation abounds with resined and well deduced
observations on the subject he treats of.
. And as intense and long-continued thought, though not terminating in any
outward action, tends also to produce an inability for farther exertions, it
would appear that the brain, or sensorium, is more particularly the organ which
is subject to that species of sufferance called fatigue. Hence the necessity of
sleep,
From these facts, we perceive the necessity of sleep, which consists in a
temporary suspension of sensation, volition, and thought, and is a resource of
nature, whereby the powers of life recover themselves after satiety and
fatigue, which are provided as guards to warn us when nature is in danger of
being strained, either by repletion or over exertion; and it is evident that
such barriers were absolutely necessary, in order to set bounds to operations
which are only occationally requisite, and which would otherwise depend on the
caprices of the will. The exercise of sensation and voluntary motion, in a
moderate degree, is conformable to the intention of nature, and therefore
salutary; and it is only when they are excessive, that they tend to wear out
the powers of life, and more especially if these are not duly recruited by
sleep. And the bad effect of immoderate labor and sensuality.
Immoderate labor, therefore, and watching, also spasms and convulsions of
every kind, are unfriendly to health and long life: in like manner, sensations,
when too frequent or intense, especially those which consist in the
gratification of the senses, tend to wear out the animal powers; and hence we
perceive why a life of sensuality is productive of certain diseases,
independent either of the repletion or evacuation which attend them. The gout,
but more certainly the palsy, seems to proceed merely from the indulgence of
the senses; for the latter commonly enough occurs in the most spare and
emaciated constitutions, and in those who have been accustomed to exhausting
pleasures, as well as those of a full habit, who have indulged in the excesses
of the table. A turgescence of the vessels in the brain will certainly be more
apt to produce that rupture of them in which apoplectic palsy consists, when
these vessels have been relaxed, as we conceive them to be, by frequent and
intense sensations. But in those who are the reverse of being plethoric, and
who fall victims to this disease, inconsequence of too tree indulgence in
venereal pleasures, in the decline of life, (as every one who has much
observation of the world, or experience in physic, knows to be a frequent case)
it must arise from a preternatural weakness in the brain, induced by the mere
circumstance of sensation. This accounts for what has been reckoned a
difficulty in reasoning on the cause of apoplexy and palsy, to wit, that the
same effect should be produced by those gratifications which produce repletion,
as by those which produce evacuation.

And the good effects of removing irritation in certain diseases.
It follows, from the same principle, that when life is threatened by certain
diseases, of which the chief symptom is irritation, any means by which
sensation, whether natural or morbid, and muscular motion, whether voluntary or
involuntary, convulsive or spasmodic, can be soothed or suspended, will prove
salutary, by allowing the powers of life to rally, as it were, and recover
themselves. In this consists the operation of narcotic medicines, such as
opium, which, in complaints both of a general and local nature, proves useful
not merely as a palliative, by the removal of temporary pain or spasm, or by
procuring sleep, but as a principal instrument of recovery, by allowing the
powers of life to exert their natural action, in consequence of the removal of
irritation As an example of the general affections of the constitution in which
opium is a useful remedy, we may mention those low fevers in which the
principal symptoms are tremors, pervigilum, and low delirium. And as an
instance of local affections, in which it has been found highly serviceable, we
may mention ill-conditioned ulcers of all kinds, but particularly those which
occur in the venereal diseas. One of the principal difficulties in the cure of
this disease, is that irritability of constitution whereby ulcers are so
exasperated, by the use of mercury, as not to bear a suffcient quantity of it
to produce a cure. This is obviated by a free use of opium, which seems more
efficacious in such cases, than even Peruvian bark, or any other remedy; and
this is one of the principal modern improvements in the treatment of this
disease.
. It is but just to own, that this is an idea which was first suggested to me
by a learned and eminent physician Dr. Warren.
of this place, when in consultation with him a few years ago.

Comparative effects of opium upon sensitive and simple life.
It would be curious, as well as useful, to distinguish the operation of
medicine, as they affect simple or sensitive life. I attempted a comparison of
this kind with opium, which, though it chiefly affects sensation, has also a
powerful effect on simple life, as I found by trying its effects upon leeches,
which are a species of animals without brain or nerves. In order to discern the
power of this drug, as affecting the different principles of animals possessing
both sorts of life, I took a solution of it in water, into one portion of which
I put some sound living eels, and into another some eels, also alive, but
having their heads bruised, choosing the former, as nearly as I could, of the
same vigor with the latter, before their heads were bruised. It was found, in a
number of trials, that the sound eels generally died sooner than the others.
The opium had a double effect on the former, as it acted both upon the senses
and upon the principle of simple life, and the effect upon the senses was more
than equivalent to the external injury of the latter, upon which the opium
acted only upon one principle, the senses being locked up by the destruction of
their organs. In order to make this operation succeed, the solution should be
of a certain degree of strength, so as to act as a poison. There should be at
least half a grain of opium to an ounce of water. When the trial was made with
a solution of half this strength, the sound eels lived much longer; for the
time was then protracted to that period in which the wounded eels would have
died merely of their injury. It may be mentioned, that those which had their
heads bruised, and were put into a solution of opium, died considerably sooner
than those which had suffered the same injury, and were put into plain water
for a standard.

Stimuli connected with consciousness.
Having considered the various qualities of the fluids exciting the
corresponding irritability of the respective vessels, as a leading principle in
carrying on some of the most important functions of the body, and serving to
account for many of the vital and involuntary motions, the only other internal
stimuli that remain to be enumerated, are those connected with consciousness.
The great masses of muscle in the trunk and extremities of the body, are the
instruments of the mind in acting upon external bodies; and we may, therefore,
reckon in the list of stimuli, the nervous power by which the will and the
passions excite external motions. This is a function sufficiently important for
the nerves, without admitting them as the principle upon which irritability
depends. This question has been already discussed; but it may be farther
observed, that the nervous power, being a stimulus acting upon an irritable
principle in the muscular fibers, affords a presumption that they are different
from each other; for, the matter being considered abstractedly, where any
effect is the result of the concurrence of two bodies, as, for instance, in the
combinations of chemistry, these two bodies must be different, in order to
produce any given effect. It is otherwise, indeed, when the effect depends on
mere communication, as in the case of mechanical impulse, where the same motion
that is lost by one body is acquired by another. But it will not be said, that
there is any similarity between what takes place in a nerve, and what takes
place in a muscular fiber in the act of voluntary contraction.

I have already acknowledged my ignorance of the manner in which stimuli in
general operate, and that this must be admitted as an ultimate fact in nature.
But the operation of the will through the nerves, seems involved in double
obscurity; for as it depends on the nature of thought, it cannot be made a
subject; of experimental investigation. For this reason I shall decline the
inquiry, as not being adapted to the ends of this Society; and it seems
impossible for human sagacity to penetrate the connection of matter with
sensation and volition, except by inferences more or less hypothetical. The
properties of different bodies, in relation to each other, appear to be the
only proper subjects of experimental reasoning; for, in their relation to the
mind, they are only the effects, perhaps the remote effects, of their intimate
nature upon the senses; so that we may venture to affirm that human reason can
no more fathom the connection of thought with the corresponding changes in the
corporeal organs, than the eye can see itself.

Effects of passions on muscular fibers
Those affections of the muscular fibers, which depend on the passons, though
distinct from those excited by the will, may yet be enumerated here among those
which flow from consciousness; for there are emotions of the mind that have
visible and powerful effects on the heart and vascular system, which are organs
entirely out of reach of the will. Not to mention the well-known effects of
grief, fear, and joy, which affect the whole circulation, there are certain
passions and sentiments which produce partial and local effects. These are
established by Nature, either to answer some important natural purpose, as in
the case of the congestion of the fluids in the parts of generation, in
consequence of the venereal appetite, or to serve as natural expressions, as in
the case of blushing and weeping. One of the most striking effects of the
passions upon muscular action, is the influence they have upon the strength or
mechanical force of the voluntary muscles. Fear produces debility, almost
amounting to palsy. Courage and ardor of mind, on the contrary, adds to the
natural strength. When the mind is agitated by some interesting object, and
calls upon the body for some extraordinary exertion to effect its end, the
muscles are thereby enabled, as it were by magic, to perform acts of strength,
of which they would be entirely incapable in cold blood. In circumstances of
danger, for instance, where life or honor are at stake, exertions are made in
overcoming mechanical resistance, which seem incredible, and would be
imposslible, were not the mind in a sort of phrenzy, and it is truly admirable
in the economy of nature, that an idea in the mind should thus in a moment
augment the powers of motion, and inspire additional resources of strength,
adequate to the occasional calls of life This extraordinary degree of strength,
infused into the muscles by ardent passions and affections, has been
considered, by unenlightened minds and heated imaginations, as a supernatural
influence; and the striking effects described above, may form some excuse for
superstition in attributing them to the secret agency of some propitious and
irresistible power. The etymology of enthusiasm, a word expressive of these
uncommon exertions, shows that there was originally supposed to be, on certain
occasions, some divine influence actuating the human frame. The consciousness
of this increased vigor of mind and body, exalted by the belief of its divine
source, will serve to account for those peculiar and astonishing efforts of
enthusiasm, which are met with in the history of mankind.
. The great increase of strength in maniacs, is also referrible to the passions
of the mind. These considerations would almost lead us to doubt whether or not
the accounts we have of the great feats of strength ascribed to individuals in
the heroic ages, are fabulous or not. It is also worthy of remark, that in
great and lasting exertions of strength, to which men are impelled by active
and generous affections, fatigue is not induced in the same proportion, by many
degrees, as by the same quantity of muscular action in the cool and deliberate
actions of common life See Observations on the Diseases of Seamen. Book II.
chap. III.
.

1. External Stimuli.
The other class stimuli to be enumerated, are the external. These consist in
impressions made by outward bodies. They are either immediate, as in the case
of those motions which are excited by mechanical means, or by acrimony,
directly and artificially applied to a muscular fiber; or they are remote, as
in the various instances of sympathy, and in the case of those instincts which
nature has constituted for the purpose of self-preservation in brutes, and in
the early part of human life. I shall here confine myself to a few remarks on
instinct, as the other branches of this subject have been fully and ably
handled by those who have gone before me in this Lecture.

Analogy between internal and external stimuli.
There is a connection established between the impression of certain external
bodies and the action of certain muscles, analogous to what has already been
noticed with regard to the internal motions excited in vessels by the peculiar
stimulus of their fluids, Nature having instituted certain habitudes between
outward stimuli and the moving powers whereby natural propensities are
constituted, equally necessary to the support of life as the internal
functions. Thus, in a newborn animal, the first contact of the external air
excites the act of respiration, and the contact of the nipple excites the act
of sucking; both of which actions are absolutely necessary to the maintenance
of life, and require the nice cooperation of a great number of muscles, prior
to all experience. Instinct.
Actions of this kind are called instinctive, and differ from voluntary motions
in this respect, that the latter are the result of memory and experience,
whereas the former are the immediate effect of external impressions, in
consequence of an established law of nature, and independent of consciousness.
The actions of instinct and those of volition, nevertheless, run imperceptibly
into each other, so that what was at first instinctive, may afterward come to
be a matter of deliberate choice. The same muscles are the instruments of both,
and they differ from the muscles obeying the internal stimuli, such as the
heart, in this respect, that they are liable to fatigue, and thereby concur
with the exercise of sensation and of thought, in rendering sleep necessary.
There are no muscles, except those of respiration, of which the constant action
is necessary to life, and which are void of consciousness in their ordinary
exercise, but which are yet in some measure under the control of the will. The
principal end answered by this power of the will over the muscles of
respiration in man, is to form and regulate the voice.

Certain instinctive actions, independent of sensation and consciousness.
But though instinctive motions are in some cases convertible into those which
are voluntary, we sold be so far from confounding them, that the former are
even compatible with the want of consciousness and sensation; for those animals
which are destitute of brain and nerves, are capable of actions evidently of
the instinctive kind. A leech, for instance, being brought into contact with a
living animal, is impelled, by an instinct of its nature, to fasten upon it,
and suck its blood. There is something very similar to this even in vegetables,
as in the case of tendrils and creeping plants being stimulated, by the contact
of other bodies, to cling round them in a particular direction. There are
facts, which show that instinctive actions, even in animals endowed with brain
and nerves, do not depend on sensation. I took a live kitten, a few days old,
and divided the spinal marrow, by cutting it across at the neck. The hind paws
being then irritated by pricking them, and by touching them with a hot wire,
the muscles belonging to the posterior extremities were thrown into
contraction, so as to produce the motion of shrinking from the injury. The same
effects were observed in another kitten, after the head was entirely separated
from the body In repeating this experiment, I found that when the spinal marrow
was cut through, between the lumbar vertebrae and os sacrum, the posterior
extremities lost their irritability, but the tail retained it. It might,
therefore, be said, that the spinal marrow served as a sensorium; but it may be
answered, that when the head is cut off, its irritability remains, as appears
by the motion of the ears, when pricked or touched with a hot wire; and as the
extremities are also irritable, it will not be said that consciousness and
sensation exist in two separated portions of the body.
. The like takes place with regard to insects; for, after the head of a be is
separated from the body, the hinder part will sting, upon the application of
such a stimulus as would excite the same action in the animal in a perfect
state. These facts show clearly that instinctive motions may be exerted,
without the intervention of the sensorium commune, and therefore without
sensation or consciousness.

In what I have farther to say on this subject, I shall confine myself to the
consideration of two of the most curious and important instincts, HABIT and
IMITATION.

Habit, as applied to muscular motion.
It is the nature of a voluntary muscle to perform any motion greater ease, the
more frequently it is repeated, and to act most readily with those muscles, or
in company with those sensations with which it has been used to combine its
action, either at once or in succession. This is the foundation of habit, and
though it is in common to man with other animals, it is the principle by which
all his practical seize acquire facility and perfection. It has been
mentioned that some actions, originally instinctive, may afterward be
performed as acts of pure volition; so inversely, all actions, which are the
result of reason and reflection, may be brought by habit to resemble
instinctive actions, and thereby to be performed with greater expedition and
effect.

Habit, as applied to sensation.
The term Habit has also been applied to sensation; for, as motions are more
readily excited by frequent succession, so one perception excites the idea of
another, in consequence of repeated connection. In this sense, it ought more
properly to be called the association of ideas, a principle upon which Dr.
Hartley has built a theory This work has been re-published, with a preface, by
Dr. Priestley.
of the human mind, perhaps the most just and consistent of any that has ever
been framed. It is habit, taken in this sense also, which Mr. Hume See Essays
and Treatises on various subjects, Vol. III. by David Hume, Esquire.
conceives to be the foundation of all our experimental reasoning, inasmuch as
it constitutes the only original notices by which we acquire any intimation of
the connection of cause and effect. But though this doctrine is ably and
profoundly illustrated by that philosopher, it may be remarked, independently
of other objections, that though habit may give notice of this connection, it
cannot constitute it; for animals, whether rational or irrational, would be
made susceptible of habit in vain, unless the constitution of external nature
had been made to correspond with it; just as the eye would have been made in
vain, had there not existed such a body as light. Now, in what does this
correspondence consist? It consists in that principle whereby nature acts by
invariable laws; for it is evident, that if the laws of nature were variable,
those recurrences of perceptions in which habit consists, and on which all
experience is built, could not take place; and this sort of contingency would
also destroy all those principles by which prudence and skill operate upon
external objects, for the purposes either of common life or of science. The
faculty, therefore, by which animals are susceptible of that sort of habit
which consists in the association of ideas, may be termed the organ whereby
animals perceive the uniform succession of cause and effect, established by the
invariable course of nature. It was necessary that this should be an instinct,
for the sake of self-preservation, not only to mere animals, but to the human
species in infancy. If the noxious effects of fire, and the various modes of
mechanical violence, such as falls and blows, were only to be learnt by a
process of reasoning, all animals would perish before they could attain to
maturity. The great difference of man and mere animals in this respect, seems
to be, that the latter only perceive these associations, when the objects
themselves are present to their senses, whereas the former, by being endowed
with memory, can reflect upon them, and render them subservient to experience:
for, with regard to external bodies, what is reason, but the remembrance of
objects as they affect each other, and the application of this knowledge to the
practice of life, in adjusting means to ends? The principal difference of one
man from another, in point of understanding, consists in the readiness with
which the mind forms these combinations, and the strength with which it can
guard against such as are accidental and fanciful, and discriminate these from
such as have an archetype in the nature of things; and that mind, of which the
conceptions correspond best with the real associations of nature, is possessed
of correct judgment and just observation, the most valuable of all mental
seize.

It would lead to disquisitions too long and too intricate, and, in some
measure, foreign to this place, to enlarge farther on the various effects of
the combination See Theory of the Moods of Verbs, by Dr. Gregory. Phil. Trans.
Edin. 1790.
and succession See a Treatise on Time, by Dr. Watson, jun. F. R. S. Land. 1785.
of ideas which connect animal with intellectual nature. Correspondence between
the properties and laws of external nature and the faculties of animals.
I shall only remark, that those internal faculties upon which habit and
association depend, carry a reference to external nature, exactly analogous to
the mutual relation formerly mentioned as subsisting between stimuli, whether
internal or external, and the moving powers corresponding to them, and between
the organs of sense, and the impressions of external bodies which are naturally
adapted to them. Muscular motion and sensation have relation to the single
properties of matter, as they affect particular fibers and organs, but habit
and association are co-relative to that stated connection of cause and effect,
established by the general laws of nature. We can thus trace a correspondenee
between the motions, sensations, and faculties of animals, on one hand, and the
properties of matter on the other hand, from the lowest limits of animal and
even vegetable nature, into the boundaries of intelligence. The same accordance
with the laws of nature is observable in the structure of animals, as in their
motions and functions, as may be examplified by that reference to the powers of
gravitation which is evident in the conformation of the limbs and the position
of the viscera, as adapted to the natural motions and posture of the body.

It would appear, therefore, that there is a co-ordinance or pre-established
harmony, as it were, between the faculties of animals and the laws of external
matter, which is the foundation of all the instinctive habits of animals, as
well as the rational conduct of man; and it is impossible sufficiently to
admire that sublime contrivance by which the frame of animated beings is thus
in all points adapted to the constitution of inanimate nature.

Habit as applied to those diseases which affect but once in life.
There still remains to be mentioned another circumstance in the animal
economy, which has been referred to the law of habit. It is the nature of
those morbid poisons called specific contagions, such as the infectious matter
of the smallpox, not to produce their peculiar effect more than once in life;
and this has been imputed to habit, from the similarity of it to what happens
with respect to external impressions, the frequency and long continuance of
which tend to produce the want of consciousness and sensibility. Upon whatever
principle this property of the animal economy depends, it is an undoubted fact
that these morbid poisons, after exciting a certain degree of disturbance, and
a certain series of diseased actions, no longer make any impression on the
powers of life, otherwise there could be no such thing as recovery; for at the
time in which a person begins to recover from the smallpox, the poison,
actually present in the circulating system, is multiplied infinitely beyond
what it was when it excited the disease. The constitution has therefore, at
that time, with respect to this acrimony, acquired an insensibility, or rather
want of irritability, and this it preserves ever afterward. This holds only
with regard to those morbid poisons which excite febrile affections, and seems
to be a necessary provision of nature to guard against such noxious principles
as are generated within the body itself.

IMITATION.
The other instinct that remains to be considered, is Imitation. This is an
action of which some brutes of no great sagacity are capable, and yet it is the
foundation of some of the most important seize of rational beings,
particularly speech, which could not otherwise be acquired, and without which
the powers of reason would be extremely limited See some ingenious observations
on this subject in Dr. Campbell's Philosophy of Rhetoric, Book II. chap. vii.
Speech seems to be to thought what writing is to speech, or rather what
arithmetical or algebraical computation is to common language, whether spoken
or writ; for without speech the operation of the mind, particularly that of
abstraction, would be extremely limited, nor could there be any of those
extensive combinations of thought which constitute a chain of reasoning. It
would appear from this, and from the remark in page 39, that all the operations
of the human mind are founded on sensation, habit, memory, and speech.


. In the early part of human life, imitation seems equally independent of
reason and reflection, as in mere animals. It takes place not only without the
operation of the will, but in opposition to it; for yawning is an involuntary
spasm of the muscles of the jaw, which is frequently excited by a sight of the
same action in others; and there is a case recorded in the Philosophical
Transactions, by Dr. Garden Phil. Trans. Vol. XII. p. 842.
, of a man who, in his adult state, and possessed of reason, imitated
involuntarily and irresistibly whatever gestures he saw in others. We are to
account, on the same principle, for that general similarity of external manner
and of accent observable in particular societies and nations, and which all men
insensibly acquire in a greater or less degree.

The only objects of imitation, are gestures and sounds. The imitation of
gestures seems, at first sight, less unaccountable than that of sounds; for it
is performed by members which are objects of sight, and would therefore seem
more easily transferable to the corresponding parts of another person; whereas
the organs of voice are so hidden and minute, that we can have no knowledge of
what parts are put in motion in order to produce sound. But upon farther
reflection, there seems little or no difference in this respect; for,
independently of anatomy, we know nothing of muscles but by their effects; and
there seems no reason why the ear being affected by a sound, should not excite
a given motion in the muscles of the larynx and fauces, as well as that a
gesture, by having its image impressed on the retina, should excite motions in
the legs or arms. Even where imitation, or any other action, is the result of
deliberate volition in rational beings, the motion is not performed from a
knowledge of their having muscles. They only will the effect, without knowing
by what means it is performed; for though it may seem obvious that all the
motions of an animal are effected by the shortening of the fleshy fibers, this
is a fact with which those only are acquainted who have some knowledge of
anatomy and physiology, and may be considered as a fundamental and first-rate
discovery in the natural history of the living body This discovery cannot be
traced to any particular improver of physiology, but seems to have arisen, like
many other discoveries in science and the arts, rather from the gradual
evolution of knowledge than the efforts of any individual. It has at all times
been observed, that exertions of strength produce a swelling and motion in the
fleshy parts of the extremities, and the word denoting a muscle in different
languages, is taken from the resemblance of the motions under the skin to those
of a little nimble animal, such as a mouse or a lizard. A muscle is called in
Greek (...), in Latin musculus, or lacertus, and that muscle which is so
visible near the ham of a quadruped when walking, is, in the common language of
some parts of the country, called the mouse. It is not ascertained, so far as I
know, who first ascribed the motions of animals to the contraction of fleshy
fibers. There is no mention made of this in the works of Hippocrates, but it is
very clearly stated by Galen; so that the discovery seems to have been made in
some intervening period. This property of muscles is so well ascertained in
modern times, that wherever we see a muscular substance, we infer synthetically
that some corresponding function must belong to it; and we find an irrefragable
argument for the circulation of the blood, only from considering the heart as a
muscular substance. This subject has not been well understood till modern
times, otherwise the circulation would most probably have been discovered
sooner; and even since this discovery, we find some physiologists so little
acquainted with the nature of muscular power, that they have invented a
fanciful theory of the motion of the blood, by a supposed fermentation taking
place in the cavity of the heart. We are chiefly indebted to Dr. Glisson, who
lived about the middle of the last century, for the first correct ideas of the
irritability and contractility of muscular fibers.
.

A state of constant tension necessary to the action of muscular fibers.
There still remains to be mentioned, that important property of living muscular
fibers, which consists in a perpetual state of tension taking place at all
times, in a greater or less degree, independent of any temporary stimulus. When
any muscular fiber in a living animal body, whether in a fleshy muscle or a
blood-vessel, is divided by incision, there is an immediate retraction of the
separated parts; and that this is their natural state, is farther proved by the
spontaneous motion which takes place in consequence of the relaxation of an
antagonist muscle, as when the mouth is drawn to one side, in consequence of
hemiplegia. A certain degree of this tension is necessary for the performance
of the natural motions of the muscles, whether voluntary or involuntary, and
the vigor with which the several actions are performed, depends on the fibers
possessing a due decree of this constant tone. In order to maintain this tone,
there must every where be a counteracting mechanical power, and we perceive
accordingly that the great muscles are kept on the stretch by the bones, the
heart and vessels by the mass of fluids, and the intestines by the ingesta, and
their natural contents.

The excess or defect of this productive of diseases,
When this tension is either excessive or defective, various irregular and
morbid actions are produced. The vascular system is more apt to be affected by
various degrees of natural tone than any other part of the body, the reason of
which may be, that this very relaxation produces a greater capacity of the
vascular system, and the relative quantity of the mass of fluids being thereby
diminished, the resiliency and energy of the vessels are not supported even by
their former degree of distension. An excess of it may arise either from the
too great elasticity of the vessels themselves, or from plethora. The first is
indicated by a hard pulse, and that corresponding state of the fluids which
occasions in blood, when drawn from a vein and cold, a contraction of the
crassamentum, and a sizy crust. Plethora is most apt to arise in constitutions
naturally too lax, and which, therefore, do not bear the loss of blood so well
as the former.

A defect of tension in the vessels is produced either by disease, by
haemorrhage, or by natural constitution. In diseases, this want of tension is
indicated by general debility and depression of spirits, and by a weakness of
the pulse. And as irritibility and sensibility are very much affected by
tension, a want of it in the vessels chiefly constitutes what is called a
nervous habit, such as is most commonly met with in the female sex; and there
is nothing more apt to induce such a habit than haemorrhage, which I have known
to produce a long train of hysterical symptoms in those who had not formerly
been subject to such complaints.

There is a particular constitution incident to both sexes, which is commonly
connected with corpulency, and has been called by authors the temperamentum
frigidum, phlegmaticum, and spongiosum, and, in common language, a gross and
flabby habit. In these there seems to be a deficiency of the natural elasticity
of the vessels, and in certain diseases, even of the inflammatory kind, such as
the erysipelas, to which they are liable, tonic remedies, such as the Peruvian
bark, are found to be the cure, and in diseases of the lungs, chalybeate
remedies have been found effectual.

characteristic of constitutions,
There is, perhaps, no circumstance in which one individual differs more from
another, than this natural tension of the muscular fibers; and it would be more
useful, as well as more conformable to nature, to found a discrimination of
temperaments upon this, than upon the fanciful theory of humors; for this
difference of constitution not only gives occasion to a variety in natural
aspect, but valuable inferences may be deduced from it in the pathology and
treatment of diseases.

subject to inequality.
Not only the general excess or defect of tension, but the inequality of it, may
be considered as a cause of disease. It seems highly probable that those local
affections which depend on the congestion of fluids, are owing to the
difference of tension in particular parts in relation to the whole system. The
whole arteries of the body may be considered as one vessel, the capacity of
which is equal to the sum total of all the branches of the arterial system, and
as every part must be equally distended by the mass of fluids, it follows that
if the strength of the vessels of any one part should not be sufficient to
support an equilibrium, they must yield more or less to the elastic pressure of
the rest of the system.

and much influenced by sympathy.
There is, however, a circumstance of great importance in the anima economy,
which must tend in some measure to counteract this inequality of tension. When
the muscular fibers of any particular part are under a state of more or less
tension than the rest of the system, this is communicated by sympathy to every
other part of the body. This is particularly observable in the blood vessels
and intestines; for a relaxation in any part of these will produce a like
affection in every other part of the animal system. With regard to the
intestines, it may be mentioned, among many other proofs, that it is common for
persons in a state of great weakness to be affected with syncope, and even
instantaneous death, in the act of evacuating the bowels. It seems to be from a
like cause that a temporary lowness is produced by an abscess being opened.
This principle of the animal economy has been better illustrated by Dr. Cullen
than any other physiologist; and he is of opinion, that great part of the
effect of blood-letting in taking off the tension of the vascular system, in
cases of inflammation, depends on the depletion of the vessels of the part from
whence the blood is taken, for the proportion of the quantity drawn to the
whole mass is very small; and it may also be urged in favor of this opinion,
that the more suddenly the evacuation is made, the more effectual is its
operation in removing the inflammatory disposition, inasmuch as the local
depletion will be greater, the less time is allowed for the balance of the
system to replace it.

Muscular ^otion considered mechanically.
WHAT has been hitherto said of Muscular Motion, has had relation to it as a
property peculiar to animal matter and animal life. What I have farther to add
on this subject, will relate to the muscles merely as mechanical powers. As
they constitute the strength of animals, it may be proper to consider the
relation of their force to their bulk, and the relation of the bulk and
strength of the body to the density and cohesion of its own materials, and to
the bulk, density, and cohesion of the external inanimate bodies with which it
is conversant.

It has been demonstrated by Galileo Vid. Opere di Galileo. Discorsi e
demonstrazione mathematiche.
, that in similar unequal bodies of a cylindrical or prismatic shape, such as
the limbs of animals nearly are, the ratio of their efforts to break by their
own weight, is in the quadruplicate ratio of their lengths, but that the
resistance they make to the same force is only in the triplicate ratio of their
lengths. It follows from this, that in order to endow the limbs of animals with
the same relative force, it is not only necessary that the bones should possess
an increased proportion of thickness, in order to give an adequate increase of
what may be called the dead strength, but a similar increase of living strength
will be necessary, by a suitable addition of muscular power, in order to keep
pace with the increased size of the bones. Now we observe, in fact, that in the
large-sized animals, such as the bull and the elephant, the thickness both of
their bones and muscles bears a greater proportion to the length of their
limbs, than in the smaller animals, and they are therefore of a less elegant
form. But Nature has not carried this so far, as to compensate for the
disadvantage arising from the increase of size; for the greater animals have
not the same proportional strength, in relation to their bulk, that the smaller
animals have. It has been computed Vid. Haller Elementa Physiologiae. Cap. IX.
Sect. II.
that a flea can draw from seventy to eighty times its own weight, whereas a
horse cannot with ease draw more than three times his own weight. This
disproportion between strength and size is very observable in different
individuals of the human species, when compared to each other; for tall men are
not muscular, even in the simple proportion of their stature. The difference in
the shape and size of different men may be considered as an accidental variety,
or lusus naturae, owing, probably, to his artificial mode of life, and for
which Nature has made no special provision.

The strength and stature of the body properly adapted to external nature.
We are led, however, from a view of the same mechanical principles, to perceive
the wisdom of Nature in assigning certain general limits to the stature of the
human body. Had man been made much larger, he would have been unwieldy, and
subject to accidents in his motions, in consequence of the momentum of the
parts increasing in a higher ratio than their power of resistance. It may be
answered, that the parts might have been made proportionally more hard and
tenacious. But there are other circumstances in the animal economy which would
have been a bar to this; for had the bones been harder, they would not have
been calculated for the common duration of life, the effect of which being to
increase their hardness and dryness, they must be endowed originally with a
certain degree of softness and succulence. And with regard to muscles, a degree
of hardness, much greater than they naturally possess, would have been
incompatible with their contractility. Another inconvenience of the greater
stature of man would be, that he would require larger habitations, more food
and clothing, while he would have less relative strength to provide for these
wants. On the other hand, had man been of a stature much less than what he
enjoys by nature, he would not have possessed sufficient power over external
objects, to act up to those superior faculties of mind with which he is
endowed. If nature had conferred on man only one half of his actual stature and
strength, with the same powers of reason, we may venture to affirm that he
would not have carried his dominion over nature to the same extent. As he is
now constituted, his force being commensurate with external nature, he has been
able, either by force or artifice, to assert his sovereignty over the woods and
fields, by mastering the strongest and fiercest wild beasts; he has been able
to change the whole face of nature on the surface of the earth, by works of
industry, and monuments of art; he has been able to fell trees, to build ships,
and to circumnavigate the planet he inhabits. It is rather a triumph of his
reason than of his corporeal strength, to say, in the language of a modern poet
Pope.
, that he can "Measure earth, weigh air, and state the tides;" or, according to
the sublime idea of an ancient philosopher Archimedes.
, that he could turn the earth from its orbit, could he find footing on another
earth, from whence to exert the powers of mechanism; but such knowledge and
such conceptions could never have been attained but by a being of a certain
degree of bodily strength and stature.

From what has been said, it may safely be inferred, that as the external
bodies with which we are conversant possess given degrees of cohesion, bulk,
and density, which require corresponding powers to act upon them; so the human
body, at its mean stature, is best adapted for producing those changes upon
matter, which are necessary for self-preservation, and the various
accommodations of life. And an argument may be drawn from hence against the
tenets of those speculative philosophers, who hold that the size and strength
of man were much greater in remote antiquity than in modern times. It is
evident, from what has been said, that if the bulk of the human body were much
greater than it is, it would be both useless and inconvenient, and would not
preserve that harmony with the rest of nature, which is so agreeable to the
analogy of her other works.

The muscles considered as mechanical powers acting upon levers.
I shall conclude this Lecture with some remarks on the muscles, considered as
mechanical powers acting upon levers.

The first remark to be made upon this, is so obvious, that it has hardly
escaped the notice of any modern physiologist, and seems at first sight to
militate against that wisdom of nature which is so conspicuous in other
respects. What I mean is, the great waste of mechanical power which is incurred
by the manner in which the muscles are inserted into the bones. Their
disadvantageous action, 1. From the manner of their insertion into the bones.
This disadvantageous action of muscles is chiefly owing to two circumstances.
One of these is their insertion, in almost every instance in which they are
connected with bones, into a part which is much nearer the fulcrum than the
resistance. Thus the two muscles of the arm, called the biceps and brachiaeus
internus, in order to support in the hand a weight of one pound with the fore
arm at right angles to the humerus, must exert a power equal to ten pounds. The
other circumstance giving rise to a waste of power, is the great obliquity with
which they are inserted into the bones upon which they are intended to act, so
that the greater part of the force is expended in pressing one bone against
another at the articulation, and only a small portion of it in making the
flexures and extensions; so as to produce the desired effect at the extremity.

This compensated by preserving the shape of the parts,
But these disadvantages are compensated by certain conveniences, and if nature
has endowed the muscles with sufficient power for the purposes of life, after
making allowance for the waste of force, there can be no reason to find fault
with her management. One of the principal advantages arising from this
distribution of the muscles, is the preservation of the shape of the members;
for unless the muscles and tendons had been pretty nearly in the direction of
the bones, they must have passed like bow-strings from one bone to another, in
making the flexures of the joints.

and in actions of percussion,
In estimating the waste of force, in consequence of the mechanical
disadvantages before mentioned, we are to distinguish between those actions
which consist in pressure, and those which consist in percussion; for as the
momentum of the latter depends on velocity, it is evident that there is a great
advantage from the insertion of the tendon being near the center of motion, as
greater velocity, with less expense of contraction, will be thereby imparted to
the extremity. The muscles, for instance, which are attached to the olecranon,
in performing those actions with the hand which require rubbing, act with a
disadvantage, exactly in proportion to the inequality of the distance from
their insertion to the joint of the elbow, and that from the same joint to the
hand. This is an act of pressure. But in the case of percussion, as in the
action of using a hammer, there is an evident advantage resulting from the
velocity communicated to the extremity; for in order to have produced the same
velocity, with the insertion at a greater distance from the center of motion, a
greater range of contraction would have been necessary. by saving contraction.
The saving of contraction, therefore, may be reckoned another principal
advantage in the attachment of muscles near to the center of motion. As this is
a point which I think has not been attended to, in explaining the mechanism of
the muscles, I shall conclude with some remarks upon it.

2. Disadvantage from the obliquity of muscles to each other.
As the muscles of voluntary motion are subject to fatigue, every circumstance
that can tend to diminish this, will be favorable to the purposes of nature.
Fatigue depends upon the force, frequency, duration, and extent of the
contraction of muscular fibers. It is this last which is meant here to be
illustrated. If any one will take the trouble of comparing the fatigue of the
biceps muscle, in bearing a weight in the hand, with the elbow joint bent to a
right angle, with that of bearing the same weight for the same length of time,
with the joint at an acute angle, he will be sensible how much the degree of
fatigue depends on the extent of contraction, and by attending to the relative
situation of muscular fibers, it will appear that nature, in distributing the
fibers of muscles obliquely, has had it in view not only to increase their
number, but to save contraction.

Oblique action universal in muscles, in relation to each other.
In surveying the actions of all the various muscles, it appears, not only from
the cooperation of different muscles, but from the position of the fibers in
the same muscle, that there is hardly an action to be met with that can be
called direct. In some instances, two muscles, or sets of muscles, are made to
cooperate, so that the motion effected by them shall be in the diagonal of
their direction. This is the case of the oblique muscles of the abdomen in some
of their actions, and the intercostal muscles in all their actions. Sometimes,
different portions of the same muscle produce in like manner an intermediate
and combined effect, as in the instance of the cucullaris, one part of which
being attached to the vertebrae of the neck, and another to those of the lower
part of the back, their joint effect is to draw the scapula toward the spine.
and in the fibers of the same muscle.
And in all the long muscles, however simple their origin and insertion may be,
there is an internal obliquity of their fibers, in regard to each other, as
described by the late Dr. Hunter; for these do not run from end to end, but
there are parts of the tendon running into the belly of the muscle, so as to
divide it into penniform and rhomboidal portions. This distribution of the
fibers takes off from their length; but as it takes place in those cases where
the origin and insertion are at a considerable distance, this can be afforded;
Compensated, 1. by multiplying the number of fibers.
and this, as well as the waste of power, in consequence of oblique action, is
more than compensated by the increased strength, from the fibers being
multiplied; for, in consequence of this structure, there is an extent of tendon
afforded sufficient for the insertion of a greater quantity of fleshy fibers.

This illustrated in the structure of fish.
This principle in the mechanism of muscular action, is well illustrated by
considering the motions of fish. The muscles of most fish consist of regular
series of oblique short fibers, forming those strata which every one must have
observed in their muscular substance. Their motions are more simple and limited
than those of land animals, but much more vigorous; for a fish in the sea has
to make its way through a medium about a thousand times more dense than air,
and with more rapidity. Nature, therefore, instead of giving them muscles whose
fibers would run straight from one end of their body to the other, has
multiplied their numbers, by distributing them into short and oblique portions.
If one was called upon to name instances of the greatest muscular efforts, it
is in fish that these are to be found. I have seen the sword of a sword-fish
sticking in a plank, which it had penetrated from side to side; and when it is
considered that the animal was then moving through so dense a medium, and in
the same direction with the ship, we must form a high conception of its
muscular power.

An advantage the reverse of what has been stated, arises from the oblique
direction of the intercostal muscles, the fibers of which are thereby
lengthened; for in parts so near each other as the ribs, there would have been
a great inconvenience in their passing directly from one to another. Besides,
in consequence of their oblique direction, the origin in the superior rib is
placed nearer to the center of motion than the insertion in the inferior rib,
the effect of which is, that all the ribs are elevated, whereby the cavity of
the thorax is enlarged, which is the view of nature.

2. By saving contraction.
But the advantage or rather compensation of obliquity, which I mean
particularly here to demonstrate, is, that the same effect is produced with a
less proportional decurtation of fibers, than if the same motion had been
performed by a direct power. Borelli has estimated geometrically the loss of
power from oblique action, but seems to have overlooked this compensation of
it, which is not inconsiderable, when we reflect that there is thereby a saving
of contraction, and consequently of fatigue. This can be rendered an object of
geometrical proof, and I here subjoin a demonstration of it, which I made out,
when engaged in the study of anatomy, eighteen years ago.

This demonstrated by a theorem.
Let the line A B, in the annexed diagram, represent a moveable bone, and the
line C D a fixed bone parallel to it. Let F E, perpendicular to these lines,
represent a muscle acting in its own direction, and the lines G E H E represent
two muscles acting obliquely, and producing, by a diagonal action, the same
effect as the other, If the bone A B be brought to the situation a b, by the
action of the muscle F E, the muscle will then be in the situation F K. If the
bone is brought into the same situation by the action of the muscles G E, H E,
these muscles will then be in the situation G K, H K.

The proposition to be demonstrated is, that the line G K bears a greater
proportion to the line G E, than the line F K does to line F E; for F K is to F
E as G L is to G E. (Euc. Elem. B. vi. Prop. 2.) and the angle E L K, being
less than a right angle, the angle G L K, which is adjacent to it, must be
greater than a right angle; and the angle G K L, being in the same triangle
with G L K, must be less than a right angle. The line G K, therefore, which
subtends the greater angle, is greater than the line G L, subtending the
lesser, and therefore bears a greater proportion to G E. But the line G L is to
G E, as F K is to F E; and therefore G K bears a greater proportion to G E,
than F K does to F E; that is, the fibers of the muscles acting obliquely,
suffer a less proportional decurtation than those of the muscle acting directly.

It is farther obvious, that the more oblique the action becomes, the greater
saving there will be of contraction; for in moving the line a b toward C D,
the line F K diminishes in a swifter ratio than the line G K, and when the
former has vanished, the latter is in the situation G F.

Conclusion.
I have thus endeavored to sketch some of the most important particular in the
natural motions of living animals, a subject which affords one of the finest
and most fertile fields for contemplating the wisdom with which Nature adapts
her means to her ends; and which has been justly considered as carrying the
most irresistible evidence of the existence of an intelligent cause. The
subject is so far from being exhausted, that I am convinced there are
circumstances in the relative distribution and correspondence of organs,
depending on muscular motion, so profound and exquisite, as far to exceed the
utmost reach of human thought to comprehend, or of human ingenuity to detect:
and here, as in every other part of the frame of the universe, the most
elevated conceptions which the most rapturous imagination can form of the
beauty and magnificence of Nature, will fall far short of the real sublimity of
her works.

THE END.

