THE CALCULATION OF Solar Eclipses WITHOUT PARALLAXES.

A Calculation of the Great Eclipse of the Sun, April 22d. 1715 in the Morning,
from Mr. Flamsteed's Tables; as corrected according to Sr. Isaac Newtons Theory
of the Moon in the Astronomical Lectures, with its Construction for London Rome
and stockholme. By W: Whiston MA.
NB. The Inquisitive are desired nicely to Observe whether in such Places where
the Eclipse is plainly Total, there be not streaks of Red Light just before and
after that Total Darkness; and how long it is visible; For if there be, it will
imply that it is an Atmosphere about the Moon that is the occasion of it, and by
its duration the height of the same Atmosphere - may in some measure be
determined also.

The Sun's True Place and Anomaly
s s Anno Dom. 1701 9 20 43 50 3 7 40 10 Years -- 14 11 29 36 46 11 40 April,
days -- 21 3 19 24 24 15 hours -- 21 51 45 3 7 52 5 minutes -- 36 1 29 Place of
the Perihel. Sun's Mean Motion 1 10 38 14 1 10 38 14 Equation Added 1 36 27 s
Mean Motion Sun's True Place 1 12 14 4^ 10 2 46 9 s Mean Anomaly The General
Eclipse by the Calculation From Dr. Halley h h Beginning -- 7. 30 7 21 Middle
-- 9. 51 9 42 End -- 12. 12 12 3 The Eclipse at London from the Calculation.
From Dr. Halley h h Beginning -- 8. 18 8 7 Middle -- 9. 24 9 13 End -- 10. 35
10 24



The Construction Explaind
This Scheme represents one half of the Enlightened Disk of the Earth as seen
from its Center Projected at the distance of the Moon. The Elliptick Parallels,
with their Hours, represent the Cities of London, Rome, and Stockholme, as
placed at those Hours at different Times. The Principal strait Line divided by
dotts represents the Path of the Moons Center ever the Disk of the Earth: And
by the Hours in Larger and those above and below in smaller Characters, the
Position of the Center is determind at those Times for those Places
respectively. So that if with a pair of Compasse^ we take from the proper Scale
the Semediameter of the Penumbra, and carry it along the Path till it first
reaches to, and then leaves the same minute on any Parallel that is the very
time of its Begin^ing and Ending there. And if at any intermediate time in both
you make Circles, one with the Moons Semidiameter on its Path; the other with
the Suns on any of the 3 Parallels* the Intercepted part will show the quantity
of the Eclipse at that time in the Place to ^ which the Parallel you we does
belong. And if you carry a Square along the Path, till the Perpendicular side
cuts the same Hour and Minute there and in any Parallel, that is the Middle of
the Eclipse there. Of all which you have examples in the Scheme. Only Note that
the Center of the Penumbra at 21 after* 7 and at 3 after 12* which are the
beginning and ending of the General Eclipse, extends beyond the* Copper Plate,
and is to be supplied by the Ren at the intersection of the proper Lines there
to directed.

The Breadth of the entire Penumbra or paitial Eclipse upon this Perpendicular
Plain, appears by the Construction to be no less than 1965 minutes or
Geographical Mibes on each side of the Moons Path, or 3930 Miles in all; which.
correspond to many more on the Spherical Surface of the Earth: Nor is it all
confind, as you may see here, to that Surface, but reaches* off a greatway into
the empty Space beyond it Northward. The Lines which distinguish that breadth
on each side into 12 parts denote so many Digits of the Suns Eclipses besides
for the Total shade) and the places both as to Long* 8* Lat: where the sun will
at any Time be so much Eclipsed: And indeed I would willingly have procured a
general Map here to have* showed over what Countries and Places the entire
Shadow would pass, as Doctor Halley has given us a particular Map of England
for the Passage of the Total Shadow over it. But the nature of the Construction
does not admit of that Projection (Such a Thing cannot be truly represented any
other way than by the Copernicus; where there is a real Globe of the Earth,
capable of a Diurnal motion, during the time of the Eclipse) the imposibility
of which in all Perspective Projections of the Sphere renders that designs
otherwise impracticable: Nor can I determine by this Construction whether the*
Eclipse will be Total at London or not, because the Circles of the Sun and Moon
at the Southern Limit seem here exactly coincident. But if we go by a
Construction according to our Calculation the Digits Eclipsed at London will be
hardly more than 11 and the Shadow* will go full 30 Miles more Northward than
in Dr. Halleys Map.

So that ye Middle of the General Eclipse in common or apparent Time* will be
50. 56. after Nine in the Morning* differing from Dr. Halley's Computation near
9 min. But Note that the Construction is accommodated to the Drs. Calculation.

Note also that hence the breadth of the Shadow of Total Darkness will be 98
Geographical Miles; and that its length on the Oblique Horizon of London will
be near 150 Miles, as Dr. Halley's Description asserts.

But it must be here Observed that if in this Calculation the that and 6th New
Equations of the Moon, taken from S. Isaac Newton's Theory, were neglected,
this Calculation would be much nearer to Dr. Halley's, as it is now nearer to
Mr. Flamsteed's. This Eclipse, if the Air prove clear for exact Observations,
will go agreat ^ay to determine how far those Equations are just; and how far
they are necessary in the Calculation of the New and Full Moons, and of
Eclipses, that happen only at those Times. St. Isaac Newton's third Equation,
which is no more than 13 to be Substr^ted, is here omitted, as very
inconsiderable.

Moon's mean Motion Motion of the Apogee Motion of ye Nodr Retr. s s s Anno
Dom.1701 10 15 19 50 11 8 18 20 4 27 24 20 Years -- 14 1 20 54 34 6 29 37 50 9
0 45 35 April* days -- 21 22 34 47 12 21 59 5 52 41 hours -- 21 11 31 46 5 51 2
47 minuted -- 36 1^ 46 10 5 (Mean Time) 9 6 41 8 Moon's mean Motion 1 10 40 43
6 20 24 10 7 20 43 12 Suns mean Anomaly 10 2 40 9 An: Eq: Add. 16 8 An Eq:
subst. 7* 41 Physical parts Subtracted 9 50 6 20 40 18 7 20 35 31 (...) 6th
Equation Substra^ 3 45 Mean Place Corrected Mean Place Corrected Sum 13 35 1 12
14 41 1 12 14 41 Moon's mean Place correcte^ 1 10 27 8 Suns True Place Suns
True Place True Place of the Apogee ^ulot 6 27 5^ 5 6 21 34 23 5 21 39 10
Moon's mean Anomaly 6 12 31 3 Annual Argument ^ Distance from the Node Equation
Added 1 42 35 7 15 47 Equat: Subst. 25 19 Moon's Equat Place in its Orb 1 12 9
43 Equation Added 7 20 10 12 Sun's True Place 1 12 14 41 6 27 56 5 True Place
of the Node Moon's Distance from ye. sun 11 29 55 2 True Place of the Apogee 5
16 56 Variation subtracted 2 Eccentricity 63 68 Inclination of ye Limit Moon's
True Place in it^ Orbit. 1 12 9 41 horary Mot. 38 0 Semidiam.. 15 58 Node's
True Place substract 7 20 10 12 ^. 2 25 Semidiam.. 16 47 Argument of Latitude 5
21 59 29 from 35 35 Semid. Penum. 32 45 Reduction Added 2 0 356 60115: 8 22
Semid. Disk 61 30 Moon's True Place in the Eclip^ 1 12 11 41 Eq. Time Add. 3 25
Ang^ of ye way with ye Ecliptic 5 35 Moon's True North Latitude 44 10 Reduct
Add. 3 9 Diff^ of that and s Diam 98or 98 Miles. Sum of 3 Add. 14 56

Engraved and Sold by John Senex at ye Globe in Salisbury Court near Fleet
street. And Will: Tailor at the Ship in Paternoster Row. Where are sold Mr
Whiston's Astronomical Lectures, his Taquet's Euclid, and ye Scheme of ye Solar
System. Also ye newest Globes and Maps.

The Copernicus, or Universal Astronomical Instrument, being now finished, is
sold by ye Author Mr. Whiston, at his House in Cross street Hatton Garden

THE CALCULATION OF Solar Eclipses WITHOUT PARALLAXES. WITH A SPECIMEN of the
same in the Total Eclipse of the Sun, May 11. 1724. Now first made Public. To
which is added, A PROPOSAL how, with the Latitude given, the Geographical
Longitude of all the Parts of the Earth may be settled by the bare Knowledge of
the Duration of Solar Eclipses, and especially of Total Darkness. WITH An
ACCOUNT of some late Observations made with Dipping Needles, in order to
discover the LONGITUDE and LATITUDE at Sea. By WILL. WHISTON, M. A. Sometime
Professor of the Mathematics in the University of Cambridge.

LONDON: Printed for J. SENEX in Fleetstreet; and W. TAILOR in
Paternoster Row. 1724.

LEMMATA: OR, Preparatory Propositions.
I.
HE most useful and most remarkable Cycle or Period for the Revolution of
Eclipses, both Solar and Lunar, mentioned by Pliny, (Not. Hist. II.) and by him
only of all the Ancients, is the Interval of 223 Synodical Months = 6585 Days:
or = 18 Julian Years: with 10 Days, when the Cycle ^or Period contains 5
Leap-Years: and with 11 Days, when with 7 Hours 43. In which Time the direct
mean Motion of the Moon and her Apogee in the Ecliptic, is nearly so much
more; and the Retrograde mean Motion of the Nodes nearly so much less than
entire Revolutions, as the mean Motion of the Moon from the Sun, upon which all
mean Conjunctions, Oppositions, and Eclipses properly depend, exceeds the like
entire Revolutions Which Coincidences do therefore nearly restore the mean
State of the Moon it self, its Apogee* Nodes, and Lunations: And produce an
eminent Revolution of correspondent New Moons, ^ull Moons, and Eclipses, after
that Interval perpe^^^lly.

This appears by the following Calculation of all these mean Motions from the
Astronomical Tables.

Mean Motion of the Sun or Earth.
s Years 18 11 29 28 32 Days 11 0 10 50 32 Hours 7 0 0 17 15 43 0 0 1 46 15 0 0
0 1 Sum 0 10 48 6

Mean Motion of the Moon in the Ecliptic.
s Years 18 7 11 37 22 Days 11 4 24 56 25 Hours 7 0 03 50 35 43 0 00 23 36 15
00 00 00 08 Sum 00 10 48 06

Mean Motion of the Apogee.
s Years 18 0 12 23 53 Days 11 0 1 13 32 Hours 7 0 0 1 57 43 0 0 0 12 Sum 0 13
39 34

Mean Motion of the Node backward.
s Years 18 11 18 7 39 Days 11 0 0 34 57 Hours 7 0 0 0 56 43 0 0 0 6 Sum 11 18
43 38

Mean Motion of the Moon from the Sun.
s Years 18 7 11 58 50 Days 11 4 14 5 53 Hours 7 0 3 33 20 43 0 0 21 50 15 0 0
0 7 Sum 0 0 0 0

From the mean Motion of the Apogee 13 39 34 Substract that of the Moon in the
Eclipt. 10 48 6 Remains -- (29) 2 51 28 To the mean Motion of the Moon 0 10 48
6 Add that of the Node 11 18 43 38 Sum 11 29 31 44 Difference from 12 Signs
(047) 0 0 28 16

Whence it appears that the Difference of the mean Motions of the Apogee and of
the Nodes from that of the Moon her self in the Ecliptic, in such a Period, is
but small: Not more in the former Case than 2 5128 = 29, nor in the latter than
28 16 = 047. Whence also it appears that the Lunar Apogee does in every such
Cycle differ but 1/^2 of the entire Difference 29) 180 (62. That the Lunar Node
only differs in that Cycle 1/^^^ of the entire Difference 047) 180 (383. And
that the Anomaly of the Sun it self differs only 1/1^^^ of the entite Anomaly:
10 8) 180 (166. Which Quantities being generally small, cannot occasion any
great Inequality in the Times and Circumstances of New and Full Moons, or of
Eclipses* nor by consequence greatly disturb the regular Succession of the same
in any single Period; nor indeed very greatly in several successive Periods.
For since the mean Motion of the Moon from the Sun is within a very small
Matter ever certain and invariable, that Revolution is always just; and always
determines the mean Time of all Conjunctions, Oppositions, and Eclipses
rightly; and since the other Anomalies are but small, and always come right
again in Length of Time, they cannot ever produce any very great Anomalies in
our Calculations from them. As will farther appear under the following Scholia.

N. B. This Period for Eclipses, has of late been called, both by Mr.
Flamsteed, and Dr. Halley, the Saros, or the Chaldean Saros: As if it were
known and used by the old Chaldeans, and thence called by that Name. For which
I know no sufficient Foundation. There is indeed a gross Mistake of Pliny's
Number in Suidas, (who thus applies this term) 222 for 223 Months, as almost
all the Editions of Pliny still have it; and He calls that Period by this
Chaldean Name Saros. Yet the Chaldeans never, that we find, applied it to any
other Period than that of 3600 Years or Days; by which Period alone all the
Antediluvian Reigns are determined both in Abydenus and Berosus themselves,
from the anc^entest Records of that Kingdom. See my New Theory, the later
Editions, Hypoth. X. Lem. to the third Argument; and Appendix to the Essay
toward restoring the true Text of the Old Testament, p. 203, -- 213.

SCHOLIA.
(1.) We may here Observe, that since the Limit for Eclipses of the Moon is
about 11 40 = 700 on each Side of the Node; as is the Limit for Eclipses of the
Sun, about 16 40 = 1000. If we divide 700, the Limit of the Moon's Eclipses, by
28 16 = 283, which is the Difference between the Revolution of the Moon to the
Sun and of the Node above given, we shall have nearly Twenty Five for the
Number of Cycles,, after a Central Lunar Eclipse in one of the Nodes, before
the Moon goes off the Shadow of the Earth entirely at the same Node, and 450
Years (25 * 18 = 450,) or double that Number 900 Years for the Time that the
Moon begins to enter the Ecliptic Limit on one Side, till it goes out of it on
the other. During which long Interval there will still be Eclipses of the Moon
each Period. And if we divide 1000 the Limit of the Sun's Eclipses, by the same
Number 283, we shall have nearly 35 for the Number of Periods after a Solar
Central Eclipse at the Middle of the Earth, in one of the Nodes, before the
Penumbra goes off the North or South Parts of the Disk of the Earth entirely at
the same Time; i. e. 630 Years. (35 * 18 = 630,) or double that Number 1260
Years, from the Time that the Moon in any such Period begins to enter the
Ecliptic Limit on one Side, till it goes out of on the other: During which
longer Interval there will still be somewhere Eclipses of the Sun each Period.
After which respective long Intervals of Time there will be no such Eclipses
for much longer Intervals.

(2.) Since the utmost Latitude of the Moon that can permit any Lunar Eclipse,
is about 62, and the same utmost Latitude that can permit a Solar Eclipse is
about 92: If we divide the first Number by 25, or the last by 35, the Numbers
of Revolutions for the Ecliptic Limits, we shall have about 26 = 2:36 for the
mean Alteration of the Moon's Latitude in each single Period all along; and
this both for Solar and Lunar Eclipses. Which Latitude will be South during the
one half of the long Period of the Ecliptic Limits beforementioned; and North
during the other half: Gradually increasing, and as gradually decreasing
perpetually: As in the following Table.

A Table of the mean Latitudes of the Moon each single Cycle, either North or
South; beginning at an Eclipse in one of the Nodes, without any Latitude at all.

Latitudes for 25 Cycles in Lunar, and 35 in Solar Eclipses.
Cycles 1 2 26 2 4 52 3 7 19 4 9 46 5 12 14 6 14 43 7 17 12 8 19 42 9 22 12 10
24 43 11 27 14 12 29 46 13 32 19 14 34 52 15 37 26 16 40 1 17 42 36 18 45 12 19
47 48 20 50 25 21 53 3 22 55 41 23 59 20 24 60 59 25 63 39 26 66 0 27 68 41 28
71 23 29 74 6 30 76 49 31 79 33 32 82 17 33 85 2 34 87 48 35 90 34

(3.) Since the principal Alteration in the Quantity and Duration of total
Eclipses of the Sun, arises from the Difference there is at any Time between
the real Distances, and apparent Diameters of the Sun and Moon, at the Time of
such Eclipses, that Quantity and Duration must depend on the Difference of
their mean Anomalies, which gives us that Difference of Distances and
Diameters; and must therefore answer in each Cycle one with another, to the
Differences of those mean Anomalies during that Interval; which in the Sun
comes to 108/180 or 1/166 of its entire Anomaly. And in the Moon to 2/^* 9/^ or
1/^^ of its entire Anomaly. And since the whole mean Excentricity of the Moon
is somewhat above three Times as great as that of the Sun, or as ^^/1000 to
17/100. The Differences of the Sun's Distances and Diameters will be but a
little greater in each Period one with another, than those of the Moon.

(4.) When therefore the Anomalies of the Sun and Moon are of the same Species;
I mean both ascending, or both descending; their Distances and Diameters will,
one with another, increase or decrease nearly in the same Proportion; and the
Quantity and Duration of total Darkness will alter but little in such a Period.
But when those Anomalies are of the contrary Species; that is, the one
ascending while the other descends; they will alter considerably. So that if
the Sun be descending, and its apparent Diameter Increasing; while the Moon is
ascending, and its apparent Diameter Decreasing, the Eclipse of the Sun will,
each succeeding Cycle, afford a smaller total Shadow; till at last it afford no
total Shadow at all; but the Eclipses become Annular. And if the Sun be
Ascending while the Moon is Descending, the contrary will happen; and the total
Shadow grow greater perpetually. From which Circumstances of the Sun and Moon
in each Revolution of the Cycle duly considered, we may nearly determine
whether any succeeding correspondent Eclipse will afford us a greater or less
total Shadow, or whether the Eclipses will be only Annular.

(5.) From the like Circumstances we may also nearly determine whether such
Eclipses will come somewhat sooner or later, than that of the mean Revolution
of the Period before us. For if the Earth be much nearer its Aphelion, than the
Moon its Apogaeon, at the end of any Cycle; and by consequence if the Earth
then revolve comparatively slower, and the Moon swifter than ordinary; the
meeting of the Luminaries will be accelerated. And if the Earth be much remoter
from its Aphelion than the Moon from its Apogaeon, the contrary will happen;
and the Moon will be later than ordinary ever it overtake the Sun. So that in
the former Case the Eclipse will come a little before, and in the latter a
little after the proper Conclusion of that Period.

(6.) Since the Motion of the Node backward in one of these Periods does not
quite reach to the Conjunction or Opposition, that Node must every Cycle go
forward, with respect to the Lunations and Eclipses; and at the ascending Node
the Moon will pass more Southward, and at the descending Node more Northward
successively. Thus at the Solar Eclipse May 1. 1706. the Moon, near its
ascending Node, had greater Northern Latitude than it will have at the next
corresponding Solar Eclipse, May 11. 1724. And thus at the total Solar Eclipse,
April 22. 1715. the Moon near its descending Node, had less Northern Latitude
than it will have at its corresponding great Eclipse, May 2. 1733.

(7.) Since the Motion of the Moon's Apogee forward is greater in one of these
Periods than that of the Lunations, that Apogee must also go forward every
Cycle: And if at any one Solar Eclipse that Apogee be in quadrature with the
Sun, after it had been in Conjunction, the Moon will the next Period descend by
going backward in its Eclipses, toward the Perigee. And if at any one such
Apogee it be in the quadrature, after it had been in Opposition, it will the
next Cycle ascend: The Reverse of all which is true in Lunar Eclipses.

(8.) The Place and Motion of the Sun in its Ellipsis is so easily known, and
that for many Ages, by bare Memory and Reflection, that a few Words will
suffice. The Sun is now farthest from the Earth Eight Days after the longest
Day; and nearest to it Eight Days after the shortest: And its Motion about 1
Degree in 72 Years. Whence it is evident, that it has, for all the past Ages of
Astronomy, been about the Summer Solstice in our Apogee, and about the Winter
Solstice in our Perigee; if I may use the T^rms of the Ptolemaick System. Nor
is it therefore any Wonder that the greatest total Eclipses of the Sun have
happened still in the Summer, and the g^eatest Annular ones in the Winter half
Year: Since the farther the Sun is off in the Winter, the less must be its
apparent Diameter, and by consequence the greater the Excess of the Moon's
Diameter above it. On which Excess alone the Greatness of such Eclipses
depends. And the Reverse is equally evident in the Case of Annular Eclipses in
Winter: Nor indeed is it very strange, that Annular Eclipses are in these Parts
of the World so rarely observed; since they most usually happen in Winter Days;
which being short, must afford us a proportionably small Number of them. To the
Inhabitants of the other Side of the Equator the Reverse must happen. But those
Eclipses very rarely come to our Notice.

(9.) Since this Period reaches only from the middle of one general Eclipse to
another, without regard to the Position of any particular Place on the Earth's
Surface, arising from the diurnal Motion, we must remember that if an Eclipse
of the Sun happens at any particular Place considerably before Noon, it will
come sooner, and after Noon later than the proper Conclusion of this Period.
Though it must be noted, that Eclipses of the Moon being absolute in their own
Nature, are here wholly unconcerned; and no way subject to any Acceleration,
Retardation, or Alteration on account of the diurnal Motion of the Earth.

(10.) The principal Alteration of the Time of the Day in all Eclipses depends
on the Excess of this Period above an even Number of Days; which is 7 Hours and
43. So that the Cycle does naturally put every correspondent Eclipse later than
the foregoing, almost 8 Hours, or one third part of a Day; which thing, by
reason of the intervening diurnal Motion, greatly alters all Eclipses,
especially Solar, not only as to the bare Time of the Day when, but also as to
the Places on the Earth where such correspondent Eclipse will be visible.

(11.) If therefore we join three of these Cycles together, those odd Hours and
Minutes will amount nearly to a whole Day; and will therefore nearly bring the
middle Point of the correspondent Eclipses to the same Time, in the same Place,
and, in part, with the same Circumstances as before: Which a single Cycle
cannot possibly do. Only with the Anticipation of 50 in Time. Which three
single Cycles therefore of 19,756 Days, or of 54 Years; with 32 or 33 Days; I
call the Grand Cycle. And this will be, I think, of the greatest and readiest
use in remote Eclipses of any other Period whatsoever.

Thus, for Example, there was a total Eclipse of the Sun on Black Monday; as it
has thence been called ever since, March 29. 1652. about Ten a Clock in the
Morning. Total, I say it was in the North of Ireland, and the Northwest of
Scotland, though not so at London, ot the remoter Parts of England and Scotland.
To this if we add one Cycle, the Time of the next correspondent Eclipse will
thus be discovered: y d h To A. D. 1652. March, 00 28 22 00 00 Add 18 10 7 43
15 Sum 1670 April 00 8 5 43 15 So that the correspondent total Eclipse ought to
have been A. D. 1670. April the 8th 43 past 5 a-Clock in the Evening. And
because the Earth was then a small Matter nearer its Aphelion, than the Moon
its Apogaeon, the Time would be a little anticipated on that Account. But then,
because this Eclipse was toward Evening, it would be much more retarded on
that Account, than anticipated on the other; and the main Part of the Eclipse
would happen after Sunset, and be here invisible.

To this Time if we add another Cycle, the next correspondent Eclipse will in
like Manner be discovered: y d h To A. D. 1670. April 00 08 5 43 15 Add 18 11 7
43 15 Sum 1688. April 00 19 13 26 30 So that the next correspondent total
Eclipse ought to have been April 20th, 26 after one in the Morning; and was
therefore, to be sure, utterly invisible to us here. To this Time if we add
another Cycle, we have the next correspondent total Eclipse thus: y d h To A.
D. 1688 April 00 19 13 26 30 Add 18 10 07 43 15 Sum 1706 May 00 00 21 09 45 So
that the next correspondent total Eclipse was to have been A. D. 1706. 9 past
Nine a-Clock in the Morning; which is not much before the Time when it was
observed here; and was no other than that famous Eclipse which was total at
Cadiz, Barcelona, Marseilles, Geneva, Bern, and Zurich; and became very
remarkable for the raising of the Siege of Barcelona during that total
Darkness: Though I have been informed by several there present, that it came to
both Armies wholly unexpected, till the great Darkness of the Sky forced them
to attend to it. Now this affords us also a remarkable Instance of the near
Approximation of our Grand Cycle, both as to Time and Place. For if instead of
tracing this correspondent Eclipse through the distinct Cycles we had at once
taken our Grand Cycle of 54 Years, and 33 Days; we had come immediately to this
Eclipse: And by allowing the Anticipation of 50 had been within about 20 of the
Calculation at London.

To this Time if we add another single Cycle, we shall have the next
correspondent Eclipse thus: y d h To A. D. 1706. May 00 00 21 09 45 Add 18 10
07 43 15 Sum 1724 May 00 11 04 53 00 So that we ought hence to expect the total
Eclipse next May 11, 53 past 4 in the Afternoon. And because both the Position
of the Sun and Moon in their Ellipses, and the more considerable Alteration
from the Time of the Day, which is here much farther in the Evening than the
last was in the Morning; oblige us to suppose about 1h Retardation, we hence
justly expect that this Eclipse will be the nearest Total at London about 40
past Six in the Evening; as the exactest Calculations do determine.

(12.) If we would now trace a few Lunar Eclipses by this Cycle, we may do it
according to the following Examples:

A. D. 1681/2, Feb. 11. about 59 past 10 a-Clock at Night, Mr. Flamsteed
observed the Middle of a great and total Eclipse of the Moon at Greenwich.
Proceed therefore as is already directed to find the next correspondent Eclipse
of the Moon thus: y d h To A. D. 1681/2 February. 00 11 10 59 00 Add 18 11 07
43 15 Sum 1699/1700 Febr. 00 22 18 42 15 So that this first correspondent total
Eclipse of the Moon ought to have been Feb. 23. 1699/1700, 42 past Six a-Clock
in the Morning; or in the daytime, and so must needs have been in great Part
to us invisible.

y d h To A. D. 1699/1700, Feb. 00 22 18 42 15 Add 18 10 07 43 15 Sum 1717/18
March 00 05 02 25 30 So that the next correspondent total Eclipse of the Moon
ought to have been March 5, 1717/1^. 25 after Two a-Clock in the Afternoon;
which was in the daytime also; and so must equally with the former have been
here invisible.

y d h To A. D. 1717/18, March 00 05 02 25 30 Add 18 10 07 43 15 Sum 1736 March
00 15 10 08 45 So that the next total correspondent Eclipse of the Moon is
hence to be expected A. D. 1736. March 15. 8h past 10 a-Clock at Night: which
is about an Hour and half sooner than the Calculation. Which difference we
shall presently find to be near the greatest Difference that can happen.

This may also be equally obtained by one entire Grand Cycle of 54 Years, and
33 Days; with the forementioned Anticipation of 50 which from Feb. 11. 1681/2
10h 59, brings us directly to March 15, 1736, 9 past 10 a-Clock at Night; or to
somewhat above an Hour and half before the Calculation.

N. B. As to the proper Quantity of the several Alterations arising in each
Period, which ought to be allowed for, they are nearly these: The Moon and Sun
being about 31 in Diameter, and the Digits of their Observation being 12. while
the Difference of the Moon's Latitude, as we have seen, is about 2 36 or the
Twelfth Part of those Diameters, it is plain that the mean natural Alteration
of every Period in the same Circumstances is about one Digit; though less in
the lesser, and greater in greater Latitudes: which in the Moon, whose Eclipse
is to all Spectators the same, holds constantly: And though the diurnal Motion
of the Earth removes all particular Places, so much each Period as to render
this Rule less observable in Solar Eclipses, yet after each grand Period, which
nearly restores their former Position, it will hold in a good Degree there
also, I mean so as to alter about 3 Digits therein: But besides that of the
Digits eclipsed, we ought also to see what Alteration in Time may happen to
each Period. Now as to the Inequality of the Sun's Motion, it is as we have
seen 108, and its greatest Velocity is at the Earth's Perihelion, and its least
at its Aphelion: Its greatest Alteration therefore must be in Aphelio and
Perihelio, and is the Difference of the Equation belonging every where to the
Addition of 108, and is here 48, which Space the Earth goes in about 20 of
Time. So that the Difference of Time on this Account, must each Period be some
Quantity less than 20. And as to the Inequality of the Moon's Motion, it is
also greatest at the Perigee and Apogee, and its greatest Alteration at the
extreme Eccentricities of its Orbit is the Difference of the Equations at 2 51
in Perigee and Apogee, according to those extreme Eccentricities: = 9 which the
Moon usually goes in somewhat less than 20. So that the Difference of Time, on
this Account, must each Cycle be some Quantity less than 20 Minutes also.

And now we come to the principal Alteration in Time that can happen in
Eclipses; though it belongs only to those of the Sun: And that is the Time of
the Day when they happen in any particular Place. Now because the Center of the
Moon usually goes over an entire Diameter of the Disk of the Earth, in about
three Hours and an half, Part of which is almost always before, and Part after
Noon: while the odd Hours of a small Cycle 7h 43, may reach equally from a
Forenoon to an Afternoon's successive Eclipse; it is possible, such an Eclipse
may appear an Hour and three Quarters later than the Period it self would
determine it. Though usually this Alteration will not be near so great;
especially when the Latitude of the Moon is very considerable. But then it is
so easy to allow very nearly for this Inequality, upon a little Consideration,
that it ought not to be objected against the Accuracy of this Period. If for
Six Hours from Noon we allow about an Hour and half; and for two Hours, three
Quarters of an Hour; we shall not err very much from the true Time.

Corollary. If we would know what is the greatest Inequality in Digits and Time
in a grand Period, made up of Three common ones, or of 54 Years, 32 or 33 Days,
besides the constant Anticipation of 50, we must say it may possibly, though it
will very rarely, be almost thrice the Quantities already stated for a single
Cycle: excepting the last and principal Difference, peculiar to Solar Eclipses:
which is never much greater than that already mentioned.

N. B. If any are not contented to know these Matters by such Approximations,
but desire the utmost Accuracy; they must either make use of Dr. Halley's
Equations, fitted to this Cycle, when published; or rather make use of Mr.
Flamsteed's or Dr. Halley's most accurate Astronomical Tables, when published;
with that Trigonometrical Calculation afterward, which I publish and exemplify
in this Paper. In the former Part of which Work, this Cycle, with its proper
Equations, will, at least, save us the one half of our Calculation, if it will
not bring us it self to that utmost Accuracy: which indeed is hardly to be
expected from it.

So that, upon the whole, If we duly consider the particular Circumstances of
the Sun and Moon, with those of the Aphelion, Apogee and Node, and with the
Times of the Day or Night when the Cycle ends, and rightly apply them to this
single Cycle and to this grand Cycle, we shall be able nearly to determine the
correspondent Eclipses with very small Trouble or Calculation.

II.
The Plane in which the Center of the Moon moves in Eclipses, is not that of
the Ecliptic, but of the Orbit of the Moon, considered with the Annual Motion:
Or it is a Plane inclined to the Plane of the Ecliptic in an Angle of about 5
36. Which in the Calculation of Eclipses is usually styled, The Angle of the
Moon's visible Way. This principal Plane I call, The Lunar Plane.

III.
This Lunar Plane cuts the Sphere of the Earth, considered without its diurnal
Motion, in a Circle whose Pole or Vertex is distant from the Pole of the
Ecliptic in the same Angle. This Circle I call The Lunar Circle.

IV.
In Eclipses which happen at the Solstices, and in the Nodes of the Moon's
Orbit, the Distance of these Poles is exactly Eastward or Westward. In those
which happen at the Equinoxes and Nodes, the Distance is exactly North and
South. But in all other Cases it is Oblique.

V.
The Angle of that Obliquity is always composed of the Distance of the Sun and
Moon from the Solstitial Colure; with the Distance of the same from the Nodes:
And is sometimes the Sum, and sometimes the Difference of those Quantities.

VI.
The Distance between this Vertex and the Pole of the Earth, when Eclipses
happen at the Solstices, is the Sum or Difference of the two forementioned
Angles of Inclination; the one, of the Pole of the Equator and of the Pole of
the Ecliptic = 23 29; the other of the Pole of the Ecliptic, and of the
Vertex of the Lunar Circle = 5 36 nearly. But in all other Cases a Spherical
Triangle must be solved, in order to find that Distance: Of which hereafter.

VII.
Since the Solstitial Colure is a great Circle, that is also a Meridian, or
passes through the Poles of the Earth and Ecliptic: And since besides the
Distance between the Vertex of the Lunar Circle and the Pole of the Earth, we
shall want the Angle included between the Colure and that Line; this also must
be obtained by the like Solution of a Spherical Triangle: Of which hereafter.

VIII.
Since the great Circle that passes through the Poles of the Earth* and of the
Lunar Circle, and that alone cuts both those Circles, and their Parallels at
Right Angles, That Meridian, and that alone wherein that Distance lies, is
perpendicular to the Path of the Moon's Center along the other; and will
determine the Point in that Path wherein (...) Center of the Shadow cuts that
Meridian at R ght*Angles and approaches nearest of all to the Pole of the
Earth: And indeed lays the Found^ o^ of our future Calculations. This Meri^^^^
I call The Primary Meridian.

IX.
The angular Distance about the Pole of the Earth, of the Meridian that is
directed to the Sun at the middle Point of the whole Eclipse from the primary
Meridian, is composed of the Sum or Difference of the Angle made by the
Solstitial Colure and the primary Meridian; and of the Complement of the Sun's
Right Ascension at the middle of the general Solar Eclipse. Which Angle is of
the greatest Consequence in our future Calculations. This Angle I call the
Primary Angle.

X.
Since the Motion of the Center of the Shadow of the Moon, in Solar Eclipses,
is nearly even, and nearly recti-linear; since it is also in the Plane of the
Lunar Circle; and is all one as if it were along a Line that touched that
Circle at the Middle of the general Eclipse, the Point of Contact; we must
divide each Quadrant of 90 Degrees into 90 or 180 unequal Parts: but so that
the Difference of the Sines of those unequal Angles may be equal, and 1/9^ or
1/^80 of the entire Radius: That so the first Sine ^/^0 may be 1111/100000; the
second 2222/100000; the third ^^^^/100000, etc. and this from the Table of
natural Sines, with their corresponding Arcs or Angles at the Vertex, as
follows: Arcs. D ff. Sines Equal. Arcs. Diff. Sine^ Equal. Diff. Diff. 191 194
0 18 7 1 11 191 194 0 38 1 7 20 191 195 0 57 7 40 12 191 195 1 16 2 7 59 191
195 1 35 8 18 13 191 195 1 54 3 8 37 191 196 2 13 8 57 14 192 196 2 33 4 9 16
192 196 2 52 9 36 15 192 196 3 11 5 9 55 192 197 3 30 10 14 16 192 197 3 49 6
10 33 192 197 4 8 10 53 17 192 197 4 28 7 11 12 193 197 4 47 11 32 18 193 197 5
6 8 11 51 193 197 5 25 12 11 19 193 198 5 44 9 12 30 193 198 6 3 12 50 20 194
198 6 23 10 13 10 194 198 6 42 13 30 21 198 205 13 49 20 50 32 199 205 14 9 22
21 10 20 205 14 28 21 30 33 20 206 14 48 23 21 50 20 206 15 8 22 11 34 20 207
15 28 24 22 32 20 207 15 48 22 53 201 208 35 16 7 25 23 13 201 209 16 ^7 23 34
36 201 21 16 47 26 23 55 202 21 17 7 24 17 37 202 211 17 27 27 24 38 202 211 17
47 24 59 38 202 212 18 8 28 25 20 203 212 18 28 25 41 39 203 212 18 48 29 26 2
203 213 19 8 26 23 40 203 213 19 28 30 26 44 204 214 19 48 27 6 41 204 214 20 9
31 27 27 204 216 20 29 27 49 42 217 242 28 11 36 4 53 218 243 28 32 43 36 27
219 244 28 54 36 52 54 220 246 29 16 44 37 16 221 247 29 38 37 40 55 222 248 30
0 45 38 4 223 249 30 22 38 29 56 224 251 30 44 46 38 54 226 252 31 6 ^ 39 18 57
228 254 31 51 47 39 43 23^1 255 31 29 40 7 58 232 257 32 14 48 40 32 234 258 32
36 40 57 59 235 259 32 59 49 41 22 236 261 33 22 41 48 60 236 263 33 45 50 42
14 23^7 264 34 9 42 40 61 23^8 265 34 31 51 43 6 23^9 26^7 34 54 43 32 62 239
269 35 18 52 43 58 241 273 35 41 44 25 63 276 34 44 52 55 19 74 278 344 45 19
64 55 52 282 348 45 46 56 26 75 284 350 46 14 65 57 1 285 354 46 42 57 37 76
286 358 47 10 66 58 13 287 363 47 38 58 49 77 288 37 48 6 67 59 16 289 378 48
36 60 4 78 29 386 49 4 68 60 42 30 398 49 33 61 22 79 30 409 50 3 69 62 2 302
418 50 33 62 44 80 304 425 51 3 70 63 26 306 43 51 33 64 9 81 31 445 52 4 71 64
54 315 46 52 35 65 40 82 32 48 53 7 72 66 26 325 50 53 39 67 15 83 33 52 54 12
73 68 5 335 53 54 45 68 58 84 54 (86) 69 52 77 54 88 56 (97) 70 49 85 79 31 59
(116) 71 48 81 27 89 63 (69) 72 51 86 82 36 67 (81) 73 58 83 57 72 (105) 75 10
87 85 42 78 (258) 76 28 90 00 90 Where the Angle made by the Lunar Circle, and
the Paral^el of the Latitude is considerable, instead of the first Number 191
you must take for 1/1^0 the Numbers following; being in a reciprocal Proportion
to the Secants of those Angles.

Angl. 0 191 5 191 10 188 15 184 20 179 25 173 30 165

N. B. Where the Parallel is different from that at the very Middle of the
Eclipse; as it usually is; you must increase or decrease the same Numbers 191,
etc. in the Proportion of the Cosines of the Latitude thus: 00 000 10 174 20
342 30 500 40 643 50 766 60 867 70 940 80 985 90 1000

E. G. If the Co-latitude at the Middle of the Eclipse be 60, and come to be
40; say, As 867 to 643, So is 191 to 142, which is there to be taken in its
stead.

N. B. The Hint that I had several Years ago, that in the Determination of
Solar Eclipses the Equality of the Difference of Sines was made us^ of by Dr.
Halley, was the Occasion of the Discoveries in these Papers.

XI.
The perpendicular Distance of every Point of the Penumbra; and the like
Distance of every Point of the total Shadow from the Path of the Moon's Center,
may be discovered by Tables made from the natural Sines; where those Sines
themselves, as before, differ equally, or in arithmetical Progression;
according to the Duration of the whole Eclipse, or of total Darkness: and their
Co-sines correspond to the Distances from that Path. Both which Tables here
follow: For entire Eclipses: Which are here supposed 108 long in the Middle,
and the Semidiameter of the Penumbra 2000 Miles.
Duration in Minut. Distance in Miles. Digts 1 2000 2 1999 3 1999 4 1999 5 1998
6 1997 7 1996 8 1995 9 1993 10 1991 11 1990 12 1988 13 1986 14 1984 15 1981 16
1979 17 1976 18 1973 19 1970 20 1966 21 1963 22 1959 23 1955 24 1951 25 1946 26
1942 27 1937 28 1932 29 1927 30 1922 31 1917 32 1911 33 1905 34 1899 35 1893 36
1886 37 1879 38 1872 39 1866 40 1859 41 1852 42 1844 1838 1 43 1835 44 1828 55
1820 56 1812 47 1803 48 1795 49 1786 50 1776 1771 51 1766 1761 52 1756 2/1 1751
53 1746 1741 54 1736 1731 55 1725 ^ 1720 56 1714 ^ 1708 57 1703 1697 58 1691
1685 59 1679 1676 2 1672 60 1667 1662 61 1655 1648 62 1642 1635 63 1628 1621 64
1614 1609 65 1603 1596 66 1589 1582 67 1575 1568 68 1561 1554 69 1546 1538 70
1534 1528 71 1521 1514 1513 3 72 1506 1498 73 1490 1482 74 1474 1456 75 1448 ^
1439 76 1430 ^ 1424 77 1412 ^ 1403 78 1394 1384 79 1374 1364 80 1354 1350 4
1344 81 1333 1322 82 1312 1302 83 1291 1280 84 1269 1258 85 1246 1234 86 1222
1110 87 1098 1188 5 1186 88 1173 1160 ^9 1147 1134 90 1121 1107 91 1093 1079 92
1065 1050 93 1034 1025 6 1017 94 1000 983 95 971 955 96 937 919 97 902 884 98
864 863 7 844 99 824 804 100 784 773 762 751 101 739 728 716 704 700 8 102 691
679 666 653 103 639 625 611 597 104 582 566 550 537 9 534 105 517 499 482 463
106 443 421 399 376 375 10 107 352 320 288 258 108 226 212 11 180 119 50 12 0^^
For Total Darkness of 166.
Duration in Secds. Distance in Miles. 1 500 2 500 3 500 4 500 5 500 6 500 7
500 8 509 9 509 10 509 11 499 12 498 13 498 14 498 15 497 16 497 17 497 18 496
19 496 20 496 21 496 22 495 23 495 24 495 25 494 26 494 27 494 28 493 29 493 30
493 31 492 32 492 33 492 34 491 35 491 36 491 37 490 38 490 39 490 40 489 41
489 42 488 43 487 44 486 45 485 46 484 47 482 48 481 49 479 50 477 51 476 52
475 53 474 54 473 55 472 56 471 57 470 58 469 59 468 60 466 61 465 62 464 63
463 64 462 65 460 66 459 67 458 68 456 69 455 70 453 71 452 72 451 73 450 74
448 75 446 76 445 77 443 78 441 79 440 80 438 81 437 82 435 83 433 84 432 85
430 86 429 87 427 88 425 89 423 90 421 91 419 92 417 93 415 94 413 95 411 96
409 97 407 98 405 99 403 100 400 101 398 102 396 103 394 104 391 105 388 106
386 107 384 108 381 109 379 110 376 111 374 112 371 113 368 114 365 115 362 116
359 117 356 118 353 119 350 120 347 121 344 122 34^ 123 338 124 334 125 330 126
327 127 324 128 321 129 317 130 313 131 309 132 305 133 301 134 297 135 293 136
289 137 285 138 280 139 275 140 271 141 266 142 261 143 256 144 251 145 246 146
240 147 235 148 230 149 224 150 218 151 211 152 205 153 198 154 191 155 183 156
176 157 167 158 159 159 149 160 140 161 129 162 117 163 104 164 89 165 70 166
44 166 00

Semidiameter of the Umbra or Total Darkness = 50 Miles.

XII.
The Angles at the Vertex of the Lunar Circle, on each Side of the Point of
Contact, by Reason of the perpendicular Situation of that Axis to its own
Circle; are always right Angles: Only diminished in the Proportion of the
Minutes described by the Annual Motion during the Continuance of the Eclipse.
Thus in our present Eclipse, which retains the Center of the Shadow near three
Hours upon the Earth's Disk, in which Time the annual Motion amounts to about
8; each of those right Angles in Strictness are to be esteemed only 89 56, and
both together 179 52. Only because the Refraction of the Rays of the Sun
through our Atmosphere, requires a somewhat greater Increase of this Angle,
than the annual Motion requires its Diminution, I shall wholly omit it, in all
my Calculations hereafter.

XIII.
The Angles made at the Poles of the Earth, which show the Difference of the
two extreme Meridians, and limit the Extent of the entire central Eclipse, by
reason of the Obliquity of the Earth's Axis to that Lunar Circle, are usually
unequal to one another; and more or fewer than twice 90, as the Eclipse happens
at different Latitudes of the Moon, and Times of the Year.

XIV.
The Meridian that passes through the Middle or Central Point of general Solar
Eclipses, is the same with that which passes through the Center of the Sun at
the same Time, when the Moon has no Latitude, and the Eclipses are Central in
the Plane of the Ecliptic; as also when they happen in either Solstices.
Otherwise the Moon's Latitude being taken perpendicular to the Plane of the
Ecliptic; and the nearest Distance of the Moon's Motion being taken
perpendicular to the Lunar Circle, while the Meridians always pass through the
Poles of the Earth; these Two Meridians will, generally speaking, be different,
and their included Angle no otherwise to be known than by Trigonometry, as will
appear hereafter.

XV.
The Dimensions of the Penumbra, or entire Eclipse, and the Extent of the total
Shadow on the Earth, are continually different, according to the different
Elevations of the Sun and Moon above any particular Horizon. For as the Moon is
about the same Distance from every Place, when it is in its Horizon, as it is
from the Earth's Center it self; with regard to which Center alone our first
Calculations are always made: So when it is in the Zenith of any Place, it is
one Semidiameter of the Earth nearer it; which Semidiameter being usually 1/60,
and at our next Eclipse 1/555 of its entire Distance, as will appear hereafter,
will deserve an Allowance. Nor will any lesser Elevation of the Moon be wholly
inconsiderable in Eclipses, but in all accurate Determinations thereof must be
particularly computed, in order to the distinct Knowledge of the Extent of such
Eclipses; especially of the Breadth of the Total Shadow therein. Accordingly we
are to observe that this Breadth of the Total Shadow will certainly be at this
Eclipse considerably greater over North America; where the Luminaries are
greater elevated above the Horizon; than over Europe, where they are much
nearer it; as this Calculation requires: Of which hereafter.

XVI.
The Figure of the entire Penumbra, or general Eclipse; and of the Umbra, or
Total Darkness; as they appear upon every Country, is different, on account of
the different Obliquity of every Horizon; and will make Ovals or Ellipses of
different Species perpetually. This in the vast Penumbra is best understood by
such an Instrument as my Copernicus; or by the Perusal of a very scarce Book
written by P. Coursier, (Philos. Transact. No. 343. p. 259.) and cited by Dr.
Halley: Which distinctly treats of the Intersection of a Conical and Spherical
Surface. But in the smaller Umbra, or Total Darkness, which is confined to a
much narrower Compass, it very nearly approaches to the Intersection of a
conick Surface with a Plane, which is a true Ellipsis.

XVII.
The Species of that Ellipsis depends on the Sun's Altitude above the Horizon
at the Time of Total Darkness; as does the Position of its longer Axis on the
Azimuth of the Sun at the same Time. Nor is it at all necessary that the
Direction of this or any other Ellipsis should be along either of the Axes, but
may as well be along any other Diameter whatsoever.

XVIII.
The Direction of the Center of the Shadow is according to the Direction of the
Moon's Motion, along the Plane of the Lunar Circle, as compounded with the
diurnal Motion, or with the Direction and Velocity of those Parts of the Earth
over which it passes; and will be hereafter brought to Calculation. And indeed
this Angle may be had, either by finding the several Points of the Path of the
Moon's Way upon the Earth, in as many Meridians as we please, and drawing a
curve Line through those Points; or by solving a Spherical Triangle, whose
Sides are the Complements of the Latitudes of two neighboring Places equally
distant, East and West, from the Place you work for; and whose included Angle
is the Angle at the Pole suited to the Difference of their Meridians; and
taking half the the two Angles at the Base, the one internal and the other
external, for the Angle desired* Of which hereafter.

XIX.
Every Ellipsis, made by the oblique Section of a Cone, has the Intersection of
the (Fig. 1.) Axis of the Cone C at some Distance from the Center of the
Ellipsis D. And the Proportion of those unequal Divisions B C and C A are the
same with that of the Sides of the Cone V B and V A: As appears by the (Elem.
III. 6.) Elements of Euclid. Whence it is evident, that the proper Center of
the total Shadow in Eclipses of the Sun, or that made by the Axis of the Cone,
is not the same with the Center of the Elliptick Shadow; and that the
Proportion of its Distance from that Center may be easily determined by the
Proposition here referred to: Of which more hereafter.

Scholium. This Ellipsis, when the Sun is of a considerable Altitude, is almost
an exact one; but when the Sun is near the Horizon, it will be very long, and
so less exact; because the Spherical Surface of the Earth is at that Distance
more remote from a Plane.

XX.
The perpendicular Breadth of the Shadow is neither that of the longer, nor
that of the shorter Axis: But that of the two longest Perpendiculars (Fig. 2.)
A B and C D drawn from the Tangents parallel to the Diameter D B, along which
the Direction of the Motion is: The length of which Perpendiculars will be
hereafter determined.

XXI.
The Velocity of the Motion of the Center of the Shadow is unequal; not only on
account of the Difference of the Moon's own Motion, at the beginning and ending
of the entire Eclipse; which indeed is very inconsiderable; but chiefly by
reason of the Difference of the Obliquity of the Horizon all the Way of its
Passage. However, since the several Points may, in all Meridians be distinctly
found by Trigonometry, as we shall show presently, this Inequality need create
us no new Difficulty in the Determination of Eclipses.

XXII.
The Number of Digits eclipsed, which are twelfth Parts of the Sun's Diameter,
with sexagesimal Parts of the same Digits, are always to be estimated as
distinct from the total Shadow; and may be discovered by the help of the
foregoing Table, p. 29, 30, 31. Where the Digits are already noted at every
proper Distance from the Path of the Moons Center; and where the intermediate
Fraction 1/1^26 is more exact than 1/6^; but which, by dividing that Number
1/16^6 by 27 will give those Sexagesimals, without any farther Trouble. The
Application of that Table will be taught hereafter.

XXIII.
The Distance of the Vertex of the conical Shadow of the Moon, which sometimes
just reaches the Surface of the Earth, as in total Eclipses sine mora,
Sometimes does not reach it; as in Annular Eclipses; and sometimes would
overreach it, if it were not intercepted, as in total Eclipses cum mora; may be
easily discovered at any time by the Analogy following: As P C the (Fig. 3.)
Semidiameter of the Moon: = 941 geographical Miles is to CV the Distance of the
Moon from that Vertex = 215000 So is R s = 45 the smallest Semidiameter of the
total Shadow, which is the same as of the circular Shadow it self, to s V, the
Distance of that Vertex therefrom = 10316, which is thus: 941: 215000 45: 10316.

XXIV.
The Determination of the Circumstances of Solar Eclipses, for any given
Distance from the Path of the Moon's Center, either way, has no new Difficulty
in it; but is to be made just as is that for the Center of the Penumbra. Only
the Quantity of the Distance of the Vertex of the Lunar Plane from that Circle
will be different; as the Path of the Moon's Center it self might be at another
Eclipse, of otherwise the same Circumstances.

XXV.
If Two Bodies A and B set out together, the one from A, the other from B: and
move evenly forward in a known Proportion as to Velocity; the Point C will be
determined where the swifter will overtake the slower, and they will be
coincident. Thus if the Velocity of A, (Fig. 4.) be to that of B, as 5 to 1,
the Proportion of the Lines A B to B C will be as 4 to 1, and if we add 1 to 4
= 5 we have the place C where the swifter will overtake the slower. Thus if
their Velocities be to each other as 548 to 1, the Lines of their Motion A B
and B C, will be as 448 to 1. So that if we take in the former Case of A B and
in the other 1/44^ of A B, and add it to A B, we gain AC the Distance of the
Point C from A.

Corollary. If therefore A represent the Center of the Shadow of a Solar
Eclipse, as it is placed at the Middle of the general Eclipse; and B Greenwich
at the same Moment of absolute Time; and at a known Distance from the middle
Point; and if the Velocity of the Center of the Shadow along the Circle be to
the Velocity of Greenwich in its diurnal Motion as 5^ 48 to 1, if we ad 448 of
their Distance at their setting out to that known Distance, we obtain the Point
or Place where the Center of the Eclipse will overtake Greenwich, or the Time
when the Eclipse will be at the Meridian of Greenwich. And this whether the
Center and Greenwich move along the same Line as A B C, or two different Lines,
as A B C and a b c.

XXVI.
The Duration of Solar Eclipses is different, according as their Middle happe^s
about Six in the Morning or Evening; or a^out Noon; or about any intermediate
Time. If that happens about Six a-Clock, Morning or Evening, the diurnal Motion
then neither much conspires with, nor opposes the proper Motion of the Center
of the Shadow; and the Duration is almost the same as it would be if the Earth
had no diurnal Motion at all. If that happens about Noon, the diurnal Motion
most of all conspires with that proper Motion of the Center, and makes the
Duration of the Eclipse the longest possible. If it happens in the intermediate
Times, the diurnal Motion, in a less Degree, conspires with the other Motion,
and makes the Duration of a me^n Quantity, between that of the other Cases. But
if it happens considerably before Six a-Clock in the Morning, or after Six
a-Clock in the Evening, the diurnal Motion is backward, and short^ns that
Duration proportionably. Of the Quantity of which Duration we shall enquire
more hereafter.

PROBLEMS.
I.
To find the nearest Distance of the Path of the Moon s Center, to the Center
of the Disk of the Earth, as seen at the Distance of the Mo^n in the total
Eclipse of the Sun A. D. 1724. May 11. P. M.

This is equal to the Moon's true Latitude at the Time of the Conjunction in
her own Orbit; and is set down in the Calculation 32 19.

II.
To find the Sun's Declination at the Middle of the Eclipse.

As the Radius of the Circle: is to the Sine of the Sun's Longitude at that
Time=61 39 So is the Sine of the Sun's greatest Declination, = 23 29: to the
Sine of the Sun's Declination then.

Rad. 10. 000000 S. 61 39 9. 944514 S. 23 29 9. 600409 S. ^8. 544923 = 20 32 =
Declination.

III.
To find the Sun's Right Ascension for the same Time.

As the Radius: to the Cosine of the Sun's greatest Declination So is the
Tangent of the Sun's Latitude: to the Tangent of the Sun's right Ascension.

Rad. 10. Sin. 66 31 9. 962453 Tang. 61 39 10. 267952 Tang. Right Ascen. 10.
230405 = 59 31 Compl. 30 29

IV.
To find the Distance between the Vertex of the Lunar Circle and the Pole of
the Earth.

Let (Fig. 5.) E P represent the Distance between the two Poles of the Earth,
and of the Ecliptic: = 23 29. EV the Distance between the Pole of the
Ecliptic, and the Vertex of the Lunar Circle: = 5 36. P EV the Angle made by
the Solstitial Colure P E: (in which the two Poles of the Earth, and of the
Ecliptic always are) and that Arc EV. And because the Sun is here 28 21
distant from that Colure, which is the Complement of its Longitude from Aries;
and the Ascending Node, or Argument of Latitude is then 5 49 distant from the
Sun backward; The Sum of these Numbers gives 34 10, whose Complement is the
Angle V E R = 55 50. In order then to gain V P proceed thus: R. 10. CS VER. 55
50. 9. 749429 T. VE. 5 36 8. 991451 T. RE ^8. 740880 = 3. 10. + 23. 29. = 26.
39. Then say, CS. R E 3 9 9. 992343 CS. V E 5 36 9. 997922 CS. P R 26 39 9.
951222 19. 949144 CS. P V = 9. 949801 = 27. 0

V.
In the same Triangle V P E, to find the Angle V P E, included between the
Colure E P, and the Prime Meridian P V.

S. P V 27 0. 9. 657047 S. V E R 55 50. 9. 917719 S. V E 5 36. 8. 989374 18.
907098 S V P E = ^9. 249961 = 10 15

Corollary. The Primary Angle, composed of the Complement of the Right
Ascension, and of this Angle V P E, is = 40 44.

Compl.Rad. 30 29 + 10 15 = 40 44

VI.
To find the Distance of the Pole or Vertex of the Lunar Circle from the Circle
it self.

As the Semidiameter of the Earth's Disk = 61 28: To the Latitude of the Moon,
or nearest Distance to the Path of the Moon's Center from the Center of the
Disk; 32 19 So is the Radius: to the Sine of the Complement of that Distance.
In Decimals thus: 6163: 3232 10000: 5244 = S. 31 38, whose Complement is 58 22:
equal to the Distance of the Lunar Circle from its Vertex.

VII.
To find the Angle included between the Meridian that passes through the Center
of the general Eclipse, and that passing through the Center of the Sun at the
same Time.

In the Triangle (Fig. 6.) M S P where the Side S P is already given, =
Complement of the Sun's Declination; find the Angle M S P thus: R. 10. S. of
the Sun's Distance from the Solstitial Colure: = 28 21 9.676562 S. of the Sun's
greatest Declination= 23 29 9. 600409
S. of an Angle ^9. 276971 = 10. 54. To which add the Angle of the Moon's Way:
+ 5 36 The Sum is the Angle M S P = 16. 30 Then, in the same Triangle P M S, we
have two Sides: M S equal to the Latitude of the Moon, or the length of the
Perpendicular to the Moon's way = 31 38. and P S = 69 28. and the included
Angle M S P = 16 30. to find M P S thus: R. 10. CS.M S P. 16. 30. 9. 981774 T.
S M. 31. 38. 9. 789585 T. R M. = ^9. 771359 = 30 34 M R + 31 38 M S = 62 12 R S
Then say, S.S P. 69. 28. 9. 971493 S.S R. 62. 12. 9. 946738 T.M S P. 16. 30. 9.
471605 ^9. 418343 T. M P S = 9. 446850 = 15 38 + 40 44 = 56 22 = Angle with the
Primary Meridian.

VIII.
To find the Longitude and Latitude of the Center of the Shadow at the Middle
of the general Eclipse; or to solve the primary Triangle.

Under Problem IV. we have sound the Distance of the Vertex of the Lunar Circle
from the Pole of the Earth = 27. 0. Under Problem VI. we have found the
Distance of that Vertex from its Circle = 58. 22; and under the last Problem we
have found the Angle at the Pole of the Earth, between the Primary Meridian,
and that Meridian which passes through the Center of the Eclipse, = 56 22. From
which data the Primary Triangle (Fig. 7.) is thus to be solved: R. 10. CS. C P
Q. 56. 22. 9. 743412 T. V P. 27. 0. 9. 707166 T. P R. = 15. 46. ^9. 450578 Then
say, CS.V P 27. 0. 9. 949880 CS.P R 15. 46. 9. 983345 CS.V C. 58. 22. 9. 719730
19. 703075 CS.P C. 9. 753195 = 55. 30 Deduct PR = 15. 46 Remt. = P C. = 39. 44
Ergo Lat. = 50. 16

To find the Angle at the Vertex CV P, proceed in this Manner: S. CV. 58. 22.
9. 930145 S. C P Q. 56. 22. 9. 920436 S. PC. 39. 44. 9. 805647 19. 726083
S.CVP.= 9. 795938 = 38 41

The following Analogy will give V C P the Complement of the Angle which the
Direction of the Center of the Eclipse makes with the Meridian, that Direction
being perpendicular to V C. S. CV. 58. 22. 9. 930145 S. CP Q. 56. 22. 9. 920436
S. V P. 27. 0. 9. 657047 19. 577483 S.V C P.= 9. 647338 = 26. 21 Compl. = 63. 39

Corollary. Hence we also learn the most Northern Latitude, where the Center of
the Shadow will cross the Meridian at Noon, and at right Angles: And this
without any particular distinct Calculation. For V Q = 58 22 ^ V P 27 0 = P Q =
31 22. whose Complement = 58 38. is that very Northern Latitude.

IX.
To find the Longitude and Latitude of the Center of the Shadow, when it
crosses the Meridian that passes through the Center of the Sun at the Middle of
the Eclipse; or to solve the second principal Triangle.

If in the foregoing Triangle we suppose the Angle at the Pole to be equal to
the Primary Angle, or 40 44. we may thus solve this Triangle: R. 10. CS. CP Q.
40. 44. 9. 879529 T. V P. 27. 0. 9. 707166 T.P R. = ^9. 586695 = 21 7 Then say,
CS.V P. 27. 0. 9. 949880 CS.P R. 21. 7. 9. 969811 CS.V C. 58. 22. 9. 719730 19.
689541 CS. CR. = 9. 739661 = 56 42 Deduct 21 7 Remt. C P. 35 35 Ergo, Lat. = 54
25

To find the Angle at the Center of the Eclipse V C P, proceed thus: S. V C.
58. 22. 9. 930145 S. C P Q. 40. 44. 9. 814607 S. V P. 27. 0. 9. 657047 19.
471654 S.CV P. = 9. 541509 = 20 22

X.
To find the Longitude and Latitude of the Center of the Shadow at its Entrance
on the Disk of the Earth: Or to solve the third Principal Triangle.

Add the vertical Angle already found = 38 41 to a right Angle at the Vertex; =
90 + 38. 41 = 128. 41 this is equal to the Angle at the Vertex CV P. Substract
this Angle from two right Angles. 180 -- 128. 141 = 51. 19, in order to gain
the Supplement, whose Sines, etc. are the same with the others. (Fig. 8.) Then
say, R. 10. CS. CV P. 51. 19. 9. 795891 T. V P. 27. 0. 9. 707166 T.V R. = 19.
503057 = 17 40=V R + 58 22=V C = 76 02=C R Then say, CS. V R. 17. 40. 9. 979019
CS. V P. 27. 00. 9. 949880 CS. C R. 76. 02. 9. 382661 19. 332541 CS. C P. = 9.
353522 = 76: 57 Ergo, Lat. 13. 03

In order to find the Angle at the Pole V P C, whose Supplement is the
Longitude of that Point where the Center of the Shadow enters the Disk of the
Earth from the Primary Meridian, proceed thus: S. C P. 76. 57. 9. 988636 S. CV
P. 51. 19. 9. 892435 S. C V. 58. 22. 9. 930145 19. 822580 ^80 S.V P C. = 9.
833944 = 43 01 Suppl. 136: 59

To find the Angle VC P, proceed thus: S. C P. 76. 57. 9. 988636 S. CV P. 51.
19. 9. 892435 S. V P. 27. 00. 9. 657047 19. 549482 S.VC P. = 9. 560846 = 21. 20

XI.
To find the Longitude and Latitude of the Center of the Shadow at its Exit
from the Disk of the Earth; or to solve the fourth Principal Triangle.

Substract the Angle already found 38 41 from a right Angle 90 - 38 41 = 51 19
= Angle at the Vertex P V C (Fig. 9.) Then say, R. 10. CS. P V C. 51. 19. 9.
795891 T. P V. 27. 00. 9. 707166 T.V R. ^9. 503057 = 17 40 from 58 22 Remnt 40
42 = R C. Then say, CS. V R. 17. 40. 9. 979019 CS. P V. 27. 00. 9. 949880 CS. R
C. 40. 42. 9. 879746 19. 829626 CS. P C = 9. 850607 = 44. 51. Ergo, Lat. 45. 9.

In order to find the Angle Q P C, or the Longitude of that Point where the
Center of the Shadow departs out of the Disk of the Earth, from the Primary
Meridian, proceed thus: S. CP. 44. 51. 9. 848345 S. PVC. 51. 19. 9. 892435 S.
VC. 58. 22. 9. 930145 19. 822580 S.QPC = 9. 974235 = 70. 27 + 136 59 = 207 26
And for the Angle VCP thus; S. CP. 44. 51. 9. 848345 S. PVC. 51. 19. 9. 892435
S. UP. 27. 00. 9. 657047 19. 549482 S. VCP. = 9. 701137 = 30. 10.

Corollary. Hence the Angular Motion of the Center of the Eclipse about the
Pole of the Earth, if there were no diurnal Motion, is 207. 26.

XII.
To find the Time in which the Center of the Shadow will go over the Diameter
of the Lunar Circle.

Say, first, 353: 60 12326: 2096; i. e. As the Number of Minutes of a Degree
passed over in an Hour: to an Hour So is the entire Diameter of the Disk from
the Calculation: to the Number of Minutes for that Passage.

Then say, 10000: 8514 2096: 1784 i. e. As the Radius: to the Sine of 58: 22 =
the Distance of the Lunar Circle from its Pole or Vertex So are the Minutes of
the Passage over the entire Diameter: to the Minutes of the Passage over this
Chord = 178 24.

XIII.
To find the Proportion of the Velocities of the Center of the Shadow and of
the diurnal Motion of the corresponding Point of the Earth at the Time of the
Eclipse:

Say thus; As 1784 to 8296 = 207 26, or as 1 to 464, so is the Time of the
Center of the Eclipse's Motion over the Diameter of the Lunar Circle: to the
Timeof the diurnal Motion's going from the entranceto the Exit of the Center.

Corollary. Hence the real Angular Motion of the Center of the Eclipse about
the Pole of the Earth, is no more than 162 40. For 464: 364 207 26: 162 40.

XIV.
To find the Latitude of any Place, over or near which the Center of any Shadow
passes, to any known Longitude or Time given. And, vice versa, To find the
Longitude or Time of the nearest Approach to any such Place to any known
Latitude. This is no more than proceeding in the Calculations as hitherto; by
taking any known Meridian or Time; or else any known Latitude for our Examples.

I shall therefore give three several Examples in both Cases; because of the
great Dignity and Usefulness of the Problem: viz. For Greenwich the Meridian of
the Tables; for Dublin more Westward; and for Paris more Eastward.

Now I here suppose, from the Calculation and Construction of Eclipses, that
the Middle of this general Eclipse will happen May 11. 1724. 17 past 5 a-Clock
in the Afternoon; and that its Center will cross the Meridian of Greenwich 41
past 6. Upon which Hypothesis I thus compute: From the Angle 100 15 = 6h 41
Deduct the Primary Angle 40 44 There remains the Angle of the Pole Q P C = 59
31 Then proceed thus: R. 10. CS. Q P C. 59 31 9. 705254 T. P V. 27 00 9. 707166
T.P R. = ^9. 412420 = 14 29 Say then, CS. P V. 27 00 9. 949880 CS. P R. 14 29
9. 985974 CS. V C. 58 22 9. 719730 19. 705704 CS. R C. = 9. 755824 = 55 15
Deduct R P = 14 29 Remains P C = 40 46 Ergo, Lat. 49 14

N. B. If we take Dr. Halley's Time 6h 36, and substract 40* 44 out of 99 there
remains 58* 16; and the Calculation will stand thus: R. 10. CS. QP C. 58. 16.
9. 720958 T. P V. 27. 0. 9. 707166 T.P R. = ^9. 428124 = 15 0 Then say, CS.P V.
27. 0. 9. 949880 CS.P R. 15. 0. 9. 984944 CS.V C. 58. 22. 9. 719730 19. 704674
CS.R C. = 9. 754794 = 55 21 Deduct R P. 15 0 Remt. P C. 40 21 Ergo, Lat. = 49
39 Diff. 00 25

N. B. My Calculation differs from Dr. Halley's Scheme no less than a full
Degree of a great Circle, in the Meridian; if our Difference of Time, which is
about 5, be allowed. And though we take the Doctor's own Time, yet do we differ
in Latitude 25 Minutes or Miles; by which Quantity the Doctor's Scheme brings
the Center of the Eclipse nearer to London and Greenwich than this Calculation.
The reason of which Difference I by no means understand. Time will discover
which Determination is most accurate.

Dublin is about 6 22 Westward in Longitude from Greenwich. Let us find the
Latitude of the Center of the Shadow, when it crosses the Meridian of Dublin.
We must proceed thus: As 364 to 464 so is 6. 22 to 8. 7 Deduct then from the
Angle at the Pole used for Greenwich this Difference of these Angles 59 31 - 8.
7 = 51 24. which is our Angle at the Pole for Dublin. So that if we use the
former Figure with that Angle, we compute as before; R. 10. CS. Q P C. 51. 24.
9. 795101 T. P V. 27. 0. 9. 707166 T. R P. ^9. 502267 = 17. 38 Then say, CS. P
V. 27. 0. 9. 949880 CS. V C. 58. 22. 9. 719730 19. 698829 CS. R C. = 9. 748949
= 55 53 Deduct R P. 17 38 Remnt P C. 38 15 Ergo, Lat. 51 45

Paris is 2 19 more Easterly than Greenwich, Say therefore 364: 464 2. 19: 2.
57 Now 59. 31 + 2. 57 = 62. 28 Then, R. 10. CS. Q P C. 62. 28. 9. 664891 T. P
V. 27. 0. 9. 707166 T. R P. = ^9. 372057 = 13 15 Say then, CS. P V 27. 0. 9.
949880 CS. R P 13. 15. 9. 988282 CS. V C. 58. 22. 9. 719730 19. 708012 CS. R C.
9 758132 = 55. 03 Deduct R P = 13. 15 Remt. = P C. 41. 48 Ergo, Lat. = 48. 12

N. B. By such Calculations we may determine the Latitude of the Center of the
Shadow's Way, from its entry upon, till its exit out of the Disk of the Earth,
to every known Meridian. A Specimen of which I intend to give presently for the
several East and West Longitudes from London in the Eclipse before us: And
another Specimen in the Eclipse, Sept. 4. 1727.

If the Latitudes be given, as for the Meridian of Greenwich 49. 14; For Dublin
51. 45; For Paris 48. 12: The Case will be that of a Spherical Triangle, when
all the Sides are given; and the Longitude or Time is an Angle sought. Thus in
the foregoing Figure for Greenwich, V C = 58. 22 is the Side against the Angle
sought. V P = 27. 0, and P C = 40. 46. From which data we thus discover the
Angle Q C P.

V C = 58 22 R. 10. V P = 27 00 S. 9. 657047 P C = 40 46 S. 9. 814900 Sum of 3
= 126 08 Sum 19. 471947 Sum 63 4 S. 9. 950138 Diff. of V C 4 42 S. 8. 913488
Double Radius 20. The Sum 38. 863626 The Remainder 19. 391679 Remainder 9.
695839 = CS. 60 14 double 120. 28 from 180. 00 as before remains 59. 32 Add the
Primary Angle 40. 44 Sum 100. 16 Equal in Time to 6h. 41.

The Time past Noon of the Center's Transit over the Meridian of Greenwich.

For Dublin thus: V C = 58 22 R. 10. UP 27 00 S. 9. 657047 PC 38 15 S. 9.
791756 Sum of 3. 123 37 Sum 19. 44880^ Half Sum 61 48 9. 945159 Diff. of V C 3
26 8. 778383 Double Radius 20. The Sum 38. 723542 The Remainder 19. 274739 Half
the Remainder 9. 637369 C S. = 64 18 double 128. 36 from 180. 00 remains as
before 51. 24. To 51. 24. Add 40. 44. Sum 92. 08 = 6h 8 Which deducted from 6h.
41, leaves 32 for the Difference of the Angle at the Pole in Time. Say then
464: 364 325: 254 which is the Difference in time of the Meridians of Greenwich
and Dublin.

For Paris thus: VC = 58 22 R. 10. V P = 27 00 S. 9. 657047 P C = 41 48 S. 9.
823821 Sum of 3 127 10 19. 480868 Half Sum 63 35 9. 952105 Diff. of VC 5 13 8.
958670 Double Radius 20. Sum 38. 910775 Remainder 19* 429907 Half Remainder 9.
714953 = C S. 58. 45 double 117 30 As before, Remainder 62 30 Add, Primary
Angle 40 44 Sum 103 11 In Time 6h 52 From which deduct 6. 41. the Remainder 11
is the Difference of the Angle at the Pole in Time. Say then, 464: 364 11 ^/2:
9. which is the Difference in Time, of the Meridians of Greenwich and Paris.

Corol. (1.) The latter Branch of the Problem determines the Hour and Minute
when the Center of the Eclipse crosses the Meridian at any assigned Latitude;
and by a very small Allowance when the very middle of the Eclipse, or of Total
Darkness happens in any Place very near the same.

Corollary (2.) The same Branch determines the true Difference of Meridians in
all Places over or near which the Center of the Eclipse passes, and so the
Distance East and West from any known Meridian whatsoever. Thus because the
Meridians of Paris, Greenwich, and Dublin do hence appear to be different as to
the Angles of the Pole from the Primary Meridian, in the foregoing Angles, 62.
28. 59. 31. and 51. 24. respectively; It is plain, that the respective
Longitude of Paris and Greenwich, when reduced from Angles of the Pole to the
Difference of Meridians, is 2 19. and that of Greenwich and Dublin 6. 22. and
by Consequence of Paris and Dublin 8. 41. Which is no other than the Foundation
of my grand Problem of Discovering the Geographical Longitude of Places by
Solar Eclipses, from the Latitude given: Of which more hereafter.

XV.
To find the Duration of a Solar Eclipse, along or near the Path of the Moon's
Center, in any Place whatsoever.

From the Motion of the Moon from the Sun gain the Duration of the entire
Eclipse; or the Time of that Center's Passage over the Diameter of the
Penumbra, if there were no diurnal Motion during that Time, thus:

As the horary Motion of the Moon from the Sun, which is in angular Measure 35.
18. and is given in the Calculation; to an Hour or 60 in Time So let the
Diameter of the Penumbra there given, also in angular Measure = 65. 10. be to a
fourth Number: which will be the Number of Minutes required. In Decimals thus:
353:606517:1108=1h:50. But then, because the diurnal Motion of the Earth must
be compounded with this rectilinear Motion of the Moon; and that as we have
already stated it, this Eclipse will cross the Meridian of Greenwich 41 past 6
a-Clock in the Evening; the one Part of the Duration of the Eclipse being
before, and the other Part after that Time, both Intervals must be unequally
affected by the diurnal Motion, and we must then take the former half-Duration
55. 24 distinctly. And since the diurnal Motion of Greenwich is in a larger
Parallel than that of the Center of the general Eclipse; while its Obliquity to
the Path of the Shadow's Center increases; their respective Motions will nearly
keep the same Proportion all along; and so we may safely omit the Consideration
of them both. We have also already discovered, that the Velocity of this
Center's Motion is here, to that of the Velocity of the diurnal Motion, As 8296
to 1784. or as 464 to 1. And because the Eclipse begins about 14 before 6, 14
after 6 balances the same; and these 28 Minutes are almost all one, as if there
were no diurnal Motion at all. So that we have only 27 24 capable of
Retardation in the first half: The middle Time of which will be about 30 after
6. We must therefore look into the Table, p. 22, -- 26 for the Arc 97, o^ its
Supplement 82 1/^, corresponding to 89 of the Sines. Where the Difference of
half a Degree is instead of 191, as about Noon, no less than 160, which
multiplied by 464 comes to 7424. So that the Motion is here retarded a 39th
Part. Say then, As 39 to 38, so is 274 to 267 which 267 or 26 42 is to be added
to the 28 before excepted, for the Duration of the former Part of the Eclipse =
54 42. The Middle of the second Part will be about 73 = 18 backward beyond 90.
that is, 71 of the Arc, which corresponds to 85 of the Sines, where the
Difference of half a Degree is 61 1/^. This multiplied by 464 gives 285. So
that the Retardation is as 191 to 285, or 1 to 149. Say then, As 149 to 139: so
is 554 to 517 = 51 42, which is the Duration of the latter Part of the Eclipse,
and added to the former Part of the Duration, gives us the whole Duration = 106
24 = 1h46 24, without the Consideration of the Elevation of the Luminaries
above the Horizon, which a small Matter enlarges that Duration: Of which
hereafter.

N. B. If we would be still more precisely nice, we may distinctly allow for
the Difference of the Parallels, and the different Obliquity of the Direction;
of which p 26, 27. before: Which yet are here omitted, as very inconsiderable.

XVI.
To find the Duration of the Total Darkness along the Path of the Moon's
Center; if the Luminaries were in the Horizon.

Say, As the Moon's Motion from the Sun in an Hour, or 60; in the Calculation =
35 18 is to those 60: So is the Difference of the Diameters of the Sun and Moon
in the same Calculation, = 1 38 to a fourth Number: Which will be the entire
Duration of the Total Darkness if the Luminaries were not at all elevated above
the Horizon. In Decimals thus: 353:60162:273=246.

XVII.
To find the Altitude of the Sun above the Horizon, when the Center of the
Shadow crosses the Meridian at Greenwich.

In the Triangle (Fig. 10.) Z P S, Z P is = Distance between the Zenith and
Pole of the Earth: 38 30. P S is = Distance between the Pole of the Earth and
Center of the Sun: = Complement of the Sun's Declination, or to 69 28. And the
Angle Z P S = interval of Time, from the Meridian = 6h 41 = 100 15, whose
Supplement is 79 45.

Say then, R. 10. CS.Z P S 79 45 9. 250280 T.Z P 38 30 9. 900605 T. P R = ^ 9.
150885 = 8 3 = P R + 69 28 = P S = 77 31 = R S And, CS. P R 8 3 9. 995699 CS. Z
P 38 30 9. 893544 CS R S 77 31 9. 334766 19. 228310 CS. Z S = 9. 232611 = 80 10
= Z S Ergo, Altitude = 9 50

XVIII.
To find the Azimuth of the Sun at the same Time and Place.

In the former Triangle the Complement of the Altitude being now found = Z S =
80 10. Proceed thus: S. P S 80 10 9. 993572 S. Z PS 79 45 9. 993013 S. P S 69
28 9. 971493 19. 964506 S. PZS= Suppl. = 9. 970934 = 69 16 = P Z From the West
20 44

XIX.
To find the Number of Minutes that any Solar Eclipse extends to, in a plain
Perpendicular to the Axis of the Penumbra.

When the Parallax of the Moon is 57 17, which is near its mean Quantity; the
Moon's Distance is 60 Semidiameters of the Earth: And one Second on the Disk of
the Earth as viewed at the Distance of the Moon; or on the Disk of the Moon
viewed at the Distance of the Earth, is exactly one geographical Mile. And 60
or one Minute, is one Degree upon the Disk of the Earth or Moon. But when the
Moon's Parallax, as in the Calculation of this Eclipse, is 61. 48 whose Sine is
17976/1000000 or 1/555 of the Radius nearly: One Second is less than a Mile;
and that in the Proportion of 555 to 60. So that about 65 geographical Miles
correspond to 60, or one Minute: And accordingly, 1781 such Miles will
correspond to 32 35, which in that Calculation, is the Semidiameter of the
Penumbra, or the utmost perpendicular Extent of the Eclipse.

N. B. We may always make use of the foregoing Tables, page 29, -- 34 for the
perpendicular Distances from the Path of the Moon's Center, at all Durations of
the Eclipses, and of Total Darkness, by still calling the Radius of every
Penumbra 2000 equal Parts or Miles, and the Radius of every Umbra or Total
Shadow, 50 such Parts or Miles; and using them accordingly. And this without
any other Inconvenience than the Supposition of other than geographical Miles:
Which Inconvenience, by the Reduction of them to geographical Miles afterward,
will always, as here, come to nothing.

XX.
To find the Alteration there is in the Extent and Duration of Eclipses, and of
total Darkness, on Account of the Elevation of the Luminaries at that Time
above the Horizon.

This is ever, as the Radius: to the Sine of the Sun's Altitude: As compared
with the particular Distance of the Moon at that Time. Thus at the Middle of
this Eclipse at Greenwich, the Altitude of the Sun has been found to be 9. 50,
whose Sine is 1708/10000, which divided by 555 is equal to of the whole: And in
the Semidiameter of the Penumbra, as well as Umbra, amounts to about 6 Miles
every Way. Thus also at the Middle of the Eclipse in North America, where it is
Central at Noon, the Sun will be about 52* above the Horizon: whose Sine is
788/1000, which divided by 555 is 1/^0 nearly; which in the same Semidiameters,
amounts to about 29 Miles every way. And for the Duration at Greenwich add to
the common Duration already found, or to 1h 46 24 the 1/324 Part of the same,
or about of a Minute both ways: which is about 2/^ in the whole; which will
bring the entire Duration from 1h 46 24to full 1h 47 and for Total Darkness
will add about 6/50 of the whole total Darkness = 20, and increase the Duration
from 2 46 to 3 6 ^/3. But for the Alteration in North America, which is about
1/7^ both ways, or 1/35 in the whole; this will there increase the entire
Duration 4 12, and from 1h 46 24 bring it to 1h 50 36, and for the total
Darkness will add about 29/50 of the whole, or bring the 2 46 to 4 47.

XXI.
To find the Species and Dimensions of the Ellipsis made by the Total Shadow at
the same Places and Altitudes.

The shorter Axis of the Ellipsis, (which is the same with the Diameter of the
Conick Shadow it self, in a Plane Perpendicular to the Axis;) is to the Longer,
as the Sines before*mentioned. Or at Greenwich, as 1708 to 10000; and at North
America, as 788 to 1000: And since that ^horter Axis is in the Calculation 98
Minutes or Miles, of 65 to a Degree; they must be equal to 90 Geographical
Miles; which by the last Problem must be increased to 96 and to 119
respectively. The golden Rule will therefore soon show the Length of the longer
Axis of the Shadow in both Places.

sine rad. miles miles For Greenwich 1708: 10000 96: 562. For North America
788: 1000 119: 151.

XXII.
To determine the central Point in the Elliptick Shadow for Greenwich, at the
Middle of the same Eclipse.

B^ Lemma XIX. and in its Figure; As V B: to V A So is the Sine of B A V = 9 34
= 166: to the Sine of A B V = 10 6 = 175, and so is B C: to A C. And
componend^, As 166 + 175 = 341 to 175 So is B C + C A = 562 to C A, which
therefore is equal to 289. Also As 166 + 175 = 341 to 166 So is B C + C A = 562
to B C; which therefore is equal to 274.

For 341: 175 562: 289.

And 341: 166 562: 274.

Whence the Parts of the longer Axis being found, the larger C A = 289 Miles:
the lesser B C = 274 Miles. The half of which, D C is the Distance between the
central Point of the Shadow D, and the Center of the Ellipsis C, = 7 Miles.

XXIII.
To determine the Angle of Direction of the Total Shadow over the Meridian of
Greenwich.

This to be done either by Construction, upon drawing the Curve Line of this
Motion, through the several Points where, by Calculation, the Center of the
Shadow crosses the Meridians of Paris, Greenwich* and Dublin; and measuring the
Angle it makes with the several Meridians; or more exactly for Greenwich by
solving the Triangle (Fig. 11.) P V O, where the Arc V O is equally distant
West, as Paris is East from Greenwich, is to be found by the Method already
made use of; thus:

Paris Angle at the Pole = 62 28. Angle for O V at the Pole is less by twice
the Difference of the Angles at the Pole for Paris and Greenwich = 5 54, And 62
28 - 5 54 = 56: 34. First then find the Arc V O = Compl. Latitude for O, as in
Probl. XIV. by this Analogy.

R. 10. CS. Q P C. 56. 34. 9. 741125 T. P V. 27. 00. 9. 707166 T. P R. ^9.
448291 = 15 41 Then say, CS. P V. 27. 00. 9. 949880 CS. P R. 15. 41. 9. 983523
CS. V C. 58. 22. 9. 719730 19. 703253 CS. P C 9. 753373 = 45. 29. Deduct 15.
14. Remt. V O. 39. 48. V G. 40. 46. V P. 41. 48.

Then in the Triangle V O P whose included Angle is 4 38, and whose two Sides
are 39 48 and 41 48. Find the Arc P R as usual thus: R. 10. CS. O V. R. 04. 38.
9. 998577 T. V O. 39. 48. 9. 920733 T. V R. ^9. 919310 = 39 48 from 41 42 Remnt
2 6 = PR. Then for the Angle UPON, say: S. P R. 02. 06. 8. 563999 S. V R. 39.
42. 9. 805343 T. O V R. 04. 38. 8. 908719 18. 714062 T. V P O. = 10. 150063 =
54. 42. And for V O R; S. V O. 39. 42. 9. 805343 S. V P O. 54. 42. 9. 911763 S.
UP. 41. 48. 9. 823821 19. 735584 S. V O P = 9. 930241 = 58. 23 + 113 05 Half 56
32 Compl. 33 27

So that the Acute Angle V G O, which the Course of the Center of the Shadow
makes with the Meridian of Greenwich, is 56 32.; And by consequence the Angle
it makes with the Parallel of Latitude there is 33 27. 5 or 6 Degrees mo^e than
in Dr. Halley's Scheme.

Corollary. The longer Axis of the total Shadow at the Meridian of Greenwich,
makes an Angle of 12 43 with the Direction of the Shadow.

for if from the Angle that the Directi^n of the Center of the Shadow makes
with the Parallel of Greenwich, 33 27 We deduct the Angle that the longer Axis
makes with the same Parallel, which is the Azimuth formerly discovered, 20 44
There remains this Angle 12 43

XXIV.
To D termine the perpendicular Breadth of the Total Shadow, when that Shadow
is nearest to London; or when the central Point is about the Meridian of
Padsto^ in Cornwall.

This Problem is, In an Ellipsis of 96 Miles broad, and 562 Miles long; whose
longer* Axis makes an Angle with the Direction of the Shadow of 12 43; To
determine the Length of the greatest Perpendicular that falls on that Diameter,
along which the Direction of the Motion is. For twice that Perpendicular is the
Breadth required. Now I have actually drawn this Ellipsis, or total Shadow, for
my Map of this Eclipse. And I find by that Construction, that the Breadth of
the total Shadow over England is about 155 Miles; or 30 Miles broader than in
Dr. Halley's Scheme. Time will probably discover which is nearest the Truth.

N. B. This total Shadow increases so greatly in Length as it goes Eastward,
that it will reach from Paris to the utmost Boundary of the Sunsetting at once.
And though the Center of the Shadow, by my Calculation, will end 8 East of the
Meridian of London, in the Latitude of 45 9, or in the Alps, not far from Milan
and Turi^; Yet by reason of the Extension and Breadth of the total Shadow, and
the Refraction of the Rays of Light near the Horizon, it seems probable to me,
that all Switzerland and Lombardy, as far as Trent, Mantua. Cremona, and Parma;
nay, perhaps, as far as Venice, Padua, Bononia, Ferrara, Ravenna and Florence;
may at the same Time be invelop'd in the Total Shadow; and that the Sun may set
eclipsed at all or most of those Places at once.

XXV.
To determine the Digits eclipsed, and the Duration of the Eclipse, or of total
Darkness, at any given Distance from the Path of the Moon's Center; and vice
versa. These Digits and Durations, if we do not consider the diurnal Motion,
are immediately found to any given Distance in the Tables, P. 29, -- 34. Thus,
if the Digits be 4, or Duration 80 24, the first Table gives us the Distance of
1350 Miles. And, vice versa if the Distance be known to be 1350 Miles; the same
Table gives us 4 Digits and 80 24 Duration. And the like is true of the total
Shadow, and the Distance or Duration in the second Table. Thus also we learn
from the Map of this Eclipse, that the nearest Approach of the total Shadow to
London will be about 40 geographical Miles: Which 40 Miles, in this Obliquity
of the Motion, is about 31 perpendicular Miles. So that 32/16^^ = 12/6^ of a
Digit, is the Quantity of the Rim of Light that will be seen at London, when
the Eclipse is greatest: And by consequence the Digits there eclipsed will be
11 48/60. Nor does it appear to me, that the total Darkness will come nearer to
London, than 40 Miles; although Dr. Halley's Scheme brings it within 7 or 8
Miles. As for the Duration of the entire Eclipse here, it will be much the same
as if it were Central: And has been already determined to 1h 47. And for the
total Darkness along the Path of the Center between Exeter and Plymouth, its
Duration will be, as before stated, 3 6.

N. B. As to the Alterations which will arise in more considerable Distances
from the Path of the Moon's Center, proceed thus: First, find the Minutes of
Duration corresponding to any given Distance in Miles, e. g. 1350, thus; 2000:
1350 3263: 2202. Or, As 2000 Miles, the Radius: to 1350 the Sine So are the
Number of Minutes for the Semidiameter of the Penumbra: to the Number of
Minutes for that Sine. Now 32 19 the present Length of the greatest Distance -
22 01 = 10 18. Then compute every Thing as if the Center of the Shadow were 10
18, Latitude or nearest Distance; and as if the Chord of that Arc over the
Earth's Disk were the Path of the Moon's Center: and the Chord of the Distance
from the Center of the Penumbra were the Diameter of the Penumbra: And all will
be discovered by the Rules before going; without any new Directions whatsoever.
Only if this Distance be the contrary way to the present Example, we must here
make use of Addition instead of Substraction.

N. B. Upon confulting the French Ephemerides of Des Places, recommended, in
some Degree, by Cassini himself, I find that he determines the Eclipse at Paris
thus.

h Beginning, May 22. (N. S.) 06 03 00 Middle 06 58 38 End 07 54 00 Whence the
Duration there is 01 51 00 Digits eclipss'd 10 17/60 Latitude of the Moon at
the Middle 39 Difference from me in Digits 01 31/^^ In Latitude 07 10

If these Digits and this Latitude be right, Dr. Halley, and I, and those
English Astronomers that have computed and constructed this E^lipse, who all, I
think, do agree, that it will be to^^^ at Paris, and that for two or three
Miuutes also, are prodigiously mistaken. For if Des Places be in the right,
Copenhagen and Stockholm will stand much fairer for the Pretense to a total
Eclipse, than either Dublin, London, or Paris. Time will certainly determine
who are in the right.

N. B. If we add the Duration of the Eclipse, considered without Regard to the
diurnal Motion, to the Time of the Center of the Shadows passing over the
entire Disk, we gain the entire Duration of the Eclipse in general, thus: h To
1 50 48 Add 2 58 24 Sum 4 49 12 Therefore the general Eclipse by the Meridian
of London, h Begins II. 52 24 Middle V. 17 00 End VII. 41 36 Duration 4h 49 12
Eclipse at London, Begins V. 45 00 Middle VI. 41 00 End VII. 32 00 Duration 1h
47 00 Digits eclipsed 11 48/60 Duration of Total Darknes^ between Exeter and
Plymouth, 03 6

N. B. Dr. Halley's Times are still about 5 sooner than mine, and his general
Duration about 7, and his Duration at London about 1 longer.

N. B. I cannot tell the Reason why my Original Calculation of this general
Eclipse, which has been carefully made according to Sir Isaac Newton's famous
Theory of the Moon, does here so much differ from Dr. Halley's Determination,
as 5 in Time; especially since both those Methods did very well agree, in the
last celebrated total Eclipse, Apr. 22. 1715. It Is Time alone that can
determine between these two Methods of Calculation.

N. B. I have lately been showed an exact Scheme of this next Eclipse,
according to Mr. Flamsteed's own Tables and Determination, and made in his
Lifetime; wherein the Digits eclipsed are 11 18/60 exactly according to my
Determination in this Paper.

A PROPOSAL For the Discovery of the LONGITUDE of the several Places of the
Earth, by Total Eclipses of the Sun.
IT is humbly proposed, That Observations be made in all Places where Solar
Eclipses are seen, of the exact Duration of the same; by either viewing the
Beginning and Ending thereof through a Telescope, with a Glass smoaked in the
Flame of a Candle, for saving the Eye of the Observer; or else by casting the
Sun's Image through such a Telescope upon white Paper, and viewing the first
and last Impression of the Moon's Shadow upon it. And that the Hour, Minute,
and Second of some Pendulum Clock be carefully noted at the same Time: And that
when the same Observations are transmitted for the Uses of Geography, the
Latitudes of the Places be also set down and transmitted at the same Time: That
the like Observations be also made in all Places where such Eclipses are total
and visible, of the exact Beginning and Ending, with the Duration of Total
Darkness; by the like Comparison of a Pendulum Clock, or other pendulous Body
that vibrates Seconds, or half Seconds; and, with the Latitude be transmitted
in the same Manner, and for the same Uses. How by the Help of these

(...) A Table of the Latitude of the Center of the total Shadow at the
Eclipse, May 11. 1724. to every 10 Degrees of the Angle about the Pole, and
every 7845. Longitude from London.
Angles at the Pole. Longitude from London. Latitde. East. 70 19 8577 45 9 69
23 7845 45 34 West. 59 23 0000 49 17 49 23 7845 52 19 39 23 15690 54 42 29 23
23535 56 29 19 23 31380 57 43 09 23 39225 58 13 00 00 46600 58 38 00 37 47070
58 38 10 37 54915 58 21 20 37 62760 57 36 30 37 70605 56 18 40 37 78450 54 27
50 37 86295 51 59 56 22 Middle. 90021 50 16 60 37 94140 48 51 70 37 101985 45 5
80 37 109830 40 40 90 37 117675 35 56 100 37 125520 30 31 110 37 133365 25 15
120 37 141210 20 11 130 37 149055 15 37 136 59 154052 13 3

N. B. Here, as well as in the next Table, The Angles at the Pole differ by Ten
Degrees; and the Longitude from London is found by the Proportion of 464 to
364. to be 7845 of Longitude from London for every such Ten Degrees. But if, as
is generally most convenient, we would have the Differences of Longitude from
London be even 10 Degrees; We must find the correspondent Angles at the Pole
before we begin our Calculations by the inverse Proportion of 364: 464 10: 12
the perpetual Addition of which Number will give us a Series for such a
Calculation.

A Table of the Latitude of the Center of the total Shadow at the Eclipse,
Sept. 4. 1717. to every 10 Degrees of the Angle at the Pole; and every 7167
Longitude from London.
Angles at the Pole. Longitude from London. Latitde. West. North 11 33 12248 30
18 4 28 7167 30 20 East. 00 00 3963 30 14 5 32 0000 29 28 15 32 7167 27 56 25
32 14334 25 40 35 32 21501 22 38 45 32 28668 18 27 55 32 35835 14 24 65 32
43002 9 21 75 32 50169 5 4 77 58 Middle. 51903 Middle. 3 57 85 32 57336 0 16
South. 95 32 64503 4 32 105 32 71670 9 55 115 32 78837 14 54 125 32 86004 19 16
135 32 193171 23 00 145 32 100338 25 57 155 32 107505 28 8 165 32 114672 29 34
168 39 116909 30 14

353: 253 10: 7167.

253: 353 10: 13952.

A Calculation of the Total Eclipse of the Sun, A. D. 1724. May 11. Post
Meridiem.
M.'s mean Mo. Motin of Apogee. Motn of Node r tr. s s s Anno Dom. 1701 0 15 20
00 11 8 20 00 4 27 24 20 Years 20 4 13 34 05 3 3 50 15 26 50 15 and 3 28 9 10 4
1 59 32 1 27 59 9 Leap-Y. May, Days 11 9 29 17 03 14 42 21 6 59 ^4 Hours 5 2 44
42 1 24 40 Minutes 15 8 14 4 2 (Mean Time.) 3 1 49 30 Moon's mean Motion 1 29
13 14 6 28 53 36 1 25 34 50 Sun's mean Anomal. 10 22 19 57 An. Eq. add 12 2 An.
Eq. subst. 5 43 Physic. Parts substract 7 7 9 38 6 29 5 38 ^ 25 29 7 2d Equat.
substract 2 31 Mean Pla. correct Mean Pla. correct 3d Equat. add 10 2 16 2 1 38
45 2 1 38 45 6th Equat. add 2 6 Sun's true Place Sun's true Place Diff. substr.
7 22 7 2 33 7 6 9 38 Moon's mean Pl correct 1 29 5* 5^ Annual A^g^ment S's
did. from Node Tru^ Pl. of Apog. substr. 7 9 14 38 10 9 0 Equat. add 18 56
Moon's mean Anomal. 6 19 51 14 Equat. add 1 25 48 3 Equat. add 2 31. 7 7 9 14
38 True Pl. of Node Moon's true Pl. in Orbit 2 1 36 59 True Pl. of Apogee 5 17
9 Sun*^ true Pla. substract 2 1 38 45 Eccentricity 6000 Inclinat. Limit. Moon's
did. from Sun 11 29 58 14 M's h mo^. 37 42 Sun's 2 24 M's fro. Sun 35 18 35
18: 60 1 46: 3 2 * Eq. time add 3 53 Reduct. subst. 2 33 Diff. add 4 22 Ergo,
Ecl pse is 11d 5h 19 22 Temp. appar. deduct the Error of the Tables about* 2 22
true Tim. 5h 17 0 S mid. Sun 15 53 Sem Moon 16 42 Sem. Penbra ^32 35 Semi.
Difc. 61 38 Angle of the M's Way with the Ecliptic 5 36 Diff. Diamet r of the
Sun and Moon, or Br^adth of total Shad. 0 98 Nodes true Pl. substract 1 25 48 3
Argument of Latitude 5 48 56 Reduction substract 1 30 Moon's tr. Pl. in Eclip.
2 1 35 29 Mo n's true North Lat. 32 14 At the Eclipse 32 19

A Calculation of the Sun's Place for the same Time.
Sun's mean Motion. Motion of Perihelion. s s A. D. 1701 9 20 43 40 3 7 44 30
Years 20 9 4 21 0 And 3 11 29 17 0 3 9 Leap-Y. May, Days 11 4 10 6 19 23 Hours
5 12 19 Minutes 15 37 3 8 9 2 Place of Perihelion. 2 90 28 59 Moon's mean
Motion. 10 22 19 57 Sun's mean An^m. (mean Time) Sun's mean Motion 2 0 28 59
^quation add 1 9 46 Sun's true Place 2 1 38 45

A Calculation of the Total Eclipse of the Sun, A. D. 1727. Sept. 4. Mane.
M's mean Mot. Motion Apogee. Motn of Node retr. s ^ s ^ s ^ Anno Dom. 1701 10
15 20 0 11 8 20 0 4 27 24 20 Years 20 4 13 34 5 3 3 50 15 26 50 15 And 6 2 9 28
55 8 4 5 44 3 26 1 29 Sept. Days 3 1 23 35 27 24 23 13 1 37 Hours 20 10 58 49 5
34 2 39 Minutes 35 19 13 10 5 (Mean Time.) 5 5 56 5 Moon's mean Motion 5 21 4
37 11 13 46 6 11 21 28 15 Sun's mean An ma^y 2 15 32 16 An. Eq. sub. 18 59 An.
Eq. add 9 7 Physical Parts add 11 23 11 13 27 7 11 21 37 22 2d Equat. substract
0 38 Mean Pl. Apo. cor. Mean Pl. of No. 01 6th Equat. add 1 57 5 21 52 53 5 21
52 53 Difference add 12 42 Sun's true Place Sun's true Place M^on's mean Pl.
correct 5 21 17 19 6 8 25 4^ 6 0 15 31 True Pl. of Apog. subst. 11 16 23 44
Annual Argum. S.'s did. ^ro. Nod. Moon's mean Anomaly 6 4 53 35 Eq^. Ad 2 56
37 Eq. Ad. 0 48 Equation add 42 26 11 16 23 44 11 21 38 10 M.'s Correct. Pl. in
Orb. 5 21 59 45 True Pl. of Apo. True Pl. of Node Sun's true Pla. substract 5
21 52 53 Eccentr. 663 37 5 17 20 Moon's Did. from Sun 6 52 Inc^in. Limit.
Variation add 9 S'.s hor. mot. 2 26 Moon's 38 29 M. fr. S. 36 2 3604: 60 69: 11
30. Ergo, Eclipse will be 20h 23 34 Mean Time. Eq. tim. 2d. 4 38 Reduct.
substr. 9 Diff. add 4 29 20h 28 03 Appar. Time. Semid. S. 16 1 Semid. M. 16 50
Diff. = 00 49 Sum = 32 52 Parallax M. Horizon 62 7 Sun 10 Semid. D^^k 61 57
Angle of the M.'s visible Way with the Ecliptic 5 36 20 M.'s true Pl. in Orbit
5 21 59 54 Nodes tr. Pl. substract 11 21 38 10 Argum^nt of Latitude 6 0 21 44
Reduction substract 6 Moon's true Pl. in Eclip. 5 21 51 48 Moon's true South
Latit. 1 54 At the Eclipse 1 23

A Calculation of the Sun's Place for the same Time. Sun's mean Motion. Motion
of Perihel. s ^ s A. D. 1701 9 20 43 40 3 7 44 30 Years 20 9 4 21 0 And 6 11 21
33 8 6 18 Sept. Days 3 8 2 28 9 40 Hours 20 49 17 3 8 12 28 Place of Perihel. 5
23 44 44 Sun's mean Motion 2 15 32 16 Sun's mean Anomaly. Minutes 35 1 26 (Mean
Time.) Sun's mean Motion 5 23 44 44 Equat. substract 1 51 51 Sun's true Place 5
21 52 53

Some Account of Observations lately made with Dipping-Needles, in Order to
discover the LONGITUDE and LATITUDE at Sea.
UPON the Receipt of the liberal Assistance of His most Excellent Majesty, King
GEORGE; their Royal Highnesses the Prince and Princess of Wales, and many other
of the Nobility and Gentry, my kind Friends, I sent last Year Four several
Dipping-Needles to Sea; with Frames hung near the Center of Motion in Gimbols,
to avoid the Shaking of the Ship; and with proper Instructions to the Masters
of the Vessels: And this, in order to discover the State of Magnetism in the
several Parts of the Globe; and to find whether accurate Observations could be
made at Sea, and to determine whether the fundamental Theory I laid down from
former Observations would hold or not; viz. "That Magnetic Variation and Dip
are all derived from one Spherical Magnet in the Center of our Earth; with an
irregular Alteration of the Variation, according to the different Degrees of
Strength of the several Parts of the Loadstone, as compounded with a very slow
Revolution from East to West: And with a regular Alteration of the Dip, nearly
according to the Line of Sines, from the Magnetic Pole to the Magnetic
Equator; the Axis of that Equator being sufficiently Oblique to its Plane: All
which is the Case of Spherical Loadstones here." Now having already received
Four Journals from Four several Masters employed, I take this Occasion of
returning my Benefactors hearty Thanks for their Assistance, and of giving them
and the Public some Account of the Success of these Observations; and what
Consequences are naturally to be drawn from them; with the Difficulty hitherto
met with in the Practice at Sea, and the proper Remedy for the same in future
Trials.

Captain James Jolly set out in July, 1722. for Archangel, with one of my
Dipping-Needles on Board. He, for some time, met with such Difficulties in the
Practice, as confined to the Frame I had given him, that he was not at first
able to make any good Observations at all. But after some Time, he took the
Needle into his own Cabin; and without any Approach to the Center of Motion, or
any Contrivance. for avoiding the Shaking of the Ship at all, having a clear
and full Gale all along, but without any stormy Weather, He made me 28 very
good Horizontal Observations, from the Latitude of 65 quite to Archangel: I
say, Horizontal Observations only, as I desired him; the Needle, by an Accident
before he went, being rendered incapable of making any other with sufficient
Accuracy. In this Space the Needle altered its Velocity very greatly, as I
expected it would: And 5 Vibrations which at first were performed in about 280;
beyond the North-Cape came to 250; till toward Archangel it gradually returned
to about 177.

Captain Othniel Beal set out about the same Time for Boston in New England,
with the same Instrument, and made Four Observations of the Dip, both by the
Vertical and Horizontal Vibrations, and by the Dip it self; Three upon the open
Sea, and One in the Haven of Boston: Which in some small Manner differed one
from another, but in the main agreed, and kept the due Analogy I expected. He
greatly complained of the Shaking of the Ship; till in Boston Haven he made a
nice Observation both Ways, which did not greatly differ: Though the greatest
Part of of his Observations by the Dip it self were somewhat more agreeable to
Analogy than the other. The Reason was, I take it, that, as he assured me, he
always took great Care to avoid the Shaking of my Frame; which Frame though it
very much avoided the slower and greater Oscillation of the Ship, yet made a
quicker but lesser Oscillation it self: Which Fault I was sufficiently sensible
of just before the Ships were going away, but was not able then to obviate; as
I am prepared to do hereafter. After Captain Beal had made and sent me these
Observations, he pursued his Voyage to Barbados, and thence to Charles Town in
South Carolina; at both which Places he made Observations; but the best at
Barbados. For before he came to Carolina, he observed the Axis of the Needle to
shake; which made him take the Dip there otherwise than he ought to have done;
which is the natural Occasion that the Dip there did not so well agree to
Analogy as the rest. However, upon my Receipt of his first Journal, with the
Four first Observations, especially the exact one at Boston, I formed a more
exact Theory of the Proportion of the Alteration of the Dip in the Spherical
Magnet of the Earth; and found it at this Distance of the Earth's Surface, not
far from that in my Spherical Loadstone, at the Distance of about 9/10 of an
Inch from its Surface; viz. Not exactly as the Line of Sines, where at the
Middle of the Line the Angles are 60 and 30; but rather as 66 to 24. Which Rule
therefore is what I now propose as much nearer than the other. By which
Proportion I determined long beforehand the Dip at Barbados of 43 or 44, as
many of my Friends can witness: And when Captain Beal delivered me the Paper of
this Observation at Barbados, before I opened it, or in the least knew what Dip
it contained, I foretold to him from that Theory the very same Dip, which both
himself and his Paper immediately assured me to be true; and whose Truth, as he
informed me afterward, was confirmed by another Observation, made a little
before in the open Sea, of about 45.

Captain Tempest also, about the same Time, set out for Antegoa and St.
Christopher's, with the same Instrument and Frame. In his Letter, da^ed last
January, he greatly complains of the Shaking of my Frame; and proposes an Hint
how it might be avoided: Which Method of its Avoidance I had long before
thought of, and provided for accordingly; and which has been a full Year ready
for Practice. Those Observations of his, that I have yet received; for I have
not heard from him since January, but hope soon to here farther; were but
Three, and all at open Sea; and but one of them made both the Ways that I
desired: And, indeed, seem the least agreeable to Analogy of any of the rest.
Only since that single Observation, which was also made by the horizontal
Vibrations and vertical Oscillations, agrees very well to that Analogy; since
they all three are about the same Quantity of 8 or 9 Degrees exceed that
Analogy; and since very near the same Place, where the third Observation was
made, I have a double Observation of Captain Beal's to correct the same; I
rather conclude, that Captain Tempest made a Mistake, and placed the wrong Edge
of the Needle upward in all the Three Observations: Which would naturally
occasion such a Difference. When I receive the rest of his Observations, or his
Needle again, I shall be able to judge better of that Matter. However, even
these Observations agree in gross with all the rest, to the gradual Decrease of
the Dip as you go nearer to the Equator: Though as they stand at present, they do
not determine the accurate Proportion of that Alteration so well as the others.

Captain Michel also, long after the rest, set out for Hamburgh with the same
Instrument; though now without the Frame, which he was not willing to incumber
himself with: and I suspected that in its present Contrivance it did more hurt
than help the Nicety of the Experiments. I also by him, sent a Letter to the
Reverend Mr. Eberhard, who was the Occasion of my studying this Matter, and was
then Pastor of Altena, close by Hamburgh; desiring that he would there make the
Experiment very exactly, and give me a particular Account of it. But I have not
yet received his Answer.

Now the Observations here mentioned, as well as those many others I had by me
before, do seem to me in general evidently to afford us the following
Inferences:

(1.) That there is one Spherical Loadstone, and but one in the Center of our
Earth; and that this Loadstone, like other Spherical Loadstones, has but one
Northern Pole: Contrary to Dr. Halley's Hypothesis.

(2) That this Northern Pole is situated, contrary to the same Hypothesis also,
a great Way to the East of our Meridian: And indeed, as I before had
determined, about the Middle of the Distance between the North Cape and Nova
Zembla. Captain Jolly's numerous Observations prove this most fully: While in
Sailing toward that Point his horizontal Vibrations greatly increased in
Number: And when he turned almost at right Angles, as he went down to
Archangel, they soon diminished; and yet so little, after some time that it was
evident he then sailed not far from a Parallel to that Northern Pole; and not
very many Degrees from it neither; exactly according to my Expectations.

(3.) That the absolute Power of the internal Magnet is considerably different
in different Places; and that without any certain Rule; as it is upon the
Surface of our Terrellae or Spherical Loadstones here. This the various Number
of Seconds to a vertical Oscillations, and all the Accounts in the other
Observations fully prove; and by consequence this must cause different
Variations in different Places, as is the Case of our Terrellae.

(4.) That there no where appears in open Seas any such Irregularity in the
Dip, as we sometimes meet with near Shores, or at Land; and by consequence that
Dr. Halley's grand Objection against the Discovery of the Longitude by the
Dipping-Needle, taken from an Observation of his own, concerning such an
Irregularity near the Shore at Cape Verd; and from his own Hypothesis of the
four Magnetic Poles is utterly groundless. Nor indeed shall I ^e at Rest,
till*I have sent a Dipping-Needle to Hudson's Bay, on purpose to determine this
Dispute about the four Poles: For that Voyage being almost directly toward his
second Northern Pole all the way, and about the same Distance all the way from
mine; if this Voyage afford much the same Dip, it will demonstrate that there
is but One Northern Pole; and that it is nearl^ where I place it: But if that
Dip greatly increase, it will demonstrate a s^^ond Pole somewhere in those
Parts of America, where Dr. Halley places it. And to this Decretory Experiment
do I appeal for a final Determination of this Question. The Doctor seems to me
to draw his Inferences from the Variation, which no Way proves any such double
Poles; as being full as sensible on our Terrelle, which have no more than
single ones; while he avoids all Observations from the Dip, which are still
against him; and which are alone capable of discovering the exact Place of such
Poles, either upon the Surface of the Earth, or of Terrellae. However, when one
Set of Experiments with a Dipping-Needle, sent to Hudson's Bay, will certainly
determine this Matter, it is a vain Thing to go on in the Way of Controversy
about it.

In short, The Observations hitherto made, show that the Foundations I go upon
in this Discovery of the Longitude and the Latitude at Sea, are true and right:
That the Terrestrial Magnetism is very regular and uniform, in the open Seas;
that the Latitude in the Northern Parts may even, without any Avoidance of the
Shaking of the Ship, in ordinary calm Weather, be in good Degree thereby
discovered already; and that if I can sufficiently avoid the Shaking of the
Ship, which I am now endeavoring, and have great Hopes of performing, both
Latitude and Longitude may by this Method be discovered in the greatest Part of
the sailing World. I say nothing here of another Method of Trial, which I am
also pursuing, and which depends, like this, on the avoiding the main Part of
the Ship's Agitation; and if effected will be more easy and universal than
this. But as to giving any farther Account of that to the Public, unless it
succeed, I have no Intention at all.

N. B. The original Journals are all in the Hands of my great Friend and Patron
Samuel Molyneux, Esquire Secretary to his Royal Highness, the Prince of Wales, and
Fellow of the Royal Society: Which Journals, when I have completed the rest of
the Observations I hope to procure, I intend to publish entire, for the more
full Satisfaction of the curious, A Table of the Angle of Inclination below the
Horizon, in Dipping-Needles, to every 1/9^ Part of their respective equal
Distances from the Magnetic Poles and Equator.
Did. from the Pole. Dip. Did. from the Equat Dip. 1 89 30 1 08 41 2 89 00 2
12 23 3 88 27 3 15 14 4 87 59 4 17 41 5 87 29 5 19 51 6 86 59 6 21 50 7 86 38 7
23 41 8 85 58 8 25 24 9 85 27 9 27 2 10 84 57 10 28 36 11 84 27 11 30 6 12 83
56 12 31 32 13 83 26 13 32 55 Did. from the Pole. Dip. Did. from the Pole.
Dip. 14 82 55 14 34 15 15 82 24 15 35 33 16 81 54 16 36 50 17 81 23 17 38 4 18
80 52 18 39 16 19 80 21 19 40 28 20 79 49 20 41 37 21 79 18 21 42 45 22 78 47
22 43 54 23 78 16 23 44 58 24 77 44 24 46 2 25 77 12 25 47 6 26 76 41 26 48 9
27 76 8 27 49 10 28 75 36 28 50 12 29 75 4 29 51 12 30 74 32 30 52 12 31 73 59
31 53 11 32 73 26 32 54 9 33 72 54 33 55 6 34 72 20 34 56 1 35 71 47 35 57 0 36
71 14 36 57 56 37 70 39 37 58 52 38 70 5 38 59 47 39 69 31 39 60 41 40 68 57 40
61 35 41 68 22 41 62 49 42 67 47 42 63 22 43 67 12 43 64 15 44 66 36 44 65 8 45
66 00 45 66 0

N. B. I take the Northern Pole of the Terrestrial Magnet to be about the
Meridian of Archangel, in the Latitude of 75. Its Equator to be nearly a great
Circle, intersecting the Earth's Equator about 2 Degrees Eastward of the
Meridian of London; and in its opposite Point. And that its utmost Latitude
Northward is in the Gulf of Bengall about 12 Degrees; and as much South in the
opposite Point, in the great South Sea. And that the Souther^ Pole is nearly
circular; its Radius 40 Degrees of a great Circle, and its Center in a Meridian
Eastward from Ceilon about 4 Degrees, and about 68 Latitude.

N. B. London is nearly 1^5/84 = 26/90 distance from the North Pole of the
Magnet, whence its Dip will be at 74 ^/^, which is certainly so in Fact. Boston
in New England is 51/^^^ = ^^/9^, whence its Dip will be about 68 22, which
Captain Beal found to be so in Fact. Barbados is about 26^/1^^ = 22/905 distant
from the Equator of the Magnet, whence its Dip ought to be about 44, as Captain
Beal also found it to be in Fact. St. Helenais about 14/49 = ^^^/9^, whence its
Dip ought to be about 47 50 as Dr. Halley found it to be in Fact. And so every
where in the main Ocean, at considerable Distances from the Shores.

N. B. If the Dip of any Needles be somewhat different at London, add or
substract a proportionable Part of the Dip elsewhere. And you will have nearly
the true Dip at any other Place with that Needle Thus if your Needle differ
from the other 2 or 120, and show the Dip at London 72 45 instead of 74 45,
which is its-proper Dip in this Table; and you require the true Dip by this
Needle for Boston in New England, Southward; which in the Table is 68 22,
proceed thus. Because the equal Distance of Boston from the Magnetic Equator
is 49 Parts of 604, the like Distance of London from that Equator; deduct
^9/604 120 = 97 = 1 37 out of the Tabular Dip 68 22. The Remainder is 66 45,
for the true Dip at Boston with that Needle. Thus if you want the true Dip, by
the same Needle, at Dronthem in Norway, Northward: Because the equal Distance
of Dronthem from the Magnetic Pole is 152 Parts of 296 the Distance of London
from that Pole; deduct 15/29 2/6 12 = 62 = 1 2 out of the Tabular Dip 82 30,
and the Remainder, 81 28 is the true Dip at Dronthem, with that Needle: And so
in all other Cases whatsoever.

N. B. The Table before set down, supposes that the true Dip differs according
to such a Line of Sines, whose middle Point gives 66 on one Side, and 24 on the
other; and is made by adding or substracting 8 to the Complement of the Dip
found by the natural Sines for every 1/^0 of equal Distances from the Equator
or Pole.

N. B. If any desire to calculate by Trigonometry the Distances of all Places
from the magnetic Equator of Poles, and the Distances of that Equator and
those Poles in every particular Case, both made use of in the foregoing
Calculations, it is thus to be done:

In the (Fig. 12.) Triangle B L A we have B L the Co-Latitude of London; B A
the Co-Latitude of the magnetic North Pole; and the included Angle, A B L =
the Distance of the Meridian of that Pole from the Meridian of London; to find
the Angle Q A M and the Side A L. Then in the Triangle Q A M, we have the
Angles Q A M and Q M A, and the Side A M, = the Distance of the Magnetic Pole
from the Magnetic Equator, to find A Q. So we have the Proportion of A L to
AQ, Q. E. I.

But since the Data are not yet sufficiently exact for the Calculation,
measuring is sufficient.

FINIS.
to fold out at the end of ye Book Fig. 1.
Fig. 2.
Fig. 3.
Fig. 4.
Fig. 5.
Fig. 7.
Fig. 6.
Fig. 9.
Fig. 8.
Fig. 10.
Fig. 11.
Fig. 12.


ERRATA.
PAge 1. lines 12, 13. read, 5 Leap. Days; and with 11 Days when 4 Leap Days.
P. 7. over against 21, etc. read, 53. 2. 55. 40. 58. 19. 60. 58. 63. 38. 66.
19. 69. 0. 71. 42. 74. 24. 77. 7. 79. 50. 82. 34. 85. 19. 88. 4. 90. 50. P. 10.
l. 32. read, Summer. P. 13. l. 7. r. 10d. l. 8. and 10, and 16. r. 18. P. 13.
l. 24. r. Bern, Zurich, and Pillaw near Koningsberg in Prussia. Dele p. 16. l.
32. to p. 17. l. 10. and instead of it read thus: Its greatest Alteration
therefore must be at the mean Distance; and is the Difference of the Equation
belonging there to the Addition of 108 = 17. which Space the Moon usually goes
in about 36 of time. So that the Difference on this Account must, each Period,
be usually less than 36. And as to the Moon's own Motion, it has also its
greatest Alteration at its mean Distance; and is the Difference of the Equation
at 2. 51. =17. which the Moon usually goes in about 36. of time. So that the
Difference on this Account must, each Period, be usually less than 36*. also,
and on both Accounts less than 1h. 12.


