ESSAYS MORAL AND PHILOSOPHICAL, ON SEVERAL SUBJECTS: VIZ. A VIEW of the HUMAN
FACULTIES. A short ACCOUNT of the WORLD. Two DISCOURSES on DECENCY. An ESSAY on
SELF-LOVE.


LONDON; Printed for J. OSBORN and T. LONGMAN, at the Ship, in Paternoster-Row.
M.DCC.XXXIV.

ADVERTISEMENT From the Publisher.
THOUGH the following Papers are of different Forms, and upon different Subjects;
yet there appeared no Reason, why they might not be all published together. I
take the liberty of mentioning this and a few things more to the Reader,
because I had a greater Latitude given me by the Person whose hands the Papers
came from; but I have exerted my Powers no further than in not letting the
Essay on Self-Love come out singly, which was his Inclination: but I hope I
shall have the public Approbation for what I have done.

I had a long Letter, chiefly relating to the Essay, with several Hints in it,
which I thought the Public ought not to be deprived of; and so (with the
Author's allowance) I have thrown some of them into the Appendix, whereof they
make the last Number. A few of his Words in that Letter seem to call for a
place here.

"I designed to have sent you these Papers several Years ago...... I
industriously shunned taking notice of some Performances that appeared at
different times after this small Work was begun and ended, having seen them as
much despised by the most judicious sort of Readers as I thought they
deserved...... All I have in view by the Essay, is, that it may serve for an
Introduction to Books of a deeper Reach..... But I took all the care I could,
that it might have no Air of a Religious Dissertation. It was indeed next to
impossible to avoid saying somewhat on the Love of God, that the contrary
Doctrine might appear the more in its own Colors......"

"I thought it was best to add the D. of Rochefoucault's Description entirely,
as being a Run of natural Eloquence, without Precision, as the French call it;
which makes it rather the more agreeable. Sometimes he puts Self-Love for
Covetousness, sometimes for Pride, sometimes for Vanity, sometimes for Passion,
sometimes for Obstinacy, sometimes for mere Whim, and sometimes for all these
together, as appears throughout his Reflections; but still he will be well
enough understood: for by Self-Love he either means corrupt Nature in general,
or some of its particular Qualities. But with Submission......" See the
Continuation of this in the last Number of the Additions.

The Author designed the rest of those Additions as an Explanation of some
Terms, and a Collection of some Citations to support the Essay, though it stands
pretty much independent of either. The Sections were also designed to have been
of a more equal length, and the whole to have been shorter; but he yielded to
an Advice of dropping in some practical Reflections, because (as he owned
himself) abstract Reasonings seldom make a deep Impression. Nor was it without
Reluctance, that he engaged at all in the Performance, having often said, "The
Nature of Mankind gives little ground to expect an Alteration in Opinions once
received; though no Speculation seems so likely for all Parties to agree in, as
that of Disinterestedness, nor any Speculation that could produce such happy
Effects, if it was reduced to Practice."

As to the Dialogues, he expressed himself as if he had been but a Witness to
the Conversation, and had wrote only from his Memory; and therefore said, "It
was to be feared it would be a kind of Murder, and at best, to present the
World with a Skeleton." He adds, "It will easily be supposed, the two Friends
talked of many things I have taken no notice of, and that their Conversation
was only reduced by me under certain Heads, and put in a different Order from
what they observed in talking together; for it would not have been so natural
to have begun with the Distinction of Body, Soul and Spirit..... Perhaps the
thing, such as it is, may be of use to those who are not much acquainted with
themselves and the World."

The two Discourses on DECENCY he called neglected Trifles, and desired I might
do with them what I pleased.

CONTENTS.
DIALOGUES on several Subjects betwixt two Intimate Friends.
Part I. A View of the HUMAN FACULTIES.
I. OF Men in general. page 1 II. The Body. 9 III. The Soul. 16 IV. Sensation.
23 V. Imagination. 33 VI. The Passions. 44 VII. Complexion, Disposition,
Humor. 54 VIII. Liberty. 58 IX. Reason. 69 X. The Memory. 85 XI. Speech. 89
XII. A Review of the foregoing Articles. 93
Part. II. A short Account of the WORLD.
I. The World taken in different Senses. 106 II. The World divided into two
Cities. 109 III. The mixed State of Things. 120 IV. Remains of Virtue. 132 V.
Helps to Religion. 144 VI. The Equality of Men by Nature. 154 VII. Accidental
Characters. 158 VIII. Conversation. 175 IX. Books. 191
Two Discourses on DECENCY.
Disc. I. Decency is the least of all Laws, and the most observed. 205 Disc.
II. 224
An Essay on SELF-LOVE.
Introduction. 245 Sect. I. Self-Love commonly taken in a bad Sense: The Duke
of Rochefoucault's Account of it. 248 Sect. II. The Change made on Self-Love by
the Fall. 252 Sect. III. What may be called lawful in Self-Love, from some of
its proper Acceptations. 255 Sect. IV. The Desires of Man considered more
particularly. 257 Sect. V. The two Principles of Action, or the two Sources of
Virtue and Vice. 259 Sect. VI. The Corruption of Self-Love farther considered
with respect to all Virtues, and Friendship in particular. 262 Sect. VII.
Natural Love considered under different Denominations. 267 Sect. VIII. Of other
Engagements of the Affection. 274 Sect. IX. The Meaning of Disinterestedness.
276 Sect. X. Some Acceptations of Conscience. 282 Sect. XI. The Reality of
Virtue. 290 Sect. XII. Religion. 295 Sect. XIII. The Unfitness of Self, as an
Object of Love. 303 Sect. XIV. The Love of the Creatures. 307 Sect. XV. The
Love of God. 314
ADDITIONS.
I. Self-Love, Pleasure, Happiness, Interest. 336 II. Description of Self-Love.
341 III. Vice, Sin, Evil. 345 IV. From H. More's Letters. 347 V. Religion,
Charity. 352 VI. Virtue, Justice, Disinterestedness. 357 VII. From Mr. Pascal,
Sect. 26. 361 VIII. Civitates, etc. 363 IX. Arrian, Lib. 2. Cap. 22. 364 X.
Truth. 367 XI. Why the Words, Heb. xii. are supposed to mean instead of the Joy
set before him, etc. rather than because of the Joy, etc. 369 XII. Amor, etc.
374 XIII. 375
DIALOGUES ON SEVERAL SUBJECTS, BETWIXT TWO INTIMATE FRIENDS.
PART I. A VIEW OF THE HUMAN FACULTIES.
I. Of MAN in general.
Lucinus and Aemilius. L. THERE are not (my dear Aemilius) two more common
words, nor a more common distinction, than of Body and Soul. The Properties and
Operations of these two are entirely different Quid enim homini accidit
infaelicius, quid turpius, quam confusio actionum Mentis Corporisque? Boerhaave
Dissert. de Chemia.
: and nothing is more shameful and unfortunate than to confound them together.


Ae. MY dear Lucinus, you are entirely in the right: and we are farther said to
be made up of Body, Soul, and Spirit; a Distinction not only used by St. Paul,
but which we have also from (...) M. Antonin. Lib. II. 2. (...) Lib. III. 16.
good Heathen Philosophers.

SENSATION is assigned to the Body, though it is the Soul that properly feels
through the bodily Organs; the Passions or Affections are appropriated to the
Soul; and Truths, or Principles, are of the Province of the Mind or the
Understanding; according to that Distribution of Antoninus.


L. BUT to go a degree lower than Sensation (for Life may be conceived without
any Operation of the Senses, as when they are shut up in a deep Sleep) simple
Life is a thing as different from Body, or Matter, as any thing we can imagine.
And therefore Life is sometimes called by the Name of Spirit, and considered
both as a Principle or Spring by which Matter (whose Property is to rest) is
moved, and the Body of Animals kept (for a while) from Dissolution and
Corruption: -- Dum Spiritus hos regit Artus.

OF this sort of Life or Spirit, every living Creature has a share, a Worm as
well as a Man; the particular Frailty of whose Life we may be easily convinced
of, though the Apostle had not told us it is but a Vapor. And yet we have no
other Barrier against that amazing State called Eternity! If the Thought of
Death or simple Extinction raises Horror; what would the Prospect of endless
Existence raise, without some latent Hope, or Supposition of Happiness! A Man
makes this Supposition secretly when he thinks at all of that State, otherwise
Nature could not bear the Prospect: and we must confess our Quiet, or rather
Indolence, as to an Article of such importance, is chiefly owing to our
Stupidity.


Ae. BUT notwithstanding all the Stupidity and Weight that loads us, there is
still in our Nature some Expectation of Immortality, some Hopes of a future
Life, and a more perfect Existence after this Scene is over. To which, if we
add our Desire of Dominion and Esteem, even in this World, we may conclude
there is really something of worth in us; and our Pride may be a sort of
Argument for our Dignity. And this Elevation of Mind is not infused into us by
Politicians, Divines, Officers of the Army, or any Set of Men whatsoever, but
may be said to be a part of our Constitution.

DIOTREPHES loved Pre-eminence. Caesar was not taught to desire Dominion: every
Man loves it (less or more) though not equally qualified to gain it, nor equally
successful. Besides, the Rewards promised by Politicians and Commanders rather
respect the Conveniences and Glory of this Life than the future. And whether
the Reward be temporal or eternal, the encouraging or the amusing People with
the Hopes of it, supposes a Desire in them beforehand of such things;
otherwise the designing Men could have no Fund to work upon, and might as well
talk to Horses.

I confess there are other Arguments besides the Pride of Man, which may help
to show his Dignity. He grows weary of every thing here (Friendship only
excepted) as if nothing were worthy of his Attention. But then, as nothing is
able to satisfy him, any thing is sufficient to amuse him. So that we must
consider Man in different Lights, before we can understand his Condition; and
after all we can think about it, our Knowledge must remain imperfect.


L. IT is by viewing Man in those opposite Lights, that he is sometimes called
the Glory of the Creation, and sometimes its Disgrace; and both Epithets are
true. There is still in Human Nature something that is bright and lovely, good
and kind; some Remains of Excellency, some Ruins of Grandeur, some Sparks in
the midst of Ashes and Rubbish.

THE Scripture informs us, that Man was made after the Image of God; and that
we are his Offspring. It Is remarkable that St. Paul cites this Passage from a
Heathen Poet: and there was great address in it, since he was reasoning with
the polite Men of Athens. But if our Pride should be apt to rise from the
Account the Scripture gives us of our Origin, we shall find in the same Books
very different Characters to keep us low. We are called but Dust, the Worms are
our nearest Kindred: it is told us, we are but Vanity in our best Estate, and
that the Imaginations of our Heart are continually foolish and wicked: with
much more to that purpose.

THE Philosophers were much divided in their Opinions concerning Man. Some
exalted him too high, others sunk him too low; without considering the strange
Mixture of his Composition, which indeed seems to make him akin to the highest
and lowest Beings, the loveliest and the hatefullest Things.

NOR is it to be forgot, that though Mankind in general are made up of
Contrarieties, yet, as my Lord Rochester says, Man differs more from Man, than
Man from Beast.


Ae. NOT only so, but the same Man differs as much from himself at different
times.


L. IT IS a strange Composition, Human Nature! But those who talk and write
against the Dignity of Man, and the Immortality of the Soul; who affirm there
is no Virtue, no Friendship, no Honor; can only argue from what they feel in
themselves, and what they observe in the World. The first Point might be
readily yielded to them: though we are not absolutely sure but they may have a
greater belief of Virtue, and more Conscience than they own; as there are
others who may have less of either than they pretend to. And as to the
Observation of the Decay of Virtue in the World, there is nothing oftener
mentioned in the Scripture than that. In short, whatever the Opinions of
particular Persons may be, human Nature will still remain in its Rank: and the
unhappy Choices of the Multitude will serve to confirm the sacred Text, Man
that is in honor, and understands not, is like the Beasts that perish.


II. The BODY.
L. WHAT do you think of this Body of ours?


Ae. IT is by this wonderful piece of Mechanism, that we hold Correspondence
with the visible World about us.


L. THE Body, as to its outward Figure, is certainly beautiful. Few are so
fantastical, as to find fault with the human Shape. Nor are the Parts within
less wonderful in their Contrivance and Use. Many Engines are constantly
playing. With what incredible force does the Heart send out the Blood! And how
much work is done within us (as Antoninus said) and we feel nothing of it! When
we feel least of it, we are in the best health.

ANATOMISTS tell us, there is hardly an Instrument in Mechanics or
Hydrostaticks but we meet with in the human Body; and indeed in the Body of
inferior Animals: scarce any part of a House or a Ship, hardly a common
Utensil, but we find in this surprising Fabric. They talk of Levers, Wedges,
Pullies, Ropes, Sieves, Strainers, Beams, Tubes, Vases, Receptacles, and more
things than I have English for. You may see Deprehenduntur enim ibidem
fulcimenta, columnae, trabes, propugnacula, hypomochlia, cunei, vectes,
trochleae determinantes, funes, praela, folles, cribra, filtra, canales,
receptacula. Institutiones 40.
Boerhaave.


Ae. SOME of those laborious, penetrating, honest Inquirers into Nature, have
really made great discoveries; and there remains still much to be discovered.
Any body may know thus far, that this outward Vehicle of ours is made up of an
infinite number of Parts, Organs, or Instruments curiously adjusted, and acting
in a mutual Subserviency each Part to another, as well as for the Safety and
Pleasure of the whole System.


L. FLESH, and Blood, and Skin, and Bones, are familiar Words, and we think
very little about the Composition and Texture of the things. But we are
surprised when we hear that Flesh itself is but a Collection of small Fibers;
that every Muscle may be divided into lesser ones, and these again into lesser,
till they become too small for Discovery; Institut. 393.
surpassing even the force of Imagination.

THE Action of the Muscles, and the Motions performed by their means, is a new
Matter of wonder. As some of these Motions are voluntary, there are others
without any design of ours. The voluntary Motions are often accompanied with
Satisfaction, as the Mind directs them either to real Use or Vanity: and we are
beholden to the Muscles for Dancing, as well as Walking: to these the
Politician owes his Shrugs, and the nice Lady her Gestures.


Ae. BUT at the same time, that we admire the Texture of the Flesh, we see
evident Marks of Frailty stamped upon it, or something worse. The mixture of
Blood and other Fluids makes the Consistency the more difficult to be
preserved: and upon the Breach of so many Canals and Vessels, which a very
ordinary Wound may occasion, we see a considerable Disorder, and have even some
horror at the sight. A putrefying Sore is still more disagreeable.


L. IT were prudence in us however, to view our Constitution sometimes on its
weak sides, that we may not forget the Materials we are made of, or imagine a
Statue of Plaster to be a Statue of Brass. The Wisdom of the Maker is still
seen in the admirable Contrivance of the Machine, though it were to last but a
day; and we have good reason to subscribe to that Text, We are fearfully and
wonderfully made.


Ae. WONDERFULLY indeed! but then the Tenderness of our Frame must not so
frighten us, as if it were every moment to fall to pieces; and consequently
under the notion of shunning Danger, make us shun the Duties of Society. The
Body is strongly fenced, and can bear considerable Shocks after all. We are
only to keep our Brittleness in view, as a guard to Sobriety and Temperance.
For there is certainly a good deal of Truth in that common Proverb, Surfeiting
destroys more People than the Sword.

How Intemperance (a general Term for all Excess) comes to be such a Ruin to
the poor Fabric, is no hard matter to account for. The Bones, it is true, have
a Firmness: but then, how are they joined together! and how many small Vessels
are employed in conveying Nourishment even to them! The whole Body may be
called but a Bundle of Pipes and Vessels wrapped up in Skin. Some of the Fluids
run in larger Channels, and with greater briskness, whilst others naturally are
but slowly filtrated. What a Pressure must a Surcharge of Meat and Drink
occasion! How must the various Canals be affected! Here a Ferment, there
Stagnation. The Ideas would be a little nauseous, if pursued farther.


L. BUT since it is much more agreeable to consider things in their good Order,
than in their Corruption, it may be very entertaining to look into some Books
of Anatomy; wherein such Discoveries are given, as cannot fail to raise
Admiration and Delight. And there is this moral Inference to be made, that as
all the Parts of the Body (united, as St. Paul says, by Joints and Bands)
contribute to the good of the whole in a mechanical way: so all Men ought to
serve one another freely and cheerfully, as Members of one Body or Society: and
the good Emperor has an useful Criticism upon the difference between the words
Member and Part, the former implying a more vital Union than the latter; for
instance, a Branch of a Tree, or any inanimate thing, is separated from the
Body without Pain, which is far otherwise in the loss of an Arm, or in the
least hurt of any animated part of the Body. This Example might be much farther
pursued with great pleasure: all the Members being found to act in Concert and
Harmony. No Schism, no Appropriation, no Contempt, no Oppression.


Ae. FEW Criticisms are of so much use. But notwithstanding all the agreeable
things that are to be observed in the Contrivance of the Body, its Charms lie
principally in the Outside. The figure of the inward Parts, and the endless
Branchings of the Veins, are looked at with more Complacency in Waxwork and
Copper-plate than in their Reality; which must give the Dissecters themselves
some Uneasiness, not to be entirely overcome by the longest Practice. But the
Shape and Air strike a Reverence, the Skin and Features a Delight: the Features
more than the Skin, and the Air more than the Features: so that the Air gives
Delight and Reverence both. We shall leave more Observations to Lovers. In the
mean time, we must do the Soul the Justice to confess that it is she that is
properly the Mistress. No Man can be in love with the finest Statue. Nor would
Life, added to Beauty, be the Attraction, if some Qualities of the Mind were
not supposed. This must hold, without dispute, in rational Love: and as to the
simple Impressions on the Eye (which irrational Animals may share in, for any
thing we know to the contrary) whatever is agreeably felt, if it is not excited
by the Soul, is at least felt by the Soul; and to it we must have recourse, as
the Seat of Life itself, as well as of Sensation and Reflection.

I say we must have recourse to some other thing than the Body, for all our
Perceptions and Faculties, of what kind soever. The Body is but a Vehicle
enlivened. We cut and mangle a dead Body without much Compassion, and without
any Injury, as if it were a Log of Wood.


L. WHAT it is that ties two things together so different in their Natures, Men
have no notion of: We see in fact, and sometimes to our great affliction, a
deplorable Alteration in the Body, or the visible Part, from whence we conclude
a Separation of the Invisible; or that the Soul or Spirit has withdrawn we know
not whither.


Ae. THE Dissolution of the Body shows a little of its Composition. As it
returns to the Dust, so it is of the Dust. But into this strange Composition
the four Elements may be said to enter, and other things often mentioned by
Philosophers and common Men, Oil, Sulphur, etc. It must be owned too, that
these Ingredients are more happily mixed in some Persons than others, as
Shakespeare observes of Brutus; from whence may proceed the difference of
Constitutions, and even of Tempers. And this should engage People to pity one
another, or to be very civil at least. If a Man thinks his Neighbor has too
much Fire, he should consider whether he himself may not have too much Phlegm;
and on the contrary.


L. IF some People heard us, they would be apt to think there is too much said
concerning the Body; others, that there is too little: and I am of the latter
opinion; considering that it is the Body which takes up the most of our Care: in
so much, that Antoninus calls Death a Release from the Drudgery about a Carcass.


III. The SOUL.
Ae. YOU asked me what I thought of the Body. Pray what do you think of the
Soul?


L. MANKIND being so much in the dark, as to the Nature of all things, can only
consider them in some of their Properties and Operations.


Ae IT seems the lowest Operation we can conceive of the Soul, is to give Life
and Motion to an organized Body, which the most curious Organs cannot give;
since they are but Matter reduced into Shape and Proportion. It Is agreeable to
see a Fly making its Motions in the Air, or cleaning its little Legs, by some
Principle foreign to its light Body. But a small Touch puts an end to the
Activity.


L. IT is an odd sort of Enquiry, whether Matter might not have Thought
superadded to it? It Is easy, and no less true, to say that infinite Power can
do every thing it pleases. But then, Men should take care, under the appearance
of Modesty (or however real it may be) not to make impertinent Suppositions. If
Life were superadded, Matter would be enlivened; and if Thought were
superadded, Matter would be thinking: whereas the settled Idea of Matter is
something that is inanimate, unactive, and incapable of thinking.

IF we were to search for mere Life, or if any Person could tell us where it is
to be found, I believe the Answer would be, not in the smallest Fibers; for
they are but Threads: neither in the thinnest Membranes, for they are but
Threads woven together. If Genesis 9.
it is in the Blood, as the Scripture seems to intimate, it still escapes our
Discovery; and the Blood itself must be reckoned but a Vehicle for the Life.


Ae ANOTHER Text in the same Book says Genesis 2.
God breathed into Man the Breath of Life, and he became a living Soul. We must
content ourselves with an Historical Account of our own Being, instead of a
Philosophical: and if we should want to know how Life has been insused into the
meanest Animals, we must only conclude that the Fountain of Life has
communicated to them their Portion of it some way or other; and without
grudging them their manner of Existence (many of them having the advantage of
us in some Faculties) we ought to study to make the best and the thankfullest
use of our own.

THAT which is called the Vegetable Life, consists chiefly in a Circulation of
Fluids, in order to the Support and Growth of the Body they belong to, without
any power of Sensation. Vegetation is but Growing: and even Stones and Metals
(some think) have a Growth of their own.


L. BAGLIVI is of that opinion Evidenter sequitur posse Lapides adinstar
Plantarum crescere ac vegetare: quia revera Lapidum Pori permeabiles sunt. Upon
which he tells of a Shellfish, called Dactilus Marinus, found in the midst of
Stone alive, and very agreeable to the Taste, not far from Naples. De
Vegetatione Lapidum.
.


Ae. PLANTS are Bodies organized to admiration. They draw Nourishment from the
Earth by their Roots: they seem to be nourished also by the Air, and may be
killed by the Air; they have Perspiration, but no Respiration, which seems to
be peculiar to the Animal Life, and is the lowest of its Operations.

LIVING Creatures can move from one place to another, and have their Roots
within themselves for their Nourishment. Which Roots (says Mr. Boerhaave) are
the absorbent Veins in the Mouth, Stomach, and Intestines.


L. Some Animals, fixed in their Shells to Rocks, are an Exception from that
Power of local Motion: though they have still some inward Spring of their own,
and may be said to move in their own Houses.


Ae. LIFE certainly, in the lowest view we can have of it, implies something
more than Matter, or Matter and Motion together, and may be called immaterial,
or a thing that cannot fall under the cognizance of any of the five Senses.
It Is finer and quicker than Flame: it cannot be extracted by the best Chemists,
nor kept in Glasses. Mr. Hobbes triumphed over the Expression immaterial
Substance, as an instance of insignificant Speech: and he would have had reason
on his side, if he had first proved that there was no Substance, nor any thing
in the Universe, but what we can see and touch, etc.


L. SNEERING is no Proof.


Ae. BUT now, though all Life may be called immaterial, it cannot upon that
account be called immortal or unextinguishable. Immortality is a Term
appropriated to the Soul. The Beasts have a Life as well as Men, and are
unwilling to part with it; yet the Scripture speaks as if it ended with the
Destruction of their Body, and they are said to perish. It Is true, Solomon
speaks of the Spirit of Man, and the Spirit of the Beast, that the one goes
upward, and the other downward; and I think some Philosophers talk of different
Principles, to which higher and lower Spirits are united, after quitting their
respective Bodies. But when Revelation stops short, Conjectures are often very
unsatisfying, and often very improper.


L. IT still bears a good moral meaning, that the Spirit of Man tends to
somewhat of a superior kind than the Beasts are capable of; Nature having made
them grovelling, as Salust expresses it, Prona atque Ventri Obedientia.

THIS we know for certain, that the Life of Man and Beast is subject to Ruin,
and under great Necessities, while it subsists; especially the Life of Man, who
not only wants Food, but Raiment. Sleep is a want common to all Animals on this
Earth; as if some Operations of Life needed to be suspended, to keep it from
wearing out: for other Operations go on; we breathe, the Blood circulates,
Digestion advances, etc. Mean time it is remarkable, that the present Wants of
Mankind (and Sleep in particular) contribute very much to any Peace and Quiet
they enjoy: Soldiers must rest on their Marches, and the plodding Statesman
drops asleep in the midst of a Project that would have embroiled Europe.


Ae. BUT of our Necessities some are real, others only imaginary: both of which
subject us to great Dependence. By the real Necessities, all Men depend upon
one another, and the highest Ranks depend most upon the lowest, who work both
for their own Subsistence, and for theirs that are idle. By the imaginary
Necessities, some put themselves under the Dependence of Men in power, and
sometimes do very dirty work for the Wages they receive. But in all our Wants,
whether imaginary or real, the Body wants nothing; for it feels nothing. It Is
properly the bodily Life that wants Meat and Clothing, and it is Luxury and
Pride that want Delicacies and Ornaments.

HOW Life comes to fail, notwithstanding all the Repairs it is constantly
getting, and all our anxiety about it, is only to be resolved into the Will and
Appointment of its Author. It Is just such another Mystery, that the bodily
Frame wears out, and becomes no longer a fit Habitation for the Soul.

CERTAINLY it might have lasted longer: and we hear of Lives in the beginning
of the world, near a thousand years old. That some of the softer parts harden
too much with time, and the Strainers cannot perform their functions, is what
Experience shows: but a new Question may arise, why that hardening of the softer
parts? Besides, we often see the Machine destroyed before it is half worn, even
in Infancy; and this without any violent Accidents. Man is the poorest Creature
in the world, in many instances: we may judge how it becomes him to be proud.
Pride was not made for Man.


L. POOR ignorant Man! The difficulty is as great to know how Life is kindled,
as how it goes out. That it enters into the Body, is but a way of speaking:
perhaps the Body and it are formed together. I have sometimes thought Men have
been too prying with their Glasses, and their Enquiries. Whatever be of that,
they discover nothing to lessen their difficulties. Nature still keeps her
Mysteries to herself.

WE see indeed, in a gross manner, how we are thrown into this World with the
distress of our Mothers, and pain to ourselves, though we have no remembrance of
it. Our stay must be short, from the nature of our bodily Frame. The Cords are
loosed, and the Wheels broken. Death comes, and puts an end to our Labors, our
Designs and our Impertinencies.

THIS Life is a state of trial, and has many Epithets. It Is called a Voyage, a
Passage, an Inn, a Pilgrimage; sometimes a Play, and a Farce, but it always
concludes in a Tragedy. A little earth is cast upon the Head (says Mr. Pascal)
and en voila pour jamais.


IV. SENSATION.
Ae. BUT how little have we seen of the Soul of Man! that Principle of Reason,
that immortal Spirit capable of inexpressible Joy and Sorrow even here, and of
both these hereafter in a degree infinitely higher, when this Clog of a Body is
thrown off!


L. IF you please, we will talk a little more of our inferior State and
Condition. As Life is a considerable Remove from Matter and Motion, Sensation
carries us a stage beyond Life, and as it were into another Region; but still a
very low one. However, if Men cannot account for simple Life, no wonder they
cannot account for Sense and Feeling. It Is much if Mr. Hobbes was in earnest in
what he says of the Cause of Sense. You may see how far it is satisfying
Leviathan, Chap. 1.
.


Ae. SOMETIMES one would hardly know whether to laugh or be angry at Hobbes.
But though the Cause of Sensation is hid from us, the Advantages of it are very
obvious. The Senses are the Canals of Pleasure: they may be said to bring
Intelligence to the Soul, and to the whole Man Safety and Delight. They are
noble Presents from our Creator, and we see what a loss it is to be deprived of
any one of them. If they are sometimes the Conveyances of Pain, this is owing
to some Accidents they are not answerable for; and very often the Pain is of
our own procuring.

IF the Organs are indisposed, the Senses must be so likewise: and if they are
lost the Senses are lost. It Is the Body that furnishes these Organs, which
probably has made the Emperor assign the Senses to the Body.

THE bodily Senses are also called the external Senses, as they serve us in the
commerce with things in this visible World. They are commonly reckoned five:
and this number has obtained a sort of Prescription. In our English Apocrypha
they are called the ["They received the use of the five Operations of the Lord,
and in the sixth place He imparted them Understanding; and in the seventh,
Speech, an Interpreter of the Cogitations thereof." Ecclus. 17.] Whatever may
be in Grotius's Conjecture, that this Passage has been put on the Margin (and
it looks to have been so) by some Follower of the Stoics, it still shows that
this way of classing our external Senses is pretty ancient: and it seems even
to answer the purpose well enough; for we can find out no other Operation for
discovering and surveying the Qualities of outward things, and for putting them
to use.
five Operations: and though Feeling is a word that may be applied to them all,
yet in common discourse it is appropriated to one of these five Powers in
particular: sometimes we say, a Sight strikes the Eye, a Sound the Ear. But
it is the Hand that is usually said to touch. And hence Touching, and the other
four Senses, are considered as active; because they can be applied to
particular Objects, as the Mind directs; by whose orders they also suspend
their Operations. A Man may shut his Eyes when he thinks fit. But upon the
matter, all the Senses are rather passive than active, which I believe you will
readily grant.

BUT though the number of those Operations has been limited to five, the number
of Sensations or Perceptions may be called infinite, both as to the Objects and
the Degrees. By the Degrees I mean the higher and lower Sensations of Pleasure
and Pain, two words that include every thing that delights us or afflicts us;
though in this place it is only what concerns the Body that is under consideration.


Ae. OF those five Operations (you know) the Sight and Hearing are reckoned the
noblest; probably because they are of a greater reach, and serve more eminently
for conveying Knowledge to the Mind. The Eye can take in half the Firmament,
the Ear can hear at a great distance, and both can receive instruction by
words: whereas the other three Senses (especially the Touch and Taste) can only
act by an immediate Application to the Object.


L. THERE is a remarkable difference between the two last named Senses in one
respect, that the Taste is for one's self alone, and so may be called but a
poor solitary Pleasure: whereas the Touch is a means of union with another
Person, and in so far may be called a social Pleasure; and it serves often as a
Conveyance of Friendship.


Ae. YOU design to be merry.


L. NEITHER merry nor grave. You must have had the Women in your head yourself,
and I don't deny that they were in mine: but setting them aside, I Will appeal to
any Man, if he would not prefer the Kiss of a Friend's Cheek to the best Wine
upon Earth.


Ae. HE must be a sorry Friend that would not.


L. THE greatest Observers have only discovered the Organs or Instruments
belonging to each Sense; and it is probable they have not discovered them all
neither. Thus Touching and Tasting are but faintly explained by the discovery
of certain Papillae molles, pulposae, medullosae, nerveae, pyramidales, in
nervis subcutaneis duris, exuta membrana exteriori emollitis, ortae, hinc
admodum sensiles factae, affluenti assiduo tenuissimo liquore humectatae,
epidermide tenuissima defensae; illibata sua sensibilitate, intra sinus,
foveasque, sub cuticula latentes; in locis tactui exercendo propriis, nempe
lingua apice digitorum in manibus, pedibusque, contractiles; iterumque
emissiles; sunt Organum corporeum quo explorata corpora tangi dicuntur.
Boerhaave Institut.

He shows afterward by what means Touch arises, and how the different
Perceptions are excited of Heat and Cold, etc. -- Tactus igitur fit -- 483. He
goes very far, yet must stop short.


Nipples under the Skin (differing in their figures) as the proper Instruments
of these two Senses; though the small Instruments are indeed described with great
labor and exactness. And as we know but some of the Instruments, so we know
but some of the Occasions or Conditions (not the Causes) requisite to affect us
so many ways as we find we are affected. So that the greatest Philosophers have
recourse only to the Non ergo videtur diversitas, haec idaearum pendere tantum
a varietate illa, qua ultima pars nervi construitur, sed a multis aliis
praeterea non quidem causis, sed ex Instituto Conditoris adorandi
conditionibus. 571.
Appointment of the Adorable Creator. The cause of simple Life is not to be
reached; much less the cause of Sensation: and the cause of Pleasure or Pain
less still.


Ae. FEELING or Sensibility (it seems) is diffused through all the Body, without
and within, and so is considered as the Foundation of what is most usually and
strictly called Pleasure and Pain. The rest of the Senses convey what is
agreeable (the Eye Sights, and the Ear Sounds, for instance) but they are not
said to create that severe racking pressure which goes under the name of Pain
or Torture, nor that gentle agreeable Impression called Pleasure. A new wonder
arises, How the same Nerves are fashioned to sustain
The greatest Pleasure, and the greatest Pain!



L. IT IS remarkable how much the present Frame of the Body is liable to Pain,
and often seized with it to extremity.


Ae. IT IS remarkable too, that the Extremes of Pleasure are much fewer than
those of Pain, from which no Fiber of the Body can promise to be exempt; and as
to the Point of duration, Pleasure has but little to boast of. Intense Pain may
continue long, intense Pleasure cannot.


L. MANKIND are in some delusion as to that point. Mr. Boerhaave and others are
very good, for showing the Frame and Texture of the Organs belonging to each
Sense. Mean time the Touch and Taste are generally most gratified, and the
Taste yet more than the former. And to these two Senses may be referred all
that is called Luxury: the Smell is but gratified in a manner for diversion.
Elegance is properly the pursuit of the Eye. Sometimes, it is true, all
Extravagance is called Luxury: as the Luxury of Building, Gardening, Apparel,
etc.

TO enter into all the bad Consequences of indulging the Senses, were an
endless Affair. There are few Persons but know too much of it from their own
Experience; with relation to their Estate, their Character, and the Body
itself. And if they want Authorities they may see what Horace says of the
Effects of gratifying a sweet Tooth, as Dr. Cheyne calls it: Dulcia se in bilem
vertunt.

BUT the Inconvenience of Sensuality is one thing, and the Injustice of it
another. Mere selfish Gratification, without regard to Society and Friendship
(supposing the Heart not to be engaged in the Pleasure) is a thing below
Humanity, but it is infinitely more agreeable to think of what Nature has done
for our support and delight, than what we do our selves to our uneasiness, our
destruction, and our dishonor. We have the Benefits and Pleasures of all the
Senses to think of, and we can never think of them enough. Mr. Boerhaave is in
After having said many things of the Ear, from the best Authors, and his own
Observations, he adds; " Supra omnem vero admirabilitatem constructa appariet
Cochleae spiralis fabrica, etc." 562.

He had said of the Nose: "Sunt praeterea in his narium cavis recondita, and
artificiose variis locis disposita, quatuor ossicula spongiosa -- Sunt haec
quatuor ossicula mire fabricata ex tenuissimis osseis lamellis, papyro
tenuioribus -- " 493.

" Nares investiuntur membrana crassa, molli, myriadibus vasculorum
arteriosorum ornata -- Membrana haec solicit se insinuat -- Unde mirabili
instituto -- " 494.


Raptures, speaking of the very Organs: How much more satisfaction must it give
to reflect on the Uses, the Delights, and the Certainty of the Operations
themselves? To suppose them fallacious, were to give our selves the lie, as
well as to unhinge all Society, Law and Commerce. A Man distinguishes his
Friend well from a Stranger, he knows his very foot before entering the Room.
Witnesses are admitted upon their Knowledge of Facts: and a Judge, from his
Conviction of the Proof, acquits the Innocent or condemns the Guilty: To say
nothing of more familiar Distinctions, known to young and old.


Ae. SOMETIMES, you know, we must have recourse to one Sense for confirming
another, or rectifying its mistakes. But this can never overthrow the certainty
of the Senses in general. If a Stick appears crooked in the Water, there needs
no more but to take it out, to be convinced that it is straight. It Is the
Philosophers that perplex people, or rather confound themselves, with their
Subtilties and their Marks of Certainty: an honest Farmer is at no loss to know
whether he is sleeping or waking.


L. THE Quickness of the Senses, as well as the Health of the Body, depends
very much on Sobriety and good Rules; though, to be sure, there are higher
motives for Sobriety than Health and Pleasure. And besides that the Body is
thus kept righter for the Exercise of its proper Functions, the Mind is freed
from an excessive trouble in seeking after those seeming Necessities of Luxury
which grow upon us the more they are indulged, and make us delicate and
fretful, uneasy to ourselves and others.


Ae. BESIDES the five Senses, the Naturalists generally speak of a Sensorium,
or common Sense, which they reckon the ground of all Sensation, or a Medium, as
it were, for modifying the Impressions and conveying them to the Mind. The Eye,
say they, knows not that it sees, nor the Ear that it hears, till this common
Sense interposes its Verdict.

THIS makes no addition to the number of our Senses, whether it be granted or
denied; it only serves, as a new Instrument, to account in some dark manner for
their Operations. And perhaps it is owing to this Medium or Canal, among other
things, that having two Eyes and two Ears we do not see nor hear double.

MANY other things belong to the animal Life, which we may call indifferently
Sensations, Actions, Powers, Faculties. Physicians speak of the action of the
Stomach, as well as that of Eating and Drinking. What name shall we give
Sleeping, which puts a stop to most of our Powers and Actions? What shall we
say of Hunger and Thirst? Some have called them internal Senses: Sensations
they are at least, and sometimes extreme Pressures; and our Pleasures arise
mostly from such uneasy preceding Sensations. Thus Rest and Motion are
agreeable by turns: and that Faculty of moving from one place to another may be
said to enlarge our Confinement, (for we are but Prisoners here on Earth) so
that the taking a walk becomes a Pleasure, were it but in a Chamber. In short,
we are so wonderfully contrived, that we can hardly speak sense when we attempt
to give any Description of our selves; and must leave many things untouched
after all. We feel our Wants, and are eager to satisfy them right or wrong. We
have indeed strong Arguments within us of our Indigence. Without Nourishment
the poor Animal starves in a very little time. Without Sleep he is intolerably
uneasy, and it is as great a necessity upon him as the former. But let us
suppose all that is necessary for the Subsistence of the animal Life, Meat,
Drink, Clothes, Sleep, Lodging, and all these to the full, and of the best:
what should poor Man do without Objects to entertain the rest of his Senses!
How melancholy must he be, and how little Joy would his finest Ideas often
give him? I say often, because sometimes there is a pleasure in them: but no
body can promise himself the continuance of that Pleasure, and sometimes a Man
would quit it for a Pipe of Tobacco. And if Ideas yield to the Senses, these
must yield to the Affections. For if the Affections are not gratified, or any
one of them that chances to have the Dominion for the time, what good could the
whole Earth do us? Let a Man in such a situation try how he can suffice
himself, and make the best of his Self-Love that he can, he will find so little
pleasure from that Fountain, that he would wish he were out of Existence.


V. IMAGINATION.
L. SELF is indeed a poor Center, as Bacon says. But our Imagination imposes
upon us, I know not how.


Ae. WE hardly know what Imagination is.


L. IT IS a dark Affair indeed. This Faculty has such a Dependence upon the
Senses, that Mr. Hobbes calls it nothing but decaying Sense; and he compares it
to the tossing of Water after the Wind ceases. But the Comparison is lame. A
thousand things are imagined that never entered into the Senses: and the Images
of former Impressions are recalled at pleasure.

FANCY is another word for the same Faculty; and both words are taken
promiscuously for the Faculty and the Act, and sometimes for the thing
imagined. Thus we say a mere Imagination, a mere Fancy.

SOMETIMES this Faculty is taken for Invention, and is distinguished from
Judgment: the one laying the Materials in order, which the other collects. And
sometimes Fancy is taken for Choice or Taste: We say a Person of a good or bad
Fancy.


Ae. I believe the Fancy is a real Faculty of the Soul: you know -- But know
that in the Soul
Are many lesser Faculties that serve
Reason as chief; among these, Fancy next
Her office holds, of all external things,
Which the five watchful Senses represent,
She forms Imaginations, Airy Shapes,
Which Reason joining or disjoining frames
All what we affirm, or what deny, and call
Our Knowledge or Opinion; then retires
Into her private Cell: when Nature rests,
Often in her absence, Mimick Fancy wakes
To imitate her; but, misjoining Shapes,
Wild Work produces often, and most in Dreams,
Ill matching Words and Deeds long past and late.
Par. Lost. B. V.
Milton calls it so, and describes it finely.

IT serves to recall the Images of Things formerly perceived, and so they are
more languid than in the first Impression; as the Idea of the Sun and Light is
very poor and imperfect at Midnight.


L. BUT as we can recall absent Images, they come sometimes upon us uncalled in
a very tumultuous and irregular manner, and when we would gladly be rid of
them; so that we may be said to dream even in the daytime. It may be called
Dreaming, though we do not entertain these Imaginations voluntarily, since they
are for the most part but Castles in the Air. Nor is it future Prospects only
that intrude upon our Imagination: there is hardly a Trifle that we have done or
heard of, twenty years ago, but what breaks in upon us, and often the most
unseasonably in the World. It Is difficult to fix the Attention so long as not
to wander before the Lord's Prayer can be repeated. All which argues some
Distemper in our internal Frame, and yet very few I believe are sensible of it.


Ae. THAT may be called involuntary Imagination. One and the same Faculty may
be said to be both passive and active. The Mind has certainly a Power of
raising Images or Appearances of things within itself, and it often feels them
raised it knows not how.

BUT though we can tell many things the Fancy can do, it is impossible to tell
every thing. It adds, it pares, it joins, it separates, it mixes, it jumbles,
it builds, it razes; in short, it works wonders in its own Shop, and the best
Description will still be inferior to its power. It can frame new Ideas upon
the model of old ones: as when we suppose a Person we have not seen, to
resemble one we have seen; and when we frame an Idea of Constantinople from
what we have seen of London, or perhaps but from a Map of London. This sort of
coining is very often a forging. Nor must it ever be forgot, that such images
are quite wrong, or rather no Images at all; that are formed when the
particular Sense is wanting or hurt: as in the known Story of the blind Man,
that reckoned Scarlet was like the Sound of a Trumpet.


L. HOW the Imagination imposes upon us when the Senses are entire, is still
harder to explain. But sometimes we say, the Imagination is imposed upon, when
it is the Sense that is mistaken; as when the Stick appears crooked in water: but
the Error lies neither in the Sight nor in the Fancy, but only in our
pronouncing too haslily. Hence we may see the advantage of that great Rule, Not
to judge according to Appearances; especially in things relating to Religion
and common Life. As to Religion, it is well known how hastly Imaginations, or
rather hasty Conclusions, bring all things into calamity and ruin. And the bad
effects of rash Judgment are no less seen in Life: we see others in a
glittering situation, we immediately pronounce them Happy: and by a natural
consequence think ourselves miserable, if we have not the like Finery. Ben
Johnson makes Fungoso faint away, upon seeing another Beau get into the Fashion
before him. The same sort of judging obtains in household Furniture, Equipage,
and Titles. It Is true, it may be called Staring rather than Judging, when we
have no other Standard of Felicity but to gape and admire with the Mob, Qui
stupet in Titulis -- But such is really the case, and such influence has
Imagination both on private Quiet and the public, that the want of a Ribbon
may endanger a Government. Pride indeed mixes with the Admiration: from what
other source can it proceed, that a Man in perfect Health is not easy to travel
the length of a Street, unless he have a Coach? and that another is not easy in
a very fine Coach, because it has not a Coronet?


Ae. IT IS this Faculty of Imagination, however, that makes the greatest Figure
in Life, especially in Company, and still more when there is a stock of Memory
along with it. It Is also the Workhouse of Poetry, and sometimes of Politics.
Examples are needless.


L. TO make a Figure in Company, there must be also a stock of Confidence.


Ae. NOTHING truer. Mean time Invention has much the advantage of bare
Imagination: and every Man either wishes for it, or boasts of it. Some Persons
indeed have a very ready Talent. But even in this readiness of Invention a Man
has nothing to call his own: for though Expedients come in his head, yet he is
not Master of that Art when he pleases; and it is a very common way of speaking,
such a thing did or did not occur. So that the hitting on a good Thought may be
reckoned as much an accident, as the unexpected meeting with a Friend. And
then, how many things do occur, that are very impertinent! False Humor,
Ribaldry, and dull Conceits! And it is very vexatious when all this is passed
for Wit.


L. THE chief Business of Wit seems to be in ordinary Conversation and
Scribbling, whereas Invention is extended to all Affairs and Offices in Life;
from the first Minister of State to the lowest Mechanic, or the poorest Master
of a Family.


Ae. ROCHESTER has pleasantly observed, that Riches and Power were very
unequally shared among Mankind, but that it was quite otherwise as to Wit; at
least that every one was well satisfied with his own Portion: Of this none
thinks (the due Division's such)
His own too little, or his Friend's too much.
And though his Lordship (whose share indeed was very great) said this only for
his Diversion, yet really the Division is more equal than is generally
believed. One shall hear very good Jests and Repartees among People of the
meanest condition: they have their smart Lads, their witty Lasses, and their
satirical Old Men.


L. What passes most currently for Wit in this Island, is properly but Humor,
and often of a very low kind. But true Humor is when the Fancy puts different
things together, which have no outward Resemblance, nor Connection in Nature.
Thus Butler says of his learned Champion, -- He knew
When Butter does refuse to come,
And Love proves cross and humoursome.
Again, when things in tolerable esteem, are applied to the most vulgar uses:
For he by Geometrick Scale
Could take the size of Pots of Ale,
Resolve by Sines and Tangents straight
If Bread or Butter wanted weight.


IN such a jumble of Images, some Ridicule naturally falls upon one of the
things for its being in company with the other. And such a merry burlesque Vein
may be pretty allowable when it brings no contempt on Things or Persons that
ought to be more respectfully treated: for in that case it is like the hanging
nasty Rags upon a fine Statue. Mr. Hobbes lays down some Regulations and
Remarks with reference to this ticklish Affair, which show the greatness of his
Genius beyond many that have succeeded him, and which likewise show the
unsuccessfulness of any Genius, when it meddles in a decisive manner with
things out of its reach. You may compare what he says in the eighth Chapter of
his Leviathan, with what he had said of the Cause of Sensation in the first.

"THE secret Thoughts of a Man run over all things, holy, profane, clean,
obscene, grave, and light, without shame or blame; which verbal Discourse
cannot do, farther than the Judgment shall approve of the Time, Place, and
Persons. An Anatomist, or a Physician, may speak or write his Judgment of
unclean things [natural things] because he is not to please, but profit: but
for another Man to write his extravagant and pleasant Fancies of the same, is
as if a Man, from being tumbled into the dirt, should come and present himself
before good Company. And it is the want of Discretion that makes the difference.
Again, in professed remissness of Mind, and familiar Company, a Man may play with
the Sounds and equivocal Signification of Words; and that many times with
Encounters of extraordinary Fancy: but in a Sermon, or in public, or before
Persons unknown, or whom we ought to reverence, there is no jingling of words
that will not be accounted Folly: and the difference is only in the want of
Discretion. So that where Wit is wanting, it is not Fancy that is wanting, but
Discretion. Judgment therefore without Fancy is Wit, but Fancy without Judgment
not."


Ae. I was still mightily pleased with that Passage.


L. IF many Books (as well as Conversation) were examined by that Standard,
they would run a great hazard. I would only differ from Hobbes in one of his
Conclusions, that Judgment without Fancy is Wit. For it is the Exuberance of
Fancy which produces the thing called Wit in general: the office of Judgment
being to keep that Current within its due Limits. All poetical Compositions
(whether in Verse or Prose, the Adventures of Telemachus, as well as the Iliad,
or Aeneid) are Works of Wit and Judgment both, but are more properly referred
to the Class of Wit; because of the Invention and Fancy that prevails in them.
A History is the pure work of Judgment and Memory. But to do Mr. Hobbes
justice, if Wit were taken according to the signification of the Latin and
French Terms Ingenium and Esprit, or according to our English word Genius, it
were hard to refuse the Epithet of Wit to a good History, or to any Composition
that is good in its kind.


Ae. IN comparing poetical Works together, some of them are observed to abound
most in Judgment, others in Fancy; as Fancy is reckoned to prevail in Homer,
and Judgment in Virgil. In the French Performance it is hard to discover whether
Fancy or Judgment prevails most; all is so well adjusted, tempered, and mixed
together. I do not mean to derogate from the Praise given to Milton's Paradise
Lost, a Performance of a quite different nature.


L. I must own, I have often thought Milton has given too much swing to his
Imagination.


Ae. I shall not dispute that with you.


L. IN many Compositions, Humor is what appears more than either Judgment or
Fancy: and often it deserves not the name of Humor, but rather of Ribaldry.
And this Observation seems to hold pretty well, that Wit in the most usual
Acceptance of it is an edged Tool, and generally hurtful to those who have
most of it. It Is a sort of involuntary, incontinent, derisive Spirit, which
must burst out either in Conversation, or on Paper, from a mixed desire of
pleasing and of being admired; accompanied with a certain Pleasure of
disburthening. The same Lord Rochester says very truly, And Wit was his vain
frivolous pretense,
Of pleasing others at his own expense.
Satyr on Man. But this desire of pleasing is not very disinterested.


VI. The PASSIONS.
Ae. THE Force and Activity of the Soul appears much more in the Passions than
in the bodily Senses, which are but passive and languid in comparison of those
violent Commotions, or even in comparison of the more gentle Affections. When
the Passions break loose, they are like Hurricanes and Eruptions of Fire: and
they are fitly called Passions, because we suffer under their Dominion. But
then, as they are bad Masters, they are excellent Servants; as we use to say of
Fire and Water: and without Passions, Life would be a very insipid thing. For
let us suppose a Man possessed of a Fortune sufficient to give him all the
Gratifications of the Senses, and that in the most elegant way imaginable: let
him have Ragouts and Burgundy, and Dogs and Horses, and what else he has a mind
for: yet if we suppose him in the bare state of Sensuality, without Love and
Friendship; no desire of Knowledge, no relish of giving or receiving
Obligations, neither satisfaction in Virtue, nor indignation at Vice: such a
Man would be reckoned by most People to pass his time very dully.

ON the other hand, let us suppose a Man heartily animated with one single
Passion, it will keep him at least awake; and the prospect of satisfying it,
will be to him instead of the most delicious Sensualities, and sometimes
instead of the Necessaries of Life.


L. IT is sometimes reckoned, the stronger the Passions are, the better,
provided they are under due Regulations. Be angry, and sin not. But this I
suppose can mean only a vigorous Constitution of Soul, to love heartily what we
ought to love, and to hate heartily what we ought to hate. For there must be an
Exception as to such Passions, or such Forms of them as can produce no good
effect. For instance, Fear and Revenge: the latter is diabolical, and the
former often very base. Such a Fear I mean, as is said to give a body to our
Imaginations, to disconcert our most valuable Faculties; and which may be
called an Alienation of Mind while it lasts: and such a Fear also as makes us
recede from any Duty that would expose us to the Censure of the unthinking
World. Such Passions we had better wish extinguished.

THE Passions, you know, are also called Affections of the Soul: for though
Affection is taken particularly for Love (which word too has its different
significations) yet Affection or Passion denotes any Motion or Feeling, whether
agreeable or disagreeable. And thus the Passions are commonly divided into the
concupiscible and the irascible, two old-fashioned words, but which intimate to
us that all the various and variable Motions of the Soul turn upon these two
Hinges, Desire and Aversion.

THIS Division of our Passions, or fetching them from two Sources, gives indeed
no Idea either of Virtue or Vice; but only a general notion of Pleasure and
Pain in the Soul, without any consideration of Merit or Demerit: so that there
had need to be another Division of the Passions, into the Virtuous and Vicious.
But because this way of classing them would be insignificant to those, who will
not allow the distinction of Virtue and Vice; it will be enough to divide them
into the Social Passions, and the Selfish, or the Disinterested and the
Interested. It Is true, those Persons will not allow there is such a thing as
Disinterestedness neither: but they will at least allow there is such a thing as
Compassion, Tenderness, Kindness, (they may choose their word) and so the
Passions might be distinguished into the Kind and Unkind, which I suppose would
pass current with all the World: since the greatest Advocates for Self-Love do
not deny that Men can be friendly, but only affirm that their Friendship is
founded upon their own Interest.


Ae. I think this may be said too, that as Desire and Aversion (especially when
they come the length of Passion) imply Want, Uneasiness, Trouble, and violent
Motion in the Soul; so Joy is the Satisfaction, Delight, and Acquiescence that
ensues on our meeting with our Desires, or even on getting free of our
Aversions. Joy is to the Soul what Pleasure is to the Senses: (and Sorrow may
be called its Pain) with this difference, that true Joy and Sorrow of the
rational Soul are still founded upon Reason. And in all the Passions the Will
has some more power than in the bodily Feelings, which we cannot augment nor
lessen: the greatest Stoic must feel the Gout; the most abstemious Recluse
cannot put a stop to his Tasting, while the Glass is at his mouth. Whereas in
the Passions or Feelings of the Soul, a Man can either cherish them, and
consequently raise them higher, or he can make some Efforts against them, and
we see they die the sooner.

SIMPLE Desire, and simple Aversion, are justly reckoned blind. And if Fancy
may be said to enter often into our Desires, it enters yet oftener into our
Aversions: for we can generally give a better Reason why we like, than why we
dislike. So that many of our Aversions are much owing to some disorder in
ourselves, or our being out of Tune; which appears remarkably in those
Aversions and Disgusts that are personal.


L. I believe Hope and Fear issue from Desire and Aversion, according to the
Views, or the Apprehensions which the Mind has of meeting with things
agreeable or vexatious. Hope and Fear therefore are supposed to be attended
with some reason: the pannick Fear excepted as before, because it concludes the
dreadful thing to be already present. Our Hopes seldom impose so far upon us:
though they rise very high, and from very narrow Foundations in some Tempers, and
not the worst ones neither. But if we consider Hope as a rational Expectation
of the Mind, it will rather come under the List of the Virtues than of the
Passions.

THE natural Fear of Death is wisely implanted in us, for the Preservation of
our bodily Frame: and neither the fear of Death nor of Pain is shameful, unless
it make us shun what we ought to do, or do what we ought to shun. Luxury and
soft Living must necessarily increase Fear, and magnify Danger: as it is told of
an honest Gentleman, who thought to have joined King Charles I. but could not
resolve to lie out of his own Bed.


Ae. POOR Gentleman!


L. I was thinking that as the Mind from simple Desire and Aversion, Appetite
and Abhorrence, proceeds to Hope and Fear: so when these are accomplished, or
come to their period, it would seem to proceed no farther, but to rest on the
Enjoyment, or in the Affliction; though Affliction or Sorrow is not properly a
State of Rest.


Ae. JOY, no doubt, is Acquiescence and Delight. When we are told that Joy is
of short continuance, I suppose we are to understand it of the Pleasure of the
Senses and of the Imagination: for the Soul seems to be capable of infinite
Joy, both as to Duration and Extent; and no less capable of Sorrow.


L. BUT how hard is it to give the Anatomy of the Soul, and to reduce all its
Motions into a regular System! I know not whether our Terms or our Ideas fail
us soonest. How many little Bastard-Passions are there that go under the name
of Ill-Humour! Fretting, Disgust, Chagrin, Contradiction, etc. shall we refer
these to the Article of Anger or of Pride? Or are they not rather made up of
both?

HOWEVER, we must never blame Nature; as if she had put so many sources of
Trouble and Disquiet within us: for we have likewise other Sources, or Funds of
Satisfaction, if we would cultivate them faithfully; but this we can never do,
till we endeavor to change the Principle of our Desires and Actions.


Ae. I confess it is the Principle, or Cause, our Passions proceed from, that
makes them deserve either Praise or Blame. Thus Grief is shameful, when it
proceeds from the loss of Money; but honorable, in the loss of a Friend.


L. NUMBERLESS Observations might be made on the Passions, each whereof would
require a Book, if one was to consider their Rise, their Progress, their Decay,
their Extinction, their Rising again, their giving way to other Passions quite
opposite, their Combinations, their Force, their Subtilty, their Enchantment,
etc. All which are but the different turnings of Human Nature.


Ae. THE Duke of Rochefoucault would throw them all into the bottomless Pit of
Self-Love.


L. IT will be good to consult the best Authors who have wrote of our several
Powers and Propensions, if they write good Sense, and make a true report of
Nature; whatever their Profession be, Clergyman or Laick: and the Sex by no
means to be excepted, since we have from their hands some of the finest
Compositions upon the most delicate and important Subjects.

INDEED the Passions (like every thing else) are better known by feeling than
description. What better can be said of Love, than that it is Love? It Is
difficult even to give a List of them. Nor do I find people agreed either as to
their Number or their Classes.


Ae. Leviath. Chapter 6.
MR. Hobbes has treated of a great many Motions of the Soul under one Head of
the Passions. And the long train he there mentions, are but Modes, and
Diversifications of five or six primary Motions, which he calls the Simple
Passions, and perhaps fitly enough, viz. Appetite, Desire, Love, Aversion,
Hate, Joy, and Grief. I think he proceeds in his Scheme thus: " Appetite with
an Opinion of attaining is called Hope.

" The same without such Opinion, Despair.

*** " Sudden Courage, Anger.

" Constant Hope, Confidence of our selves.

*** " Desire of good to another; Benevolence, Good Will, Charity. If to Man
generally, Goodnature.



HE discusses other Passions or Tendencies after the same Aphoristical manner,
and (it would seem) just as they have come into his head; such as Ambition,
Pusillanimity, Magnanimity, Valor, Liberality, Miserableness, [Churlishness]
Love, Jealousy,... Curiosity, Religion,.... Pannick Terror,... Glory,...
Dejection,.... Laughter,.... Shame,... Impudence, Pity, Cruelty, Emulation,
Envy. He speaks of certain Tendencies that I do not remember, and I wonder he
said nothing of others, since he was giving the History of Man; for instance,
Affectation. But it is hard for one to know what he should write, or what he
should not write: and there is something so like Pedantry in all those
discussions, that perhaps Mr. Hobbes has been glad to dispatch them off as soon
as he could; and it must be owned, he often writes in a very natural way. I
cannot, however, subscribe to all his Aphorisms or Definitions; for instance,
that constant Hope is a confidence in our selves: for it may proceed as
naturally from a confidence in another. And as to Religion, he places both the
true and the false only in Fear: "Fear of Power invisible feigned by the Mind,
or imagined from Tales publicly allowed, Religion; not allowed, Superstition:
and when the Power imagined is truly such as we imagine, True Religion."


L. A poor account of true Religion!


Ae. We find by Experience that the Passions domineer by turns; and when two,
or more of them, are in competition at once, the weakest must certainly yield,
unless Reason interposeth. But the Duke of Rochefoucault observes, that Sloth
or Indolence (though it deserves not the name of a Passion) often gets the better
of them all, and triumphs equally over our Vices and our Virtues.

THERE is another of his Maxims which I cannot so easily join with, that the
Passions are but different Degrees of Heat and Cold in the blood. That I think
were a little too mechanical: though we are undeniably under a sort of Mechanism,
and are drawn like Puppets by Strings, as Antoninus has expressed it. We may be
literally said upon some occasions to be transported and inflamed. Nothing is
more common even in the sacred Writings than such Expressions.


L. THE Degrees of every Passion are infinite: a Man may easily suppose himself
capable of greater Sorrow, or greater Joy, than ever he has yet felt. And an
extreme violence of any one of the Passions is more than enough to separate the
Soul from the Body.


VII. COMPLEXION, DISPOSITION, HUMOR.
Ae. THE Constitution of the Body is reckoned to depend much on the Fibers, the
Blood, and the solid Parts and the Fluids; from the good or bad Temperament or
Habit of all which, we may expect the better or worse Health, the longer or
shorter Life. The Complexion implies something more akin to the Soul, though it
seems also to depend on the more or less happy mixture of the Elements, and
certain Chemical Ingredients in us.


L. THERE is a strange Variety among Mankind: but to give the preference to one
Complexion above the rest, might be thought too forward and partial. Each
Complexion has its advantages, and each has its defects. The sanguine Person
would think it hard to be reproached for the hastiness of his Temper, which
sometimes indeed flies out like Gunpowder; but when he cools and comes to
himself, he is all kindness and civility. It is most advisable for the
Complexions not to dispute too much about their several Prerogatives: for in
all such Reckonings, each Party comes off with loss.


Ae. AND there is nothing a Man disparages in another that he has not a part of
himself, and sometimes the largest part.


L. THE Complexion and Disposition seem to differ in this point, that the
latter is a more internal thing than the former. We shall find two Persons
equally sanguine or equally phlegmatic, and yet the one remarkably prouder
than the other. Pride is not reckoned a complexional thing, but to lie deeper
in the Soul: (the same may be said of Covetousness) and some Souls have a
remarkable Tendency to some predominant thing, almost from the Cradle.


Ae. BUT whatever Inclination prevails in the Soul for the time being, the Wits
are set at work to bring it about. Men are both drawn by Pleasure, and pursue
it: the same Person, as it were, going out of himself, for what he cannot find
within. It Is true, it is for his own sake that he goes thus out of himself: but
then he often goes on the Errands of a Fool, or a Madman: so that the Term
Self-Love might be with as great propriety changed into Self-Will; and it is in
this view that the Duke of Rochefoucault takes it when he says, it will pursue
things not only frivolous, but destructive, merely because it will.


L. THIS Quality of the Mule must be purely unreasonable, and Butler says
excellently: For Obstinacy's never so stiff
As when it is in a wrong belief.
But it is not always from Pride that this Obstinacy arises: for it acts often
without any Reflection on its own Qualifications, or any regard to Consequences.


Ae. THERE is another Disposition no less hard to account for, not less hard to
conquer; and that is, Inconstancy. The Soul grows weary; and loathes, and knows
not why: the Object has lost nothing of its agreeableness, and yet can no
longer pleased And this happens as suddenly as frequently. Dispensary.
New Passions new Opinions still excite,
And what we like at Noon, we loath at Night.
Heaps of Verse and Prose might be produced on this Subject. And it may be said
the Passions and Opinions excite one another, though the Passions or Inclinations
are the greater Favorites; and Rochefoucault.
we take it more impatiently to have our Inclinations condemned than our
Opinions. We are also for the most part as forward to show our Opinions, as we
are unwilling to show our Inclinations; in which respect these last may not be
very ill compared to a dirty Shirt.


L. THOUGH it is not possible to find words for all the Motions of the Soul, yet
we may discover what things Men are most naturally carried to, when we discover
their Differences of Complexion and Disposition. And it were very profitable
for us to make those Discoveries at home: but we are seldom at leisure for
that; nor indeed is the Study very agreeable. The Patrons of Self-love would
have fewer Proselytes, if People were more inclined to Self-examination. But
whether we look at home or abroad, the nature of things will continue the same:
and we may make this general Conclusion as to the difference between the
Complexion and the Disposition, that it is the Complexion which makes us quicker
or slower, warmer or colder, and the like: as it is from the Disposition, that
we are more or less proud, humble, cruel, mild, covetous, honest, and whatever
falls under the Denomination of Vice or Virtue.


Ae. THE Knowledge of Tempers and Dispositions seems to be very necessary for a
first Minister, in order to deal with his particular Men, to gratify one with
Money, another with a Ribbon, and so on.


L. SOME are even gratified with a Nod or a Smile.


Ae. HUMOR is a word that seems to imply something different both from
Complexion and Disposition, which are reckoned settled things; whereas Humor
changes like the Weather, and may be called the Mother of Freaks, Whims,
Frolicks, and even of Moaping, the reverse of these. Good Humor, or good
Temper is more properly good Disposition; and to be in good humor, and
good-humored, are different things; the worst-temper'd Person being sometimes
in good humor. But in all the Turns and Casts of Human Nature (whatever source
they come from) there is such an endless variety, that every Person may be
justly called an Original.


VIII. LIBERTY.
AFTER what we have observed of the Passions, and Inclinations, their
insinuating Power and open Violence, and from what is daily to be seen in the
world; we might be induced to think there is no such thing as Liberty in Man,
but that he were a piece of Clock-work, or an Engine actuated by Fire, Wind or
Water.

Ae. SOME have refused Liberty even to the Deity, subjecting their Jupiter to
Fate: and our Moderns borrow from old Opinions.

OTHERS, thinking Liberty the Prerogative of the Almighty alone, cannot allow
it to Mankind, lest their abuse of it might seem to alter the Purposes of
Heaven, or lest too much should be ascribed to Creatures in procuring their own
happiness. But no such Consequences can be apprehended from all the Liberty
that we suppose to be in weak Man: it is nothing but such a Power as the opening
or shutting his Eyes, not of seeing without Light, a Power only to accept or
reject what is freely offered him, and which he could by no means furnish to
himself; no more than he can make the fruits to grow for the Subsistence of his
natural Life, though few will deny that he can sow and plant.


L. LIBERTY, no doubt, is a pure Gift from Heaven: and in all Creatures it is
only a Power to use their Faculties for the Purposes they were given. In this
general acceptance of it, the meanest Creature that has Life has Liberty. And
we see among Beasts and Birds great marks of Deliberation and Choice.


Ae. IN rational Creatures, Liberty must be supposed not only as a Foundation
of Virtue, but of Reason itself: since the nicest Engine in the World cannot be
said to act rationally, nor so much as to act freely. Mr. Hobbes, indeed,
proposes to reconcile Liberty and Necessity by the Comparison of a River which
is said to run freely when nothing hinders its course. But this is mere playing
with words. A River will hardly be called a free Agent: and I think it may be
affirmed, that those who make Self-Love the sole Spring, or Motive, of human
Actions, allow no more Liberty to a Man than to a River. There is only this
difference of Consciousness between them, the one knows what it is doing, the
other not: but both are under a like overbearing unvirtuous Necessity.


L. ANOTHER Term for Liberty is Free Will, which imports no more than a freedom
of Choice. But sometimes People confound the Will with the Inclinations; and
these having so much the upperhand in us, it is no wonder if Liberty is
absolutely denied. But as we do many things from our Inclinations, so we do
many things against them; but can strictly be said to do nothing against our
will.

For he that swears against his Will,
Is of his own Opinion still.

IT IS but a Jest that Butler says on swearing. The acting against our
Inclinations is a pretty good proof of our Liberty.


Ae. THE Term Liberum Arbitrium supposes the Understanding to act without any
bias, or rather without any thing that may darken it; in which case it may be
said, to act freely and necessarily both: freely, because it is not hindered,
as Mr. Hobbes says of the River; and necessarily, because its nature is to see
and judge. But there is still a further Power of choosing, after all Trial and
Examination is made. If it be alleged that this choice it self is determined;
it may be asked by what? If'tis by the reasonableness of the thing, then the
choice is as it ought to be; but it cannot be said to be necessarily
determined, because it might have been (and often is) otherwise; that is,
contrary to Reason.


L. MAN then seems to have got a Power or a Spring within himself to determine
him: if this Spring be called the Will, it must be free, since a forced Will is
no Will.


Ae. THE unhappy Disputes concerning Liberty being rather with reference to
things moral than natural, it might help to shorten them, if it were referred
to every man's Breast, whether in any thing he ever did that was wrong, he
could not have done otherwise? Unless this Question be answered in the
Affirmative, what Foundation can there be for Remorse, or even for Guilt, or
for Justice in punishing it? All Divines admit of Moral Evil: wherein can it
consist but in the abuse of Liberty, or the making a wrong choice! St.
Augustine searching for the Origin of Sin, lodges it only in the Free Will of
the Creature: being well assured that Blame (which must fall somewhere) cannot
fall on the Author of all Good. The Gnostics indeed maintained with a bare
face that God was the Author of Sin: and it is probable, the absurdity of that
Thought has given rise to the other, the two Eternal Principles.


L. THE Scripture too always speaks of Man as a Creature endowed with Freedom
of Choice. Hence so many Exhortations, Threatenings, Expostulations, and express
Declarations of his Liberty, and that his Ruin is only of himself. Many Texts
might be adduced: but I shall only read you a few Lines of Milton, who founds
the most of that excellent Work of his on Scripture Authority. He supposes the
Almighty to declare that Man will be deceived by the Suggestions of a more
crafty revengeful Spirit.

Paradise lost, Book III. L. 5.
-- So will fall
He and his faithless Progeny: whose Fault?
Whose but his own? Ingrate, he had of me
All he could have; I made him just and right,
Sufficient to have stood, though free to fall.
Such I created all the Ethereal Powers
And Spirits, both them who stood, and them who failed;
Freely they stood who stood, and fell who fell.
Not free, what proof could they have given sincere
Of true Allegiance, constant Faith or Love,
Where only what they needs must do appeared,
Not what they would? What Praise could they receive?
What Pleasure I, from such Obedience paid?
When Will and Reason (Reason also is Choice)
Useless and vain, of freedom both despoiled,
Made passive both, had served Necessity,
Not me. They therefore as to right belonged,
So were created, nor can justly accuse
Their Maker, or their making, or their Fate;
As if Predestination overruled
Their Will disposed by absolute Decree
Or high Foreknowledge; they themselves decreed
Their own revolt, not I; if I foreknew,
Foreknowledge had no Influence on their Fault;
Which had no less proved certain unforeknown.
So without least Impulse or shadow of Fate,
Or aught by me immutably foreseen,
They trespass, Authors to themselves in all
Both what they judge, and what they choose; for so
I formed them free, and free they must remain,
Till they enthrall themselves; I else must change
Their Nature, and revoke the high Decree.
Unchangeable, eternal, which ordained
Their Freedom; they themselves ordained their Fall.
The first Sort by their own suggestion fell,
Self-tempted, self-deprav'd: Man falls deceived
By the other first. Man therefore shall find Grace.

Ae. HAPPY Genius!


L. IT would be an idle thing to make any Commentary upon so clear Sense. It
must only be remembered, that the Liberty of Created Beings is rather a Power
of making themselves miserable, if they will needs do it, than any Power of
making themselves happy, though they have ever so great a mind, without a higher
Support, and a Compliance with the Conditions upon which Happiness is yet
before them.


Ae. These two words Fate and Fortune ill understood, have helped to perplex
Men in their disputes upon Liberty and other Subjects. Neither of them are
words current in Sacred Writ: but Fate, which is the same thing as Edict, is
sometimes taken for the Decree of the Supreme Being, as it relates to the
happiness of intelligent Creatures; and it is also considered as the settled
Order of Nature, and the connection of Causes with their Effects. A Stone goes
to the bottom, whilst a piece of Wood floats above: the Fire melts Metals,
hardens the Clay, and reduces Wood to ashes: and Nature is another word for
this Constitution of things. To use Scripture-Images, if a Man takes a Coal in
his Bosom, he must be burnt with it; and if he touches Pitch, it will stick to
him. Such necessary consequences might therefore be called Fate, and eternal
Decrees: to which may be added the Pleasures and Pains of the Mind, from a
review of its good or bad actions: Remorse is an natural as Sickness; and the
Torture of the Mind may become so great, that a Man may be said to be in Hell.


L. All such Consequences, and the whole Course of Nature, are really of the
Divine Establishment; and Liberty is so in a particular manner. So many
Faculties without the power of using them to the right purposes, would be a
much sorer Evil than what Solomon observed, of a Man to whom God had given
Riches, but had not given him power to eat thereof. But the last part of the
Verse is not to be precisely taken: for the gifts of God are complete and
perfect. You know what (...)
Prudentius has said on this head of Liberty, after he had laid the Objection
as strong against it as possible. And it seems Homer has had it much at heart,
that the Abuse of Liberty should not be charged against the Gods. Perverse
Mankind! whose Wills created free,
Charge all their Crimes on Absolute Decree.
Is it not so that Mr. Pope has it?


Ae. I think so. Some have made strange work with the Decrees of God!


L. BUT those Opinions are wearing out in this Island.


Ae. THE word Nature has also occasioned Disputes among Men, some having
confounded it with the Author himself; whereas it is only to be looked upon as
his Divine Art. Some of the Stoics failed much in this point, and Spinoza
improved upon it, to the total exclusion of the Deity. All that Nature implies,
is but the Birth or Production of things, which still supposes a Producer or
Author, who was (according to the Expressions of the Psalmist) before the
Mountains were brought forth.


L. FORTUNE is a more insignificant Term than either Nature or Fate: Juvenal
says, it is only we that make her a Goddess. And indeed when the Word is rightly
considered, there is nothing at all in it; no more than in Chance, Hit,
Accident, and the like, which can produce nothing; as all the different
Materials for building collected together could not put up the House, without
the Contriver and the Workman. There Is a trifling Exception of a Pencil Apelles
is said to have thrown in his anger, which performed what he wanted to have
added to the Piece: but it is to be remembered the Colors were already prepared
by the Hand, and the Pencil thrown by it; so the Hand still gave the Direction,
though out of the common way. There is a large Field for such Accidents as that,
if we consider the Freaks of Man, and the present State of things. Instances of
successful Rashness are very common.


Ae. SOMETIMES our exterior Situation, or Circumstances in this Life, is called
Fortune: and some Persons being so unexpectedly raised, and others depressed,
without much to be ascribed either to their Skill or Merit; those who have not
recourse to Providence are induced to think with Sallust, that Fortune
certainly rules in every thing. But there is no loss though particular words
stand, if people are but convinced of an invisible unerring Direction and
Superintendency in the Government of the Universe, and in the Concerns of every
individual Person. Our Savior has designed we should be much persuaded of
this, when he told us the Hairs of our Head are all numbered.


L. THE Belief of an overruling Providence is mighty comfortable, and Liberty
is very consistent with it: it is agreeable to find that Gift asserted; for
without admitting Liberty, Men can hardly be brought to condemn themselves.
It Is only the Atheists that formally deny it, others dispute rather about the
Extent and the Consequences of it. But it is remarkable, that the same Milton
makes those Disputes the Amusement of some of the fallen Angels; and so an
Amusement, one would think, to be avoided. Others apart sat on a Hill retired,
In Thoughts more elevate, and reasoned high
Of Providence, Foreknowledge, Will and Fate,
Fixed Fate, Free Will, Foreknowledge absolute,
And found no end, in wandering Mazes lost.



IX. REASON.
Ae HITHERTO we have chiefly considered Human Nature with reference to the
Senses and Affections, according to that Division of Body, Soul and Spirit; the
last of which I will be glad to have your opinion of. For though the Soul is
often taken for the highest thing that can be supposed in Man, and is to be
considered as an immortal thinking Principle, of an inexpressible Activity, and
of a quite different Creation and Constitution from unactive lifeless Matter;
yet according to the Plan above mentioned, there is a superior Region in Man,
called indifferently by the Philosophers Mind, Spirit, or the governing Part:
and what they call Spirit, St. Paul takes in a higher sense still.


L. HERE is my Opinion without ceremony. In the Body itself mention is made of
three Regions, the Belly, the Breast, and the Head; which bears some analogy to
the Senses, the Affections, and the Understanding. But as there is no fixed
Standard for most words, sometimes the Heart, and sometimes the Bowels, is made
use of, to signify those Sentiments of Tenderness and Pity, and also the Seat
of them; the Head being generally taken for the Seat of the Judgment, as well
as for the Judgment it self.

ACCORDING to these three Regions in the Body, the Pleasures are generally
classed, and denominated. Those of Sense being the lowest, are sent down to the
Belly: whose God is their Belly, says St. Paul, and he gives a Character of the
Inhabitants of Crete (...) Tit. 1. 12.
from one of themselves. The Chinese God of Pleasure is also represented like a
dismal Creature, all Belly. But these Representations and Expressions are only
figurative, and not designed to be taken according to the precise Letter. The
Pleasure of the Taste it self is far from the Belly. The Pleasure of the Eye
has yet less connection with it; so that the Epithet of the Cretians seems
designed to express their Luxury in general, though perhaps they have been
particularly remarkable for eating and drinking.

MEAN-TIME the Body, which we study to soak in Pleasure like a Sponge, is of it
self but a mere dead Husk, and drops off at last: and a Man reckons upon it no
farther, than as a Machine for bringing him Pleasure, and would sometimes be
content to change it for another Body, if he could, and does often wear it out
before its natural period.

BUT to come to the highest Region in Man. The Mind, or Understanding, is
considered as a Principle of Light or Discerning; as the Senses and Affections
are supposed to be blind. The Mind sees the Order and Value of Things, their
Relations, and Properties; and this either by immediate Intuition, like the
bodily Eye, or by a sort of Process, which considers one thing after another;
and so is called both Reasoning and Reason.

THUS Reason, or Judgment, is taken both as a Faculty and as an Act. We say a
Person of Judgment, or of no Judgment; a Judgment given, and the like.

YOU know Reason is also taken for the Cause or Motive; as such a Law is
founded upon such a Reason, and such a thing has no Reason in it, or no Sense
in it. The same words are used promiscuously for different things, and it is but
a dry affair to adjust their Significations.


Ae. IT seems one great use of the reasoning Faculty is to supply the want of
Intuition, which is seeing at a glance. For this purpose the Mind puts things
in a certain order, as Figures in Cyphering, that we may find out the Sum, the
Remainder, the Proportion, or whatever we want to know about them. These three
Operations of numbering, weighing, and measuring, seem to answer to the several
Exercises of Reason; and so it is compared sometimes to a Balance, sometimes to
a Line.

REASON then must fall into the grossest Mistakes, when it meddles in things
beyond its Line, or out of its Sphere: in this case it is like an incompetent
Judge, and the Conclusions must be absurd. Quam pene lapsu pes mihi lubrico
Gressum fefellit, dum pede metior
Immens^ parvo, dum trutina mea
Expendo stultus, Judicium Dei.
* * *
Causas latentes dum sequor, anxius,
Et pertinacis viribus Ingeni
Pugno, profundum se Chaos ingerit,
Et nocte mentis lumen ad obruit.

Buchanan's Paraphrase on the seventy-third Psalm is very applicable to this
purpose. It mistakes also in things within its Sphere, when it is imposed upon
by the Affections, like a Judge that is corrupted. And nothing is truer than
that Observation, the Understanding is the Dupe of the Inclinations.


L. BUT the Understanding, or Reason, however often misled, may still (in some
respect) be called the leading Faculty, and supposed to be free of any bias;
all Light, without any Heat. Pure Deliberation, assenting, denying, choosing,
rejecting, etc. imply the operation of the Head only, as if the Heart had no
interest in the thing: for certainly we judge thus coolly on some occasions.
And as Liberty was considered but as a power to make use of our Faculties in
general, so the last step of Reason is to make its choice, which it does (in
sound unbiased Minds) according to the nature of Things; or, in other words,
according to the Truth.

AT present, we are supposing Reason to be entire, so far as it goes, without
considering the narrowness of its Limits, nor the Clogs that are upon it, nor
whether these Clogs are most owing to the Appetites or the Passions. All such
Discussions are endless.

TAKING Reason therefore only for the natural Light of the Mind, we may well
enough conclude, that natural Truths, or Principles, belong to it, as visible
Objects belong to the Eye. Knowledge is but the seeing things as they are, or
in the way they are designed to appear to us: for, strictly speaking, we see
few things as they really are, no more than we see the Sun in the Firmament as
he is.


Ae. WE may thus have some little Idea of Faith, Reason, and Revelation; the
last of which (like the drawing of a Curtain) gives a Discovery of what the
natural Powers of Man, or the present Frame of his Understanding could not find
out, By Revelation Men might be informed of the state of Things, past, present,
and to come; of Things relating to the visible World and the invisible, of
Things in Earth, and Things in Heaven.

WE may likewise see how Faith is taken in different Senses: one acceptance of
it is Trust, Confidence, Dependence; another acceptance is Honesty and
Fair-dealing, bona fides. But the acceptance relating most to the present
purpose, is that Divine Conviction of the Understanding, whereby we cannot
refuse our assent. And though we see but through a glass darkly, as St. Paul
says, (and how few see like him!) yet the least remove from Infidelity is a
kind of Faith: and if there is but an honest Heart to receive it into, it will
grow like the greatest Trees from the least of Seeds. Nor is a Man to be
discouraged if he does not perceive its growth; and even though he should think
he had no Faith at all. Such a dark uncertain state, as it is very afflicting,
may perhaps also be purifying. But to say the truth, most people are in the
contrary state, rather inclined to think their Faith greater than it is, than
less: and such Persons would do well to consider what Faith is, and examine
their own by St. Paul's Definition, who calls it the Substance of Things hoped
for, and the Evidence of Things not seen. We ought to take great care that our
Faith be not found to be bare Opinion.

THUS we see also that there is a difference between Faith and Reason, or that
some things are spiritually discerned, and others naturally. I only wish it
were considered how Religion and Society suffer by setting these two Gifts at
variance. Religion suffers when things are obtruded as Articles of Faith, and
an Assent required to them under the highest Pains, without satisfying the Mind
that such Articles are of the boasted Importance, or even that they are not
repugnant to common Sense. It Is true, Religion cannot properly suffer: but
Society, or the particular Members of it, suffer many different ways;
Persecution and Obstinacy mutually exciting each other. All Histories,
ecclesiastic and civil, are the melancholy Registers of mutual Oppression,
Bigotry, and Contempt among all Parties. And yet all Parties must make use of
Reason, either true or false, when they argue for their Faith; otherwise there
must be nothing for it but an Act of Parliament, and a Standing Army. The
Protestants are professed Admirers of Reason, their Faith hangs upon it; and
the Papists, who say they believe upon the Authority of the Church, must make
use of Reason to prove the Church is infallible.


L. RELIGION even suffers by such Disputes and Hatred, in so far as occasion is
given to its professed Enemies to despise it; and to the negligent part of
Mankind to be still the more careless about it. I have interrupted you.


Ae. To see Things as they are (even the Things of Nature) there must be
another Light than the natural. How little do we know about the Things we see
and handle? only some of their outward Properties, Color, Hardness, and the
like; as Mr. Lock instances in Gold, its Yellowness, Ductility, and other
Qualities; without any Knowledge of the Essence, as it is called, or the
Substratum. Again, how little do we know about ourselves? Can we tell, as Dr.
Garth says, Why paler Looks impetuous Rage proclaim,
And why chill Virgins redden into flame? etc.
And Dr. Burnet, who was as much a Freethinker as a Man should be, takes notice
how little we know of Things that are Objects of Faith. Shall I read you a few
of his elegant Expressions?


L. WITH all my heart.


Ae. -- "These Revelations, as most in Sacred Writ, are short and incomplete:
as being designed for Practice more than for Speculation, or to awaken and
excite our Thoughts, rather than to satisfy them. Accordingly we read in
Scripture of a Trium Deity: of God made Flesh, in the Womb of a Virgin;
barbarously crucified by the Jews: descending into Hell: visibly ascending into
Heaven: and sitting at the right hand of God the Father, above Angels and
Archangels. These great Things are imperfectly revealed to us in this Life;
which we are to believe so far as they are revealed; in hopes these Mysteries
will be made more intelligible in that happy State to come" --

THAT Article of the Crucifixion, and the other of the Ascension, are indeed
two Points of Fact which Reason may be satisfied about, by enquiring into the
Character of the Witnesses, and other things relating to Proof. The Crucifixion
is a piece of History, and a much less surprising Event than the Ascension. But
the Mystery is, that such a Barbarity should have been permitted against the
Son of God: This is to the Jews a stumbling block, and to the Greeks
Foolishness. And so a new Enquiry arises, if Jesus Christ was the Person aimed
at in the Prophecies? To be satisfied about which, the Prophecies must be
considered, and the Old and New Testament compared together, and both these
with the Doctrine and the Works. In all such things Reason may modestly exert
itself, and we are guilty of sloth if it be not exerted. But we must be in the
dark about many things still: So the Doctor subjoins;

"IN like manner, how little is it we understand concerning the Holy Ghost?
That he descended like a Dove upon our Savior: like cloven Tongues of Fire
upon the Apostles -- These things we know as bare Matter of Fact, but the
method of these Operations we do not at all understand. Who can tell us now,
what that is which we call Inspiration? What change is wrought in the Brain,
and what in the Soul; and how the Effect follows? -- These Things we see
darkly, and hope they will be set in a clearer light, and the Doctrines of our
Religion more fully expounded to us in that future World, etc. Theory of the
Earth.
" This is an instance of great Honesty in that ingenious Man, so frankly to
confess his Ignorance, when far meaner Heads take upon them to explain the
deepest Mysteries! As a strange turn appears in others, who will not admit of
the possibility of a thing, because they cannot conceive how it is! Reason
would at least tell them thus much, that every thing is possible to the
Almighty, which does not imply a Contradiction.


L. IT must certainly be very ill service done both to Religion and Society, to
make an Opposition between Faith and Reason, as if they were two Contraries,
like White and Black, or Fire and Water; whereas they seem to differ more in
the degree than in the kind: the natural Light itself being from God, as well
as the divine; there is one Glory of the Sun, and another Glory of the Moon.
And then the same thing may be the Object of Faith and Reason both; for
instance, the Fall of Adam: it is indeed revealed as a Fact that has happened,
and is consequently an Object of Faith: we do not hear that it occurred to the
Philosophers, (though something like it is implied in the opinion of the
Pre-existence of the Soul) and this Ignorance of the Fall made their Systems so
imperfect and clashing. But after getting a hint of that unfortunate History,
many Men are satisfied of the Truth of it by their natural Reason; as they are
also of the Creation of the Heavens and the Earth. And this may be called a
mixture of historical and rational Faith, but cannot be said to come up to
divine Faith, which carries along with it a more forcible Conviction, and may
be reckoned such a thing as the (...)
intellectual Sensation of the Platonists.


Ae HOWEVER, the Faith of common Christians is not to be despised. Our
Savior's Disciples believed in him because of the Miracles they saw him
perform. This does not derogate from the Divine Operation upon their Hearts:
but it was very natural for them to think, and reason with themselves, that no
Man could do such Works if God was not with him. But he says himself upon
another occasion to St. Peter, that Flesh and Blood had not revealed these
things to him, etc.


L. IT IS no better service done Religion and Society, to put Faith and Works at
variance together. There is a natural enough Agreement between the two, if the
Scriptures were well considered: and they may be said to be two things God has
joined, and which therefore no man ought to separate. St. James and St. Paul
are in perfect harmony with one another; and with the rest of the Apostles,
upon this Subject. Faith without Works is dead: that is, without the Works of
Charity. The Works St. Paul seems most to run down, in his disputes with the
Jews, are the Works of the Law, upon the Observance of which they valued
themselves to an excess; as they did also upon their Free Will, and natural
Powers: which perhaps may be a Key to some of the darkest of that Apostle's
Writings. You may consult Smith's Discourses.


Ae IT is remarkable that both the Partisans of Faith and Infidelity have high
Pretenses to Reason, and each side accuses the other of Pride and Laziness.
It Is certainly as reasonable to assent when the Proofs are clear; as to deny
when they are not; and to be in suspense when the Probabilities seem to be
equal. But, I know not how, it is thought a prettier thing to contradict than to
agree to RECEIVED OPINIONS, and so it is natural for those who set up to make a
Figure in the World to fall into that way; as it is as natural too not to be at
much pains to enquire into the Proofs and Presumptions that are adduced:
Excepting always out of the number of the Lazy some laborious old Unbelievers,
who are as indefatigable as Missionaries.


L. THERE is still a worse Quality in Man than the two former, which is
Insincerity: but as this Character is not levelled at any particular Person, it
is so very base in it self, that I shall not insist any farther upon it.


Ae WHAT is best and highest in Man, is certainly the most agreeable to be
thought on. He has a Mind made for the search after Truth, the Discovery of it,
and the delighting in it: and all this may be granted even to the natural Man.
We have St. Paul's word for it, that the Gentiles who had not the Law, did by
Nature the Things contained in the Law. But he tells us also, the natural Man
knows not the Things of God, and even that they are foolishness to him. Upon
which account the natural Man (if he would be a wise Man) ought to be very
humble; and though he had come to all the Knowledge and Virtue of St. Paul
himself, to follow his advice, to take care lest he fall.

IN short, as the natural Understanding, or the Mind, was considered by some
Philosophers both as the Discoverer of Truths, and the Director of the
Affections, (and the Horses will be confessed to be very unruly) so the Spirit,
in St. Paul's sense, must be looked upon as the Director of the Understanding
it self, and as it were a Deity within us: and those Philosophers even looked
on Man as a Temple where some Divine Genius resided, and have almost made use
of St. Paul's Expressions, grieve not the Spirit, etc.


L. WHAT if this should be called Enthusiasm, and a high Flight?


Ae IF it should, let St. Paul and the Philosophers answer for it. It is indeed
a high Flight, if Men can get into that true Spirit to see things as they are,
to put the estimate upon them they deserve, to love them according to their
dignity, and from the proper motives. This is truly a Flight, above Self-Love;
and what Human Nature, as it is now fettered, cannot possibly attain unto,
without superior assistance. But the bare Speculation of the thing is no more
than one of those Truths or Principles which natural Reason can be convinced of.


L. BUT as to the Comparison of Faith and Reason; when they are considered as
two Lights of the Mind, the principal difference between them seems to be with
relation to their Objects. The natural Man receives not the things of God.
This natural Man is not denied by the Apostle to have the Faculty of Reason:
but for all that, the things of God are foolishness to him; and he adds,
neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned. There must be
another Faculty therefore in Man for knowing the Things of God, whatever Term
be used to express it; and so the Spirit of Man may be said to receive
intelligence from the Spirit of God, concerning such things as his natural
Understanding is not capable of.

I should not indeed wish to add to the number of our Faculties: since it were
the same thing, as to our Happiness, whether we had many or but one, if that
one could perform all the Offices of the rest. So if it be alleged that what
is called Divine Illumination is nothing but the making new Discoveries to the
old natural Understanding; I should readily enough give up the Argument, if it
were owned that it was impossible for Man to make those Discoveries himself:
but then I know not what to make of those express words of St. Paul above
mentioned, whose words the Clergy at least will grant me are not to go for
nothing.

BUT though Reason be confined to natural Knowledge, its province is still very
extensive: it can examine several things concerning Revelation it self; for
instance, This was meant of things proposed to our Belief by others. And when a
Man reflects of his own head upon Passages of Sacred Writ, if the Meaning is
not so obvious, Reason is allowed to examine whether such Passages are to be
taken in a literal sense or a figurative: and if he find it must be the
figurative sense, then he is to consider what may be couched under the Figure
it self.
whether a Proposition said to be divine (and which really may be so) is
consistent with what we know already of the Divine Nature: it can also search
into Records, and judge if they are authentic or spurious; here is large scope
for exercising Reason, and for baffling it.


Ae. THE searching into Records would seem the first thing to be done in point
of Order, though few have time for it: but Providence supplies the loss to the
Poor and the Well-intention'd.


L. WHERE I said it differed from Faith rather in the Degree than in the Kind,
I meant not to make their difference consist only in more and less, as one Man
may have more Reason than another; but that they were both a kind of seeing,
the one supernatural, the other not.


X. The MEMORY.
Ae. THEY who make the Soul to consist of three Powers (taking the Soul in the
same sense with the Mind, and in a direct opposition to the Body) have class'd
this power of the Memory with the Understanding and the Will; though it does not
come up to the Dignity of the other two. Every body complains of his Memory,
but no body complains of his Judgment. A bad Will is the worst of all.


L. BESIDE the advantage of a good Memory, as it serves for making a figure in
Conversation, it is still valuable upon better Reasons; since it may be made a
Storehouse of the most profitable and agreeable things. If it is for the most
part but a Magazine of Trash, the Gift itself is still to be esteemed; and a
Man has his own bad choice to blame, for making such a Collection.


Ae THE Memory is not only a Register of Tales, and Names, and Fictions, (the
Materials of common Discourse) but may be called a Register of every thing that
enters into the Senses and the Imagination. But what shall we think of this
strange Sieve, which lets some things pass through, and retains others; and
often retains the most unprofitable? To forget, is certainly among the Defects
of our Nature: and yet, as things go, it were a kind of Happiness to forget the
most part of what we hear; and we should be at no loss to forget even several
things that we read: though we may blame our selves more for what we read than
what we hear, not having at all times the choice of our Company.


L. INDEED I have often thought it a misfortune to have a Memory of such a
cast, as not to be capable of forgetting any thing, not so much as the poorest
Scandal; a Memory of that kind may very well be reckoned an unhappy Memory.


Ae BUT what shall we think of this odd Treasury, which retains things during a
certain time, and then loses them, even before the Infirmities of Age come on?
We say a thing has dropped out of our head: (where does it drop?) and it drops in
again when we least expect it. What Corners do those Images lurk in? and how do
they cast up? What portion of Matter, and of what figure, are they united to?
and what Canals are they conveyed in? I hardly expect these Questions will be
resolved; and the proposing them is only designed to keep my self in mind of
our Ignorance, both of the Defects, and the remaining Excellencies of our
Nature.


L. THE Memory being considered as a Register of Things, whether perceived or
imagined, these Things are usually called Ideas; or, in plainer English,
Images; and are accounted the Materials of Science: when they are exact, our
Knowledge is exact, and not otherwise.


Ae OUR Perception, or Reception of Ideas, even in the first instance, is but
superficial and defective; and when we recall them from our Memory, it is but a
Picture formed in absence of the Original.


L. As to the first Entry of Ideas into the Mind, you know Aristotle has been
blamed for affirming that nothing is in the Understanding which was not before
in the Senses. But there seems to be no great danger in that Opinion, if we do
not limit the Senses to too small a number. You remember Mr. Locke's Account of
their Entry?


Ae. NOT well.


L. IT IS to this purpose: "The Senses at first let in particular Ideas, and
furnish the yet empty Cabinet: and the Mind, by degrees growing familiar with
some of them, they are lodged in the Memory, and Names got to them, etc."


Ae. Obscurum per Obscurius. The question is, how this Familiarity arises? and
how the Cabinet comes to be sensible of any thing that is put into it? A
Scritore knows nothing of the Papers which the careful Banker locks up in it?
Or a Glass, though it may be said to receive the Image of a Beau, and he really
sees somewhat of himself in it; yet it can hardly be said to see any thing of
him. It would rather seem the Mind had some native Light of its own, which is
awakened we know not how, and flies out, as it were, through the Senses to the
things it apprehends or lays hold on.


L. THIS might be the Foundation of a Dispute like that they say was in
Holland, Whether the Bait catches the Fish, or the Fish catches the Bait. And
truly most Disputes are of that sort -- de Lana Caprina. But one would think it
might easily be granted that the Mind is of an inconceivable activity, and yet
may be called passive, in its admittance or reception of what comes into it.
Nor does it lay hold and take in at random, but has a distinguishing perception
of one thing from another; to say nothing of a farther Power still, of judging,
accepting, and rejecting.


Ae. THOUGH Ideas, or Images, would seem applicable only to the Sense of Seeing;
yet all the Senses have their respective Ideas, or Notices, (if the last Word
be liked better) so that one may be said to have the Idea of a Sound, as well
as of a Sight: and on hearing a Tune one had heard twenty Years before, one
knows and remembers that it is the very same: and so of the rest of the Senses.


XI. SPEECH.
L. MR. LOCK was an ingenious Man.


Ae. HE was really so. Pray what account does he give of Speech?


L. I protest I don't know. But it is pity this Interpreter of the Thoughts
should not always interpret fairly, or that the Mind and the Words should not
agree together. But the Gift is still to be admired, and its uses cannot be
thought of without pleasure.

To say nothing of the common Advantages of Speech in the Commerce of Life, how
is the Mind instructed and calmed by it! How sweet are the Words of a Friend!


Ae. EXCELLENT Gift ill used! The Concurrence of all the Organs, by which
Speech is formed, with the Air that carries it, and gives it a sort of Body,
would be extraordinary surprising, if the thing (being so common) were not
quite overlooked. You may see what Mr. Boerhaave has said in his Institutions
we have so often mentioned, where he also refers to Dissertatio de Loquela.
a curious little Treatise printed at Amsterdam in the Year 1700.


L. THE Abuses of Speech are but the natural Consequences of an unhappy
Disposition; and the Tongue is blamed for the Vice of the Man. But the Tongue
is only one of the Instruments of Speech, though a principal one; and may be
compared to a Pump that brings up either clean Water or foul. Out of the
abundance of the Heart the Mouth speaks.


Ae. WORDS therefore may be called Thoughts in Vehicle. We find Ideas are
conveyed to the Ear by certain Sounds, and to the Eye by the more arbitrary
Dashes of a Pen or a Stamp. How Minds are agreed about the meaning of these
Sounds and Strokes, is not easy to conceive, without having recourse to the
Instruction of Heaven in the first Parents. We see how it goes now by
Imitation: the Organs of Speech are formed in Children by degrees insensibly;
and their Minds ripen the same way, to find out the meaning of what is said to
them. But it is not conceiveable how any number of old People meeting together,
who had not learned to speak in their Infancy, should be able to contrive any
Language at all: it would be nothing but Cries, and Signs, and Confusion. For,
admitting that the strongest, and the loudest Person should force the rest to
call a thing by the same Name he took in his head to express it by, what should
become of all the intermediate Parts of Speech necessary to connect those
arbitrary Terms together? The Invention will appear impracticable on a very
little reflection.


L. I had a little dispute on this head with a Friend, who thought a Language
might be artificially contrived: but as we could not convince one another, nor
were at much pains about it, we agreed that it might be left as a moot Point.


Ae. THE use of Letters is also reckoned by many, to have been taught Mankind
from Heaven. For, altho'Figures and Shapes (like the Egyptian Hieroglyphics)
might have been fallen upon to express some Precepts and Instructions, yet this
could give no notion of Letters, which are rather the Marks and Figures of
Sounds than of Things: and here is a great Convenience, that so few of them are
needed; so that from the various Combination of this small number of
Characters, or Letters, arises the infinite number of Words that make up the
different Languages; and more new Languages might arise without end.


L. THOSE Characters are a happy Invention for conveying Thoughts from one end
of the Earth to the other. Thus we are informed of the Welfare of a Friend in
the Indies! and thus we are instructed, as well as delighted! It Is needless to
enter into the Abuses of Writing and Printing, so often made the Conveyances of
Error and Deceit, they proceed (like the Abuses of Speech) from a bad Heart;
but the Faculties and Inventions are still to be valued and admired.


XII. A REVIEW of the foregoing ARTICLES.
Ae. FROM what we have observed of Man, Body and Soul and all his Faculties, it
will easily be perceived that of himself he is a mere Void, and all that is in
him precarious and dependent.

To apply this to the Body: as it is fashioned we know not how, so it must have
Life infused into it, to put it out of the Condition of so much dead weight, an
unactive Lump of Matter. And as Life can be called nothing but the
inconceivable Knot that holds Body and Soul together, so neither can Death be
called any thing but the Dissolution of that Union; it is but a Cessation of
Life, or the retiring of the Soul, which is often in great concern and horror
to think of being driven out of its Lodging.

Animula vagula Blandula, etc.


L. POOR Adrian! what did his Empire signify then?


Ae. As the Body is so dependent upon the Soul for its short duration and
existence in this World, the Soul is no less dependent upon the supreme Being
for all its Operations and Enjoyments both here and hereafter. David says upon
good ground, He holds our Souls in Life. For though Immortality is natural to
the Soul made after the Image of God, yet it may be conceived capable of
extreme anguish without Objects to nourish and delight it; so that a state of
that kind were rather to be called Death than Life, and is so called in sacred
Writ.


L. NOT only are the Objects of our Faculties to be reckoned Gifts from our
Creator, but the Faculties themselves are Gifts. We see some of them taken
away, or lost we know not how, both the external Operations, and the internal:
and supposing them to be ever so durable, Man is still but a Void, and so
cannot be the Object of his own Love. Love always supposes an Union with, or a
desire after some other thing than the Subject that loves; so that, Self-Love
would be found an Impropriety, if one had a mind to quarrel with common
Expressions. For what is it that a Man calls Self, or Himself, but a Creature
endued with certain Appetites, Desires, Qualities, or whatever they may be
called? And what can he make of himself, without Objects adapted and
proportioned to his Wants? Again, what can he owe to himself farther than Care
and Benevolence, which every animated Creature, in some measure, has a share
of; and in which there is nothing to be blamed or praised? If it be said, a Man
owes himself Respect; this is not as he is such a particular Person, but as he
is one of the Human Species: and he had best take care not to think too often
of his particular Qualifications, lest they appear to him greater than they do
to others, and make him also overlook his Defects.


Ae. WITHOUT all question Love is most eminently due to God, or He is to be
loved with our whole Heart, Strength, and Mind. And this is even reasonable on
our own account (no other Object being able to satisfy our infinite Desires) as
well as just, with regard to Him. Inferior rational Objects are only to be
loved with a Love that may be called Relative, or subordinate, as we have often
agreed on, by which Justice and Order are not violated.


L. WE only condemned Self-love, where Self is made the Center: and what is
thus condemned is properly Self-interest. Whatever is loved from that
Principle, is not loved according to Justice. For the preferring greater
Delight to lesser, and endless Joys to transient, would indeed argue good
Judgment; but where is the Righteousness of it, and the Piety? It is but Wisdom
for a Man's Self; which Sir F. Bacon calls a left handed Wisdom. But Love makes
no Bargains, and has no Limitations. Moses was willing to be blotted out of the
Book of Life; and St. Paul to be an Anathema for his Brethren: it were strange,
after two such Instances, to deny a disinterested Love to the Savior of the
World; or to draw Inferences from a false Reading of a Text of Scripture, as if
the Love of his Father, and even of Mankind, was not the prevailing Motive when
he made the choice of enduring the Cross, and despising the Shame. Nor is it
any Argument against the Purity and the Force of Love, that in a Competition of
eternal and temporal Delights (as in the case of Moses, with the Delights of
Egypt) the preference is given to the eternal; since the Clearness of the
Understanding cannot be supposed to exclude the Love and Obedience of the Heart.


Ae. THE Dignity of Man appears conspicuously in the Power of Loving, and in
the Object that can only satisfy his Love: if it centered in himself, it would
be wretchedly directed, and no acquiescence could ensue. The lower Appetites
are satisfied for a time: the Belly being full, demands no more till the
Digestion is over, and the Fibers of the Stomach irritated anew. It is not so
with the Eye and the Ear, as Solomon informs us; nor with the Mind neither, for
it must be constantly amused with new Discoveries and Tales: there is a Fund of
Curiosity in Man, or a Desire of knowing, which must be satisfied one way or
other; so that Knowledge may be called the Food of the Understanding.


L. NATURAL Affection, Love, and Friendship are satisfied by the Solaces and
Endearments proper to the Soul and Body; and were it not for the selfish
Principle, many of our Satisfactions would be much greater than they are. It Is
true, the broken State of things makes all our Enjoyments very uncertain, and
we often find our selves unexpectedly bereaved and desolate. But if the highest
Faculty in Man were exerted, or, which is much the same, if his Love were
principally directed to the highest Object, perfect Satisfaction would readily
follow; at least Man would be in the State of Order, and where he should be: if
divine Consolations were denied or suspended, it would be but for a while, and
the resigned Soul would have Contentment in the Divine Will, whatever Desertion
or Pain it might suffer. The bearing our natural Afflictions is recommended
upon the same Principle.

IT must be owned, this State of Mind, in which God is loved for himself, is
not at present natural, like our other desires: we naturally love created
things, or desire them for our Convenience; but the Love of the Creator may be
called a stranger to us: it cannot dwell with Self-Love, for either the one or
the other must give place.


Ae. MOST certainly. Mean time in this Review of Man, the Distinction of Body,
Soul, and Spirit, may still be had recourse to; or the Senses, the Affections,
and the Understanding. This last is called the governing Part by Antoninus, who
makes little account of the inferior Powers, as being in common with the
Beasts. He makes a kind of Diffection of some Pleasures (perhaps a little too
far) and speaks of them with disparagement. But every Sensation, as well as
every Motion of the Soul, is surprising to think of. Even Smelling, which is
counted the most frivolous of all the Senses, is of more use than we can
imagine; and in fact we see it can raise the Spirits as it were by Magic.


L. It Is generally in favor of the Senses that the Passions are exerted; these
are alarmed and rise in arms, when our Pleasures are in danger. It belongs to
the Understanding to regulate the Passions or Affections; or, in other words,
to keep the Pleasures in order: for it cannot alter our Sensations or Feelings.
And if it be said that the Understanding, which is but passive it self, like
the bodily Eye, cannot be called the Leader of the rest of the Faculties; it
must be granted, that (strictly speaking) it is rather the Light than the
Guide: for if we consider it in the Apprehensio, Judicium, Discursus.
three Operations mentioned by the Logicians, it is still but one Light operating
in three different manners. The governing Power therefore must be something of
Life, Force, and Activity, which sets all the other Faculties at work; and though
the Will is a more vital Principle than the Understanding and the Memory, the
Spirit may be considered as somewhat superior to the Will it self, since the
same Person may have a very different Will at different times. Sometimes the
Will is manageable, sometimes obstinate; a Man will not so much as hearken:
What is it that makes him reflect and yield? Sometimes the Persuasion is
addressed to the Understanding, sometimes to the Heart; and Entreaty commonly
prevails more than Reasoning. The Memory is only applied to as a Register.


Ae. SHALL we say then, that there is a first Mover within us, a Mind, Rector,
or presiding Faculty over the rest? Indeed we may be indifferent what is
concluded in such Speculations, for it will not alter the state of the things.
People frequently do speak of such a leading Principle, and of a Spirit in Man:
and then this Spirit is as frequently denominated, or receives its Character,
from any Quality that appears most prevailing, not only with regard to the
moral Dispositions, but even the Complexion, Temper, Genius, and whatever is
most observable in the Person: thus we say, a proud Spirit, a violent Spirit,
an active Spirit, and many other kinds of Spirits (some better, some worse)
that are to be met with in the world.


L. To assert the Superiority of the Human Spirit (or if it shall only be
called the Human Nature) above that of other Animals upon this earth, has been
the endeavor of many Persons, who (I cannot but think) have made their System
more coherent than those who have endeavored to put Men and Beasts upon a
level. Some of this last Party indeed acknowledge the advantage that Mankind
have from the Frame of the Body and its Organs, which they pretend makes all
the difference. But what Texture of the Brain is sufficient to perform all the
various Operations they assign to it, Sensation, Reflection, Wishing, Loving,
Hating? Of what figure are the Cells for Poetry, and those for Mathematics?
And what Lodgings of the Brain are Honesty and Knavery to be found in?


Ae. WHATEVER Sensations and Powers inferior Creatures may be endued with, the
bodily Organs are but the Instruments of their Operations; and it must be
something even within them, that sets those Engines a going. The Be and the
Elephant have little resemblance of each other in their outward figure, and
there may be supposed as little in the Texture of their Brain: but each
performs very remarkable things; for which there had need to be recourse to
some inward Principle actuating their different Machines.


L. THE same Conclusion holds as to Man: whatever is performed in him, bateing
some Actions called Vital, such as those of the Heart and other inward Parts,
is properly the Action of the Soul upon the Body, and the Change is first made
within; the Soul is touched before the Blood flushes out in the Face, to
proclaim either Bashfulness or Anger: and the Notion of a Contact, and
reciprocal Action betwixt the Soul and the Body, is but a way of speaking; for
if it were strictly true, the Soul would depend as much on the Body, as the
Body does upon it; or rather, all would be reduced to Body, according to
Lucretius: Tangere enim and tangi sine corpore nulla potest res.
The truer Philosophy seems to be The Body is touched, the Soul feels.
tangitur Corpus, sentit Anima.

IT IS pretty evident the Soul moves the Body, as the Hand moves the Glove; but
that the Body moves the Soul, is not evident. If they say Music strikes the
Soul, and raises different Passions, and Music is Sound, and Sound is Body;
and therefore, etc. it may be granted that bare Sensation is excited by the
means of bodily things, as all Sounds make impression upon the Hearing: but in
Music you know all Ears are not equally affected, some People only hearing the
bare Sound, without being sensible of the Harmony, and so are said to have no
Ear. Much less is it mere Sound that raises any Passion in us, but some other
thing that we have no name for; as it is not mere Words that touch the Heart,
even in friendly Expressions, but the Persuasion we have of some Friendship
designed by them, common Compliments affecting us but little.

BUT in all this, they will say, the Superiority of Man does not appear, the
Beasts having Sensations and Passions as well as He: a Dog or a Horse is
sensible of a kind Word and a gentle Stroke.


Ae. THAT is very true; but it is seldom affirmed that Dogs and Horses have as
high a Sense of Friendship as Mankind. If any were really of that opinion, we
should easily know what estimate to put upon their Friendship.


L. THAT which is called moral Sense, implies both a Tenderness of Affection,
and a Relish of Justice; or Benevolence and Honesty. And it is remarkable that
this Tenderness, or Benevolence it self, must be regulated by Justice, as
appears in that Precept, Not to respect the Person of the Poor: for in a Claim
of two Persons, the one in great Poverty, the other flowing in Riches, there
would be a natural Bias in the poor Man's favor; which would also be
increased, if he were found to be the honester Man: and yet both these
Considerations must be overruled, and Right take place. The same Rule, every
body grants, should be followed if a Man were one of the Parties himself, where
the benevolent Bias may yet be supposed stronger: but because of this Bias,
neutral Judges are applied to, though it has sometimes happened that mutual
References have been made by each Party to the other, and both Interests
equally safe.


Ae. THIS shows there is such a thing as Disinterestedness, and it seems to be
the highest Quality in Man: an honest Heart implies a great deal. Nor is there
any weight in the Objection, that this Honesty is only from Considerations of
the next World: for such an Inclination to Justice may be found, where the
Belief of another World is not very strong. And if the peevish Objection be
pushed farther, that it is for the sake of a Character in this World; this is
nothing but an Assertion without proof, and the contrary may be asserted with
more probability. Every one must judge for himself.


L. WHAT is most valuable in Man, is certainly his kind Affections and his
Sense of Equity: He has even inferior Faculties, which also distinguish him
from other Animals. I wish every body may make the best use of their Faculties
that they can; and that it may be remembered they are all but Gifts, as well as
the Objects of them; that Man consequently is but a mere Void, and must be
miserable if he has not Objects to satisfy him; that, in the placing his
Esteem and his Affection, the Giver is to be considered above all Gifts; These,
and many other Truths would naturally present themselves to the Mind, if it
were composed and free of distraction.


Ae. IT IS strange, that so natural Reflections come so seldom into the Mind.
They must certainly be very obvious, because the very mentioning them is often
tedious and shocking.


L. THERE are other Reasons for that. You know People have their Heads taken up
for the most part with their Business or their Amusement: and then they don't
love it should be thought they wanted Instruction.


Ae. THEY shall never be instructed by me.


L. NOR by me: but there is no reason why two Friends may not talk together of
whatever they please.


Ae. I know none.


PART II. A SHORT ACCOUNT OF THE WORLD.
I. The WORLD taken in different Senses.
Aemilius and Lucinus. Ae SOMETIMES by the World is meant the whole Creation,
visible and invisible; it is also called the Universe. Sometimes there is a
distinction of the Natural World, and the Moral; and among some Persons we find
much Talk of the Polite World.

THE Natural World is justly acknowledged to be a beautiful and harmonious
System, as implied in the (...), Mundus.
very Names of it. We are obliged to the Astronomers for the Accounts they have
given of the Motions and Order of the Planets, and to the Natural Philosophers
for their Discoveries of the Productions of this Earth: but a great deal of
Beauty lies open to the Eye of the simplest Beholder. The Sun and the Fields
are delightful to the Farmer, as well as the Philosopher. Every Animal and
every Vegetable have their Beauties, both to consider them in whole, and in the
parts that make them up; a Leaf of the meanest Plant is a Demonstration of an
infinite Wisdom.


L. THIS Earth of ours is but a small Part of the World, notwithstanding all
the Disputes about it, and often about very useless Parcels of it. Dr. Burnet
Theory of the Earth.
speaks of the whole Globe as meanly as if it were a Turnip: the Great-ones
(says he) slice it among them. He shows also the Ruins and broken State of it
since the Flood; to which another excellent Theorist Mr. Whiston.
ascribes the same Ruins. This latter Author reckons it has suffered more by
the Fall, than the former takes notice of. And not only has the Earth suffered
in its Make and Luster, but all the Creatures upon it are said to groan Romans
viii.
.


Ae. There are, however, great Excellencies and Beauty remaining in this lower
World; and no Deformity can be found, except in the Manners of Men.

IT IS this Moral World therefore we are chiefly to consider, in order to
discover our Duty, to shun what we ought to shun, and follow what we ought to
follow. I call it the Moral World (though there is little Morality in it) only to
show that it is with reference to Men's Manners or Actions, that inspired
Writers exhort us not to be conformed to the World; giving us this good reason,
that all that is in the World is the Lust of the Eye, etc. They exhort us, it is
true, not to love the World, meaning the Love of the Creatures, as well as the
Love of the Fashion; because it is not in their Nature to suffice our Hearts;
and they contribute to nourish in us that Principle of Self-Love, by which we
covet every thing without Justice and common Sense.


II. The WORLD divided into two Cities.
L. IT IS a fine Passage of St. Augustine, De Civitate Dei.
Two Loves have made two Cities; Self-Love makes the City of the World, which
is also called Babylon, even to the Contempt of God: The Love of God, which is
called Jerusalem, makes the City of God, to the Contempt of Self. He has been
very happy in this Thought, as in many others; for it lets us into the Causes
both of Strife and Concord in this World, and shows the Foundation of Misery
and Happiness in the next, as we cultivate the one or the other of those two
Loves or Principles.


Ae. SELF-LOVE will be readily acknowledged to be the cause of Strife and
Confusion in the World, if we consider it but in the least impetuous of its
Streams, Sensuality. But what is meant by Sensuality? and why is it less
impetuous than Pride and Covetousness? Sensuality may indeed include the
Pleasures of all the Senses; and so the Lust of the Eye may be Sensuality, as
well as the Lust of the Flesh: and the Flesh is often taken for all the Desires
of the natural Man, and put in opposition to the Spirit. But it is probable that
by the Lust of the Flesh St. John means what is generally understood by
Voluptuousness in Eating and Drinking, and all Pleasure and Indulgence of the
Body, abstractly from Elegance and Parade, which are properly the pursuit of
the Eye, and are peculiar to the Human Kind, as well as Pride; the Beasts
contenting themselves with plain Sensualities.

COVETOUSNESS supposes both a desire of fine things, and a superfluous
abundance of them; Pride a desire of Distinction and Superiority.

SENSUALITY alone, without supposing Covetousness and Pride in company with it,
is looked upon as an inoffensive thing; and if a Man falls into Intemperance of
any kind, all the harm is said to be done to himself.


L. BUT it rarely happens that Sensuality is free of the other two Vices. Our
Fancy suggests to us imaginary Wants; and also makes us think Nature is not so
easily contented as we find upon Experience it is. Thus we covet things both as
to Quality and Quantity: and then our Pride, which is seldom asleep, wants to
have Witnesses of our Magnificence, and of our elegant Taste. It Is said Luxury
wants many things, and Covetousness all things; but Pride is certainly the most
insatiable of the three.


Ae. WHAT is condemned under the name of Sensuality, is not the Sensation of
Pleasure, for there is no Crime in Feeling; but in the exorbitant Desire of
Pleasure, and the Excess of the Indulgence, by which the Mind is indisposed for
other Seize. Antoninus allows Man to indulge his Nature as he is an
Animal, but with this caution, that it make not his Nature worse, as he is an
Animal endowed with Reason and designed for Virtue.

IN this View, the harsh Idea of Self-denial would be softened, as contributing
to our higher Interests, though its proper and solid Foundation is only upon
Justice.


L. BUT why did you call Sensuality less impetuous than the two other Streams
of Self-Love?


Ae. BECAUSE we see these make more mischief and desolation in the World.
Particular Persons are indeed carried away by certain Pleasures, but the
general Competition is for Riches and Honor. Wars are now seldom made for a
Mistress; and even few Duels are fought in that Quarrel.


L. VERY true, luxurious People may agree together better than the Covetous can
be supposed to do. For the natural Effect of Covetousness is to disunite and
alienate Men from one another; every Individual aiming at nothing less than to
engross what belongs to the whole Society. Such Men, says the Prophet, would
add Field to Field, till there be no place; that they themselves may be placed
alone in the midst of the Earth. The covetous Man would leave the World to
starve, whereas the Luxurious, though without designing it, is an Instrument in
the hand of Providence for supporting many, who would otherwise be destitute;
and so Luxury in some manner supplies the place of Charity. Indeed the
Luxurious cannot be acquitted of Injustice; for it is not Fair-dealing that one
Man should drink as much Wine, or any other Liquor, as would cherish the Hearts
of twenty; and that the Expense of adorning his single Person, might keep a
greater number from going naked.


Ae. OF all the three Branches of Self-Love, Covetousness has something in it
so peculiarly grasping and appropriating, that a covetous and a selfish Person
are almost convertible Terms. What is most remarkable, is, that this grasping
selfish Temper sometimes produces a sort of illegitimate Self-denial, and
renders the poor Miser hard-hearted and uncompassionate to himself. You know
how Mr...... lives.


L. THERE have been Instances of this Disease of the Mind in all Ages,
ingenious Men have exercised their Wit upon it long ago; but such Diseases
seldom yield either to Raillery or Argument.


Ae. IN this case Money is the Object of the Love, not because it answers all
things, but because it is Money; and so this Love of Money can hardly be
reduced to Self-Love, because the Desire seems wholly to terminate upon the
Metal.


L. IT must be granted, however, that Covetousness is for the most part
attended with Luxury and Pride, or it may be said as properly to attend upon
them; for it is very natural for the Profuse and the Ambitious to desire much
Money, and to take many ways of getting it. Alieni appetens, sui profusus.
Those Extremes in Catiline's Character are often united. Prodigality makes some
Atonement for Covetousness in the World: but when this last Vice is
predominant, it is the most contemned of any, and is indeed the least restrained
by Shame, and creeps the lowest.


Ae. BUT at the same time that the Love of Money is despised, the Possession of
it generally draws Respect. Salust was sensible of this in one of his
Discourses to Caesar, where he proposes, as a great stop to Reformation in the
Commonwealth, to take away the Respect given to Money, pecuniae Decus;
concluding Ubi Divitiae clarae habentur, ibi omnia bona vitia sunt; Fides,
Probitas, Pudor, etc. Orat. 11. de Rep. Ordinanda.
"that the paying such Honor to it, proves the contempt of all Virtues." But
how to bring about that point of Reformation, is not easy to conceive.


L. NOT easy indeed. The shortest way to Wealth would be plain Stealing and
Robbing: but these being too hazardous, cunning people have recourse to the
safer Arts of Tricking and Deceit: and hence all those Infidelities in Trusts
and Contracts, those Disappointments in Trade and Politics; and sometimes this
Love of Money produces Disappointments yet more delicate and vexatious.


Ae. IS not Pride the third branch or stream of Self-Love, the most raging and
impetuous of all?


L. NO doubt: it makes Cities and Kingdoms desolate, and the Earth a Field of
Blood.


Ae. THIS Spirit also discovers it self most universally. Mr. Pascal says,
"Vanity has taken so firm a hold on the Heart of Man, that a Porter or a
Turnspit can talk big of himself, and is for having his Admirers: Philosophers
do but refine upon the same Ambition."

WE see therefore that Pride, which may be called the eldest Daughter of
Self-Love, has still a more ample dominion than either Covetousness or
Sensuality: it enters into the privatest Houses, it breaks the closest Ties:
Covetousness divides Friends, but Pride divides nearer Friends.


L. THE difference between Pride and Vanity is seen in the different
appearances of Men; and sometimes by their appearances we may know what they
have most at heart. A Man that delights in fine Clothes, shows them upon his
back: so that Vanity consists in outward Show and Ostentation in general, and a
Man's Vanity appears in the finery of his Servants, and all his Parade without
doors and within. Pride is a sturdier kind of thing, and lies deeper in the
Heart: thus, says the Duke of Rochefoucault, "Pride always saves its interest,
even when it renounces Vanity."


Ae. SOMETIMES Pride aims at dominion over others, sometimes barely at their
applause; and it is strange to see what some people will endure for this light
thing. Self-Love, or rather Pride, is said to live upon nothing, and to find
its account in Austerities and voluntary Mortifications, from that desire of
applause; though Pride seldom takes that way of showing itself in this Island.

INDEED the excessive desire of Esteem, without doing something for it, argues
small experience of the World; for it is seldom so good-natured as to give
praise for doing nothing.


L. THE desire of Esteem, and the fancy that we are esteemed, are very
different things: the former may be without the latter, but the latter is never
without the former.


Ae. AS the fancy that we are esteemed when we are not, arises from
Self-conceit, so the same turn of Mind makes us eager to show our selves upon
all occasions: we run into every company, and affect to shine in every
conversation. But sometimes we think to show our selves more superior by a
profound silence, and then we are the proudest.


L. YOU are a little severe. But whatever way our Pride discovers it self to
others, it must be a torture to the soul that is possessed with it, and an Inlet
to many disturbances, of which it may be called the Parent. The proud Man is
the aptest to fall into Jealousy, which he would have to be thought a just
concern for a delicate part of his Property; not perceiving that it is rather
Pride than either Justice or Love that tortures him. Could Jealousy be stripped
of Pride, it would neither be so racking nor so ugly.


Ae. BUT what do you think of Envy?


L. IT IS a more shameful Ulcer of the Soul than Jealousy, and more visibly the
effect of Pride; and the more unaccountable, that it grieves at the good of
another, when we our selves lose nothing by it. This, it is true, is the Idea of
pure Envy; but generally there is in it a mixture of other Passions, which
render it somewhat more excusable, such as Anger or Grief arising from
competition or disappointment: however, there is nothing a man labors more to
conceal, than that he has any Envy at all.


Ae. I believe we are at no less pains to conceal our Hypocrisy, though it is a
more voluntary thing, and all over art and design rather than infirmity; and
having a more extensive view than Envy, it runs more through our whole Life and
Actions.


L. WE are got into a sad Field.


Ae. THERE are other effects of Pride more undisputed, to wit, Hatred and
Revenge; the Pulpit declares against these: and the Stage, though it does not
always speak so dishonourably of them as they deserve, yet it shows many of
their bad consequences. Nor does the Stage fail to expose ill humor, not so
much indeed because it is the effect of Pride, as upon account of the Ridicule
that is found in it: Vanity is also exposed upon the same account. And this
shows us another part of our Constitution called Shame, which some resolve
wholly into Pride: but there is a Right and a Wrong in every thing. We see from
Stultorum incurata pudor malus ulcera celat,
Again, -- falsus Honor juvat, quem?
Hor.

And Plautus tells us, Plerique homines quos cum nihil refert, pudet etc.


fine Spirits of old, the distinction betwixt two kinds of Shame and Honor,
which some Moderns struggle hard to get free of, and take help from some old
Hands. And they forget another distinction, betwixt the sense of Shame and the
excessive fear of being ridiculed. We see how People are laughed out of their
Virtue, and sometimes out of their Life: they drink for fear of being thought
abstemious, and they fight for fear their Courage should be called in question;
as my Lord Rochester honestly acknowledges.


L. THIS puts me in mind of a contrary Supposition of the Characteristicks,
which does not show so much knowledge of the World. "I can very well suppose
(says that I. 96.
Author) "Men may be frighted out of their wits: but I have no apprehension
they should be laughed out of them. I can hardly imagine that in a pleasant way
they should ever be talked out of their Love for Society, or reasoned out of
Humanity and common Sense." Now an appeal may be made to the World, if the
reverse of this be true. Indeed Men cannot well be said to be reasoned out of
Humanity and common Sense, but they are certainly talked and laughed out of
both. We have a more natural account from Vision of Hell.
Quevedo, where (speaking of those in the righthand way) he says, "some of them
stopped their ears and went on without minding our Raillery: others we put out of
countenance, and they came over to us."


Ae. IT IS certainly the fear of being put out of countenance, and suffering
confusion, that keeps Mankind (especially those who affect most Politeness) in
such a subjection to one another, notwithstanding their contempt of one
another. This is the foundation of many troublesome Modes and Points of
Decency, invented by no body knows who, and yet observed with a rigorous
exactness.


L. IT IS indeed very remarkable that many who set up for an universal
Independency and Exemption from all Rules, should be governed at so easy a rate.


Ae. IT tends much to preserve some Quiet and good Order in the World: and it is
really a satisfaction to observe, that vain extravagant Man is so easily
governed, that a Straw is sufficient to bind him.


L. A little Experience of the World, and careful observation of what passes
within our selves (where indeed we should properly begin) joined to the
information of some of the best Books and the best Company, will let us see
what the World is, and how we ought to behave in it.


III. The Mixed STATE of Things.
Ae. HAD not the Doctrine of the Fall some footing among the Heathens?


L. IT had: but not being so thoroughly received and understood by them, the
accounts that many of them gave of the World and of Human Nature were so much
the more defective. Some who have enquired into the sentiments of remotest
Antiquity, inform us there was a pretty general belief of a former State,
wherein Justice and Innocence prevailed, which they called the golden Age,
without any disorder in the Elements; perfect Health and perpetual Spring. They
spoke also of a Revolt, which reduced things into the present confusion and
weakness; and that all would be renewed and brought again into the primitive
Beauty and Perfection.

A few indeed among the Ancients did argue for the present State of things, as
if it were the best State they could possibly be in; and so they concluded
"there was no Evil nor Defect in the Universe, but that every thing contributed
to the perfection of the Whole."


Ae. THE last part of the Conclusion may be true in some sense. But what could
they make of Sickness and Death? it is hardly natural to say they are things
indifferent, much less that they are really good. Every body knows this
Doctrine of Fatality landed in Atheism, and how Spinoza improved the Notion of
the Universe to exclude the Maker and Governor of it; a design Antoninus is
never suspected of. The Characteristicks, who have taken much of their Scheme
from that Emperor, are at great pains to persuade the World that it is they who
do the greatest justice to God in banishing Evil from the Creation; affirming,
"that to suppose it to have entered into his Works, the Government of the World
is arraigned and the Deity made void."


L. IT must be left to the public Judgment, who are the best Apologists for
the Deity (if any Apologies are needed) they who speak in the common way, and
acknowledge there is Evil both Natural and Moral; or they who acknowledge
neither? If the inference were certain, to wit, that there is no God if there
be any Evil, the last part of the Proposition would be contradicted by few. And
truly the Arguers against Evil expose themselves much to the scorn of another
Set of People, who are as adverse to revealed Religion as they themselves can
be. There is one thing remarkable, the old Stoics did not deny there was such
a thing as Pain, but only maintained that Pain was no Evil: so if their
Followers say no further, the dispute is only about Words.


Ae. WE are told by Moses that moral Evil entered first: Man abused his
Liberty, and fell into Disobedience. The fault is specified. Whatever Allegory
may be in that History, there must be Truth also in the Letter. Now the outward
State of Man being still to be suited to the inward, his Body to his Spirit;
this Spirit is condemned to inhabit a frail, heavy Body, very unlike to what it
seems to have been in the first State, and stripped of several advantages which
the Bodies of many Animals have at present. Moreover, the Earth is said to have
been cursed, by which a considerable change may be supposed in its Beauty as
well as its Fertility; but this alteration is also wisely adapted to the
condition of Man now become mortal and proud, who must work hard both for his
Life and his Humiliation.


L. ST. Augustine has preserved to us a passage of In Libro 3. de Republica.
Tullius Hominem dicit non ut a, matre sed a noverca natura editum in vitam,
corpore and nudo and fragili and infirmo; animo autem anxio ad molestias,
humili ad timores, molli ad labores, prono ad libidines: in quo tamen inesset,
tanquam obrutus, quidam divinus ignis ingenii atque mentis. --

Rem vidit, causam nescivit: latebat enim eum cur esset gravt jugum super
filios Adam. Lib. 4. contra Jul. Pelag.


Cicero, which shows at least the present State of Man in lively colors: it is
to this purpose, "that Nature has brought Man into the World rather as a
Stepmother than a Mother, his Body naked, frail, and infirm; his Mind anxious,
timorous, and soft; prone to Lusts: but that nevertheless there is a divine
Fire of Genius and Spirit, though in a manner buried." After which Quotation he
adds, " Cicero saw the thing, but knew not the cause; for he was ignorant why
the heavy Yoke was laid on the Children of Adam." The same Father had said in
his Confessions, which some reckon the most useful of all his Works Confess.
Lib. 1. cap. 1.
, "that Man carries his Mortality about with him as a Testimony that God
resists the Proud."


Ae. THE best Authors are far from bestowing flattery upon Man. You know what
Dr. Burnet "We must not by any means admit or imagine that all Nature, and this
great Universe, was made only for the sake of Man, the meanest of all
intelligent Creatures that we know of. -- Surely if we made the least
Reflection upon our selves with impartiality, we should be ashamed of such an
arrogant Thought. -- Man that comes into the World at the pleasure of another,
and goes out by a hundred Accidents. -- A knock on the head makes him a Fool,
stupid as the Beasts of the Field; and a little excess of Passion or Melancholy
makes him worse, mad and frantic. In his best Senses he is shallow, and of
little Understanding; and in nothing more blind and ignorant than in things
sacred and divine." Theor. 1. B. C. xi.
says in particular.


L. I remember some of his words. But as to this heavy infirm Machine of a
Body, though it is very soon to be void of all Sensation, and reduced to a State
of great Disgrace, yet St. Paul informs us it is raised in Honor; and in
another place he says, Jesus Christ shall change our vile Body, that it may be
fashioned like unto his glorious Body.


Ae. As we are informed that Man's Pride brought such disgrace upon him, so we
are informed by the same sacred History (though in few words) that he was tempted
and seduced by a Spirit of more cunning. It Is much easier therefore to account
for the Sin of Adam, than for that which happened first. Only St. Jude speaks
of the Angels who kept not their first station, and a Prophet mentions
Lucifer's affecting an equality with the most High: by which Pride is generally
believed to be the first Sin. But the difficulty still remains how it could
ever have entered. Ingenious Men have given their Conjectures, but it seems to
be one of those secret things which belong to God.

WE know how things stand at present with regard to Man, all his Faculties, the
Earth he treads on, and the Elements that serve him, and often master him. It
were an endless, as well as a melancholy Task, to enumerate all the Infirmities
and Diseases of the human Body alone; some of these so very painful and
loathsome, that Nature shrinks at the very thought of them. If we are told that
Pain is confined to that Sense alone which is called Feeling; it is very true
that racking Pain or Torture, and indeed all those uneasy Sensations which
commonly go under the name of Pain, are confined to that Sense; the Nerves
being stretched out of their natural Position, or whatever be the cause: but
the rest of the Senses have their uneasy Sensations too; the Smell, the Taste,
the Eye and the Ear are grated and offended, or in general rendered very
uneasy, whatever Term the uneasiness is expressed by. A delicate Person would
be shocked to find himself led into an Hospital, or to have a List of Diseases
laid before him; all representations of Pain and Nastiness are disagreeable,
two things (however) the Body in its present State is very liable to. And the
general tendency of all Bodies, animate and inanimate, to Corruption and
Dissolution, is very conspicuous.


L. IF the Disorders of the Mind were inquired into, they would be found in no
smaller number; and the discovery no less unpleasant. The Disorders of the
Imagination are the most harmless, but often exceeding melancholy to behold; as
any body will acknowledge, who has ever seen a Madman. Even the common
Distempers of the Fancy in those that are not reckoned quite out of their
Senses (we may say in their best Senses) are not the marks of an original
State. And it were pretty well, if all that could be said of a Person, were,
that he is a little fanciful: Dark, Sullen, Peevish, are less agreeable
Epithets; Unjust and Cruel less still.

BUT it is best not to dwell upon Evils, and what is shocking, and afflicting;
if we turn our Eye to the other side, we shall find many fine things still
left, and also be forced to acknowledge that the disagreeable things mixed with
them, are the effects of Wisdom and Goodness in the supreme Governor, whose
purposes of doing good remain invariable, and whose Mercies are over all his
Works.


Ae INFALLIBLY so. The contrivance of the divine Artificer appears in the frame
of the meanest Animal, nay of the meanest Vegetable, which is made up too of
its Fibers and Canals, and woven and joined together with Order and Beauty. How
agreeable does this Still Life appear, from the Cedar to the Hysop! How gay are
the Flowers! how sweet, how refreshing! This single Subject would be a large
Province for declaiming, to any who had that Talent. Nor is the Wisdom less
conspicuous in the care taken for the propagation of all these inanimate
Beauties, as so many Philosophers and Divines have observed, whose Works are in
every body's hands: Cicero, Ray, Derham, and many more.

BUT as the Idea of Goodness is more endearing than that of Wisdom, so every
thing that has Life and Fecling does actually feel the effects of the former
Attribute of the Deity; and rational Creatures both feel, and can reflect with
Pleasure and Love. It would seem to be this Capacity in Man that made Ovid call
him a more holy Creature than the rest.


L. I know not what Ovid has meant by Holiness. But these two words,
Righteousness and Holiness are very near akin: most Actions that are called
impure, are only such because they are unjust, and it were easy to give
examples. I am still glad to suppose there is some Righteousness remaining even
after the Fall. Nor will this clash with St. Peter, in the character he gives
of the new Earth wherein dwells Righteousness; for though it is to dwell there
openly and in triumph, a little of it may lurk here under a Cloud. There is yet
some Honesty and Friendship in the World, which is a very useful Consideration
in a dark Fit of the Spleen.


Ae. THERE are really so many good things remaining after the Fall, that one
would sometimes think there had been no Curse. Nor must we take that word for
an execration, since it is chiefly to be taken for a change to an inferior from
a superior State. We cannot indeed know how great the change is (and it is much
for our ease) the Scripture being so short in the Description of the former
State. To consider only the Body: though it is called both frail and vile, yet
still it has its attractions, and whatever is shocking about it, is well
disposed of, out of sight; to say nothing of the usefulness of those things
that may be counted the vilest, as the Gall it self. Then, with relation to the
Spirit which inhabits this Body, as there is a congruity that such a Spirit
should be so lodged, or imprisoned, let it be considered what disorders would
be committed if this Vehicle were not so gross and heavy as it is: what would
greater degrees of Strength and Agility have produced but more mischief. How
good is it for the public Quiet that we are subjected to Hunger and Thirst,
Cold, Weariness, and all the rest! And if we are designed for a higher State
after this, such Defects and Vexations seem also designed to keep us from
doting upon this Jayl: for, as Sir Thomas More used to say, "to aim at Honors
here, is setting a Coat of Arms over a Prison-Gate."


L. THERE are so many smiling things still in the World, and really pleasant
and good, that many would wish to live in it for ever; even when their share of
Comforts appears to be very small, and when they confess this to be a State of
Trial and Discipline, as the State before the Fall was a State of Trial alone.
Mr. Lock calls this Life a Probationership: this supposition would be of great
use, both for regulating our own Conduct, and vindicating the Author of Nature,
when the Humor arises of criticizing his Works.


Ae. BUT moral Evil (say they) is harder to digest.


L. WITHOUT doubt; and it is certainly a more melancholy thing to think of: but
there is a great difference betwixt some moral Evils and others, betwixt a
flash of Anger (for instance) and deliberate Malice. Those little Humors, and
Whims, and Oppositions of Temper, so common in the World, do contribute to the
mutual Discipline of its Inhabitants, beside what they must all suffer from the
disorders of the Elements and the infirmity of their own Bodies. Indeed when
instances of Cruelty and Fraud are objected, this is a greater blot upon the
divine Workmanship; and a severer Discipline still: but who could ever say he
was forced to be a Villain? Did Fate, or We, when great Atrides died,
Urge the bold Traitor to the Regicide?
The good Emperor, it is true, speaks of Mr. Collier's Translation.
necessary Rascals, yet any body may take the liberty to say, the World would
be better without them. A Government, indeed, may find some advantage from
Spies and Informers, and other Servants: but those necessary Men are only so at
times, and the Ministry could fall on a more agreeable way of employing the
Money. Many things therefore called necessary are only convenient in certain
Situations and Cases, as one Poison is made use of for driving out another.


Ae. WE have but one of three Opinions to follow, That things could not
possibly have been in a more perfect State than they are at present; or to
believe what the Scripture says of a Fall: or, lastly, to suppose that Man was
created with all the corruptions of Soul and Body that we find in us, and the
Earth and all other things about it to have been always as they are at present.


L. THE first Opinion will have few followers that know any thing of the World,
and are acquainted with Complaints and Groans: it is much if the most unthinking
Beau that is carried in a Chair can believe it. The third Opinion (though not
blasphemous) does not seem honorable for the Deity, whose Works can scarce be
supposed to have been made imperfect originally; though if that were true, it
would make no alteration upon the duty of rational Creatures, who should still
do the best they can, and struggle with their Infirmities and bad Tendencies,
which way soever they have come. The second Opinion therefore seems most
rational, that Evil has entered, though we cannot comprehend how.


IV. Remains of VIRTUE.
L. IT IS agreeable to leave the gloom, and to consider what remains after such
a melancholy Shipwreck. We did not indeed speak much of the Fall, nor can it be
represented by Mortals. If such an Event had been capable of description,
Milton's Imagination had bidden fair for it. Pascal's reasoning to evince the
fact, Art. III. and elsewhere.
from the Contrarieties of human Nature, is very fine.


Ae. ALL he writes is so.


L. BUT to come to what remains after the sad Overthrow, external Nature is
generally granted to abound with good things; no body denies the Beauties of
the Spring, Summer and Harvest; the Winter itself has its Beauties. The great
dispute is concerning the moral State, and two sorts of Authors are at war with
one another upon this Point. The Controversy was pretty ancient, as Pascal
observes, between the Stoics and Epicureans, and other clashing Sects of
Philosophers. Among the Moderns the Duke of Rochefoucault is thought too rigid
in his Sentiments upon Virtue: but he only reckons the thing a greater rarity
than the pretenses to it. Monsieur Bail is indeed severer, and seems to
resolve it wholly into Complexion and Education; upon which, a delicate Affair
(the Women's Chastity) has been brought upon the Carpet. Bail may be put at
the head of the Moderns, who strike against Virtue in general; and my Lord
Shaftesbury (because of his Quality) may get the command of the other Party,
who reckon the balance of the Passions may be so easily kept, and all the
Virtues to be of our own growth.


Ae. IT may be granted to the severe Men, that whatever is the bare result of
Complexion is no Virtue; it is but a mechanical sort of thing, nor can it be
called Vice neither, as being but a tendency of Nature to its Relief or
Pleasure, without any reflection of the Mind upon the Moral Good or Evil. One
may have naturally a greater Thirst than another, and drink more to satisfy it,
and yet be as sober as the other. There are very different Constitutions in
both Sexes, and it was an injury done the Women to place their chief Virtue in
the point of Chastity, as if it were their greatest Difficulty and Trouble;
whereas Men have much more to struggle with of that kind, and indulge
themselves without much blame from the World. The Sex are at another loss in
that way of reckoning, they are tempted to believe this single Virtue may give
them a dispensation from observing all the rest. The Men therefore have
themselves to blame, in making their System of Virtue so imperfect, which seems
to have arisen from their Jealousy and Pride.


L. SOME of Bayle's followers have kept no measures with the Sex at all, and
would seem to have forgot the difference betwixt being capable of Love and
being Lewd. He at least keeps the appearances of Civility, and is much more a
Master in the Art of This Comedy deserves not to be forgot. Mons. Bail was
accused before the Divines of Rotterdam for advancing unfound Doctrine in his
Pensees diverses. In his Continuation of those Thoughts he answers Mons.
Jurieu's Accusations, and I believe quotes him fairly. Jurieu's words are, "He
pretends that the Virtues of Christians do not proceed from a Principle of
Religion, but only from Fear, the Love of worldly Honor, and other worldly
Principles. A scandalous Proposition! which destroys all Virtues, as if there
were no true Christians! See the Causes he gives of the Chastity of Women. He
treats that matter after an impure and scandalous manner, pretending that Women
are not chaste through Virtue and Religion."

Bail answers, "Of all that my Accuser has done, this is what confirms me the
most that he is like the unjust Judge who feared neither God nor Men: for if he
had had any respect for the Public, and any concern for Reputation, would he
have dared to suppress the Exceptions I always made? Did not I positively
except the truly Faithful and the true Religion? I renew my Declaration in
these terms, I have declared already, and declare once more, that I except from
the general Rule a good Number of Persons who are guided by the true Spirit of
the Christian Religion, and whom God preserves from the Contagion almost
universal."

I know not if the poor Clergyman made any Reply: but it was difficult to argue
with one who had such a Talent, and not to come off with loss. Bail goes on in
his grave Ridicule, appealing to his Readers if he treats the Article of Women's
Chastity after an impure and scandalous manner. "Are not they comprehended in
that good Number of Persons guided by true Christianity?.... Thus what I have
said does not concern the predestinate and regencrate Women; it only concerns
the Women comprehended in the absolute Decree of Reprobation, who, according to
the Theology of the Synod of Dort, are incapable of doing any thing for the
Love of God, and live and die in the slavery of Sin..... All that my Adversary
can allow them, unless he will contradict the Decisions of that Synod, is that
the servile Fear of Hell may restrain them....... But is it not a greater Glory
to the Sex, to ascribe their Chastity either to the Complexion, or the Ideas of
Honor and Reputation, rather than the Fear of Punishment? Nor ought my Accuser
to forget the severe and rude manner of his Preaching several times upon that
Subject, and the Indignation a number of Women conceived at him."

From the French Edition, p. 571. This is a Specimen of a fly Writer,
frequently imitated with less dexterity.


Sneering. But in short, when rude Hands attempt to draw the Picture of both
Sexes, it looks as if Prostitutes had sit to the one, and Cowards and Sharpers
to the other.


Ae. THE restraints of Pride and Shame are evident enough: but why may not
Virtue have its attractions as well as Vice? not is it properly Vice, but
Pleasure, that has the Charm; as in the Story of Hercules. Sir Thomas More is
of opinion, that Virtue is attractive, and I Will read you his account of the
Sentiments of the Utopians. "They think not Felicity to rest in all Pleasure,
but only in that Pleasure that is good and honest, and that hereto, as to
perfect Blessedness, our Nature is allured and drawn even of Virtue, whereto
only they that be of the contrary Opinion do attribute Felicity. For they
define Virtue to be a Life ordered according to Nature, and that we be hereunto
ordained of God.... His Utopians set up much for harmless Pleasures, and a
merry Life: but (he adds) in all things this Counsel they use, that a less
Pleasure hinder not a bigger; and the Pleasure be no cause of displeasure,
which they think to follow of necessity if the Pleasure be dishonest," etc.
Here are different Ideas of Pleasant and Honest, and Conscience and Remorse
supposed. They had already contemned the foolish Pleasures of the Imagination
(Gewgaws and common Honors) and preferred the Pleasures of the Mind to those
of the Body; saying, "the chief part of them does come of the Exercise of
Virtue, and Conscience of good Life, etc."

BY this account of Human Nature, which may be admitted to be pretty just,
before bad Example and Habits have added a second corruption to it; we see the
Opposition is not betwixt Virtue and Pleasure, but betwixt honest and dishonest
Pleasure: nor is the Opposition betwixt the Pleasures of the Body and those of
the Mind, no Pleasures being dishonest that are natural; but that which spoils
all, is the bad Principle from which the Actions and Intentions proceed.


L. WHAT do you think of those that call Virtue a thing so much of our own
growth?


Ae. I differ very much from them. But suppose it were yielded; the
Consequences would not be so dangerous, if it were considered that whatever we
have that is good is free Gift, and that of our selves we cannot think a good
Thought, no more than we can keep our selves in Life and Health. The only
Question is, whether we are not born with some Tendencies to Virtue as well as
to Vice? I ventured to say above, that there is still some Honesty and some
Friendship in the World, which some of the Advocates for Self-Love do not deny,
maintaining only that it is all for our own ends: but I would beg leave to put
the following Questions.

MAY not a Judge give a just sentence without any view to Applause, or any fear
of Censure? He may be supposed to be in such Circumstances, that his Name shall
never be heard of; and his belief of a future State can likewise be supposed to
be very little, or nothing. May not a Merchant give up a fair Account, when he
might give up a wrong one without all possibility of Discovery? We can suppose
the same of all Trustees, and whose Belief may be sometimes of the same size
with the Judge's. So much for Honesty in dealing. Then may not a Man eat and
drink moderately and unexpensively, from a better motive than the Fear of being
sick, or for saving his Money? And, to suppose a greater Temptation, may he not
abstain from violating the tenderest Right of another, when he might encroach
with all the safety imaginable to his own Person? It were hard if the same
favorable Supposition could not be made for the Sex, as if the Fear of
Discovery were their only Restraint. Have not they the same Sense of Justice,
and a much greater Sense of Modesty, implanted in their Nature? But to talk of
ourselves, if a Man had two Women in his power, and equally charming, but the
one free, and the other not; it were a strange perverseness to go deliberately
to his Neighbor's Property, merely for the sake of encroaching. It was
Caesar's Opinion, that if Right was to be violated, it was only to be for the
sake of a Crown: which shows a natural tendency to Justice when there is no
temptation to the contrary; and I shall easily grant that Men are overcome with
very small temptations. But it is enough in the present Enquiry, if it can be
said that they would naturally go the straight Road, if there was nothing to
allure and seduce them. Even when we are deceived it is under some specious
appearance or other; decipimur specie Recti -- So that if we should allow that
a Man might be so perverse as to wrong his Neighbor in the point already
mentioned, we may suppose him to have been previously deluded by false Ideas of
Glory and Gallantry; he has imagined it a pretty thing to break through all Laws,
it is a sort of Conquest too, and he can talk of Favors he has obtained, and of
more than he has obtained.


L. IT seems when the Springs of Actions are laid open, it will be found that
it is Vanity or the Love of Glory which determines Men, rather than the Love of
pure Vice, or the doing Ill for Ill's sake. If it be said, that Men in their
honest Actions are neither determined by Ill nor Good, but by mere Chance; this
word has nothing in it that can make it to be the motive of any Action
whatsoever. And when we see Men acting in the same uniform way, as we have
supposed in the Case of your honest Accountant, it may be fairly concluded that
the natural Love of Honesty, which also implies an abhorrence of Roguery, is
the determining Principle, though it may not be much reflected on by the Person
himself.


Ae. AS to Friendship, it will perhaps be alleged, there are so many endearing
things in it, that we are ready to do good Offices to our Friends because we
are fond of their Persons; so that in this affection there can be no Virtue: a
Man would not cheat his Friend, no more than he would cheat his Son, because he
loves him, etc.

IT must be confessed, that where there is true Friendship there is surety
enough for fair dealing, and all the good that can be done besides; Love is the
strongest of all ties. But if an honest Man should have to do with known Cheats
(a thing that may readily happen) will he not find himself obliged to give them
fair play? It Is true, my Lord Rochester says, Satire on Man.
You Will be undone, and one may really be at a loss: but this lively piece of
Poetry (every body knows) is not to be set up as a standard of Virtue, and at
the bottom it is rather a banter upon Vice.


Ae. I believe it is difficult to determine whether Men are more capable of
Honesty or of Friendship: both are comprehended in Virtue, and both seem to be
natural. But Men differ from one another very much in their Tempers and
Dispositions; some are strictly honest to all, but very limited in their
Affection. If the Benignity be universal, it will draw Honesty along with it:
but the contrary cannot be affirmed. However, Virtue in general may so far be
said to be innate, or of our own growth, (let the Word pass) that all the
Instances of it are pleasant to hear of, Friendship and all other Sentiments of
Humanity, Justice and all that falls under the Idea of Honor; some of which
Sentiments are upon occasions actually exerted in Minds corrupt enough, good
Offices are honestly done; and perhaps none are born so very corrupt, as not to
wish they could do better. The Understanding sees very often what is right: if
the Will follows it but seldom, there are at least Intervals of regret, and a
Man is angrier with himself than with all the World.


L. HAD not the Author of our Nature implanted in us some tendency to Virtue,
we might have had ground to complain of our unhappy Constitution and of his
Severity (greater than that of the Egyptian Taskmasters) in requiring so much,
and furnishing so little. Book III.
Milton says, -- yet once more he shall stand
On even ground against his mortal Foe:
Which had not been the case, if all our natural Byasses had been entirely to
the wrong side. But the Moral Sense extends both to the Understanding and the
Heart, though every body knows which of the two proceeds with the most warmth:
the one barely approves or disapproves, the other loves or abhors. When they
act in concert, and under the right direction, then all is right.

BUT that vain Man may not imagine himself to be something, he will do well to
consider the weakness and disorder of all his Faculties. A very little
Self-examination would soon undeceive us. If we have sometimes a pleasure in
doing good, and the kind Affections stir in us, we too often find what may be
called unkind Affections; we are affected with Anger and Resentment, and feel a
sort of joy in prosecuting those unhappy Motions. Man's Heart is compared to a
Seed-plot, where very opposite things spring up together, and the worst Plants
need no cultivation; as the best and tenderest are brought up with difficulty,
and soon choked.


Ae. SOMETIMES this Soil is almost incapable of producing any thing either good
or bad: stupid Sloth extinguishes all. We are all Fire or all Ice by turns.
This is some little account of our Heart. As to the Understanding, the
shortness of its Reach agrees with the slowness of its Apprehension; and how
often are we but dazzled and deceived, when we think we see best! The Fall has
produced very contrary Effects upon us, we are fanciful, stupid, giddy,
timorous, stubborn, impatient, etc. In short, if we would dwell at home (as
Persius says) we should find our household Furniture very poor and scanty.


L. BUT after all, we have something given us to cultivate and improve. Mr.
Lock does not deny the vis insita, you know: it is on the Title Page of his
Book of Education; and in his Essay on Human Understanding, he does not deny
neither, " Book I. Chap. 3.. 3.
That there are natural Tendencies imprinted on the Minds of Men."... He says
indeed, (. 4) "Another reason that makes me doubt of any innate practical
Principles, is, that I think there cannot any one moral Rule be proposed,
whereof a Man may not justly demand a Reason."... And he adds, "should that
most unshaken Rule of Morality, and Foundation of all social Virtue, That one
should do as he would be done unto, be proposed to one who had never heard it
before, but yet is of Capacity to understand the meaning; might he not without
any absurdity ask a Reason why? And were not he that proposed it bound to make
out the Truth and Reasonableness of it to him?"


Ae. IT would be strange, I think, if a Man of capacity to understand the
meaning of that Rule could really want a Reason for observing it. It must be
supposed he has some Notion of Right and Wrong, or he can never see the
Obligation of any moral Rule, let it be put in any Shape or Terms whatsoever.
If he has any Notion then or Sense of Equity, his Friend the Proposer can have
some access to his Mind, and will be able to make out the Reasonableness of
that Rule to him in some other form of words more adapted to the slowness of
his apprehension; for the Defect must be only there. The Principle is innate,
only a particular Proposition may not chance to be assented to on the first
hearing; or there may be no innate Idea of a moral Proposition, any more than
of a mathematical one, before the first hearing, and even not 'till certain
steps are made for getting at the bottom of it. But as to that sacred Rule of
doing as we would be done unto, it is highly probable, that having been given by
the Savior of the World, and spoken to the simplest Multitude, every Man will
see the Reasonableness of it at a glance, and also wish (if he is not wholly
abandoned) to be able to put it in practice.


V. Helps to RELIGION.
L. I Suppose, though all Virtues are comprehended in Religion, yet there are
some of them that must properly be called Divine and Spiritual, and
consequently not of our own Growth, or natural to us since the Fall.


Ae. No doubt: and upon this seems to be founded the Distinction of the Virtues
of Nature, and those of Grace or Religion.

AGAIN, the Virtues of Religion itself are all comprehended in Charity or the
Love of God, without which they would signify nothing.


L. BUT this divine Love seems to be quite lost since the Sin of Adam, Faith
which is previous to that Virtue being now extinguished. Before we can love we
must believe, since (according to the old Maxim) there is no desire of a thing
unknown. All the Faith natural Men can pretend to, is worked up by their
Reason, 1 Cor. xi. 14-16.
the things of God appearing Foolishness to them. We may see God indeed in his
Works, for the Heavens declare his Glory, and there may be an impression of his
almighty Power upon our minds some other way than by our own Reasoning or
making Inferences from the things that strike our Senses: but this is only what
they call believing a posteriori, and we could give no Demonstration of the
Existence of God to others who doubt of it, but that either they must believe
it, or they must believe a Contradiction; as Dr. Clarke very well argues in his
Discourses upon Mr. Boyle's Establishment; the substance of which is this.

"EITHER there has always existed some independent Being, the Author of all
others, or else there has been an infinite Succession of dependent Beings
produced one from another. If this supposition were true, there would be
nothing Self-existent: and then what should have determined such a Succession
of Beings from all Eternity? Necessity is already excluded, because there is
nothing supposed necessarily existing: Chance is but an insignificant word, and
can produce nothing. So of two Cases equally possible, to wit, whether any
thing or nothing should have existed, the one is determined rather than the
other, by pure nothing, which is a palpable Contradiction. And therefore some
unchangeable and independent Being must have existed from all Eternity."

THIS Reasoning (which does better in the Doctor's own words) is still but
reasoning, and an ignorant Countryman may have as strong an impression of an
eternal Author of all things; but the impression is still faint in comparison
of true Faith, which may be called a spiritual Sensation; as St. Paul speaks of
things that are spiritually discerned: he also calls Faith the Evidence of
things not seen.


Ae. HOW weak the Belief of invisible things is at present, may be easily
gathered from the Practice of the World, even of those who make a profession of
believing. We are much more determined by the Love of things on this
contemptible Earth, which we are so soon to leave, and the Fear of what a few
of our Fellow-Mortals will say of us, than by all the Encouragements and
Threatenings of the Gospel. Our Hopes and Fears are confined to this Life. We
are so far from believing an immortal Life to come, that we hardly believe we
shall die; notwithstanding we have carried many of our Acquaintance to the
Grave! and yet upon the least Fit of Sickness we are in fear of Death, but
hardly fear any thing after it; and hardly wish for any thing after it!
Sometimes, it is true, there is a confused sort of Fear of things invisible, but
it rarely operates so far as the Fear of natural Death, or of bodily Pain, or
common Censure.


L. BEING thus stupid, and without sense of future and invisible things, Faith
is the first thing we have need of in Religion: but as it is itself a part of
Religion, and contains several Articles, we have need to cultivate our natural
Faculties, to employ our Reason, and exert our Activity (so far as it can go)
in proper Enquiries and Researches, in order to obtain this lively Faith.


Ae. BUT is there not also a Necessity of praying, in order to obtain our Wants
of all kinds?


L. No doubt: For though our Pride is unwilling to acknowledge our Wants, yet
Prayer is among the first Helps to Religion, and a part of it also. Then every
body knows that Prayer signifies nothing without Sincerity, by which I mean an
upright Intention of observing whatever we shall believe our Duty, and to do
the best we can in our Uncertainty about it. As Prayer therefore is supposed
previous to Faith, Sincerity is previous to Prayer; or the first step of all is
to wish to do well.


Ae. I know not what Thoughts would occur to us, and what we would do in a mere
natural State, without the advantage of some Instruction. Mr. Wollaston has
given a Scheme of the Religion of Nature very handsomely, and toward the end
of it, confesses he wants a Guide: but then he had Plato and Cicero, and the
Rabbis, to be Guides to Him, as they had others before them: so that unless a
Man was writing who had seen no Books, and had received no verbal Instruction,
we can hardly tell what his self-taught Opinions would have been; perhaps of
very small consequence. It would seem enough to allow to Man a Power within
himself of discerning things after they are presented to him in (...)ordinary
way, or a Capacity of being instructed, which irrational Creatures have not.
And if the usual means of Instruction should be denied, (as in the case of a
Man brought up, by some strange Accident, among wild Beasts) we can set no
Limits to the Source of Light, the Eternal Reason, which may communicate it
self in such Circumstances; and very easily supply the loss of all ordinary
means whatsoever. But these Enquiries are of no great use.


L. SOME would say you were a Quaker, and an Assertor of the Light within.


Ae. I AM pretty easy. I have heard others say that Truth is split, and each
Party had got a bit of it. But to return to the Helps of Religion: Sincerity
and common Sense being supposed, a Person that finds himself so indigent and
out of order, will naturally have recourse to Prayer, either with words or
without them. Finding that he is far from being self-sufficient, he will
readily ask the Assistance of the Almighty; for it is here likewise supposed
that he has some Belief of the supreme Being, and a Confidence in his Goodness,
Faith implying both these.

AGAIN, supposing our imperfect Believer to have been born in a Christian
Country, and to have read the Bible, he will see more positive Marks of the
divine Goodness, which will incline him to Praise and Thanksgiving, as well as
to Prayer: Fear would seem to be the Source of the latter, as Love is of the
former. Even the Writings of some Philosophers, ( Plato's in particular) show
us the properest kind of Prayer, which is, to refer to the Deity to choose what
is best for us. His Dialogue named the second Alcibiades is well known, and
upon that Model Juv. Sat. X. Pers. Sat. II.
Juvenal and Persius have formed two admirable Poems. Epictetus Arrian. Lib. I.
Chapter 16.
makes Praise the chief Character and Business of a rational Creature. Indeed,
true Prayer and true Praise are much of the same nature, and each of them is
accompanied with Love of the Object to which the solemn Addresses are made.


L. No doubt, the Eminence and Purity of that Love is the End of all Religion,
as appears from many clear Passages in the old and new Testament. For though
Faith and Prayer, and other Duties, are called Parts of Religion, yet since
they lead to that Charity, which is the end of the Commandment, the Distinction
betwixt the End and the Means is very obvious. And among the Means themselves,
there is a Distinction betwixt those things that are to be done, and those that
are to be avoided. But there are still things of an inferior Class, which are
only to be called Helps to Religion, and therefore not properly Parts of it, as
any body may see.


Ae. IF the Love of God be the Point, or Stage to which we must arrive,
Self-Love seems to be the Stage from which we must set out; those two Loves, as
St. Augustine tells us, having made two Cities. They are certainly two States of
Mind diametrically opposite, (the one also contemning the other) or two
contrary Principles, by which we are determined: but as they are not for the
most part in their utmost force, but the one sometimes weaker than the other,
and sometimes stronger, so we may be said to be Inhabitants of both Cities, and
to go from the one to the other by turns: which of the two we are oftenest
found in, is easy to discover.


L. THE removing of Hindrances is much akin with the Helps to Religion, and
both these are so numerous, that we cannot enter into the Detail: every body
talks of bad Company, and the Example of the World, as being very pernicious.

EVERY body likewise speaks of greater and less Duties, and of Religion or the
Tie that binds us to all Duties, as the word imports. If some contemn this Tie,
or profess to contemn it, the Number of such Professors is very small, and it is
but in some random Expressions over a Bottle, or else from a singular
Affectation of being impudent. The Professors on the other side are vastly more
numerous.


Ae. I believe this may be farther observed, that among the several Parties
into which the Christian World is now divided, most People are mightily pleased
with their own choice, which (God knows) is very accidental: but the wonder is
not so great, that they should like their own Opinions, as that they should
hate the Persons, who differ from them; and this sometimes, when there is no
Interest to interfere, to make the Quarrel look a little solid.


L. BUT most People having just as much Religion as to make them hate one
another, and to go to their particular Houses of Devotion, the wonder ceases
that they load each other with Names of Contempt, viz. Superstition,
Enthusiasm, Bigotry: There are, no doubt, such Characters in the World, but to
whose share they should fall heaviest, would not be easy to know, without more
labor than People commonly are at before they censure. A reasonable Diffidence
therefore of our selves, and a due respect for others, may be reckoned among
the chief Helps to Religion, though they are properly two States of the Mind
which produce one another; and the Esteem we bear our Neighbors contributes to
make us love them, which is a great part of our Duty accomplished, and without
which the other part is impracticable: for He that loves not his Brother whom
he has seen, how can he love God whom he has not seen?


Ae. IT were to be wished that they who own the sacred Authority of the
Scriptures would apply themselves more to the study of these Books, wherein
they will find a great variety of things; some for Speculation, I mean the
Exercise of the Understanding, but more for Practice, which is by far the most
important. Perhaps Curiosity will sometimes take it ill to be stopped short and
put to a nonplus: but Impatience becomes a Reader ill, who has once aknowledged
a Writing to be Divine. His Inattention argues disrespect of a different kind,
and it cannot well be denied that Folly accompanies both the one and the other.


VI. The EQUALITY of Men by Nature.
Ae. IT IS a current Maxim, that all Men are born free, equal and independent.


L. THE Equality is more easily made out than the other two: for all Men are
born helpless, and many ways in subjection. If by Freedom is meant the Liberty
of the Mind, there would seem to be little ground for Dispute about that; no
man having any power over his Neighbor's Thoughts, farther than he can
persuade him either by Reason or Sophistry: for in compliances from Fear or
Profit, the opinion stands much as it was.


Ae. THE natural Equality therefore should be granted, both as to the Mind and
the Body; all Creatures of the same kind are in that respect equal. There are
indeed differences of Complexion, Genius, Disposition, and Temper, all which
may be called Natural, as appearing very early, and continuing very late; but
these differences are only in the particular Constitution of Souls and Bodies,
or in the Degrees of certain Qualities, every Man having less or more of the
same Quality; as for instance, Pride, Compassion, Hatred, Joy, Curiosity,
Penetration, etc. for of every Quality or Power relating to the Affections, the
Understanding, or the five Senses, every Man has somewhat.

EVERY Man has something in him of the Mathematician, the Mechanic, the
Lawyer, the Statesman, the Mountebank; and so of all other Trades or
Professions. A Man, no doubt, may mistake his Genius, and enter upon a wrong
Trade; but still he may know some little thing of his Business, though as little
as you please. XXXI.
Mr. Pascal observes, "There is a wide difference between a Genius for the
Mathematics, and a Genius for Business or Policy." The French word is Finesse,
which is not always taken in a bad sense. He shows at some length the different
Principles on which those Professions are founded; and drawing to a conclusion,
he says, " Mr. Kennet has taken a good deal of liberty generally in his
Translation: the French is, Mais les Esprits faux ne sont jamais ni fins ni
geometres.
But then it is certain, between both, that a false Genius will neither make a
Geometry Professor, nor a Privy Counselor."


L. NATURAL Differences are no less remarkable in things relating to the Heart,
than in things relating to the Genius: you shall meet with one Man whom you
would not trust with a Halfpenny, another whom you could frankly and safely
trust with all you have. It Is true, bad Education and Example are often to
blame; and even Good Natures, Bene-nata, are corrupted: but still there are
natural Differences; and if it should be asked, Whence do they come? or what
makes one Man differ from another? no Answer can be given, but that in fact it
may be said, one Man has got two Talents, and another ten. St. Paul's Question
is very much to be remembered, What have thou, O Man, that thou have not
received? But I believe People are not so much inclined to think that what they
have received is not freely given, as that their Gifts are greater than in
reality they are.


Ae. THE natural Equality of Mankind appears most of all in certain unavoidable
States and Appointments of the great Lawgiver. It is appointed for all Men once
to die, and after this the Judgment. The first part we see. The Midwives know
how equal Men are at their birth, and the Gravemakers at their burial. And in
all the passages between, or the states intervening, the Equality is not
disputed. If any Man arrives at the Weaknesses of Old Age, he must pass through
the raw State of an Infant, the Silliness of a Child, the Rashness of Youth; in
short, the common Follies and Miseries adhering to all the Periods of Life.


L. OUTWARD Vexation and Trouble is another point of Equality, not only
affecting the several Periods of Life, but all the Situations and Circumstances
which Men can be placed in. -- Ecclus. xl.
Great Travail is created for every man..... from him that wears Purple and a
Crown, to him that is clothed with a linen Frock.


Ae. BUT besides the Troubles annexed to the different Circumstances of
Fortune, every Man has a particular State of his own, which few are or can be
acquainted with. And there are some little things that may be called the
Troubles of the Day: the French call them les Occasions journalieres; and upon
these daily or hourly Incidents the Quiet of our Life is observed very much to
depend. Those that are in the highest Stations will be the most sensible of
such nameless Difficulties.


L. THERE is one thing to show the natural Equality among Men, which may help
also to sweeten some uneasy Reflections upon Life; and that is, the natural
Promptness of contracting Friendship. (I believe, we observed it before.) We
shall find Men engaged in the closest Ties of Good Will and Fidelity, from the
purest Accidents imaginable, a Stage-Coach, or a Track-Scout. It Is true, as St.
Paul said to the Athenians, God made all Nations of one Blood; which shows a
common Relation among Men, as well as an Equality: but how this Relation is
minded, every body knows. The very words Relation and Blood are confined to
certain narrow Degrees of Kindred, into which some Persons are admitted with
great reluctance, or truly because they cannot be disowned.


Ae. AND among those who admit each other into that Distinction, the Friendship
is seldom very warm: so that we often find it the most hearty, when it has
risen the most accidentally. I say, without Blood, without any Combination of
Interest, any Design of overturning Governments, or of quietly making rich
under them, or any private View whatsoever, we shall see Friendships
contracted, which can only end with Death; if they end then.


VII. Accidental Characters.
L. THERE are Differences among Men by Nature, which may be called natural
Characters; as the Differences occasioned by Fortune may be called accidental
Characters. Though all Power is from God, yet to us it appears a great Accident
that one Man should have been a King, another an Archbishop, another a Colonel
of Horse, and so of other Offices and Employments.


Ae. WHICHSOEVER way Power comes into a Man's hands, it is natural for him to
endeavor to keep it, and even to increase it; as the Desire of it is pretty
natural to all Men. These are new Instances of their Equality; and many other
Instances of it may appear in their accidental Situations.


L. POWER and Dominion seem to have been appropriated before any Property could
be fixed in Goods and Money. The natural Power of Parents is not to be called
Appropriation, because the Safety of the Young depends upon the Care of the
Old; and this is a Dominion founded in Love. But if we could suppose a Company
of any grown-up People to have met together by some uncommon Chance, unless
they agree that one or more of themselves shall have the Rule, there is great
likelihood of War to ensue among them. If every one should suppose himself as
fit to govern as his Neighbor, and had an equal stock of Courage to back his
Pretensions, whose hands would the Government fall into? But we see even among
Pirates there is Command and Subjection, and great need for it. How far Cunning
or Force, or a mixture of both, are used in the forming of Governments, is
needless to mention; nor how they go on afterward (for some time) pretty
regularly like a piece of Clock-Work. In both Instances there is more to be
ascribed to Providence than is commonly imagined. You know Philip de Comines
ascribes a good deal to it.


Ae. EVEN Horace acknowledges that the Dominion of this World is from the
Powers above: Dis te minorem quod geris imperas,
Roman --



L. IT were a difficult Task to enquire into all the different Forms of
Government, and much more to adjust the Prerogatives and Privileges of the
Governors and the Governed. It Is enough that every body is satisfied of the
Necessity of Government, and that, whatever the Form be, it must be absolute;
though this last Point is not so much taken notice of, because of the
Disagreeableness of the Sound. One Design of Government, no doubt, is to secure
Property, but then the Governors will call for such a Quota as they shall find
expedient: for no body has yet said that eight Shillings in the Pound may not
be demanded as well as Four. All the question is, where this great Trust shall
be lodged? And here an Opportunity might be taken of extolling the British
Constitution, but that it is needless; most People being agreed that it is a very
good one. All Panegyricks upon an Administration are yet more to be avoided,
since they are liable to be suspected either of Flattery, or a design of
reproaching with safety.


Ae. PRIVATE Property being secured by the Government, there arises a mighty
equality among the Subjects as to that point in a Free Country; every Man being
allowed to get as much Money as he can, provided he keep within the bounds of
the Laws.


L. WHY do you call it private Property?


Ae. BECAUSE the Governors must determine in the first place what is necessary
for the Support of the Government. But though the Subjects are equally allowed to
get all the Money they can, there is a great inequality in the Hits of Fortune,
which creates distinctions without number. Hence Nobility and Gentry of several
Classes and Denominations: hence Officers of the Church, the State, the Army,
the Excise, and the rest. But still every Man has his chance for Preferment,
and most Men are still climbing, and still many breaking their necks.


L. BUT Men venture for Money as well as for Preferment; and no wonder, since
Money answers all things, and that a good deal of it would purchase an Empire;
as it actually happened at Rome, where the Empire was put to sale by the
Soldiers, and bought by a substantial Citizen.


Ae. MEN venture a great deal also to shun Poverty, or rather the Contempt of
it: Per mare Pauperiem fugiens, per saxa, per ignes.


BY the way, the Change of the Roman Taste is remarkable between the first Ages
of the Commonwealth and the Age in which Horace makes his Observation. And Livy
makes a boast in his Preface, that there was no People among whom Poverty was
held in so much honor, and for so long a time. This Poverty does not mean
Beggary, but Food and Raiment, with which these old Heathens were content.


L. PROPERTY being an exclusive Right to use and dispose of the Goods one has
acquired, or is Master of for the time; it might be thought that when great
Estates are got, they would be kept for ever: but it seems in the Course of
things there is a natural Tendency to Equality or a Level, as Heaps
artificially piled up, fall almost by their own weight. If Men were determined
by Covetousness alone, they would have a fairer Chance for keeping their Goods,
and transmitting them to their Representatives; but having Vanity and other
Inclinations also at heart, the far greater part of their Wealth, must be for
others who assist them in those Gratifications: and thus when the Estates are
tolerably good, there is an Opportunity for Shopkeepers and Tailors, and a
world of other Trades, to make something for themselves, till the Profits
arising from the several Bubbles produce a new one, that is, a new Family, to
make a Figure and to be served like the old ones.


Ae. IT seems the word Bubble has two Significations, and both agreeing to the
Subject.


L. THERE is an Universal Circulation: Ranks must be still shifting about, new
Meteors appearing, and forgetting their old Acquaintance, and even their
Blood-Relations. But in the humor of taking care of Relations, People differ
very much: some are willing at least to see their Friends, and to do for them
what they can. Others are of a different humor, and conclude that those who
are already under the hatches, should be kept under.


Ae. BUT Fortune often takes care of those whom Nature forgets. Some who are
born to nothing, and sometimes (one may say) of no body, make a mighty
appearance. Instances of the present time would be disobliging: I shall only
mention two, neither very modern nor very ancient, Sextus Quintus, and
Castruccio Prince of Lucca; the latter a Foundling, and the former a Keeper of
Hogs. Their Friends indeed could do no better for them: the Pope used to jest
upon his Family, and call himself the Descendant of an illustrious House,
because the Light came through the Roof for want of Tyling. But Fortune takes
care of many who have not such metal as those two had: One would often wonder
how some are raised so unexpectedly, while others are as unexpectedly
depressed! And this unequal Proceedure of Fortune has made her sometimes be
called a Goddess, and sometimes (especially by those she neglects) a blind
Gypsy.


L. BUT to talk of the matter soberly, it would seem there is a secret
Direction in the Affairs of very private Persons, either to make them
beneficial to others, or for their own particular Discipline; second Causes
being still allowed to work. If some are said to be raised up to be Scourges to
others, it certainly may be called a particular misfortune to themselves.
However, the Abuses of Power and Distinction are not of so bad consequence, as
the want of them would be in the present Disposition of Men. How wisely has it
been ordained, to distinguish Men rather by the exterior show, than by the
interior Endowments! Here Is another Person and I disputing the way. Who shall
have the preference in this case? Why, the better Man of the two. But I am as
good a Man as he: so that if no Expedient be found, he must beat me, or I must
beat him. Well; but all this while, he has four Footmen at his back, and I have
but one. This is a visible advantage: We need only tell Noses to discover it.
It Is my part therefore to yield; and I am a Blockhead if I contest the point.
See here an easy Method of Peace, the great Safeguard and supreme Happiness of
this World. XXIX.
Mr. Pascal has a pretty Illustration of this Subject, which Mr. Kennet
translates with some Humor.


Ae. BUT the odds of four Footmen to one, is a real Distinction of Power as
well as of Figure; it is a sort of Life guard to a great Man. It Is even
remarkable how far a bare Name will go, without much Attendance, or much Money,
to secure a Man from Insults, and to keep those who have a dependence upon him
in some order among themselves. So that Name and Rank have a magical kind of
Power in the World, which, as things now stand, is of no small benefit.


L. MONS. Domat, who has very good Reflections on the Nature of Society, and
the Distinction of Ranks, gives us a view of the different Orders of Persons
who compose the State or Commonwealth, as they are ranked in his polite Nation.
Le Droit public, Live. I. Tit. IX. Sect. 3.
They stand thus:

AFTER the general Distinction of the Clergy and Laity, in which the Clergy has
the preference, the first Order among the Laics is that of the Officers of the
Army; the second, the Council of the Prince; the third, the Administration of
Justice; the fourth, the Finances; the fifth, the Sciences and Liberal Arts;
the sixth, Trade; the seventh, Handy-Crafts; the eighth and last Order,
Husbandry and the Care of Flocks. He seems to make an Apology for putting
Agriculture in the last place, and makes a sufficient Encomium upon it; yet he
Place above cited, X.
adds, "But as this Labor is very painful, and employs the greatest part of
Men, and removes them farther than any other from Ranks and Precedence, those
who exercise it are placed in the last Rank."

THIS way of classing Men, we see, is pretty arbitrary: Domat says on Place, as
if he had said Custom has so determined; and that is all.


Ae. INDEED in all Nations there is scarce any other Rule of living than as
Custom determines; People seldom enquiring any farther than whether a thing is
done, or is not done? But to say nothing of the Hardships of putting Men in the
last Rank, because they have the most Toil, which affects only those who work
at the Plough and other Parts of Husbandry, and many other Trades have as hard
Labor too; if Agriculture were to be considered in the view of taking a Lease
of a Piece of Ground, the Farmer may be looked upon as a Party-Contracter with
the Proprietor, and sometimes he may be the richest Man of the two, and may do
as little Work as his Landlord: in this case his Employment will scarce be
reckoned derogatory. And if there is any Honor in being independent, the
Farmer is more upon that Lay than the Followers of the Sciences and liberal
Arts. Illustrations upon this Head would not be very agreeable neither. But
some Gentlemen's Sons would probably make more of their Patrimony by laying it
out upon a good Farm, than in several Trades they take to; and if it once
become fashionable, it would have a double Advantage.


L. SOME have made a Division of Mankind into the good People, that is, the
People of Fashion, and the Mob. If this Division has no great Foundation in
Nature, it has a good deal in the Appearance; for it is very easy to discern
who is of the Mob by one's Clothes. But Mr. Cowley, (if I remember well) makes
a Distinction between the great Vulgar, and the small: and he has Vulgus autem
tam Chlamydatos, quam Coronam voco: non enim Colorem vestium, quibus praetexta
Corpora sunt, adspicio, etc. De Vitabeata.
Seneca's Authority upon his side. With these two and some others, it is the
Qualities of the Mind, and not the Clothes, that raises Persons from the
Character of the Vulgar; but this reckoning would be a little dangerous.

THE Canaille, or Rabble, is another Term for the great Body of the inferior
People: it is much the same with the Mob or the Mobile, which denotes
Inconstancy and Giddiness; and in this Character also many of the rich and
fashionable might be included. But the Mob signifies principally the Crowd got
together, sometimes for bare Curiosity, sometimes to make Disturbance, and of
which King William used to say, the Mob is not always in the wrong. Indeed the
common People may be said to see pretty exactly within certain Limits, though
they cannot be said to see far. The Canaille is mostly applied to the Dregs, or
the worthleslest of all.


Ae. IT IS pity that People are so ready to look with Contempt upon others of an
inferior Rank, which I suspect they will do still; but they would do well to
reflect upon the Equality by Nature: though this may be attended with some other
Reflections a little uneasy; for if they once begin, (supposing Pride to keep a
while out of the way) they will probably regret the senseless Fashion of the
World, which has separated them from the great Body of Mankind, and so has
deprived them of the Familiarity of some Persons who would have made excellent
Friends, had it not been for the Coarseness of their Clothes. Marriage suffers
by this Confinement as well as Friendship, and the Choice in that State is
still more confined through particular Views of Money or Alliance. It Is pity the
Appearances of Good Humor, (though sometimes they are but Appearances) and the
Reports of a good Education are so much neglected. I believe I have been upon
this head before.


L. YOU have so. I wish the World may not take you for a Leveller.


Ae. YOU know I Am pretty cautious in declaring my Sentiments to the World. And
truly any body will easily see, that though all Ranks by some Miracle were
reduced, the Equality would not continue half a Day. And for the renouncing of
Property, it will be reasonable to wait till one sees the Apostles, at whose
Feet the Goods are to be laid.


L. WE have as yet talked of the different Characters among Mankind, chiefly
with regard to their Fortunes, and it is these indeed which make their natural
Characters appear more remarkably; so that the same may be called natural and
accidental both.

WITH reference to Religion: Every Body knows it is accident, for the most part,
that makes us of one Religion, rather than another. It Is either the Religion of
our Parents, or the Religion of the Times; and our Parents seem to have been
determined the same way that we are. This is with reference to Forms and
Systems. Those Defects and Blemishes in Religion, called Superstition,
Enthusiasm, and the like, are owing to the particular Temper of Persons, and
not to the System they espouse: for we shall find some of the same Profession
very warm, and others very indifferent.

THERE is hardly a Pamphlet comes out, that does not take notice of those two
Characters. Both the Superstitious and the Enthusiasts, I believe, have a
design of pleasing the Almighty, and the Enthusiasts imagine they please him
better than they do: the Superstitious have more of Fear than Pride, and so
they are rigid Observers of little things, without which they think there is no
Salvation. Both Characters may meet in the same Person, but it is the prevailing
one that gives the Denomination. Enthusiasm is apt to despise all Observances,
Superstition to magnify and multiply them.


Ae. THE Disease of Enthusiasm has more or less dangerous Effects, both for
Society and the Persons themselves, according to the Tempers it seizes. If a
Man whose Pride is not excessive should fancy himself inspired, or clothed
with some extraordinary Commission from Heaven, the Government may be pretty
safe from his Attempts: but if one should think himself God's peculiar
Favorite, and that his Commission was given him on account of his singular
Merit, or even though his Fancy should not carry him to the Extremity of
Inspiration, if he but thinks himself a peculiar Favorite, it will be enough
to make him set up for temporal Dominion, and fight, (if he have Courage) like
John of Leyden.

BIGOTRY and Zeal may be called the Offspring of Superstition and Enthusiasm.

CARELESSNESS in Religion, is much the same as the having no Religion: it
proceeds partly from Stupidity, and partly from the Love of Pleasure. The
Contempt of Religion is chiefly from Pride, or the Love of Independency. Hence,
it is easy to trace the Sources of Atheism and Deism.


L. IF the Atheists are sincere in their Profession, they must be very dull.
The Deists may be suspected of affecting more Unbelief than they have: nor can
they be altogether freed of the Character of Dullness. But then their Antipathy
at the Clergy, whose Post they envy either for its Ease or its Grandeur, added
to the Pain they have to enquire any farther, makes them take up with very weak
Arguments against revealed Religion. Sometimes they put on respectful Airs, and
call it in Irony their most holy Religion, pretending to differ from those
Scepticks, who think Characteristicks III. 236. There is a great Fertility of
Insinuations in that whole Chapter.
the holy Records were compiled by an interested Party, in behalf of the
richest Corporation or Monopoly that could be erected.


Ae. THAT IS Shaftesbury. But these are poor Doings.


L. BUT they are sufficient to make a young Gentleman swear it is all a Trick,
the Priests contrived the Bible. But I can never believe the Priests would have
contrived it so well. If one should ask the Lad what Priests did contrive it?
the Popish Priests, or the Protestant? he will be a little at a stand, when
it is told him the Books are older than Popery it self. Again, if he reflects
that some of those Books are called the Old Testament, and others of them the
New; he will find the Old was in the keeping of the Jews long before
Christianity was heard of. It would perhaps be some loss, if the Deists were
hindered from writing against Christianity; for their Arguments are sometimes
of more use to help a weak Faith, than some Arguments that are brought in its
behalf. But in return for this Privilege of writing, they ought to do it in a
fair honest way.


Ae. VANITY and Ill-Humour being known to be the Springs of most of the doings
of Men, there needs little to be said concerning the Characters of most other
Professions. As every Man has got a particular Stamp from Nature, so every
Trade or Profession has its particular Air or Appearance: the Military Men have
their Airs, the Clergymen theirs, the Courtiers theirs, and so on. There is
also the Air of a Rake, and the Air of a Deist: but this Rank of Men are best
discovered by their Conversation and their Writings.


L. IT may be some help toward keeping one's self in good humor, to consider
the Equality of Mankind, both as to their Nature and their Proceedure, and to
give allowance also for Accidents: if all desire Esteem, it can be no surprise
that they take the way to obtain it that appears to them the fittest. And if a
Man happens to be remarkably saucy, perhaps he might have been less so in a
different Post, or had he not been spoiled with Flattery


Ae. ALLOWANCES indeed ought to be given. And the Consideration of natural
Equality will likewise help People to some Humanity and make them wish at least
that every body were easy in their different Statious* In this view there will
be some care taken of the meanest Servant.


L. ONE thing must indeed be granted, that if this Life be designed as a State
of Trial and Discipline, the Inequality of Fortunes and Humors answers that
End very well.


Ae. IT IS very remarkable too, that the same Principle of Self-Love, which
divides Men from one another, and produces such a variety of fanciful
Distinctions, should yet in some measure unite them again, their Necessities
making them subservient to one another; and, which is still more remarkable,
the inferior Ranks often serving their Superiors cheerfully, and without the
least disdain. Domat has very good Observations upon this Head, in his Treatise
of the Law, showing how out of Self-Love, which is the Poison of Society, God
brings Remedies for its subsistence. And there seems to be the like Impression
on the Minds of the generality of Mankind, very much to the honor of the
divine Wisdom, that God draws Order out of Confusion.


L. THERE is farther a certain Mildness to be observed in the Conduct of
Providence, Sapientia disponit omnia suaviter: by which Society not only hangs
together, but the great Body of it, upon whom the drudgery of Labor is thrown,
has an Equivalent of sounder Sleep, and (generally speaking) more Contentment.


Ae. THAT divine Truth is of an extent that reaches to the whole Creation: a
fine ad finem pertingit fortiter.


VIII. CONVERSATION.
L. THE thing generally understood by Conversation is that grand amusement of
Talking, when People meet together, either by chance or design, to pass the
time; or, as the French say, to murder it. Drinking or Gaming does that pretty
effectually: the former making the Conversation very tumultuous, as the latter
confines it to narrow bounds.


Ae. THE Persons who have most time on their hands, are they whose indulgent
Parents, or their own particular good Luck, have left them Rents to live on,
without the necessity of working either without doors or within.

THE Laborers in the Field, and Tradesmen (Handy-crafts, Mechanics,
Artificers) generally work the most part of the day; they eat their Meals with
a good appetite, they speak little, and sleep sound.

MEN of public Employment, such as Officers of State, Judges, Lawyers,
Clergymen, etc. have more or less time for Conversation, according to the
Nature of their Employments and their Diligence in them.


L. IT were neither kind nor civil in this Argument, to forget the Women; for
they can speak too. But to say the truth, Idleness and speaking for speaking
sake is not their general Character: they are more active, more foreseeing, and
better Managers than we. If a foolish Education sometimes spoils them (as whom
does it not spoil?) the fault should be laid where it ought.

BUT since there is such an Equality in both Sexes as to the Operations of
Self-Love, that the same Principles only seem to act in a softer or rougher
skin; the same Motives to Conversation, and the same Errors in it must prevail
in both.


Ae. THE first Project, before Vanity begins to stir, is to make Life easy; and
this is founded on Self-Insufficiency, as it may be called: but supposing
People once met together, it is natural enough to endeavor to shine a little,
and to be glad to be in such Companies, where one shines most. Est quod gaudeas
te in ista loca venisse, etc.


L. IT were too severe, however, to affirm that a Man never opens his mouth but
out of vanity, and that he never goes into Company, but with the View of
leaving a respectful Impression of himself. Such Reflections would lead to
Melancholy. They serve but to imbitter Life, or at best to make it tasteless.
Nor are they true in fact; for a great deal of that Talk or Superfluity of
Words which seems to proceed from Vanity, is often but mere Habit or Infirmity.
And just so in the case of Detraction, which though it seems to spring from
Illnature and Vanity both, yet is rather a senseless Custom than any thing
else: indeed the Duke of Rochefoucault says, it is more from Vanity than
Ill Nature that we are Slanderers; which is a milder Construction than he
generally makes of Actions: but I humbly think he might have been a little
milder still.


Ae. THERE are certainly other Inducements to Conversation than Vanity and
Ill Nature. There is Curiosity, Amusement and Friendship. The Mind naturally
desires Knowledge, though there was no pleasure in showing it to others. That
Curiosity which is the bare Itch of hearing a new thing, is much the same with
Amusement. But Friendship may concur with both, or it may be alone the
Inducement of going into Company; there being a pleasure in the very sight of
Faces, where no great Information is to be expected.


L. To turn this Affair to some account, there must be a good deal of
Familiarity, and some little Philosophy. I believe we observed it before, that
Horace lays down a very good Plan of Conversation, wherein he tells what his
Friends and he talked of, and what they did not talk of. One cannot think of it
too often. Sermo oritur, non de villis domibusve alienis;
Nec male necne Lepos sallet: sed quod magis ad nos
Pertinet, and nescire malum est, agitamus: utrumne
Divitiis homines, an sint virtute beati?
Quidve ad Amicitias, Usus, Rectumne trahat nos?
Et quae natura boni, summumque quid ejus? etc.
AGAIN, Brundusium Numici melius via ducat an Appi:
Quem damnosa Venus, quem praeceps alea nudat;
Gloria quem supra vires and vestit and ungit, etc.



Ae. HERE is a good deal of Scandal and many frivolous things cut off, and
useful things insisted on: but they would be too philosophical for most
Conversations. One must often hear Stories of a Cock and a Bull, and talk of
them too, with an Air of Contentment, when one cannot make better of it. It Is
in familiar Conversation, and chiefly between two, that free Sentiments can be
exchanged upon grave Subjects. In promiscuous Company, such Discourse must be
avoided, lest it should look like Cant, and give a Disgust.

BUT care must be taken in familiar Chat, not to fall into Detraction, to which
it must be confessed there is a natural Tendency, especially when two Heads are
got together. This Whispering puts one in mind of the hissing of Serpents, and
for the most part some body is stung. But in this there is much of Habit, as
was said before; though it is a very unlucky Habit, and often produces very bad
Effects.


L. AMONG the several Abuses of Speech mentioned in the Government of the
Tongue, there is none the Author desires People more to beware of, than that of
Detraction; giving this Reason for it, that few seem to be sensible of its
Guilt. He says, "many who would startle at an Oath, whose Stomachs as well as
Consciences recoil at an Obscenity, do yet slide glibly into a Detraction,
etc." The good Author probably has had the Sex in his eye, when he mentioned
the recoiling at an Obscenity: But upon the matter, what is it but Obscenity,
that is so currently talked under the peculiar Term of Scandal? The talking of
Bastards has a great resemblance of Obscenity. What are the Scandals about
Court, or in the nearest Village, which will do just as well for Discourse, but
Obscenity? And yet this is a great Subject of Conversation among much commended
Women!


Ae. AMONG Gentlemen, it is of use to have some knowledge of History, the common
News running soon out; whereas History can last a while, and can be as little
suspected of Vanity as any Subject a Man can talk of: for it chiefly requires
the Memory, which few are ready to value themselves upon, and it gives
Opportunity to others in the Company to tell what they remember too; and even
those who have read very little, can keep their Countenance, by putting in a
Word, or asking a Question. But to dwell too much upon History will not be
diverting, and therefore Allowance must be given to something that is more
familiar, and tending a little to Mirth; with this Caution always, that it be
at no body's expense, either in the Company or out of it.


L. HERE a Question might arise concerning Jesting, whether it be consistent
with the Rules of Christianity? Some are apt to conclude it is not, from the
Words of St. Paul to the V. 3, 4.
Ephesians: But Fornication, and all Uncleanness, let it not be once named
among you, as becomes Saints: neither Filthiness nor foolish Talking, nor
Jesting, which are not convenient: but rather giving of Thanks, etc. It Is hard
to understand the precise Sense of the two last things to be avoided, at this
distance of time; though the Christians in those days have been at no loss to
know it: but among us Foolish Talking is an undefin'd Expression, and if
nothing were to be admitted into Discourse but what is wise, there would be
little talking at all. As to Jesting, People are not agreed even about the
Translation of the (...)
Word; it may mean either Scurrility, or Quaintness, or Buffoonery. Castellio
translates it Facetia, but Facetiousness has not a hard meaning in English, nor
do I know who can justly condemn it: I Am sure very grave Persons, and who have
a great regard for Christianity, sometimes use it. On the other hand, who can
take upon them to give formal Allowances, when they are not absolutely sure but
it may contradict the meaning of an Apostle? For St. Paul, after he had
exhorted the Ephesians to abstain from bad Actions and bad Discourse, tells
them how they ought to employ their time, to wit, in giving of Thanks; which
agrees with the Directions of St. James, Is any of you afflicted? let him pray;
is any cheerful? let him sing Psalms. But every body knows these Directions are
not for common Conversation, wherein too great Gravity is to be avoided, as
well as too great Liberty. How hard is it to keep the Midway! It Is Vanity to
pretend to it: all we are to endeavor, is to keep as near it as we can.


Ae. I think instead of inconvenient, ( ver. 4.) our Translators might have put
unbecoming, or impertinent, which seems to agree better with the Greek Word.
All I would infer, is, that there is such a thing as Decency, as well as
Religion: and though we cannot now so well judge of what becomes Saints, yet we
may know what is becoming or unbecoming to be said in honest Company. And
therefore all Trash, Scandal, and Detraction will be carefully shunned, where
the Taste is not already vitiated by ill Habit: for it must be owned, that some
things have a Relish, or Smack, beyond others; as Scandal, in comparison of
common Prate: and even in these it is well known how much precious time is
wasted.


L. WASTED indeed!


Ae. BUT as to Jesting, when it has no worse Tendency than to keep the Company
in good humor, or from falling asleep, some grave enough Persons have not
declared against it: and there may be as little Vanity in that sort of
Discourse, as in any other. There is an advantage too, that to tell any merry
thing said by any other Person is all one to the Company, as if the Jest were
the Repeater's own; and in this he only shows a little of his Memory, which
generally succeeds better than when he endeavors to show his Wit; as we find
little Tales are more taking than Quirks, and Raillery, and other Things that
are called smart.


L. THERE is one thing that may justify a harmless Jest, and it is the natural
Disposition Men have to laugh; which other Creatures have not, nor the Faculty
it self. Monkeys can grin, but it hardly comes up to laughter? I shall not
however affirm, that it is one of the distinguishing Characters of a rational
Creature, since it often arises without Reason, the Fancy being only tickled,
and an unvoluntary, convulsive Motion produced, little better than coughing or
sneezing.


Ae. SOLOMON says of Laughter, that it is Madness. We must allow, that besides
his inspired Character, he was in a situation to know the value of things
better than most Men, and had left nothing untried. It might therefore be
concluded from his Words, that Laughing should have no place in this Valley of
Tears. But it seems more probable that the wise King spoke only against
Excesses, and that he would not have refused a little innocent Laughter to poor
heavy Mankind, no more than taking the Air to revive their Spirits.

I shall not set up to be a Casuist; but we see in Fact, that one of the
greatest Plots in Life is to laugh: even drinking would go heavily down without
it, though Men are not wholly indifferent about the Liquor neither; yet to laugh,
seems more to be the End of their meeting, than to drink.


L. BUT however allowable Laughter may be, it had need to be put under
Regulations; and as to these, Prudence and Good Manners must judge, pro re nata.


Ae. THE most allowable as well as agreeable kind of laughing, is that which
proceeds from cheerful Good Humor: the Person that laughs is pleased, and no
body offended; the Satisfaction even runs through the whole Company. On the other
hand, the Laughter that proceeds from Contempt, argues a Disturbance of Soul,
and gives a quite different Air to the Countenance: it is really an Effect of
the Spleen, Nature taking that way to relieve it self, though there is something
involuntary in it too; the Fancy being touched uneasily, not tickled.


L. A very disagreeable kind also of laughing to the Beholders, is that which
is affected, wherein the Fancy is not touched at all, and the Sides are only
shaken artificially, or rather aukwardly; as well as the Face is put in a
foolish Set, without any Charm or Life: such is the Laughter of those who study
to please, Attendants upon Levees, Pages, Chamber-Maids, and many others.


Ae. THAT which makes Boys and Girls, and generally young People, more ready to
laugh than the older, seems to proceed from the Temperature of the Body, as
well as the State of the Mind; since we see all young Creatures are merry and
sportive. Care must be taken however, both in young and old, that this Mirth
degenerate not into Insolence and Derision; young Women arriving sooner at
their Wit and Mettle, are apt to laugh at young Men, and are great Observers in
general of what is heavy and blundering, or any way ridiculous either as to
Persons or Things. Sometimes Children are corrected, but who shall correct the
older? Mean time it is remarkable, that the Excess of Laughter is generally
succeeded with Lowness of Spirits, Uneasiness, and Pain in the Breast and
Sides; concerning which Mechanism, the Anatomists may be consulted.


L. IT were to make too great a Panegyric upon Laughing, even the best sort of
it that can be imagined, to say that it gives the greatest Pleasure in
Conversation; for People are truly better pleased, when the Understanding is
well informed, than when the Imagination is tickled: and then a kind Word is
more delightful than the greatest Discoveries of Speculation. The Understanding
and the Heart are very different Regions. Indeed in common Conversation a Laugh
is the best Fruit we can propose to reap: but to be convinced there is no great
Excellency in it, we have but to consider that it is only frivolous Things that
make us laugh most; a Word out of joint, an odd Gesture, and the like. And
which is still more unphilosophical, we sometimes fall a laughing alone, on the
Remembrance of some of those out-of-the-way Things we have seen or heard. Nay,
a thing will tickle the foolish Fancy, that was never seen nor heard before.


Ae. WHAT shall we make of that readiness to laugh, when one slips a Foot and
tumbles over? We are even afraid he is hurt, and yet cannot refrain from
laughing! In very small Instances we may discover plain Evidences of our
Disorder.


L. WHAT do you think of Smiling?


Ae. SMILING may be called Laughter in its Infancy, and sometimes it is most
agreeable when it goes no farther. The Difference between a natural Smile, and
an artificial, is easily perceived; for though the same Muscles seem to be
employed in both, yet there is a Sweetness and Vivacity wanting in the
artificial Smile, which one needs not go to the Drawing Room to be convinced
of, but may discover it upon all Occasions.


L. THE tedious Drawing Room!


Ae. IT seems Sneering is meant both of scornful laughing and scornful
speaking, and is far from being a pleasant Thing. There is a Severity in it, as
it exposes a weak side, or a Ridicule, a thing that no body is reckoned to be
free of. It Is a standing Maxim, that every Man has his Whim and his Ridicule.
There is likewise national Ridicule as well as personal; and there is the
Ridicule of every Profession: but it belongs rather to the Playhouse, than
private Conversation, to lay open these Infirmities. It Is true, the Stage is
seldom successful in the Cure: but it is at least of some use to let People see
the Follies of their Neighbors, and if they will not look at home, the Stage
cannot help it. But as new Questions arise at every turn, it may be asked who
shall correct the Stage when it goes wrong it self? I know no Cure for
Dullness; but plain Immorality is a staring thing; and the Wisdom of the
Legislature must take notice of that, the best way it can.


L. As History is among the proper Materials for Conversation, so the more
particular the better: such as Memoirs and Lives, if they be well done; because
the Nature of Man, and the Springs of Actions are there best discovered.
Travels afford good Materials too, as the different Customs of Nations, their
Climates, and what they produce.


Ae. WHAT shall become of Romances?


L. IN some cases I Am very unwilling to give a precise Answer; so I must ask
again, who would part with Virgil and Milton? Was not Telemaque writ by the
Bishop of Cambray? Who would even part with Hudibras, and several other
Performances? The old voluminous Romances are well out of fashion.


Ae. SOME Novels are even but dull.


L. AS to the Attention that should be given to frivolous Discourse, it is
enough if one appears to give attention to it; he may take some liberty of
thinking with himself of what he has a mind, and a Nod now and then will be
enough. There should be some Appearance of Attention, or else it would be very
mortifying; like what is told of the Prince of Lucca, who hearing a tedious
Discourse one day, of which he took little notice, and the poor Man, who began
to perceive it, making an Apology for having spoke so much; answered, "You need
make no Apology, for I hardly know what you were talking of." -- This was a
little severe, but perhaps the Prince had reason.


Ae. BUT it is much easier to know how to hear others, than what to say our
selves. The Government of the Thoughts is previous to the Government of the
Tongue. How shall the Wheel of the Imagination that is continually in motion, be
either stopped or regulated? But since the Tongue must talk of what is rumbling
in the Head, it were to be wished, that every one should empty his Head of the
high Opinion of himself, and the Contempt of others. I think Cardinal de Retz
says, "A Man ought to be much upon his guard against the Pleasure he is apt to
take in Raillery; for upon many Occasions it cost the Prince of Conde dear." It
seems, Contempt and Derision are very ill to digest: when it is to one's face,
it is hard to shun a Quarrel; and when it is behind the back, it usually comes
round again, to the disturbance of both Parties: so that Jesting is often
inconvenient, according to our Translation.


L. COMPLAINING is also a poor thing; and when groundless, very unjust, But as
Affectation is ready to enter into every thing, these Complaints are put on, to
procure Sympathy and a little Esteem, as being the Due of a patient Sufferer.
It is not prudent however to be still complaining, especially of unkind Usage,
because People may be apt to think there is not much in it, or that it is taking
the first word.


Ae. IT IS really strange, how Affectation runs through our whole Behavior! We
are every thing by turns. We affect to be weak, and we affect to be strong; we
affect to be poor, and we affect to be rich; we affect to be temperate, and we
affect to be debauched: the Desire of Esteem still working in us, and producing
it self, as seems most likely to turn to the present account.


IX. BOOKS.
L. HERE is another Amusement, which those that are at leisure have more at
their hand, than those that are harassed with hard Labor, or with Business.
It Is true, a Book may be for more use than bare Amusement; but that depends
upon the Qualities of the Performance, some Books being good for very little.


Ae. IF a Man were to consider for what End Life is given him, quidnam victuri
gignimur, he would readily enquire after the Books that could direct him best.
But in this he is apt to meet with very different Advices. If he be already
sworn to a Party, he must be directed by his Masters; and if he is only to
follow the Starts of his own Fancy, he can hardly have a worse Guide. If again
he is to ask Counsel from every Party, he must be much divided about what he
shall choose. Here is one fixed Point however, as to Books of Religion, all
Parties of Christendom acknowledge one Book, which is called the Bible, as the
Standard of all Belief and Practice: and though it is called but one Book, yet it
is a Collection of many, and has a Variety of Subjects, which I need not
enumerate. There is also a Variety in the Style, according to the Character of
the Writers. That Irony does not signify much, Characteristicks III. 236.
that in the Composition there is nothing miraculous or self-convincing. A
miraculous Style is a new Phrase: but the Style of the Scriptures is by most
People acknowledged to be natural, and by some even to be Longinus not only
instances Moses, but in a MS. in the Vatican he makes mention of Paul of
Tarsus, as an Author of great Excellency.
sublime. Conviction must also come another way than from the Words of a Book:
a self-convincing Style is another Curiosity.


L. BUT the deepest Objections are against the Authority of those sacred Books:
I should have called them Insinuations rather than Objections, for generally
they are nothing else; and where any Arguments have been really formed against
any particular Book or single Prophecy, they have been answered by very good
hands, and the impartial Reader will judge whose Arguments are the strongest.
But for those who acknowledge the Scriptures both to be Authentic and Divine,
and who may want to know the best Rules of living in order to be happy in the
next World, and even in this; such Persons, I believe, will find in that
neglected Collection of Writings, what will be useful for both these Ends, and
an Agreeableness of Style very distinguishing. I could name several Books
wherein Plainness or Simplicity has been studied; but the Authors have not been
able to hinder the Art from appearing.


Ae. WHEN a Person happens to have such a Value for the Bible, he will of
consequence make it a good part of his Study; and will approve of other Books
on Religion, as they shall appear to agree to that Standard. Let him dip in
Commentaries and Sermons, and wherever he thinks his weak Faith may be best
assisted. And though he may chance to think some of those religious Books a
little heavy, he should not reject them all in a lump: for that which he may
suppose to be the Effect of his delicate Taste, may be in reality but the
Weakness of his Appetite. Nor let him think that Dullness is confined to the
Labors of the Pulpit, and Works of Divinity; since not only the Workmen for
the Stage, who must labor for their Bread, but even fine Gentlemen who might
live at their ease, and yet labor for Esteem, do often produce Works of great
heaviness. It is also to be considered in behalf of the Clergy, that they are
so limited to a few Topics, and these often insisted on, that their Fancy has
little scope to exert it self, in comparison of the Authors whose aim is
Ridicule, and sometimes Ribaldry, (things that rarely do well in a Sermon;) and
so they whose Profession is Seriousness, must be at a considerable loss, and
therefore ought to have the Allowances that Justice requires.


L. AFTER Books that treat expressly of Religion, those of Morality have the
next place. Perhaps Mr. Cowley, when he recommended to Dr. Sprat to publish
nothing in his Compositions that might be offensive either to Religion or Good
Manners, has by Good Manners chiefly meant Decency; because Morality has a
higher meaning, and is a Part of Religion: and it is remarkable, that there was
nothing found in the Works of that fine Gentleman, which a worthy Divine could
have any scruple to publish.


Ae. MORALS and Divinity are by no means to be separated. And as to those
Writings that are properly called Books of Morality, it is among the old
Philosophers they are principally to be sought after. Not to say but some of
those great Men have also left many Instructions concerning Religion, and
Discoveries of the divine Nature; as a small Acquaintance with Plato and some
others will testify. Though Socrates wrote nothing himself (in which he resembles
the great Instructor of Mankind) yet we have his Sentiments and his Manner of
Life recorded by those who were familiar with him, and at the same time the
finest Hands in the World. Epictetus wrote none neither, but we have that Loss
supplied by Simplicius and Arrian. Nor are the Poets to be overlooked among
those ancient Writers, Morality being their aim too in another Dress. It would
seem, the earliest Authors have wrote best. Horace recommends those who were
counted Ancients in his time, as being worthy to be read day and night.

AS to modern Authors, a Man is to make the best use of them he can, without
disparaging or over-valuing them. All Searches are painful, and much rubbish
must be turned over before coming at the best Books, and before coming at what
is excellent in several Books that are not despicable. This I mean of some
Books where Instruction is openly intended: where it is intended more covertly,
the Authors have a better Excuse to plead for the Rubbish that must be turned
over. And the Reader's Intention being often Amusement, he will still find his
account less or more, even in that View. All then, it seems, must be looked
into, even the common Performances of the Time. Wit is always Wit, and Dullness
always Dullness.


L. IT seems you have a mind to keep the Balance between the Moderns and the
Ancients.


Ae. IT IS true: but I have some Biass to the Ancients. But, non nostrum est
tantas componere Lites.


L. THERE is one Point in which a Reader has a considerable advantage of an
Author; any Dullness he has is apparent, whereas the Reader's is best known to
himself, unless he set up (against his Stars) as a Critic, and give his
Opinion mal a propos. It may happen also, that what has been writ in good
Humor, shall be read in bad Humor; which is another Disadvantage of an
Author. And there is still something expected that is new, which is a hard
Demand upon one hand, and a foolish Pretense on the other. Such Authors (who
are to blame in their turn) should mind honest Chaucer: For out of old Fields,
as Men says,
Comes all this new Corn, fro Year to Year;
And out of old Books, in good Faith,
Comes all this new Science that Men lear.



Ae. PRETENDING is very silly. When a Book is brought into another Language,
it is a Translation of the Words; and when the Thoughts of one Book are brought
into another Book, this is but a Translation still.


L. THERE can be no better Description given of some Books upon all Subjects,
than Ovid gives of the Chaos, for five or six Lines together; -- rudis
indigestaque Moles, etc.

BUT a Reader cannot always free himself either of want of Penetration or want
of Attention; so that Authors have a harder Fate than is imagined.


Ae. WRITING is indeed a ticklish sort of Affair: for the same advances by
which one grows into a Familiarity with the World, are apt to make him forget
the Respect he owes it; and on the other hand, to bring him into Contempt with
it.


L. SINCE Amusement is the great Design of Conversation, no wonder it is the
Design of Reading: and why not of Writing? I think Horace calls it playing with
Paper. Yet sometimes he seems to have been weary of writing upon ludicrous
Subjects -- Valeat res ludicra si me
Palma negata, macrum, donata reducit opimum.

, and to have bid farewell to it, because of some bad Consequences.


Ae. BUT Horace might have writ what he pleased, and have been pretty sure of
Approbation: others ought to risk but moderately. Nor can there be a greater
Mistake than to think of pleasing People of quite opposite Tastes, the sincere
and the scornful, the wise and the foolish. But there is a certain Incontinence
of Fancy, which often proves too hard-mouthed for the Judgment, as the Tale of
a Tub honestly acknowledges. It Is pity Mr. Hobbes's Human Faculties, Art. V.
toward the End.
Cautions upon this Head were not more observed than they are. A witty Man
happens to let some Flings at Religion and the Scripture, for both which he has
a real Value; and his Words are treasured up by shallow Heads, and retail'd
against his Intention. But what Help? They have a mind to shine by the
repeating, as the Author could not shun it in the writing.


L. IN a Country of Liberty, whatever is published will be read; and it were
hard to take away this Privilege, though it were practicable. As to that of
Publishing, it must be left to the Discretion of the Legislature: and whatever
Difficulty there might be in restraining the Liberty of the Press, there would
be much more in restraining the private Use of Pen, Ink, and Paper; and
therefore one would think it were not unworthy of the Care of the Government to
appoint a moderate Sallary for some who have a little Scholarship and common
Sense, to enable them to translate the most approved Books whether ancient or
modern. This would keep them from a certain Theft, and transmit to us the
Sentiments of those Standard-Performances entire and unmixt.


Ae. I wish that were done.


L. THERE are two kinds of Books almost exploded a while ago, the voluminous
Romances and School Divinity. It was pity some of the Schoolmen had not
employed their Talents upon more solid Things, for they have been great Men,
and had a Sense of Religion; but their metaphysical Subtilties made their
Writings of little use to the World, and served principally to nourish Dispute
and Contradiction. The Writers of large Romances had some very good Ideas of
Virtue; but all was lost in tedious Narratives: and sometimes they gave too
favorable Ideas of Vice, as Revenge in particular. Our Novels deal most in
Scandal.


Ae. CONSIDERING the great Variety of Humors, it is no wonder there is the same
as to Books. But when a Man reflects on the Variety in the former, it will
hinder him from prescribing or recommending Entertainments in the latter,
concluding that People are generally best pleased with their own Choice. You
will see, I have here chiefly in view the Books designed for Amusement.
Harmless Raillery is universally acceptable. Gibing is pretty passable, and
it is the more honest when it discovers itself in the very Title of the
Performance; for instance, the Praise of Folly, a Tale of a Tub, and the like.
If a dash of unlucky Humor happens to mingle, it is what an Author cannot
always help. Sneering is seldom taking, because of the Air of Insincerity that
attends it: there is somewhat more agreeable even in Writings of professed
Remissness, to use Mr. Hobbes's Expression. I shall not say positively that all
Books are to be read, but every body will agree that many of them may be read
with very little Attention....... I Am sorry I cannot see you again for some
days, being obliged to go a little into the Country.


L. PRAY return as soon as you can.


Ae. YOU know how uncertain all Things are: but I Will endeavor to see you in a
few days.


TWO DISCOURSES ON DECENCY.
DISCOURSE I.
Decency is the least of all Laws, and the most observed.
THIS Reflection we have from an eminent Person, who knew the World very well;
and it shows how much we stand in awe of the Opinion of Men. But whence comes
it, that we are so very much afraid of what others will say of us, even when we
have a very mean Opinion of their Judgment? Words are but imaginary Lashes, and
still more when we do not hear them; nevertheless some would choose to undergo
the severest Whipping, (if no body was to see it) rather than undergo the Lash
of Censure. And this dread of Censure goes yet farther: we are afraid of what
others will think of us, as well as of what they will say.

AND here it is all one, whether Decency has any real Foundation in Nature, or
if it arises only from the Fancies of Men; since it is the Fear of Reproach
that chiefly makes us avoid indecent Things, or what passes for such in the Eye
of the World: though it cannot be fairly denied that there is a real, as well as
an imaginary Decency; as there is real, as well as imaginary Honor: and though
the Reality of both is denied by a few Persons; it is a great question if they
are in earnest.

IT must be granted that Decency, whether imaginary or real, reaches no farther
than the Outside and Circumstances of an Action, without rendering it either
morally good or bad, virtuous or vicious. Decent is one thing, and Lawful
another. It Is unbecoming to eat alone, when a Man can have Company, though no
body reckons it unlawful: in some other Actions no Witnesses are to be
admitted, for very good Reasons. And the Cynicks who had all manner of Decorum
in such contempt, only discovered their own Pride, and Ignorance of Human
Nature, the Dignity of which must needs put our Actions under different
Regulations from those of inferior Animals.

IF any should ask, How we make out this Dignity of human Nature? it might be
answered, that the Power which Decency has in the World, is at least a strong
Presumption of some Respect, justly due to the Sentiments of our own Species;
for we are not afraid of what Dogs and Horses will think of us. And we may
judge of this Power of Decency by its being such a Restraint upon Pleasure,
sometimes in the most Voluptuous.

DECENCY then owes its force to some tacit Consent, and Conviction of the
Dignity of Mankind. What may be called real Decency, has its Foundation in the
natural Congruity of Things; and what may be called imaginary, depends only
upon Custom. If any has a mind to call it customary Decency, as being a softer
Term, I shall easily go into it.

IT seems to be this last sort of Decency, which the Duke de Rochefoucault
calls the least of all Laws; by which Term he would seem to have an eye to the
great Obligations of Religion and Humanity, the Laws of the Land being
tolerably well observed for fear of temporal Punishment. And some Things
belonging to Religion are pretty well observed too, either to compound the
Matter with our Consciences, or to get the Name of religious Persons, or at
least to be called Observers of good Order.

THERE is even some Reason for observing customary Decency, or the Modes of the
World, in things that are harmless, of inferior Classes; because an
Affectation of Singularity must be Pride or Folly, or both. If a Man, for
instance, living in a Country where they wear Hats, should wear a Turbant, how
impertinent would this be? In things that are not unlawful, nor too
inconvenient, a Compliance ought to be given, both on our Neighbors account
and our own. Why should we offend others, or expose ourselves to laughter for
nothing at all? Indeed if the thing required by this Decency appears unlawful,
(about which a Man's own Conscience must be satisfied) he is to stand as firm
as he can: and if the thing is too inconvenient (which must be determined by
his Prudence) a Compliance in this case would be want of Sense, as in the
former it would be want of Religion. Although a Man is to wear a Hat, he is not
obliged to have a new one every Week; nor to put Lace about it, unless such
Hats were as much the Fashion as once were Shoulder-knots. But as some things
are evidently fantastical as well as superfluous, it would seem Deference
enough to Custom to comply with it, only in things of the latter sort; and a
good Mixture of Folly will be found even in these. There is no help, one must
be a little foolish, in a foolish World.

IT were much easier to lay down general Rules, than to point out all the
Exceptions and Limitations that are to be made upon them. The World abounds in
good Maxims, but the Difficulty lies in the Application. We see imaginary
Decency often interferes both with Religion and Prudence, and often gets the
better of both: but the greatest wonder is, that even Pleasure sometimes
submits to it.

THE Matter seems plainly to stand thus: we are at more pains to please the
World, than either to please our selves or the ALMIGHTY. The Foundation of all
which is the vain Fear of getting a mean Character among the few Persons that
know us, or among those that chance to hear of us.

IT IS true, there is a Desire of Praise, as well as an Aversion to Reproach;
but since they both produce the same good Behavior, and may proceed from the
same Vanity, it is a matter indifferent which of them be considered as the
Foundation of Decency, that great Disturber of Quiet and Pleasure: as in
another view it may be called the great Security of our most valuable
Possessions.

CIVILITY and Politeness are comprehended in this Notion of Decency we have
been talking of, which is but a sort of Tenderness for our own Character: But
there may be a Civility really proceeding from a Fear of making others uneasy,
which may be called a Branch of Humanity, and is capable of continual Advances
in true Friendship.

SOME Hints given by Cicero, who had the Practice of Decency much at heart, may
be of good use to fix some Notion of the thing itself. Speaking of the
Difference between the Words Oportet and Decet, he says to this purpose:
Oportere enim perfectionem declarat Officii quo and semper utendum est, and
omnibus. Decere, quasi aptum esse consentaneumque tempori and personae: quod
cum in factis saepissime, tum in dictis valet, in vultu denique and gestu, and
incessu, contraque autem dedecere. De Oratore.
"To be necessary, is understood of the indisputable part of a Duty, or the
Perfection of it, which is to be observed to all Men without distinction: and
thus we say it must. To be decent, or when we only say, It Is fit, or proper,
implies no more than the Sutableness of the thing to the Time or the Person;
which, though it is to be understood most frequently of Actions, is to be
understood also of Words, and descends even to Looks and Gestures. The Failing
in any of these things is indecent."

THIS great Man always distinguishes carefully between things of a perpetual
Obligation, and such as only depend upon Times, Places, and Characters; and he
is so willing there should be nothing wrong even in the smallest matters, that
he has not forgot to mention the Air and Gait.

HE had but little occasion to say any thing about Dress, and some other Points
of Decency that perplex the World now, such things being at that time under
more stated Regulations.

IT would appear sometimes as if the Apostles themselves had not looked on
Decency as a thing altogether unworthy of their Care; for St. Paul speaks of
honest things in the sight of Men. It Is true, the two Words which are
translated into honest and decent, and by some Persons ridiculed, are used
promiscuously by that Apostle; but they would seem in some places to denote
somewhat of a lower Order than the Duties of Religion and Morality. Perhaps
they may be considered as being opposite to shameful, when it does not imply
moral Turpitude, but only some Impropriety shocking to the Eye; as when he says
it is a shame for a Man to have long Hair, and that Nature even teaches the
same. No doubt this Instance has appeared stronger at that time than it does
now: but we need observe no more about it, than that there are some natural
Congruities and Incongruities, neither to be called Virtues nor Vices, which
Persons of good Taste must be more sensible of than others; and it is generally
reckoned, the Ancients had a better Taste than the Moderns.

INDEED any body that knows the World but very little, will see how many
Difficulties must arise from the fantastical Customs of Men, and their clashing
Opinions concerning Decency, now that Plainness and Simplicity of Manners are
banished the World. Some new thing happens every day, or almost every hour, to
put one's Discretion to the trial; for it is impossible to have Rules for every
thing laid down to our selves beforehand. We find Cicero, for instance,
advising to treat People according to their Ranks and Offices, which is
certainly a good Rule in the general. But how are we to treat those Persons
whose Rank is not fixed, nor their Office known? If their Fortunes are made,
that is, if they have got some Money (the quantity of which is not fixed
neither) it is not usual to enquire any farther, but to treat them according to
the Value they put upon themselves; and we find they make their way into the
greatest Assemblies, of what kind soever. But as this Indulgence may be a good
expedient to make such Persons easy, it must naturally make others uneasy at
the same time, who look upon the ill-plac'd Respect as if it were so much
robbed from themselves.

FOR as Decency respects not only a Man's own Character, but the Character of
those he must hold Commerce with in the World; the difficulty of observing it
with reference to others, is often greater than with reference to one's self
alone. For though the World will meddle to judge of a Man's fulfilling his
Character purely as to what he owes himself and his Station, yet in dealing
with others, he must both satisfy those that are not concerned and those that
are; the last of whom will be so much harder to please, that they are Parties
as well as Judges.

IN short, there are so many little things to be observed under the Notion of
Decency, that, as matters now stand, it is become a very troublesome Affair. In
the Instance of personal Respect, there seems to be a Contradiction between the
Rules given by Cicero and St. James, which might be such a strait upon
Christians, as to make them free themselves from very much of the Burden. Jam.
ii. 1.
The Apostle forbids the Respect of Persons in very plain Words, and gives a
very plain Example of unjust Preference and Partiality. It Is true, the natural
Tendency of this would not be to overturn all Civility, it would rather make it
more equal and extensive: For another Apostle bids us honor all Men 1 Pet. ii.
17.
. But the Face of Christianity is so much altered since those times, that in
several Things relating to Politeness and customary Decency, I Am afraid we must
follow Cicero rather than the Apostles; since it would be an ill-suted thing,
and contrary to true Decency, to join the Forms of primitive Christianity with
the Spirit that now prevails, which may be called a modern Heathenism. I shall
leave this Point without any further Explication.

THE first thing that occurred concerning Decency, was the Power it has in the
Actions of Men, without regard to its Foundation in nature: but it seems there
is a real Congruity in things, altogether independent on Fancy or on Custom;
and the Violation of this Congruity, or Order of Nature, is in some Cases not
only indecent, but abominable. If any body should ask a proof of this
Assertion, I know not how it could be proved by any thing clearer than itself.
An Appeal may be made to any Man in his Senses, whether he is not persuaded
there is right and wrong in general? If any should deny such a Distinction, he
would cease to be a Member of Human Society; and all Correspondence must be
given up with him: as if one should deny there is any difference between Light
and Darkness, or bid us prove that we see and hear, we must take leave and
part. Even those who would pull up the Fence of worldly Decency, would
introduce very wretched doings: but they will make very few Proselytes, while
the Desire of pleasing is so rooted in the Heart of Man.

MOST People are not only convinced of the Distinction of Right and Wrong in
things of highest consequence, but they allow it to take place even in Trifles.
There are certain Demonstrations of Civility, which are more or less shocking
to the Eye: but as such things are properly the Dancing-Master's care, so an
Error as to them is not to be called Incivility, but Aukwardness. An honest
Farmer may be a very civil Person, though he knows not how to make a Leg: and his
clownish Behavior is even more agreeable than finical Airs and Speeches.

SUCH things are indeed but arbitrary signs of Civility, and purely depending
upon Custom; though still there is a better and a worse manner of performing
them. And it were strange if the Mind of a rational Creature, made for Truth
and Benevolence, were not shocked with things of an immoral kind, as well as
the Eye is uneasy to see such frivolous Incongruities.

THE very word Bienseance supposes there is a natural Fitness or Agreement, or
something that every body understands by the words proper, becoming, fit,
seemly, and twenty more to the same purpose; which may have taken their Rise
from some sensible Ideas, as that of People's Clothes sitting well or hanging
well about them; the Tailor being here the great Lawgiver. And hence Decent
Pride has come to be a current Expression, for it is certain that one Person's
Pride has a more becoming air than another's.

TO say that all this proceeds purely from Custom and Education, is to begin at
the wrong end: for these are founded upon Decency, and not Decency upon them.
Imaginary Decency will allow Custom a large enough Province, but real Decency
will allow it no Province at all. It stands upon it is own Foundation. And when
Instances are brought from the miserable Behavior of the Hotentots, and such
rude Tribes, to overthrow Decency in all its Acceptations; the Objection can
have little weight against the general Sense of Mankind in all Ages. These poor
People are certainly ill educated, and so are many of the Polite World in a
different respect. Education is commonly but a servile Imitation of others; the
Rule that Parents propose in bringing up their Children, being to make them
mere Apes, as they have no better standard of Life themselves: and so the World
goes on. But the mistake is in supposing that Education constitutes the Beauty
of Things, whereas it only helps us to see it; as a Musick-Master may be said
to help the Ear to perceive the Harmony, at the same time that he teaches the
Hand to play. And here indeed we see the force of Custom very remarkably: the
external Practice is not only facilitated, but the internal Relish is improved
also. The frequent hearing good Music, and the seeing good Painting, improves
the Taste in both; and the contrary tends evidently to corrupt it.

NOR can this Influence of Custom be denied in matters of Virtue, and even in
Speculations. As some little things in Dress and outward Behavior are called
either Decent or Nasty, just as they happen to be fashionable or unfashionable;
many Persons have hardly a better Rule either for their Opinions or their
Practice. But as Philosophy cannot pretend to account for those Impressions;
all the use that ought to be made of the Observation, is to guard against bad
Examples, and to think as freely and deliberately as possible. I have not
designed in any of these little By-reflections concerning the Dignity of Man,
and the Order of things, to carry the Notion of Decency any higher than was
given of it at first; that is, only as it affects the Circumstances of our
Actions, without making us innocent or guilty in the sight of Heaven. It Is very
true, that every thing that is sinful is indecent, the lesser being comprehended
in the greater, but every thing that is indecent is not sinful; and many things
which the World would reckon indecent, are far from being so in reality. But
the Vexation that arises upon Censure, or the Fear of incurring it, works so
strongly upon that Fund of Shame within Mankind, that they hardly do or omit
any thing without putting the Question (as it were) to themselves, What will be
said of it? And it is well that this restraint is in the World.

THERE is indeed a true Shame, as well as a false: or rather, it takes its
Denomination from the things we are ashamed of. If they are contrary to real
Decency, the Shame is just; either when we feel it or fear it: if they are only
contrary to Fantastical Decency, the Shame is foolish. But the Confusion and
Dejection of Mind may be the same, as People are sometimes really frighted at a
Shadow. The mauvaise Honte of the French often means Bashfulness, which is much
owing to the Complexion; the Blood being more easily put in agitation in some
Persons than others; and the Appearance it makes in the Countenance is far from
being unbecoming in the Sex and in young Men.

THAT the Passion of Shame is peculiar to Mankind, is generally agreed on; as
also that it is often the Result of Pride, another Quality peculiar to our
Species. Fear and Fierceness belong to other Animals, but they are hardly
touched with Shame, or capable of reflecting on the Consequences of their
Actions: all their Motions are sudden, and they go directly to their Aim. If in
their Anger they seem to deliberate before they attack, it must be from some
Apprehension of getting the worst: but in following their Appetites they have
neither Reflection nor Remorse. In which respect Mankind, are not so happy, who
have their Pleasure to gratify, and their Character to support at the same
time; and when the one or the other must give way, Decency pleads for the
Character, and is sometimes hearkened to, and sometimes not.

THE greater the Pride is, this Decency has the greater Dominion. We find every
body complaining of the Tyranny of Custom, which is, in other words, the
Tyranny of Decency. But it gets a new Dominion from the Elevation of Persons,
or their Rank in the World: for though the meanest Person has his Pride and his
Decencies to observe, yet they are far more numerous and troublesome to those
in higher Stations, who, having for the most part little else to do, contrive
many fanciful things, and subject themselves and others to the Observance of
them. And as the World is the School where these painful Rules are learned, the
thing chiefly recommended is the Acquaintance of People of Fashion; and the
Advice is by no means to be despised: but it should be remembered, that the
World is also the School of Vanity, wherein Self-Love is more nourished than
either Virtue or true Decency, which may be called its Offspring; so that we
should look out for Persons of Virtue and good Taste, in order to form our
Manners, as well as to make our few Days pass with the less Chagrin.

OUR Quiet must certainly have some other Foundation than the Decency of the
World, or we shall have no true Quiet at all. We may well hug our selves a
little in the Concealment of our Actions and Motives, and reckon it clear Gain
what is thus hid from the Eyes of Men; but still many Discoveries will be made
against us, notwithstanding our slavish Hypocrisy, so long as we have no better
Principle than the Desire of Men's Esteem, or the Fear of their Reproach. Any
body may consider how poor a thing a Life must be that is spent in Grimaces and
Airs, though Religion were out of the question. Even our Observance of
Punctilio's ought to be from the Heart, that is, from an honest Intention not
to shock our Friends and Acquaintance. And upon that account chiefly the
Trespasses against Decency of all kinds are to be avoided: Singularity is very
offensive, as being a tacit Reprimand of the Behavior of others; who fail not
in their turn to call those Singularities ridiculous, and they may really
appear so through their Unusualness.

IT IS always to be remembered, that we are to consult the World no farther than
as to our outward Behavior: nor does it pretend to teach us the Rules of
Virtue, but only how to shun Ridicule, a thing on the other hand we ought not
to be too much afraid of, lest we make a Sacrifice of our Virtue, our
Convenience and all. There is the more reason for this Caution that the World
is made up of so many different Tastes, that it is simply impossible to please
all: This Man shall complain, that you use too much Ceremony with him; if you
use less of it with another, he shall think you brutal; and perhaps the former
Complainer would not have been so easy, if any part of it had been omitted.
This is but one Instance: it is impossible to mention all the Trespasses and
Regulations in the Affair of Decency, and the Mistakes People fall into by
their injudicious Endeavors to please; very often mistaking the Objects of
their Civility and Complaisance, as well as the right Proportion of the thing.
If a Man should be surly to his own Family, and his nearest Friends, and
obliging and frank with those he only makes an Afternoon's Visit to; this were
no Argument either of his good Sense or his good Humor, but would look like a
vain Desire of Applause from those he has little to do with: and if a Woman
should fall into the same Affectation, it would be nothing to her praise.
Husbands and Wives have certainly a Title to good Looks and good Words, as well
as Strangers.

THE World will be a good enough School to form our Behavior in many little
things, to tame our natural Wildness, to smooth our Roughness, and even to
qualify our Civility, that it may not dwindle into formal Ceremony, or too soft
Complaisance: all which must bring Ridicule upon us, and it is the proper
Business of this School-Mistress (for so the World may be likewise called) to
prevent that Mortification.

THE Severity of the School-Mistress will hardly be complained of, when we
consider the Allowances that are given to gratify the strongest Inclinations of
the Heart. A Man is not found fault with for striving to get as much Money as
he can, or aspiring after the highest Employments and Honors in the
Commonwealth; he is rather blamed if he omits any Opportunity of raising
himself, or neglects any Pleasure. All the Instruction the World gives, is to
keep free of certain Blunders in our Conduct, and weak Appearances, which
affect the outward Character, without any regard to Vice or Virtue. The neglect
of that Instruction does expose us to the Severity of the World, which in
different respects may be called tyrannical and gentle; and the highest
Prudence is to know when to make it our Guide, and when to despise its Maxims.

DISCOURSE II.
Plerique Homines quos cum nihil refert pudet,
Ubi pudendum est, ibi illos deserit Pudor.

AS Creatures of the same Species have commonly a Pleasure in herding and
flocking together; the like Pleasure is found among Mankind, with the Desire of
mutual Approbation added to it. Solitude and Selfapprobation will not always
support us, nor will Company and our own Approbation do it separately; we must
often have the Approbation of others, in order to reconcile us to ourselves.
It Is true, there is one sort of Pride, which will very much lessen the Desire
of Approbation; that is, when a Person is thoroughly possessed with an Opinion of
his own Excellency. But this Pitch of Extravagance is very rare: inferior
Degrees of it will be enough to slacken the toilsome Pursuit of Applause, nay,
if one is hot in the pursuit of any other thing, he will mind the Judgment of
the Public so much the less, and applaud himself, as the Miser does when the
People hiss him.

BUT as any Inclination is seldom so strong as to make one renounce all views
of popular Applause, so the too eager Pursuit of that Uncertainty, is called
Vanity rather than Pride: Vanity denoting the emptiness of the Thing, as well
as the frivolous Temper of the Person. And thus some have made a Distinction
between Pride and Vanity, giving us an Idea of two different sorts of Men,
those who content themselves with their own Approbation, and those who are
uneasy without the Approbation of others. But perhaps the first Temper is not
only very rare, but impossible in nature, and so the Difference is only in the
greater and lesser Degrees of Selfsufficiency, or in the way that Pride
discovers itself in different Persons. Those that are fond of outward show, or
of making an appearance, are called Vain; those that value themselves upon
their inward Endowments, Proud: but both Parties value themselves, and both
Parties may be called Vain, as both are really Proud; some proud of their
native Ornaments, others of borrowed ones: and the very proudest can hardly be
supposed free from the Desire of Esteem from others. They are indeed freer from
Ostentation, and their Desire of Esteem is more concealed; but pure independent
Selfsufficiency is not a natural state of Mind; and if the Notion should enter
the Thoughts of any created Being, it must argue the greatest Disorder of the
Understanding that is conceivable.

BY Self-conceit is meant a much inferior Disorder, implying only an Opinion of
one's own merit not well enough founded; and this state of Mind is only
chargeable with more or less Folly. But the simple Desire of Approbation is
neither chargeable with Folly nor Vice: for it is as natural to desire the
Approbation of others as their Friendship, though Friendship is the most
delightful Possession, and commonly draws the other after it: we always esteem
those we love, though we don't always love those we esteem.

THERE are other kinds of Pride which belong not so naturally to the present
subject, such as the Desire of Power or Deminion over the Persons of others,
and the Desire of subduing their Judgment. The latter of these is most found in
spiritual Matters, though a desire of temporal Power may sometimes be at the
bottom. The Desire of a little Triumph in Conversation is less extravagant, but
more common, and arises almost upon every Subject whether grave or frivolous.
But this Observation may be made, that according to the several kinds of Pride
in Man, in conjunction with their several Tempers and Humors, some are more
inclined to Company, others to Solitude. The Pursuers of Fame must expose
themselves to public view, cost what it will; the less Ostentive are more
disposed to Solitude. Those again who are remarkably afraid of Contempt, will
for that very reason prefer Solitude, thinking they make a good bargain
Rochefoucault.
to renounce all the Good that others might say of them, upon condition they
would say no Ill.

THIS Maxim (by the way) might infer some middle state between Approbation and
Reproach, which is not so conceivable; unless the saying nothing should proceed
from an absolute suspense of the Mind: but this is not usual, most Minds being
forward enough to pronounce Sentence one way or other, and most Actions and
Motives being pretty evidently either worthy of Praise or Blame.

THERE is likewise a certain Distinction betwixt Approbation and Applause, the
former being understood to be given by good Judges, and the latter by the
Multitude. Applause will never be desired where there is Wisdom, and the Desire
of Approbation is only Pride when it is courted for itself, without desiring a
virtuous Disposition. And again, though the Fondness for Reputation may be an
Argument of Pride, the Neglect of it will be no Argument of Humility, but of an
abandoned Character, or being without shame. But Man is not only under
different Directions or Impulses from his Pride, but also from his opposits
Inclinations; these also varying according to different Circumstances of Age or
Fortune: so that our Motions must be very uncertain and irregular, and
sometimes our Opinions are excited by our Inclinations, and sometimes our
Inclinations by our Opinions.

THESE Reflections, and many more that will easily occur, may be of some use to
discover the Foundation of Decency, as well as to show wherein it consists. If
some things are naturally becoming, Men must be pleased to see them observed;
and the Doer is pleased doubly, by his adhering to Nature, and his pleasing
others. There is Good Humor and Complaisance, as well as Vanity, in Mankind.
But this very Complaisance had need of Regulations, that it go not to an
Excess; and, as things now stand, a little Pride must often come to the support
of weak Virtue. If it shall be called only the support of a Character, it may
be granted that the Aim often goes no farther: but then the Character may be
reckoned at least among the Outworks for the Defense of Virtue.

RELIGION and Good Manners seem to express all the Obligations Men are under.
Natural Affection and Humanity, no doubt, are Obligations too; but they are
included in Religion, as all the Duties are that concern our Neighbor. But by
Good Manners People generally understand Morality, or Moral Virtue, which is
reckoned inferior to Religion, and yet is a higher thing than what is called
Good Breeding or Decency; "which, though the least of all Laws, is more observed
than any."

OUR Obligations standing in this Order, it may be thought strange that the
lowest should be so much minded, and the highest so little! All other Laws have
a Sanction to enforce their Observance, Decency has not so much as the Name of
a Law, and the Sanction of it is only Censure; and yet the Fear of incurring
this imaginary Pain is sometimes greater than the Fear of Hell. Many Persons, I
know, would take it very ill to have their Belief of a future State called in
question; but let them examine themselves, and see how far their Belief affects
their Conduct, and whether their Fears are not more awakened as to the temporal
Confusion than the eternal, and all the exquisite Torments they believe are
joined with it.

THIS Fear of Shame and Disgrace contributes not a little even to the
Observance of temporal Laws: it sometimes goes farther than the Fear of Death.
And where the Opinion of the World makes a crime extraordinarily disgraceful,
it is very rarely committed; as Theft among Men of Fashion. If the Opinion of
the World should happen to change, the taking a Bribe would be as little hear
of among some Ranks, as the picking a Pocket.

BUT as neither Opinion nor Custom can alter the Nature of Things, there will
still be a Party (however small) that will approve and blame according to
Reason; and so Decency will be allowed all the Privileges it can justly pretend
to, and no more.

COULD a Man be contented with the Approbation of this small Party, he would
find himself considerably at ease: good Judges are not only just, but mild, so
far as the thing will bear, and are not severe upon every little Trespass or
Punctilio. The Multitude indeed (by whom are meant the cager Followers of
Custom) are very indulgent in some matters of Consequence, but sometimes they
cannot forgive the least Trifle. Again, the great Body of the People, as they
are almost without the Sphere of Decency established by Custom, which does not
dazzle them; so they see better in Matters of real Decency, and abhor those
Crimes which the higher Ranks overlook.

IF this Distinction should be quarreled, as if it were making two different
Multitudes, or two Classes of the Mob; it may be answered, the Distinction is
not new, and only shows that the Difference between Seneca.
fine Clothes and coarse can add no weight to the Judgment of the Wearers. And
certainly it is a great Point gained toward a Man's Quiet, when he knows who
are his proper Judges, and is indifferent about the Opinion of others. This (if
one could get at it) is not going too far in Stoicism. Nobody would choose to be
on the Rack to their Lives end; and a Creature that pretends to Reason, had
need also to consider what Life is designed for, as well as what the best means
are to make it easy.

NOW upon a very little Reflection a Man will find, that he has not been made
to be a Mountebank, but to act a more solid part; to do what Good he can, and
to endeavor heartily to acquire a Delight in all Virtues, in proportion to
their value. And Delight, every body knows, makes a Facility in Practice.

BUT this is still to be remembered, that though the Delight in Virtue is said to
be acquirable; yet the Sense of it, or the Faculty of relishing it, is brought
with us into the World; as we bring the Faculty of Reason itself, which ripens
by degrees, and all our Powers are improved or weakened by good or bad
Management, to say nothing of the Foundation that is laid in this state of trial
for our future Happiness or Unhappiness.

IT IS true, Decency and Virtue have different Provinces; and the former may be
said to lie only within the Verge of this Dream of Life, wherein our
Fellow-Passengers may indeed set up Tribunals to judge of our Behavior, but we
know all the harm these Judges can do us.

As we discover our Pride therefore by affecting an universal Esteem, and our
Cowardice by the Subjection we put ourselves under; so in both Instances we
discover our Folly, the thing in the world we would wish to discover least. We
can put a plausible Face on some of our Weaknesses, and imagine other People
will show the like Favor; our Fear we can term Prudence, our Covetousness good
Management, and so of other Failings: but Folly is laughed at and hissed by
every body; and when our own good Opinion forsakes us, it is natural to
conclude, that we are ridiculed by others: nay, sometimes through the Disorder of
our Judgment we think we are more ridiculed than we are, or that certain
Practices and Omissions will draw more contempt upon us than possibly they can;
and so we fall into the very thing we would avoid, by our Apprehension of
falling into it.

THUS Mankind, by mistaking their Judges and their Duties, are still upon the
Rack and in constant Slavery; unless we should except a very few Emperors; to
whom no Rules are prescribed but their own Will. But though we do not know all
that passes in their Breasts, we may presume they have some Fear of Censure
like other Mortals. Nor, if we turn our Eyes to the opposite and lowest Rank,
can we affirm that they have got over all human Regards: it is probable that
even sturdy Beggars are afraid of some Reproach among their own Gang.

WHATEVER be of that, we are pretty sure the greatest Rakes among Gentlemen
have some Qualms about their Reputation; and though they talk and write against
Decency, as if they wished it were out of the World, and probably they do bear
it a Grudge, yet they cannot shake off its Yoke, and are as much Hypocrites (in
another way) as those who pretend to have a value for it; both Parties paying
it a sort of Homage, whether they will or not.

DECENCY, it seems, will triumph over all Ranks and Characters, and will be a
constant Discipline to Mankind. But our Pride and Ignorance make it a greater
Discipline than otherwise it would be. For if Virtue be agreeable to a Taste
that is not wholly vitiated, Decency will be agreeable too: it is not
inconsistent with Virtue, but rather is inseparable from it, as the Shadow from
the Body.

VIRTUOUS Persons therefore will observe Decency from the Principles of Virtue
(the Love of Order, and true Civility) as the Vicious will observe it from
Self-Interest: and so it may be looked upon as a great Instrument for
preserving some Peace and good Order in the World; few Persons being so
thoroughly virtuous as to need no restraints, and few so thoroughly abandoned as
neither to be capable of Remorse nor Shame.

PERHAPS it would be expected after these little Speculations concerning
Decency, that some Instances should be given of the Trespasses against it. But
as it would be but a disagreeable Task, any Person of tolerable Sense will
easily know such Trespasses when he sees them; and it is no advantage to have
the Head filled with unlucky Images. All Trespasses against Virtue, are
certainly Trespasses against Decency, though the contrary Position does not
always hold: but several things that are only looked on (by some) as Breaches
of Decency, are really Breaches of Virtue and even of Religion. If any Man
among you seems to be Religious, and bridleth not his Tongue, but deceives
his own Heart, this Man's Religion is vain St. James.
. But not to make the World worse than it is, a great deal of the Humor of
Detraction proceeds not so much either from Pride, or Malignity, as from a mere
Habit of idle talking; till at last the Head becomes a Register of Trash and
Scandal, and the Itch of Repeating increases with the Itch of Hearing. If this
Apology should not be kindly received, I should be content to know another
Source of the Errors in Conversation than either Vanity or Ill-Humour, or
downright Folly; and there is sometimes a Combination of all the three.

THE Instances of Indecency in common Conversation (which would make a very
large Book) are not the only Trespasses. We trespass against Decency in most
things we do for our pleasure, and even for the support of our Character: Though
in things of this latter Class it is Custom under the name of Decency that
misleads us; for if we are but told, that such a thing is done or not done, we
enquire no farther. But as we are not to torture ourselves with the Fear of
being ill spoke of, we must even shun too great a Squeamishness, or the Fear of
doing ill. Where Religion and Virtue are silent, common Sense must determine
the best way it can.

THE Sex have their particular Decencies, both natural and artificial, which
they observe with great exactness. Decent Pride is appropriated to them: and
though it is but a poetical Expression, both Sexes being under equal Obligations
as to Virtue, and under equal Restraints as to Vice, yet the Women have a right
to value themselves a little upon their native Charms and the outward
Advantages of Fortune, that Men (who have more Ill Nature than they, and as
much Vanity of another kind) may not look upon them as too easy a Conquest.
Good Sense and some Religion (to which Women are more inclinable than Men) will
help to keep this Self-Esteem of theirs within due bounds, that they may not
forget their loveliest, and even brightest Character, Good Humor; nor appear
without the Ornament of a meek and quiet Spirit. For it must not be forgot,
that there is a difference between decent Pride and Decency itself, and it
seems to be this: Decency is a certain Gracefulness in Actions; decent Pride is
a Regard to Reputation, with some mixture of Self-Esteem not too observable:
and it were good upon some occasions that even Men had a little more of this
Quality, till a better Principle takes place. If Self-Interest could be wholly
separated from the regard to Reputation, it would immediately be of the number
of the pure Virtues; and if a Man had any view of being useful to the World,
the more Reputation he has, the more he is useful.

PRIDE would get very little footing in the midst of Applause and Approbation,
if a Man knew himself well, and what he is in Soul and Body at his best. He
would soon acknowledge the Truth of that ancient Expression, Pride was not made
for Man. The same Knowledge would inform him, that Applause is a dangerous
thing for a Mind so easily puffed up. And as the Knowledge of ourselves, and
the Knowledge of the World are subservient to each other, so by this latter
Knowledge we find out the Difficulty and the Emptiness of that airy Conquest;
and by seeing the Ridicule that others fall into, we are somewhat on our guard
to shun it; the Fear of Shame being as natural to us, as the Fear of Pain: and
Shame is truly a Pain of the Mind, as every one that has felt it will
acknowledge.

THOSE who allege that Shame is only artificially worked up in human Nature,
may as well allege, that any other Sensation is so worked up: the Fear of it
indeed may be artificially excited in us, as the Fear of several things may be
excited the same way: We may be afraid where no Fear is, as well as ashamed
where no Shame is; and we may be insensible both as to Fear and Shame, when we
have most reason to be sensible of both, as the old Comedian has told us.

ONE might easily be led into a Dissertation upon Shame (especially from the
words of the Text) designing only to make a few Reflections upon Decency; such
a Connection there is between the two; and the different sorts of Ridicule, or
the Variety of ridiculous Characters are ready also to come into the Mind: but
as such Characters are without number, and are all Trespasses against Decency,
many of them are represented every day in Books of Wit and Humor, and even in
Books of Divinity; so that the World may be well instructed in the ways of
shunning Derision. And indeed all the Authors have reason for touching upon
that string, since the Fear of Shame is so prevalent with Men: It Is a thing
that stirs very early, for even Nurses endeavor to shame their young ones into
good Behavior and Decency, before Reason is awakened in them; and it often has
a good Effect, beyond the Threats of whipping.

THIS Sense of Shame is often a promising Disposition toward Virtue, and is a
very agreeable Delicacy of Spirit. Impudence is Stupidity, it is the want of one
kind of Sense, or of something implanted by the Author of Nature in rational
Creatures. We see how carefully those Decencies are observed, that relate to
the Body, as if there was a Respect due even to it, and Men were conscious of
some Advantage in their outward Form: No Nation goes upon all four. The Body is
not only covered, but adorned. It Is true, this may infer a Consciousness of
Defect, and some natural Disadvantages, which must be granted; but it is the
part of Reason to supply and rectify all Disadvantages, so far as it can. We
even observe numberless Decencies naturally, without Art and Instruction, from
a Sense of what is beautiful as well as of what is unseemly. If we hear
sometimes of poor doings, and great Degeneracy in human Nature, it needs give
no more surprise than when we see a good Tree illtrain'd, or a piece of Ground
overrun with Weeds. It happens on the other hand too often, that external
Decencies are minded with an extraordinary Carefulness, when there are horrid
Trespasses committed against Virtue.

A few Hints or Items well remembered, will save a multitude of Illustrations,
that might be made upon this Subject of Decency. What follows is not proposed
to have the Authority of Maxims, but is offered only to the Consideration of
some Persons who have not much leisure to read large Treatises; and upon a very
little attention, a variety of Reflections will spring in their own Minds in a
short time.

THERE must be a Fund to work upon, in concurrence with good Instruction.

MAN naturally loves Virtue and Decency: and when he is deceived, it is under
an appearance of something that is good.

WE are often led by mere Imitation, and often ruined by it.

DECENT, with most People, is but another word for Customary. Hence the
interfering of Decency and Virtue.

DECENCY in Opinions is more properly Truth: in Inclinations and Actions it is
Virtue and Goodness. But the common Province of Decency goes no farther than
the Circumstances of Actions, or the Manner of doing them.

WE often fall into Extravagances and Follies, thinking to avoid what is
reckoned Indecent, and the Contempt that follows upon it; but more frequently
we fall into these Inconveniences from the Humor of Distinction and
Superiority.

THE Indecencies of Conversation arise from Vanity, Ill-humour, and a bastard
kind of Good Humor. This false Complaisance appears much in the Custom of
Detraction: it goes on against the Absent, because it is supposed to be
agreeable to the Present, who become the Absent the next moment, and suffer in
their turn.

PROFESSED Indecency of any kind is Insolence. Vanity is commonly the first
Inducement to foolish talking. Thus smutty Jests oftener show the Ostentation
of Wit than the Inclination to Lewdness; and impious Expressions are no sure
Argument of Unbelief.

AN Excess of talking of any kind is seldom free from the same Vanity.

MOROSENESS is the Effect of Pride, as if the Company was not worthy of our
mixing with it. The Indecency lies in the sullen Air.

INDECENCIES in Apparel are as much shunned as any. Herein Custom triumphs
eminently: it is the chief Point of Uniformity among all Ranks and Parties.

IN all other Articles of Expense, that which is nearest the middle must be
Decency; the precise Point not being discoverable: the Extremes of High and Low
are either called Extravagant or Sordid.

WE see of what use this inexplicable thing, Decency, is for regulating all our
different Motions: it keeps our Pride itself in some order, though it be called
its Daughter; and if it does not restrain our Inclinations and Aversions, it
often hinders them from breaking out. It lulls our Spirits asleep, and by turns
rouses them. In short, Decency may be now reckoned of such service in the
Commonwealth, that without it the Judicatures both in Church and State would
have much more to do than they have; to say nothing of the Tranquillity it
helps to preserve in private Families.

AN ESSAY ON SELF-LOVE.
Modus ergo diligendi praecipiendus est homini; id est, Qu^^^ se diligat, aut
prosit sibi: quin autem se diligat, aut (...) sibi, dubitare, dementis est.
AN ESSAY ON SELF-LOVE.
INTRODUCTION.
THE Disputes upon this Subject have been very much increased (as it still
happens) by the different Acceptations of the Terms, which ought regularly to
have been adjusted before entering upon the Merits or Demerits of the Thing.
Some Men have exalted Self-Love so high, as to make it the Source of the
greatest Duties, while others have looked upon it as the Sink of all
Wickedness! And sometimes its greatest Advocates, when they are pressed with
Difficulties, declare plainly they meant no other thing but Self-Preservation;
which, if duly regulated, no body can have a good Reason to condemn.

FROM this Obscurity, and Contradiction, have arisen new Disputes concerning
Human Nature; some making very unfavourable Reports of it, and others affirming
it to be without fault. The former Party assert, "That a Man is not capable of
the least Act of common Honesty, or common Friendship, without a deliberate
Prospect of his own Interest as the prevailing Motive." And thus the selfish
Principle, which may be compared to the dead Fly in the Apothecary's Ointment,
is set up as the only Wisdom or true Rule of all Actions and Designs! This is
also a false Account of Religion, if we suppose Man to have a higher End than
himself, or consider Religion as the Duty we owe another Being, and a Being of
such Perfections as are only to be found in the Deity.

THE latter Party maintain the Principle of Disinterestedness sufficiently: but
as they deny the Infirmity and Corruption of human Nature, their Doctrine
labors under insuperable Difficulties.

THESE two Partys are diametrically opposite to each other in their Schemes and
Opinions, agreeing only in their Aversion to revealed Religion, which indeed
would be an useless Thing if either of the Schemes was true: a Creature so
highly exalted, and able to govern itself, needed no other Assistance; and a
Creature so very low, and deprived of all Liberty, must be incapable of any
Degree of Virtue.

THERE is a third sort of Men, who admit the Difference between Right and
Wrong, and show likewise a great Respect for the Christian Religion; I ought to
say farther, that I believe them to be sincere: but at the same time they are
so violent Advocates for Self-Love, or the interested Principle, as to speak of
the pure disinterested Love of God in very unbecoming Terms.

SINCE any Controversy that may arise in this Essay, is chiefly with those who
own Christianity, I shall say little in behalf either of its Proofs or its
Doctrine, both which have stood firm against the Attacks of more subtle
Spirits than we have at present; my principal Design being in a rational way to
show the best and the worst of Self-Love, and in what sense it is to be
understood, before it can be set up either as the Principle of Vice or Virtue.

SECT. I. Self-Love commonly taken in a bad Sense: the D. of Rochefoucault's
Account of it.
CUSTOM, which determines the Signification of Words, has generally put a bad
meaning upon Self-Love; so that a Self-Lover is reckoned the same with an
interested unjust Person, whose Interest or Pleasure (in whatever Form it
appears to him) will be his constant Aim, without any regard to the Rules of
Equity.

WHEN St. Paul says, in the last days Men shall be (...) 2 Timothy iii. 2.
Lovers of their own selves, no body doubts but that he speaks of a very
remarkable Degeneracy. There Self-Love is put at the head of a great train of
Vices, as if it was the Parent of them all: Lovers of their own selves,
Covetous (or Lovers of Money) Boasters, Proud, etc. We find also in St.
Augustin's Lib. x. cap. 39.
Confessions, an Account of a very extravagant perverse state of Mind, wherein
Self-Love or Self-Complacency is carried so far, that the Person minds the
pleasing of no body but himself; and values himself upon those Gifts he
receives freely from God, despising others who he thinks are not so privileged,
and envying such as are. Hence the Idea of spiritual Pride.

CONFORMABLE to these Acceptations of Self-Love, the French and other Nations
generally understand by it Pride and all other ill Qualities of the Mind; but
Pride most frequently. Selfishness is every where a vile Character.

AMONG the easiest Acceptations of Self-Love is such a Self-Complacency or
Self-conceit, as is represented by the Fable of Narcissus, and which is only
considered as a Folly.: But it is accompanied for the most part with Arrogance,
and a Desire of engrossing all things. And thus Self-Love has become a current
Term for Pride, (as was said before) or another Word for corrupt Nature in all
its Tendencies: at the same time it is a softer Word, and so has been introduced
by polite Persons, when they had not a mind to shock delicate Ears.

THERE is a masterly Description of Self-Love, supposed to be done by the Duke
of Rochefoucault, as it now works in the Heart of Man: it is a small Book, and
very much known. He begins thus, See the Additions, No II.
Self-Love is the Love of one's self, and of all things for the sake of one's
self. After which Definition, he proceeds to mention the Effects. It makes Men
Idolaters of themselves, and would make them the Tyrants of others, if Fortune
gave them an Opportunity. This supposes the total Subversion of our Duty, both
to God and Man: we not only act as if we were independent of the Almighty, but
we set up ourselves to be worshipped in his stead; and are not only careless
and unmindful of our Neighbor's Interest, but make a Sacrifice of it, and him
to our own. Such is the Modesty of Self-Love!

MEAN time, the first part of the Definition, Self-Love is the Love of one's
Self, gives us but little Discovery; and the second part of it is not quite so
proper: for the Love of Things for our own Sake, implies only a Desire of them,
as being serviceable to us, the Love terminating upon ourselves. And thus some
have blunder'd, who confound Self-Love with the Love of Pleasure, or any thing
the Heart is set upon. And sometimes Additions, No I.
Pleasure, and Interest, and Happiness are all jumbled together, and made
convertible Terms for Self-Love; which is a greater Confusion still. But this
Criticism has nothing to do with the Duke of Rochefoucault's Account of
Self-Love, who seems only to have intended to give a Representation of that
Principle in its various Shapes and bad Consequences. Accordingly, he next
considers it in its Impetuousness, its Subtilty, its Refinements; and adds,
that it is often invisible to it self: that it hatches and nourishes an
infinite Number of Inclinations and Aversions, some of which are so very
monstrous, that it cannot believe them to be its own Brood. He says, it is made
up of Contradictions, and can act the most contrary Parts; proud and fawning.
It changes its Pursuits of Glory, Riches and Pleasure, according to our
Complexion, and the Changes of our Age and our Condition: but it is equal to
it, to have many Pursuits, or but one; for it can divide itself into many, or
contract itself into one, as it has a mind. He gives a View of its Inconstancy,
both as it proceeds from the Insufficiency of Things which please us, and our
own natural Changeableness. He shows its extreme Positiveness, which makes a
Man do the most fantastical Things, and even such as are hurtful to himself,
for no other Reason but merely that he may gratify his own Will. And this gives
the Idea of positive blind Self-Will; Instances of which are very frequent in
Life. He concludes, that Self-Love is found among all Ranks, and in all
Conditions: it lives every where, it lives upon every thing; nay, it lives upon
nothing! It finds its account even in the most rigid Austerities, hoping (it
seems) to get the Reputation of Sanctity in exchange. This, (says he) is a
lively Representation of Self-Love, the continual Agitation whereof may be
compared to the restless ebbing and flowing of the Sea. The Prophet Isaiah
makes use of the same Image Isaiah lvii. 20.
; the Wicked are like the troubled Sea, when it cannot rest, whose Waters cast
up Mire and Dirt.

FROM that Description of Self-Love, (abridged as it is) we may form an Idea of
it, as of a bottomless Gulf, out of which issue those three Rivers of Pride,
Covetousness, and Sensuality; as there is nothing that proceeds out of the
corrupt Heart of Man, but may be reduced to one or other of those impure
Streams, or, as Mr. Pascal calls them, those Rivers of Fire. All that is in the
World is the Lust of the Flesh, the Lust of the Eyes, and the Pride of Life.

SECT. II. The Change made on SELF-LOVE, by the Fall.
AS the Fall of Adam is concluded by all Christians, (from the Authority of
sacred Writ) to have made a strange Alteration upon all the Powers and
Faculties of human Nature; so Mr. Pascal gives different Accounts of Self-Love
before the Fall, and after it. He says Sect. XXX.
, "Man was at first created with two kinds of Love; the one for God, the other
for himself: but with this Condition, that the Love for God should be infinite;
that is, without any other End but God alone; and that the Love for himself
should be finite, and leading to God as the End. [ rapportant a Dieu.] Man in
that State not only loved himself without Sin, but he could not lawfully have
ceased to love himself. When Sin entered into Man, he lost the first of those
Loves; and the Love of himself, having remained alone in that great Soul of
his, which was capable of infinite Love, this Self-Love spread itself, and
overflowed the vast Space which the Love of God had forsaken: and thus he loved
himself alone, and all things for himself; or, in other Words, he loved himself
infinitely."

THIS Supposition of the Fall makes the Injustice of Self-Love certainly no
less than it was before, and the Folly of it infinitely greater. If Man was to
love himself when he was uncorrupted and entire, only with such an inferior
and subordinate kind of Love as Mr. Pascal represents, shall he love himself
now in his Corruption and Misery, with such a supreme and ultimate Love, as if
he were the Deity itself? This is a thing that even some of the Deists exclaim
against, as the highest Extravagance; and it is shocking to common Sense, though
Christianity were out of the question.

WE see Mr. Pascal does not pretend to account for the Fall of Man, but only
tells by way of History, "That when Sin entered, his Condition was so very much
changed, that he is now overspread, as with a loathsome Disease No III.
." But what Idea can we have of Sin? It Is but a negative thing: We can only
consider it as an Apostasy, or some perverse State of Mind, which has brought
such Miseries upon Man, and all things about him. And what is this Apostasy,
but some Defection in our own favor, the Source of which seems to have been
Pride? And Pride is but Self-Esteem, forgetting the Original from whence all
good things are derived, and so transgressing every day as at first: but it may
now (according to the common Phrase) see its Sin in its Punishment: We
ourselves, and whatever we may be said to have commerce with, being reduced to
such extreme Infirmity and Disorder! The Charity also of the great Author may
appear in changing the State of Things from what they were, that so Man might
have wherewithal to be undeceived, both from within himself, and from the
Defects of the inferior Creation.

SECT. III. What may be called lawful in SELF-LOVE, from some of its improper
Acceptations.
THAT Art or Address, which the Divine Wisdom has implanted in every living
Creature for its own Good, is often called Self-Preservation, and sometimes
Self-Love; though it is thus common to all Animals, and is no more than an
Impulse or Determination toward their own Safety. Every Animal is dear to
itself, without thinking of it; and at the approach of any Danger, we find a
sudden Effort used for Self-Defence; as when we are falling, we naturally throw
out our Arms. The want of this Care and Address would be Stupidity.

THE same Divine Wisdom, which is also called Nature, has added to the Impulse
of Self-Preservation, another Impulse in every living Creature toward its Ease
or its Delights. And though in rational Creatures we hear much of a Desire of
Happiness, and they actually have it; yet it operates often without Reflection,
or any deliberate Project and Design. If this Desire be called natural
Good Will to ourselves, Self-Affection, or even Self-Love, there is no harm in
any of the Terms, if we but allow of a Principle of Good Will toward other
Creatures upon their proper account, as well as upon our own; that is, if we
allow of a Desire of Good to them, as well as of Good to our selves. In both
Cases the Benevolence, or Desire of Good operates first; Reason serving to
direct us in the Choice of proper Objects, and the Means of Happiness.

IN rational Creatures, (when they act rationally) the Desire of Happiness is
the same with the Desire of Perfection. Here is meant the highest Happiness.
When a Man discovers the Dignity of his Nature, he immediately wishes to arrive
at all the Excellency he is capable of: and his Good Will to himself, far from
being extinguished, is put under new Regulations.

THE Question at present is not, how we come to discover our Dignity, whether
by our own natural Light, or a supernatural? All the Design is to show that the
Desire of Happiness in general, was before that Discovery, and continues after
it, independent of Reason; the due Exercise of which, would indeed inform us
that our Happiness must be founded in the disinterested Pursuit of Truth and
Justice.

SECT. IV. The Desires of MAN, considered more particularly.
WE may therefore consider in Man, these several kinds of Desire. 1. A Desire
of simple Existence. 2. A Desire of Ease or Indolence: 3. A more positive
Desire of Pleasure, either for the Body or the Mind; and, 4. A Desire of
Perfection or true Happiness, which is only to be found in the Love of the
Sovereign Beauty and Goodness. The three first Desires are natural, and can
only be called criminal, in so far as Injustice or Vice enters into them: the
fourth must have been natural to Man in his original State, though it is not so
natural in the present; and therefore now appears to be rather a divine Desire,
than a natural: so rare and so languid is the Desire of Perfection! Nor,
supposing it to be in the strongest Degree, would it be virtuous; unless it
were animated by the Love of Truth and Justice.

IT must be remembered, that the Idea of Love implies more than simple Desire:
it supposes some Acquaintance and Notion of the Object, which it esteems, and
with which it desires to be united: it is a secret Attraction, and the Pleasure
or Charm is derived from the Object. Whereas Desire is here supposed to be only
blind Appetite, in which the Understanding has no share, and the Value of the
Object is not considered. It must be remembered too, that even Love, the more
it is struck with the Beauty of the Object, will still act with less Reflection
on itself, and still have its own Interest less in view. This may be applied to
Love in general, which is often called blind, as well as Desire: but where the
Object is supposed worthy of the Affection, blind is too harsh an Epithet;
since no more can be meant, but that the Heart is captivated, and, only if it
be unreasonably so, is the Love to be called blind or blinded.

BESIDES the several Desires abovementioned, Nature has farther implanted in
us, a Desire of the Approbation of others, our own not being sufficient to
support us; which seems to be founded on a tacit Respect, that all Mankind have
for one another, or a Conviction of the Dignity of human Nature. With all which
Desires there is a Self-Complacency, almost constantly supposed to attend us,
and to have been wisely given to reconcile us to our low State, and to support
us against the Contempt of others. But the Self-Complacency here supposed to be
without fault, is a quite different Thing from that which was spoke of in the
foregoing Sections, as implying either Folly or Arrogance, or both: and the
Desire of Approbation is an additional Tie upon Men to observe the Rules of
Humanity, and all good Order.

NOW as the Gratification of all our lawful Desires (lawfully pursued) may be
called our true Interest, so this Interest cannot properly be called Self-Love;
because a very great Degree of that Principle may be found in the Pursuit of
Things altogether destructive. If it shall be said, "That it is not a right
Self-Love that makes Men pursue such destructive Things," it may be said just
as well, "That it is not a right Pride, or a right Covetousness that makes Men
pursue them:" which would not be a very significant Way of speaking.

SECT. V. The two Principles of ACTION, or the opposite Sources of VIRTUE and
VICE.
IN rational Creatures there are but two Principles, or two Sources, to which
all deliberate Actions are reducible, viz. Self-Interest and Disinterestedness.
If we seek for the moral Good or Ill of an Action, the Virtue or Vice of it, we
must have recourse to one of these two Principles. What a Man does merely for
his own Ends, has no share of Virtue in it: on the contrary, the sole Motive of
Interest, rather stains an Action that is otherwise materially good. To use a
plain Instance, if I do a Man a good Office, to receive in return either a good
Office from him, or a good Character from the World, no body will reckon this a
Virtue. We may therefore conclude, "That the Virtue or Worth of an Action is
only to be rated by its Disinterestedness."

IT is not indeed in our power to put things always to that Touchstone, and we
may be imposed upon by false Appearances: but we know well in the general,
whence the Worth is derived, and fail not to pronounce Things both worthy and
worthless, when no Interest of our own can possibly determine us. Friendship
has been accounted a sacred Thing all the World over: Whence can it have that
Character, but from the Disinterestedness conceived to be in it? And however
interested the common Friendships of the World may be, yet every Man in his
particular Professions thereof disclaims any View to Interest; being sensible
that a Friendship founded upon that Bottom, is but mere Traffic and
Merchandise.

THIS shows the general Sense of Mankind, as to the Speculation of the Thing,
from which we may conclude the Reality of it; and it is not easy to conceive
how that can be good, which every body is ashamed to own. Even Horace, who was
no extraordinary Divine, seems to intimate to us, that we ought to examine
ourselves upon the Motives of our Friendship, that we may discover Quidve ad
Amicitias, Usus, Rectumne, trabat nos.
After this Essay was written, (and it is now some Years) I had the satisfaction
to find the same Passage cited by the Bishop of Cambray, and also some of
Cl^^'s Expressions to support the Doctrine of disinteressed Love. He makes use
of more Testimonies from the Heathens: for Truth is always Truth. The Reader
may see the (...) Volume of his spiritual Works: Discourse XLI.
whether we are engaged by Profit or a better Principle. And he had reason: For
the Desire of any thing merely for its Usefulness to us, implies that we have
no more Regard for it (to use the Words of another Butler.
Poet) than for the Desk we write upon.

IF virtuous Actions thus derive their Value from their Disinterestedness, the
Baseness of vicious Actions must be from their Interestedness. For Contraries
cannot come from the same Principle, no more than sweet and bitter Waters from
the same Fountain.

VICE No III.
, and Sin, and Wickedness, are but different Words for the same Thing: they
certainly imply some great Corruption and Injustice, two other Words or
Qualities, the Source of which we can find no where, but in Self-Regards or
Interestedness. No Man Nemo gratuito malus est.
, says Salust, is wicked for nothing. When we are unjust, it is still some way
or other in our own favor. The Scripture says of Ahab, "That he sold himself
to work Wickedness." So in many Instances of Corruption, Men may be said to
sell themselves, even when the Abominations are not so heinous: but there is
still some Interest or Bait presupposed, to induce them to make the wretched
Bargain.

SECT. VI. The Corruption of SELF-LOVE farther considered, with respect to all
VIRTUES, and FRIENDSHIP in particular.
THOUGH I was against the making a Jumble of Self-Love with true Interest, so as
to make each of the Terms stand indifferently for the other; yet Self-Love and
Self-Interest may be convertible without any confusion: that is, when a Person
is said to act from Self-Love, he may be as well said to act from
Self-Interest, or from the Principle of Interest; the View of his own Advantage
(whether he act prudently or no) being his Principle, and often his sole
Motive. And this leading Motive, or Interestedness, is frequently enough
expressed by the short Word Self: as, such a thing has a great deal of Self in
it, and the like. But to pass to what is more material.

IF Self-Love be not the same with Corruption, in things relating to Virtue, at
least it may be reckoned the Cause of the Corruption. Men often talk both of
Corruption and Integrity, but can neither define the one nor the other: and
it is no wonder, since it is as hard to give a Definition of Sweetness and
Bitterness, or such things as strike the outward Senses. But we see in fact,
that a Man led by his own Interest will ruin every thing committed to his
Trust, when he can do it with impunity, and will even venture on the highest
Punishment and Infamy when the Temptation is great. This made Mr. Pascal say,
Le Sect. XXIX.
moi est haissable: "Self is a hateful thing, both because it is unjust in
making it self the Center of all things, and oppressive to others, in designing
to subject them to it self: for every selfish Man is a common Enemy, and would
be the Tyrant of all others if he could." Again, "Our Sect. IX.
Inclinations ought to stand toward the Public: and this Bias toward
ourselves, is the first Spring of all Disorder, in War, in Politics, in
Oeconomicks."

IT IS this Bias toward ourselves, which spoils all. In War it makes Disputes
about Command, and just so in Politics; and even in Church Matters, the Desire
of Preeminence is a great Spring of Division. The same selfish Bias is the
Ruin of Domestic Affairs, not only as it occasions what is called bad
Economy; but, which is of more importance, as it destroys the tenderest and
closest Unions.

AN older Author says stronger things yet of the selfish Principle, calling it
by the Names Self, Me, Nature, the old Man; and affirms it to have been the
Cause of Adam's Fall, and the Devil's before; both having affected to be
somewhat, and arrogated to themselves, what they ought not. It Is a small Book,
entitled the German Theology, and much esteemed by Protestants and Papists.

BUT to come lower down, to the Damage that Friendship suffers from Self-Love;
it can hardly be better illustrated than by Lib. II Cap. XXII.
Arrian upon Epictetus. He makes Friendship as uncertain as the Agreement among
Children or little Dogs, who play together very cordially till some Bone of
Contention is thrown among them: and he adds, that Fathers and Sons will be
divided in the same manner, if they chance to interfere in their Amors, or in
any thing else. He also gives the Instance of Eteocles and Polynices, two
Brothers who were brought up together, and lived in the strictest Friendship
till the Sweet of Dominion set them by the ears, and made them fight hand to
hand, and kill one another on the spot: It Is indeed unnecessary to go to old
Examples.

THE same Philosopher says farther, that "if Men take it in their heads, that
the Gods are opposite to their Interest, they curse them and overthrow their
Altars." But his Design seems to be far from advancing the interested
Principle, or the Bias toward ourselves: He only shows how this Selfishness
is so rooted in our Nature, that if we shall make a Separation between Interest
and Virtue, we shall of course run to the side where we think our Profit lies:
for this, he says, is dearer to us than all things; this is our Father, our
Brother, our Country, our God. Arrian therefore, like the rest of the Stoics,
applies himself chiefly to direct the Understanding; thinking if it was rightly
informed, all the Work was done: but it is easier to make the Understanding see
what is right, than to make the Heart adhere to it; according to the famous
Exclamation, -- Video meliora, etc.


THAT honest Confession of seeing the Good, and approving it, and yet doing the
Ill, is also made by St. Paul himself, when he says, the Good that I would, I
do not; but the Evil which I would not, that I do, etc. A lively Representation
of our Inconsistency, and the War arising upon it in the Mind.

IT seems very plain, that whatever Relish we may have of Virtue in our present
State, we are not necessarily determined by it; as our natural Bias to Vice is
not so strong neither, as to deprive us altogether of our Liberty. But it is no
less plain, that, being blinded and corrupted as we are, a superior Principle,
Grace, or whatever it be called, is absolutely necessary for expelling that
Poison, wherewith Self-Love has one way or other infected and confounded us.

SECT. VII. NATURAL LOVE considered under different Denominations.
AS all Love implies both a Desire of obtaining the beloved Object, and a
Delight in it after it is obtained; Self-Love in the first of these Views is
Nonsense, and in the second, it is the next thing to Delusion: nay, if the
Complacency exceed the due Bounds, no Delusion can be greater. It Is silly and
foolish in the eye of the World.

BUT there are three sorts of Love, all granted to be natural, and even
reasonable; our Love to our Children, our Love to the Sex, and our Love to our
Friends. If any of these Loves is right, or what it ought to be, Self-Love is
wholly out of doors: at least, the more perfect they are, it has proportionably
the less place. A Father loves his Children by a happy Instinct (or whatver it
be called) without a View either of Profit or Pleasure from them; for, as
Liberis consultum volumus, etiamsi posthumi futuri sunt, propter ipsos. De
sinibus.
Cicero says, we wish them to be happy after we are gone. The Pleasure that may
follow upon loving, is by no means the Cause of the Love. Nature has wisely and
kindly designed that every Man should take care of his own Children in the
first place: the Care and Affection of Mothers is yet more remarkable: and what
Tenderness is there observed, even in Nurses! The Love of Children to their
Parents, not being so much determined by Instinct, has been sometimes called
Piety.

AS to the Instinct by which Parents are said to love their Children, a
burlesque Question has been asked, viz. If this Love be an Instinct free of
Selfishness, whence is it, that they feel that Instinct for other People's
Children, when they believe them to be their own; and on the contrary, feel no
such Instinct for their own, when by Accident they are ignorant of the
Relation? If a serious Answer was to be given, this perhaps might be it, That
the Question makes neither for Selfishness nor against it, and that in such
Cases, Nature is hoodwinked; but still the End is obtained, which is the caring
for the young helpless Creatures.

THE Love to the Sex is a more delicate Article. Every body knows what the
Desire of continuing their own Species leads them to: this is hardly to be
called Love; and if any will call it Self-Love, they must allow other Animals
the same cool, deliberate Motives of proceeding. It Is plain, that when a Man is
heartily in love, all Self-Considerations (Provisions and Settlements) must
yield; and the Lover will pursue his Aim, unless an extraordinary Principle of
Justice, or Regard for the Person, make him lay it aside. And this too is
honorable for Love, that the Mind is first engaged by the Qualities of the
Woman: If Fancy now and then gives the Object a Value, which in reality it has
not, this is still another thing than Self-Love; the Man is taken: and there
arises not only a Desire of possessing, but he feels a Tenderness as a Parent
does for a Child; and for proof of this we may appeal to Dilexi tum te, non
tantum ut Vulgus Amicam,
Sed Pater ut Gnatos diligit and Generos.
Ad Lesbiam.
Catullus. Whatever the Body may claim for its share, this cannot be said to
proceed from Reflection; but is rather a kind of mechanical sweet Impulse.

LOVE then is a Concurrence of Ardor, Respect, and Tenderness. But some People
seem hardly to have a right Notion of any sort of Love, when they suppose we
must still be reasoning and reflecting in it, with a View to our own Interest.
An old Naturalist speaks more Sense upon the Love he treats of: Unde feritur eo
tendit --


AND it is remarkable that Lucretius's Metaphor here agrees with the modern
Philosophy of Gravitation. And indeed St. Augustine speaks of Love in general,
as a Weight or Force by which we are carried: Amor meus, pondus meum, etc. But
it seems the Love of our Philosophers sits very light upon them: they think
they may put it in their Pocket, like their Gloves.

THE Love that enters into Friendship, is only free of that Ardor which tends
to the Sex, but is accompanied with no less Respect, and little less
Tenderness, save what the Weakness or Delicacy of the Sex calls for at the
hands of the stronger. But the Power of Love among Friends is sufficiently
known, and remarkably expressed in these Words of Moses, If the Wife of thy
Bosom, or thy Friend whom thou love as thine own Soul, etc.

IT IS evident now, that wherever Love enters, the Delight is from the Object,
not from Self: the Person is delighted, or pleased, but the Pleasure is not
from himself; since he receives it from somewhat else. If they say he still
loves the Object from Self-Interest, or his Interest is the Cause of his Love,
this is contrary to Nature: and as Horace seems to reject the Supposition in
the Case of Friendship, Cicero is more express and full upon it. No. XII.
He shows excellently, "That Love is the Principle and Motive which engages us
in Friendship: that Interest or Profit may be made even by a Friendship which
is but acted; but in true Friendship all is for the sake of the Friend, all is
free, genuine, and real. Therefore (adds he) Love appears to be founded on
Nature, and not on our Necessities and Occasions; on a certain Relish and Bent
of the Soul, ( applicatione Animi) rather than any Thoughts of reaping Profit.
That though Interest may attend Friendship, yet it is not the Aim of it. But (he
says) most People choose their Friends, as they do their Cattle, to make a Gain
of them; and therefore have no Experience of that most beautiful and natural
Friendship, by which we love a Friend for himself, and cultivate Friendship for
its own Value. That, in short, as we love ourselves without a View to any
Reward at our own hands, we ought to love our Friend after the same manner: for
to love one, is to cherish him for his own sake, without any Regard to our own
Indigence or Interest." Much more will be found to this purpose, in that
excellent little Treatise upon Friendship. He supposes all along that Virtue or
personal Worth is to be the Cement of Friendship, and the only thing that can
render it durable: and he reckons the Charms of Virtue so great, that we cannot
but love it, even in those we have never seen, and can never hope to see, and
from whom it is impossible we can receive any Advantage.

THE only Evasion some have fallen upon, is, that we love for the Pleasure we
find in loving; and so it is still (say they) Self-Interest at the bottom. But
this, as it would take away the Distinction of Vice and Virtue, and imply a
fatal Necessity, without leaving any thing to Reason; so it is plainly a
mistaking the Effect for the Cause: we are attracted first, and seized on by
the Object, without Design upon either side; unless on some Occasions, where
certain agreeable intelligent Objects are said to lay Traps for Lovers, by
showing their own Charms: but then this Forwardness of appearing, which the Sex
is sometimes accused of, proceeds more from Curiosity and a Desire of
Amusement, than of exciting Love, or even of drawing common Admirers. But this
is a Speculation foreign from the Purpose: whatever be in it, the natural
Attraction, whether Love or Friendship, is accompanied with a certain Sweetness
in which we are but passive, and can challenge nothing of it as our own
Contrivance. Pleasure is the Result of Friendship, not the Inducement to it.

NOW if the Constitution of our Nature is such, that Pleasure is inseparable
from loving our Friends, and doing them friendly Offices, this is the
Contrivance of our Maker, and we cannot alter our Frame: nor have we any reason
to wish it altered, because our Maker seems thereby to have designed that Self
Love should be swallowed up by a more generous Principle, in which our Nature
finds its account, without laying a Plot for it. And as Generosity consists in
giving, not in receiving, our Savior declares, that to give is more blessed.
At this rate one would think Friendship should not be such a Rarity, since so
much Pleasure attends it: But let Self answer for that. It Is enough for us to
have the agreeable Conviction, that our Nature is capable of a finer Cast; and
they who would resolve every thing into sordid Interest, do only argue from the
Abuse of our Faculties, without a right Knowledge of the natural Use of them.

SECT. VIII. Of other Engagements of the AFFECTION.
BESIDE the three kinds of Love mentioned in the last Section, there are other
things more properly called Attachments than Love; such as the Concern about
one's Family, separate from the Love to Children, and the lawful Concern we
ought to have for our Posterity and Kindred, which lies in the Desire of having
Representatives, and keeping up a mere Name. We shall hardly discover a
Foundation for this Love in Nature, unless it be said to proceed from an
Abhorrence of Extinction, or from an Anxiety that at least a Sound should
remain after us to keep us from being forgot. Pride will affect that this Name
should be highly regarded, because of its seeming Relation to our Persons; and
so we wish our Representatives to be Rich and Potent, not so much for their
Convenience, as our own Glory.

TO this sort of Love, the Love of our Country is frequently sacrificed. But
there is a nearer kind of Self-Love, which gets the better even of it: for we
see good Estates played away, or otherwise squandered, according to the Humor
of the Proprietors. And these will be called no extraordinary Discoveries.

THE Love of our Country has more of Nature in it than the former, as if it was
an Instinct planted by the great Ruler of the Earth, that all the habitable
Parts of it might be inhabited with Contentment, and improved to the utmost,
without wandering to finer Climates, and dislodging other People: and we see
how alluring the native Soil has been in all Ages. But the Love of our Country
farther implies (and with greater Reason) a peculiar Affection and Concern for
the Society wherein Providence has placed us; as if we looked upon it as the
Household we belong to, and which we are therefore chiefly to care for, (the
general Law of Humanity always observed) as being its most immediate and proper
Members. However, if that kind of Self-Love, which aims no farther than the
present Gratification of the Person, gets the better of the Concern for the
Family; it is no wonder the Concern for the Country is so much forgot, and
looked upon as an old-fashioned simple Thing. The wife self-loving Man has no
Country, no Family, no Friends; but where he can eat best, or make the greatest
Figure, there he lives.

THERE is a Love which had almost been passed over, viz. Party-Love. It owes
its rise to Self-Love plainly enough, whether it be considered as an accidental
Agreement of Opinions, or a Combination of Interests and Designs, without any
Cement of Virtue, or Regard to Truth. And though we see this Attachment to Party
sometimes producing strange Offices of Friendship; yet it must be a very
ambulatory Affair, according to the various Changes of our Situation or our
Humor.

THE short Conclusion may be this, that Friendship is the Soul of all
Relations, and the Soul of it is Disinterestedness.

SECT. IX. The Meaning of Disinterestedness. Two Sources of NATURAL VIRTUE.
PERHAPS it will be thought strange that Disinterestedness, being but a
negative sort of Term, implying only an incorrupt or unselfish State of Mind,
should yet be mentioned as a positive Quality, and called the Soul of
Friendship. To answer such People in their own way, it may be maintained that
Disinterestedness is really a positive Term, as well as a positive Quality: for
Interestedness is but the Negation of Integrity, and Disinterestedness is the
taking away that Negation: an interested Person is generally taken for an
unjust Person.

BUT not to dwell upon Words: if Man was originally upright and incorrupt, by
the Removal of the opposite Qualities, he is reinstated in his primitive
Integrity; so that an incorrupt Man is the same with an upright Man, and
Disinterestedness but another Term for Uprightness. This way of speaking
therefore, when the Matter is well considered, will pass both with Christians
and Deists; for both Parties suppose Man to be originally upright, the latter
only denying his Defection from that State. And most Christians, though they
acknowledge the sad Effects of the Fall, yet do not deny that there remains
some Sense of Equity, and some Fund of Goodnature.

THERE seems to be a natural Love of Justice and Order, as there is of
Proportion and Harmony. We are pleased with a fine Character, as well as with a
fine Picture, or fine Music. It Is true, the Heart is properly called the Seat
of Love: but the Understanding has its Objects of Pleasure too, and what
pleases is loved. The Understanding not only sees, but it approves, and
Approbation implies Delight. Let us say plainly, every Man has a Sense of
Equity and fair Dealing, whatever Stretch we may make in our own favor; and
every Man is well persuaded of the Difference between Right and Wrong,
independent of Education and Example. As in things relating to the external
Senses, no Man can be taught to see or taste; so no Man can furnish another
with a Sense or Relish of Virtue: all that teaching can do in this Case, is to
lay things before the Mind in such a way as it may perceive either the Beauty,
or the Deformity of them, by its own native Force. Instruction, no doubt, is of
great importance, as it helps to cultivate those innate Powers of the Soul,
that Doctrina sed Vim promovet insitam, etc.
Vis insita, as Horace calls it: but that is another Affair.

TO return, a Man feels when the Rules of Equity are broke to his own
prejudice, and he sees when they are broke to the prejudice of his Neighbor,
if the Injury is done by a third Person; for he does not always see it when it
is done by himself. Thus the Prophet accosted David under the Parable of the
Ewe-Lamb, which made him see his Error immediately, and his Conscience was
convicted.

Mr. Hobbes himself does not deny there is such a thing as Leviath. Chap. XI.
Right and Wrong; he only says, "the Doctrine thereof is perpetually disputed
both by the Pen and Sword; whereas the Doctrine of Lines and Figures is not
so." -- And he gives a very good Reason for it just after. "Because in this
Subject Men care not what be Truth, as being a thing that crosses no Man's
Ambition, Profit, or Lust." A Frenchman would have put l'Amour propre for all:
but the Principle still holds good, that Truth, and Justice, and Virtue, are
naturally agreeable to the Mind, when it is free of Byasses in its own favor:
and the Character of an honest Man will be as lovely as that of a Scoundrel
will be hateful; which it sometimes happens to be even among such Folks
themselves.

THIS Sense or Relish of Virtue, without any View to Self-Interest, is one
Source of moral Actions; though often very unable to produce them, as was
observed before, Sect. VI. To which this may be added, that our Inclinations
not only hinder us from following what our Reason sees to be good; but they
confuse and darken it in the first instance, making it often take the Ill for
the Good. But we are here supposing Reason, or the understanding Faculty to be
free of any Influence from the Inclinations, in which case it sees and judges
of things within its Sphere distinctly enough; and so may be called one Source
of disinterested Actions or human Virtues.

WE may observe farther, that beside that Relish or Approbation which the Mind
gives to Truth, either after a Process of Reasoning, or a more instantaneous
Perception, there is still in Man, fallen as he is; a Fund of Compassion or
Tenderness, operating in a more warm and feeling manner, without any help of
Reflection. And this is another Source of disinterested Actions, seated in the
Heart (as the former is in the Understanding) which yet being but a happy
Constitution of Soul, a Man is no more to value himself upon it, than upon
bodily Health.

PERHAPS Benignity had been a fitter Word than Compassion, to express that
affectionate Temper which prompts Men freely to do good to others: but
Compassion came first up, and in the present distressed State of things, every
Man is some way or other an Object of it; so it may be taken for a general
Inclination to relieve and assist. However, Benignity has a more extensive
Signification, not only importing Pity for the Afflicted, but a Desire to see
every body happy, and an Endeavor to make them so: and such a Temper must
extend to the whole sensible Creation. The just Man is merciful to his Beast.

WHOEVER then has any thing of this compassionate Temper in him, (as none but a
Devil is supposed to be wholly void of it) ought to cherish it carefully: for
it is a surer and a more fertile Principle of good Actions than that wherein the
Understanding is only engaged. Most Men can love better than they can reason:
and thus they are to blame who talk of Pity as a contemptible Thing; as Seneca
called it the Defect of little Minds: but this great Man was carried away by a
false Philosophy, which did not allow what was due to the Affections, and would
needs set up for an unnatural stiff Composure that was good for nothing, even
supposing it to be free from Grimace. Benevolence generally implies a Warmness
of Heart, and care should be taken that be not too cool; otherwise it
degenerates into Indolence.

NO doubt the warm Temper ought to be regulated by Discretion. A Judge, for
instance, is not to be prevailed on by more Tenderness for one Party, than the
other; but must give the Subject in dispute to the Person whose Right is
clearest, though the other may be more necessitous: and Merit is not in the
question neither. Again, in giving charitable Assistance, a Man is not to strip
himself in favor of the first Object he meets; but to proportion his Charity
so as none may justly complain for want of a Share, and that Mercy may agree
with Judgment. As to our reserving for our own Occasions, Self-Love will
readily take care of that.

SECT. X. Some Acceptations of CONSCIENCE.
CONSCIENCE is either the Sense of Equity in general, or the Consciousness of
our adhering to it; which is supposed to carry its Reward along with it, as was
said in an old elegant Speech. -- and Men's sibi conscia recti.
VIRG.

AND a good Conscience is called in Sacred Writ, a continual Feast. If, on the
contrary, we are conscious that we have done wrong, or departed from Equity,
this Reflection carries a Pain along with it, as the former carried a Pleasure:
and all the Account we can give of those different Effects upon our Minds, is,
that such is the Establishment of things. St. Paul informs us very plainly,
that this Operation of the Mind has been uniform in all Ages of the World: When
Romans ii.
the Gentiles which have not the Law, do by Nature the things contained in the
Law; these having not the Law, are a Law to themselves: which shows the Work of
the Law written in their Hearts, their Conscience also bearing witness, and
their Thoughts the mean while accusing or else excusing, etc. He says in
another place, He had kept a Conscience void of Offense toward God and toward
Men. So that Conscience may be considered as one of the Powers or Faculties of
the Mind, like an Ear for Music; with this difference, that some few Persons
have got no Ear, but no Man was ever without some Conscience. The Taste indeed
may be corrupted, and so it fares with Conscience.

THIS View of Conscience, as a natural Relish of moral Rectitude, and not Mr.
Lock gives that Definition in his Essay on Human Understanding: and arguing
against innate Principles, he says, "If Conscience be a Proof of innate
Principles, Contraries may be innate Principles; since some Men with the same
Bent of Conscience prosecute what others avoid." But this Argument would seem
to strike most against Virtue, as it seems to take away the Difference of Right
and Wrong, or to render every thing so arbitrary and uncertain, that an Appeal
could not be made to the common Sense of Mankind in no Case whatsoever. But Mr.
Lock cannot be suspected to have had so bad an Intention: the Regard he
expressed for the Christian Religion, as well as moral Virtue, is sufficient to
clear him from such an Imputation. It Is remarkable too, that some professed
Deists not only set up for the moral Sense, but also acknowledge the innate
Principles, which they call (after Epictetus) Anticipations, or previous
Notices of the Mind.
merely our own Opinion or Judgment of the moral Rectitude or Pravity of our
own Actions, (as an ingenious Author defined it) will help to solve some
Difficulties arising from the different Opinions of Men, (particularly
Christians) and their mutual Persecutions; each Party really thinking
themselves in the right. For it is to be observed, that these Differences are
chiefly in Matters of Belief, and concerning the Interpretation of revealed
Doctrines, and that all Parties are nevertheless agreed in the Principles of
Justice and natural Equity. For instance, every one's Conscience declares to
him, that God is to be honored in the most perfect Manner: so that the Dispute
comes only to be, what is the most perfect Manner? As to which, (though Men must
necessarily be divided, so long as they differ in the Interpretation of what
has been revealed, or do not all equally agree upon the things that are to be
received as Revelation) their Consciences (if they would hearken to them) would
tell them that they ought to love one another, notwithstanding any such
Differences of Thinking. But Hurry, Prepossession, and Interest, darken the
Understanding; making People take human Inventions for the Commands of God, or
less earnest to observe the weightier things of the Law, than the most
inconsiderable Ceremonies. But this Confusion of the Judgment does not infer
that we have no such Faculty, since it might be as reasonably said we have no
Sight, because sometimes we do not see clearly. Nor is Christianity to be
charged with the Persecutions among the different Sects and Parties, which its
Enemies make a handle of in their Arguments against it: for Religion is
commonly but a Pretense for such Severities, the Quarrel rather rising from
Ambition, or Covetousness, or both. And if blind Zeal or Fury, without any
other Mixture (which is even very rare) should really be the Cause of the
Severities, what more could the Founder of the Christian Religion do, to inform
Men's Understandings, than by making their Love to one another, the principal
Mark of being his Disciples? If People will call themselves Christians (as each
Party call themselves the only Christians) and yet retain their Pride and
Ill-Humour, and all the Vices of Nature, is Christianity justly to be blamed
for that? They who thus blame it, as they are no less corrupt than the
Christians, are also guilty of a manifest piece of unfair Dealing; since any
body that can read, may see what the Gospel requires, and what it forbids.

THE same View of Conscience, as a natural Sense of Equity, may help to settle
the Debate about innate Ideas, which is not now so high as it was some Years
ago: for it needs not be asserted, that we came into the World with the Ideas
of Virtue, or Dictates of Morality, no more than with the Ideas of Squares and
Triangles, and their several Properties. It Is enough that the Mind ripens as to
its Comprehension of Truths both geometrical and moral: and whatever may be
called Science in either, is only as it were an Evolution of some first
Principles which Mankind are agreed upon; and so in Matters of Right and Wrong
there lies an Appeal to the moral or internal Sense, as in mathematical
Demonstrations there lies an Appeal to the external.

IT was very agreeable to find that Sir Matthew Hale had asserted both the
moral Sense, and the moral Dictates, in a Discourse on our Savior's Precept of
doing as we would be done to. Here are a few of his Words: "As Contemplat. Part
III. from page 154 to 198.
the Eye of Sense, as soon as it is open, discerns the Light, without any solemn
Process to evince it to be such; so there be some kind of Truths that the Eye
of the Understanding assents to, as it were by Intuition." -- He adds, "The
great Reason of Inequality in our Actions is Self-Love, that makes a Man
partial to himself, and warps him from that Equality and Justice, that should
direct him." -- And speaking afterward of the several Parts of Charity, he
mentions, "A general Frame of Humanity and Benignity to all Mankind, whether
Relations or Strangers, Friends or Enemies -- The contrary whereof (says he) is
Selfishness, making a Man's single Self the Center of all he does." And having
said again, "That Self-Love blinds and seduces the Judgment, whereby a Man
often attributes to himself such Circumstances as render the very same Action
done by him to another, to be just and righteous; when the very same Action
done by another to him, seems to be unjust." He therefore proposes a
Transposition of Persons, which would put the Matter in a quite different
Light: so he concludes most ingeniously, "The truth is, this Precept does
discharge Self-Love from having to do in this Business of moral Righteousness
or Charity; or at least puts it in that Condition, by Transposition of the
Persons, that it speaks as much for Gaius as it does for Titius, when Titius
sustains the Person of Gaius; and so Self-Love becomes equally an Advocate for
Titius and against him."

OUR Savior has in a manner proposed such a Transposition of Persons in that
same glorious Precept, when he says, Therefore all things whatsoever ye would
that Men should do to you, do ye even so to them; for this is the Law and the
Prophets. And he has made the Command universal and absolute, without any
prudential Limitations which Self-Love would be too ready to suggest. But the
same natural Reason which sees the Fitness of the Command, sees also where the
Transposition is to take place; and that the Precept is not designed to defeat
Order and Government among Men: as a Parent is not to abstain from correcting a
Child, nor a Judge from punishing a Criminal: such Power, being given for the
Good of others, must be exercised accordingly, and is sometimes exercised with
grief.

A world of things might be said about Conscience, were it not for fear of
being too intricate or too obvious. But it is remarkable, that the same thing
which acts within us sometimes as a Judge, acts at other times as an Accuser,
and even as an Executioner: and hence the usual Expression of the Lashes of
Conscience. Nor is it any Argument that People have no Conscience, because they
do not always feel those Lashes, nor are troubled with any Remorse. For, not to
say that they sometimes feel more than they are willing to own, they are under
the power of another Principle (Self-Love) which hinders them from seeing that
they have done wrong, or may at first push them on to commit it, contrary to
their plain Conviction. It Is this Liberty they take of doing what they know
they should not, that makes it be said they have no Conscience, or, which is
the same thing, a large Conscience: both Expressions importing that they stick
at nothing.

IT is not possible to account for the Difference of Souls in the point of
Conscience: some have it of a very delicate Sense, others of a very dull one.
And this Difference would seem to be in their very Nature, like the Difference
of Complexion or any thing else. Why the same Person has this Sense quicker and
duller at different times, is another Secret, but the thing is certain in fact:
for the same Temptation will prevail at one time, that would have no force at
another.

A scrupulous Conscience implies a Defect in the Understanding, and is akin to
Superstition and Bigotry; with this difference, that these two (which differ
very little) often prompt Men to do extravagant Things: whereas Scrupulosity
restrains them from doing what may be very reasonable.

BUT it is not always Scrupulosity to differ from the current Practice of the
Times, the Multitude being an ill Guide; and bare Example strong enough to
carry People away, even when neither Interest nor Pleasure solicit. But this
one Observation may be made, that whatever may contribute to raise Scruples,
Interest is very apt in most Cases to remove them.

SECT. XI. The REALITY of VIRTUE.
IF there is such a thing in Man as Conscience, there must also be such a thing
as Virtue, though this is as hard to define as the former: but the Existence of
both is discoverable from the Distinction of Right and Wrong, and so Virtue may
be considered as the adhering to what is right, the Loveliness of which the
Conscience was convinced of before. Nor does it strike at the Existence of
Virtue, that it is sometimes represented as No VI.
an abstracted Notion of the Mind; for all Qualities are nothing more, when they
are considered separately from any particular Subject; and Men speak of such
Qualities that fall under the outward Senses, as well as of those moral
Qualities affecting the Mind; as they speak of Streightness, both in Lines and
Actions. What is there more common than to talk of sweet and bitter, without
joining these Words to any particular thing tasted, or any other way perceived?

THIS Pedantry seemed the more allowable, that some Men have called Virtue, a
Chimaera, a Phantom, and at best an arbitrary thing: but honest People are at
no loss, when they hear of a virtuous Action, to know whence the Virtue of it
proceeds, and they call both Actions and Persons good without hesitation; so
that Virtue and Goodness often pass for the same thing, and no Confusion
ensues. Only it must be remembered, that the Idea of Goodness is less
restricted than that of Virtue, which is chiefly applicable to rational Agents
(called also moral Agents) and their Actions and Intentions.

AS every body allows that Goodness is the Object of Love, so Virtue must be
the Object of it too. Yet there is a sort of Reasoning, which, if it took
place, would destroy the very Being of Virtue: and that is, when People affirm,
"That no Man can love any thing but under the Notion of Good with respect to
himself." But this in the first place is contrary to Experience, since we love
many things under the Notion of Good with respect to others, with whom we have
not the least Connection, and therefore cannot be said to love those things
with respect to ourselves. In the second place, by that reasoning we could
acknowledge no Difference between Good and Evil, but in so far as we found our
Account (or thought we found it) in the one or the other: or, in other Words,
the Goodness of things consisting only in their being good to us, or giving us
pleasure, the Ideas of Goodness and Virtue would be swallowed up in the sole
Idea of Pleasure; and since vicious Persons must be owned to be pleased with
their Pursuits, as well as virtuous Persons are with theirs, the moral
Difference between these two Parties would vanish. I do not say, that both
Parties are equally pleased with their Pursuits; but both certainly are
pleased. Nay, mad People are highly pleased with their extravagant Fancies; and
where shall the Difference lie between them and the sober, if Pleasure is the
only thing to be appealed to, and no Appeal to be made to the common Sense of
Mankind in their right Wits? Both must be equally mad, or both must be equally
sober.

THOSE Reasoners bring themselves into this farther Difficulty, that when it is
asked them, Why they love any thing? and they make answer, Because it gives
them Pleasure; a second Question (why Pleasure?) leaves them nothing to say at
all: unless they say they are pleased, because they are pleased. Whereas
others, who acknowledge the moral Difference of Things, independent of private
Good, could answer readily, they loved a thing because it was lovely, or good
in it self; which is much the same.

THE Idea of Virtue as a thing lovely upon its own account, shows the
Reasonableness of the old Expression, viz. Virtue is its own Reward, and that
mere Pleasure (without Justice) does not constitute the Happiness of rational
Creatures; otherwise Vice might have been as well said to be its own Reward.
'Twas pity indeed the sincere Stoics had not had some more lively Thing to fix
on, than their abstracted Notion of Virtue: if Brutus, who perhaps had more of
it than any Man at that time in Rome, had seen a little farther, he would not
have called it an empty Name. But it is possible his Virtue (without
disparagement to him) has been pretty much tinctured with the Desire of
Applause, which is empty enough; and likewise the Distress and Perplexity of
his Mind at that time, may have forced that Expression from him. But Cicero,
and those who wrote of Virtue deliberately, always represent it as a real
Thing, and infinitely charming.

HOWEVER, though the Understanding may be pleased with certain Ideas and
Speculations of moral Goodness, and the Heart (supposing it honest) may partake
of the Delight; yet the Heart must have something to cleave to, that has Life;
since otherwise the Affections would not have an adequate or suitable Object:
so that (if such a way of speaking can be allowed) we must conceive Virtue and
Justice, and all that is lovely, even Love itself; as it were in Person, or
united to an intellectual Nature.

VIRTUE then is still a real Thing, whatever way it be supposed to affect Men:
and there can hardly be a greater Proof of its Reality, than the melancholy
State those are reduced to, who see it and forsake it. If a Curse was to be
wished to any, there could be none imagined heavier: Virtutem videant,
intabescantque relicta.


THE Pleasure that is found in the Practice of Virtue, is much owing to the
Relish or good Taste of the Soul. But as this Taste is much vitiated since the
Fall of Adam, Virtue is sometimes represented as a very uneasy Thing; and no
doubt is so, in many respects: for if it were so very natural and easy as some
make it, our Savior's Precept of Self-Denial would be superfluous; and if it
were so very unnatural and hard as others make it, his declaring that his Yoke
is easy, would not be agreeable to Truth. But that which is easy to Nature in a
State of Order, is not so in a State of Disorder; for Nature is one thing, and
corrupt Nature another: and they who never heard of the Distinction, nor of the
Fall, had reason to recommend a Life according to Nature; and to maintain
Nunquam aliud Natura, aliud Sapientia aixit. Juv. N V.
that she never differed from Wisdom. But the Case is now altered, and to live
virtuously and wisely is a Matter of Difficulty and Labor: so that indeed our
Savior's Declaration seems to import that his Yoke is easy, rather in the
Consequences, than that it is always so in the first Instance.

NOW what makes Virtue uneasy at any rate, but some unhappy Turn of Nature,
some Poison of Self-Love, something that is not right, whatever Name it get?
But this is certain on the other side, that, corrupt as our Nature is, there
are many Practices of Virtue, which are mighty agreeable; and therefore to
affirm absolutely, "That nothing can be virtuous, but what contradicts, and
does violence to Nature," is not only false, but looks like a Design to
discourage all Attempts toward Virtue, whether natural or divine.

SECT. XII. RELIGION.
AS Religion is principally meant of Man's Duty toward God, it is therefore
considered as a higher Thing than Virtue: yet if the Distinction of natural and
divine Virtue, be admitted, the highest Things in Religion will suffer no
disparagement in being called Virtues.

BUT the Design here, and all along, is only to give a general View of
Religion, and to confront it with Self-Love, in order to see how far it gains
or loses by its being mixed with that Principle.

IF a formal Definition of Religion were to be asked, perhaps that might do
well enough (with some variation) which the Civil Law gives of Justice, viz. a
constant and perpetual Will to render every one his Due. A Man cannot be said
to have Religion, unless he has a Love for Justice; and this Love ought to be
in a very great Degree, as our Savior has made use of the Words Hunger and
Thirst, and placed it in the Number of the Beatitudes: Blessed are they that
hunger and thirst after Righteousness.

IT IS very true, the above Definition represents Religion as a Thing that is
internal; and lying chiefly in the Heart: but this does not take away the Idea,
nor the Obligation of external Religion, which consists in outward Practices,
either moral or instituted; no more than the actual Exercise of Justice is
taken away, by the perpetual Inclination of doing justly. Virtue and Vice both
are internal Things, breaking out according to the Occasions that fall in our
way. We call those Practices of Religion instituted or positive, the Reasons
whereof do not appear clearly to us, though there may be good Reasons for them in
the Wisdom of God; if it was but to make them the Figures of higher Things, and
to excite the dull Affections, by striking on the outward Senses. The Jewish
Ceremonies were remarkably calculated for that purpose: And Christians will
hardly disown that they have need to be awakened by sensible Impressions. But
this by the way.

THERE is a more express Definition of Religion, given by a late Author; which
raises the Idea of Justice very high: it is in these Words; Religion then is
nothing but a respectful Worship of Justice and Truth, which makes us treat God
as God, and the Creatures as Creatures. Perhaps few Definitions will be found
more exact, and there is none that captious Spirits will not censure: this at
least agrees with Mr. Wollaston's Rule Religion of Nature.
, to treat things as they are. It Is also very plain, that the truest Worship
consists in Imitation, and Imitation is the Effect of Love: so that whatever
Ideas we form of Religion, if they be formed right, they all hang together in
an Order that may be called natural, and whereof Reason itself may see the
Consistency.

AS to Mr. Wollaston, his Rule is most just: but then we can make no more of
it, but to treat things only as they appear to us, or according to the Notions
we have of them; and however imperfect these may be, we may be said to act
justly if we follow our Light. But the same Apostle, who tells us that the
Gentiles do by Nature the Things contained in the Law, tells us also that the
natural Man knows not the Things of God; and that they are spiritually
discerned. The Things therefore contained in the Law should seem to be those
Acts of Humanity and natural Justice, which we find instances of in all Times
and Places; and the Things of God may be supposed to be meant both of his
unsearchable Nature, and the Mysteries of Religion, which are but revealed as
it were historically, or that they are, not how they are; and therefore, as the
Apostle concludes, only to be discerned by a spiritual Light.

THE natural Ignorance of Man will easily be confessed by those who acknowledge
revealed Religion: and let those who deny it tell us honestly what things they
know really, or in their true Nature. Indeed the Rule of treating things as
they are, holds very well as to certain Relations and Characters: Parents, for
instance, ought to be treated as Parents, and Children as Children; and so of
other Relations. Again, People of Worth are to be treated in a different Manner
from the Worthless; and in all Cases, Prudence and Equity (which are never
separate) will know how to distribute and render what is due to every Relation
and Character.

BY thus considering the Difference of Relations and Characters, we may form
some imperfect Notions of our Duty, even to our Maker and the Creator of all
Things. If we suppose a Being of infinite Power, Wisdom and Goodness, the
Obligations of Fear, Reverence and Love naturally arise: Reason itself goes so
far, as to make that plain Inference and Conclusion. Nor can we hinder
ourselves from making such a Supposition, if we allow Reason any Exercise at
all. We see and feel enough to persuade us of the Existence of such a Sovereign
Being, unless we are stupid or hurried out of our Reflection. Though we cannot
comprehend the divine Nature, we cannot fail to see that it is; else we must
fall into the Absurdities of imagining Things that are made, to have made
themselves, or to have been made by nothing; or else to confound the Maker and
the Works together, like Spinoza; who, in that point, imitated some of the
Stoics, and (with them) is imitated by later Authors.

RELIGION now is principally to be taken for the Duties we owe to God: What we
owe to Men is usually called Morality, though it is also a considerable Part of
Religion, as being enjoined by God, who puts no value on any thing we do to
show our Homage to him, if we neglect our Duties to our Neighbor. This is
confirmed by many Places of Scripture.

RELIGION also may be divided into the internal and the external, and this
again into the moral and the ceremonial. What a Man has of the internal, can
only be known to God; and the external will only be approved by him, as it
proceeds from the internal. To instance even in the moral Part; Giving of Alms
(which is of more value than going to Church) is rejected by God, when it is
done only to be seen of Men; or it is so far rejected, as it is tinctured with
that Principle: for our Savior told the Pharisees, they had already their
Reward.

IT IS true, the ceremonial Part of Religion is much abolished by the Christian
Dispensation (the Jewish Ceremonies certainly are) and the few Institutions or
positive Precepts in it may deserve a higher Character; though still they are but
Ceremonies, when the Heart does not go along with them. What else is taking the
Communion to secure an Employment? Baptism also is a Matter of Parade in the
Parents for the most part, and the Children generally think as little about it
when they come to Age, as in their Infancy. There is this Difference therefore
between the moral and positive Institutions, that the former are of use to
others, even though they are not done from a right Principle; but the latter,
unless they be done from a right Principle, are good for nothing.

BUT true Religion, as it contains all Virtues, so it will not omit any the
least Observances, whether it may think them appointed by God, or Men having
his Authority; nay, though it is not so sure of the Authority, it will submit for
Peace sake, when the things enjoined seem to impart no Disadvantage to Society,
nor any Dishonor to the divine Nature.

IT IS only with reference to that Disadvantage and Dishonor, that the
Distinction of true and false Religion has come in use: for false Religion is
no Religion. There is indeed a Difference between the disowning all Religion
(which is Atheism) and the Defects arising either from the Confusion of the
Understanding, or the Perverseness of the Will; and the last is by far the
unhappiest. Bigotry and Superstition flow from a disturbed Understanding. Blind
Zeal or religious Fury arises more from the Temper or Complexion, if these are
proper Words; and what is called Enthusiasm is generally from the same
Fountain. I have no intention to enquire into all the Sources of Error. But
Religion (which may be called the Wisdom that comes from above) is first pure,
and then peaceable, etc. Hypocrisy does not even deserve the Name of false
Religion: it is a Cheat upon the World, either to get Money or Applause, or
both, when they can be had.

How many things may be added on this Subject! But I shall refer to a few Hints
in the No. V.
Appendix, from which the Reader will easily draw a thousand more.

SECT. XIII. The Unfitness of SELF, as an Object of LOVE.
THE common Ideas of Love, Happiness, and Justice, show pretty evidently what
rank Self-Love should stand in. Some Persons indeed seem to be fond of the very
Word: but if they mean by it the Desire of Happiness, it is plain we ought to
desire the Happiness of all Men, and thus we should fulfill the Command of
loving our Neighbors as ourselves.

BUT as Love implies more properly a Complacency in the Object; what Sense
would it make, if Self were said to be this Object? The Love of other Creatures
(that is, an ultimate Acquiescence in them) is justly reckoned an Absurdity as
well as an Impiety, because of their natural Insufficiency to satisfy the
Heart. But still they are Supports of a certain kind, which Self cannot be,
since it is like a Void, that wants other things to fill it. So that the
Self-Complacency of a Creature is much of the same import with Self-Delusion;
the Notion of a Creature always supposing Indigence. For as the Body cannot be
Food to itself, so the Soul must depend for its Nourishment upon some other
thing than itself. And this Difference is to be remembered between these two,
that the Soul cannot fall to pieces like the Body, but subsists by its
unexstinguishable Nature (in Misery and Anguish) when its Desires are not
satisfied.

IT IS very true, in this short Dream of Life the Soul has several Desires; and
these more upon the Body's account than its own: nay, often we cannot say the
things we desire are of use, either to Soul or Body; for instance, Titles and
Ribbons. But the Fancy (with a mixture of Pride) finds its account in such
things; and to that Source we may refer most of the Desires of Men, Women and
Children.

IF it shall be said, that those Marks of Distinction not only draw more Money,
but also the Esteem of others; it must be only of such as are fanciful like
ourselves. A through Pride leads to the Contempt of all external Riches and
Pomp, that we may be thought sufficient for ourselves, like the Philosopher in
his Tub. I shall not determine that Diogenes was led by the sole Desire of
Esteem and Admiration, though it was so said by some of his Contemporaries, who
have seen his weak sides as he has seen theirs: but wherever that Desire
prevails, it concludes for the Insufficiency of Self as an Object of Love or
Complacency, since we cannot be eas^ but from without.

NOR can we ever be said in this Life to be satisfied, but only amused by
getting one Rattle or Feather after another; (the Delights of Friendship are
not of this Class:) and when we come to shake off this Body, and our Stupidity
with it, what a State, can we think, the Soul will be in, that has been only
accustomed to delight in Vanity, and follow Shadows; when all its imaginary
Buildings are pulled down, and nothing remains but Remorse, Shame, Horror, and
what no Words are sufficient to express! This is upon the Supposition of a
future Life: and Christians profess a Belief even of the Resurrection of the
Body, the Senses of which will be infinitely more quick, both as to Pain and
Pleasure, than here. Men will make little by their Self-Love at the Day of
Judgment.

As the Consequences of Self-Love are such as have been represented, though
saintly; the Consequences of loving the most perfect Object with the most
perfect Love, are not only Rest and Joy to the Heart, but the whole Man is
dignified and exalted. The Understanding is enlightened, and the Heart
enlarged, as David expresses it. If the divine Love possessed us, we should be
no long those little, narrow, proud, angry, confused Creatures, shut up in a
hard Shell; we should then be free, in another Element, and without Strife.
Charity is the Principle of Union, Self-Love the Principle of Division.

ALL this appears from the Nature of Things, and Experience of the World.
Bateing a few Gentlemen who follow the Stoics, every body complains of the
Imperfections of Nature, which is indeed in a very poor State; and not only
imperfect, but wretchedly disordered. To take a view of Body and Soul, many
things occur, that are very disagreeable, and particularly with respect to the
moral World, (still more out of order than the natural;) and let any body judge
what those things are owing to. Our Self-Love not only makes us the Tyrants of
others, but also our own Executioners, and Self-Tormentors: whereas the divine
Love, by making us lose sight of ourselves, leads us both into Truth and Peace.
It rectifies our corrupted Taste: It Is no longer insufficient miserable We,
that are the Deities, but Honor is given where it is due. If we see any thing
excellent in our Neighbor, we love it and him as Rays of the divine
Excellency. If ever we turn an Eye to ourselves (and the seldomer we do it with
complacency, the better) we shall consider ourselves, and every thing we have
as derived from that Source.

IF we observe this Order, there can be no Error. We can hardly love ourselves
too much, if we love our Neighbor as much; that is, if both these Loves center
in a higher. And lest People should deceive themselves with a Fancy that they
love God, when they do not, they ought to examine themselves, and see whether
they love their Neighbors also: for he that loves not his Neighbor, whom he
has seen; how can he love God, whom he has not seen?

SECT. XIV. The LOVE of the CREATURES.
AS we have no Commerce or known Connection with any rational Creatures of
another Species than our own, and Love always supposing a Desire of Union with
the Object; we can only be said properly to love Mankind, and but to desire the
Possession of other created things, which are still less able to satisfy our
Heart.

IT IS to be considered too, that the Creatures of our own Species, as they are
desired by Self-Love only for our own Utility, are reduced to the same Class of
inferior things; to the great indignity and contempt of human Nature; nor are
the Defects of human Nature, either as to Soul or Body, any reason for treating
it at such a low rate. If the Body decays and rots, it is but in the Condition
of Plants and Vegetables; and if Gold and precious Stones are of a firmer
Consistence and Duration, than any animal or vegetable Body, yet our Love of
those glittering Things, is more on account of the Distinction they give us,
than for any sensible Pleasure they are able to convey. It Is true, the Eye has
a certain Pleasure in looking at them: but then the Eye is never satisfied.

LET us suppose, that all the Creatures together are not able to satisfy the
Heart of Man, and then see what Inference Reason might make from the
Supposition: The Inference would seem to be this, that Mankind must naturally
have recourse to the Deity, as the sole Object of their Acquiescence and Love.
But we see how small advances Reason made this way: the great Body of Mankind
were intent only on satisfying their lower Appetites, and their Pride; and the
Philosophers (who despised them) were ignorant themselves of the true State of
things: The Corruption of Man and the Fall was not found out by Man, but
discovered to him by Revelation. This is so true, that some of the
Philosophers, who were sensible enough of the Defects of the visible Creation,
raised an Objection from thence against Providence, and even a creating Power.

No body shows better than Mr. Pascal the opposite and imperfect Schemes of the
Philosophers Sect. iii, etc.
, for want of that Discovery of the Fall. If at present the great Roll of
Miseries and Calamities are objected, to disparage the Divine Providence; and
those dismal Scenes appealed to, that are fo frequently heard of, Murders,
Robberies, Frauds, War, Pestilence, Famine, Earthquakes, Hurricanes,
Inundations; in short, all the Evils, whether natural or moral, which afflict
and destroy poor Mankind; to say nothing of bodily Diseases, and common Death,
which attacks us in so many Forms, and often without any warning: if all those
things be objected, it will mend the matter nothing to deny, (with the Stoics)
that there is any Evil: it will be more reasonable to acknowledge (with St.
Paul Romans viii.
) that the whole Creation groaneth. And likewise it will be very proper to keep
in mind the Difference between moral Evils and natural, and to impute all that
belongs to the first Class to the Corruption of Man, and even to Self-Love; as
the natural Evils may be reckoned either as Punishments of the moral, or
sometimes as Preventions. How many Extravagancies are prevented, as well as
punished by Sickness and Poverty!

As to the natural Evils, and Death itself, they cannot be supposed (no more
than the moral Evils) to have been in the first Establishment of things. Wisd.
i. 15.
God made not Death.

BUT farther, all the Evils that are either felt or heard of (sometimes indeed
very terrible) may yet be called little, in comparison of the Good that remains
in the Creation. The Eruption of a burning Mountain is but like a Chimney on
fire in a great City: And the Service of the Elements in general is a large
Equivalent for the Desolations they sometimes occasion, as the Pleasure and
Fertility of a River makes well up for what it carries away in a Stream. Not to
mention the Beauty and Regularity of the Heavenly Bodies, with their beneficent
Influences, (a Theme often and to good purpose insisted on) which sufficiently
Psalm. xix.
declare the Glory of God.

SOME late Ridiculers of Providence, who do not speak out, have occasioned this
little Digression, in acknowledgment of the infinite Power and Wisdom that
framed the World, and still supports it, in a surprising Luster and Harmony.
They would also have it believed that the World is without Virtue, as well as
without a Governor; and argue from the common Practices of Men, of whom they
reckon Christians the worst, and take a handle from thence to disparage
Christianity. But their Cavils against revealed Religion signify nothing, who
deny the natural; as theirs signify as little who ascribe more to the natural
than its due, and who are justly suspected of a Design against all Religion,
and as secret Abetters of Atheism, by denying that Religion, which alone
accounts for the present Disorders of Men and Things.

WE are indeed in a mixed State, and a very tolerable one. As we are among
Thorns and Briars, so we are among Roses and Violets: and our State here is
justly reckoned a State of Trial and Discipline. The Belief of a better Life
afterward, and if we add the Fall from Paradise, will make the present
Afflictions light, and account pretty well for Affliction itself.

IT IS in the view of the afflicted, broken, unsatisfying State of things, that
the Love of the World and the Creatures is so much forbidden in Sacred Writ:
Mankind being often addressed with Arguments from their own Interest, as well
as from the Point of Justice. The natural Disorders of the World seem to be the
Consequences of the moral. Our Lives are short, our Bodies weak and full of
Diseases, as if the Souls that inhabit them could not have a fitter Lodging:
And from these proud and giddy Souls proceed more Sorrows than can be numbered.
The Enquirers into the Origin of moral Evil will ever be at a loss to account
for it. We see there is Pride, though we cannot tell how it first entered; and
all our Speculations labor under Difficulties. But we see that of Pride comes
Contention, and that it does more mischief in the World than Covetousness and
Luxury put together.

THE Love of the Creatures then is condemned, because they are frail and
unsatisfying of themselves; and by the Love of the World may be meant the
Passion of following common Custom, as well as that of gratifying our own
Inclinations, some of which we must often drop for fear of Censure.

BUT the Love which is thus condemned, is more properly a Dotage: even the Love
of rational Creatures may be so, and the Love of Money and fine Things deserves
not so good a Name as Dotage, but rather Avarice and Folly. The Love of
rational Creatures is more excusable on account of their Relation to us; and
the natural Capacity they have of delighting us, as any body will acknowledge,
who has the least Sense of Friendship, or even a Satisfaction in seeing Faces
and keeping Company. At the same time, rational Creatures are full of
Imperfections, and but like Apparitions for their Duration: so that our Rest is
not to be in them. Nor, on the other hand, are their Imperfections so to
disgust us, as to make us hate and despise them. The Command of loving our
Neighbor imports a great deal, and is a divine thing, wherever we are not
allured to it from our own Satisfaction; for in that case it may be called
natural Love (the Object making an agreeable Impression upon us) but not
Self-Love or interested Love, unless our own Interest were the only Spring of
it. And it is still to be remembered, that the divine Principle does not
extinguish the natural, and that the Pleasure resulting from the Constitution
of things is not to be called Self-Love, nor the Effect of Selfishness, no more
than it is selfish to be pleased with the Light of the Sun. In fine, though we
should neither suppose a Fall nor a future State, the Arguments for Self-Love
(by which all along has been meant the selfish Principle) can have no
Foundation: for if we do any thing that can be called good with reference to
others, it is only so far good as we do it upon their account: And for this we
may appeal to the common Sense of Mankind, especially to those who have not
been corrupted with Books.

SECT. XV. The LOVE of GOD.
RELIGION being considered as our Duty to God, the highest part of this Duty is
Love, which may be called the Mother of all Duties. Particular Commands and
Prohibitions seem only to have been given for leading Man back to that Love,
which was natural to him in his first State.

IT was said before, (Sect. vii.) that Love in general implies a Desire after
the Object, and a Delight in it. Now the Perfections of the divine Nature
demonstrate the Love of God to be perfectly reasonable, both in the Pursuit and
the Acquiescence. And though Love is called blind, as in some respect it is
really so; yet the Understanding being enlightened, actuated, and influenced by
the same unerring Spirit that influenceth the Heart, both these Powers are in
perfect Order and Harmony; and their Operations consequently must be complete,
rational, and natural, every way right, strong, and consistent; nothing feeble,
nothing foolish, nothing defective. The poor Expressions of Men, are more
defective than their Conceptions.

BUT however imperfect either our Words or our Ideas may be, we can well enough
perceive the Distinctions of things and their Properties. Nor does any
Distinction seem more necessary to be kept in mind, than that of the
Understanding and the Heart. By the former we discern the Beauty of an Object,
and by the latter we love it or cleave to it: In agreeable Objects each of
those Faculties is pleased, but the Pleasures are different. Again, our
Understanding is the Seat of our Opinions, the Heart is the Seat of our
Inclinations.

UPON the different Operations of these two Faculties, Dr. Henry More forms an
Argument for the disinterested or pure Love of God; No. IV.
the Substance of which is, "That as Truth is the Object of the Intellect, and
is assented to because it is true, without regard to the particular
Understanding that contemplates it; so Goodness is the Object of Love, which is
loved chiefly for its own Excellency." And he concludes, "We may as well affirm
that there is no Understanding, but what is self-interested, as that there is
no Love but what is self-interested."

No body was ever found that denied to Mankind a Faculty of loving, as well as
a Faculty of discerning: and one may be bold to say, that Love is so much the
Perfection and Happiness of our Nature, that it is deplorable it were not
directed to the proper Objects, and attended with all the Conditions that
render it worthy.

THE Heart is a Term both for the loving Faculty, and Love itself. Where your
Treasure is, there will your Heart be also: and Thou shall love the Lord with
all thine Heart. It is indeed added, and with all thy Might; to show that the
Dignity of the Object requires that all our Faculties and their utmost Force
should be employed in Love and Adoration. Again, an honest Heart is taken for a
sincere Intention; and in short, the Heart is considered as the principal thing
in Man. My Son, give me thy Heart.

I have the rather mentioned this obvious Distinction of the Heart and the
Understanding, that some (and I believe very good Persons) have considered the
Love of God only as an Act of the Understanding, by which the supreme Being is
adored for its Excellencies, and loved also; but chiefly loved, because those
Excellencies are beneficial to us: and such Persons are so much afraid of
falling into Enthusiasm (meaning the Extravagance of a warm Imagination) that
they exclude Love wholly from the Heart, lest it should be called a Passion, or
an indiscreet thing. But why may there not be divine Passions, as well as
human? Spiritual Affections, as well as natural? The Imagination is by no means
the Seat of Love, any more than it is the Seat of Hatred, Joy, or any other
Affection of the Soul. However, Imagination may impose upon us, or be imposed
upon itself, this is but like seeing through a false Glass; the Operations of the
Heart belonging to a quite different Province.

"THE true Love of God (says a late Free-Thinker. No. ccxvi.
Writer) is calm, and sedate, and permanent. The crackling Blaze of Passion is
soon over; it dazles, and it scorches, for a moment; but leaves no lasting
Warmth: whereas the silent Glowings of the Heart are strong, and durable; and
preserve an equal Temper of Heat."

THIS is very well expressed. The Author does not exclude the Love of God from
the Heart; he rather says it ought to be there always, only in a calm sedate
manner. But who can give Rules to Love? The State of the Heart, either as to
its Sedateness or its Disturbance, its Coolness or its Warmth, depends chiefly
on the divine Power that acts upon it; and the same Person at different times
is under very different Operations; in Distress, in Joy, in Hopes, in Fears; as
is evident from many Passagges in sacred Writ.

I have not the least intention of falling into a Dispute with this Author, for
I know nothing at all about him, nor have seen any of his Papers but this
single one. I Am willing only to quote some of his Expressions, as being among
the best and the modestest that are to be found in the Advocates for Self-Love,
who often write both saucily and confusedly.

He says, "Whoever traces our Love of others, he will find, it ultimately
terminates in ourselves; and that our Affection toward any Person is in
reality a Retaliation of some kind Offices we either have received, or do (at
least) expect from him. It is true, we often have a tender Regard and a Value
for those who have been Benefactors to others, though they never extended their
Kindness to us: But he who searches deep into human Nature may observe, that
here likewise we give a secret Glance toward ourselves, and love the generous
Person, not so much because he did good to another, as because we imagine we
also should have felt the same Effects of his Munificence, had he seen us in
the like indigent Circumstances."

HERE the Charge against Self-Love is carried as high as necessary, though the
Author seems to have designed it no disparagement. The Search into human Nature
can hardly be deep enough, so very latent is the Bias toward ourselves. But
the Retaliation of good Offices is by no means to be found fault with,
Gratitude being a part of Justice; and it can have no Tincture of Self-Love,
when we expect no such Offices for the future. What seems to be unnatural in
the Account given of our Love of generous Persons, is the founding it on an
Imagination, that we should have felt the same Effects of their Generosity;
which is at most but a posteriour Reflection, and it is possible the Fancy might
never enter into one's head. And though the Apostle says, we love God because he
loved us first, this is to show the Excellency of God's Love above ours; we
having such Motives for loving him, whereas he had none for loving us.

THE Opposition made to the pure Love of God, by Persons of Integrity and good
Sense, has certainly arisen from the Abuse which has been made of that Doctrine
by weak People, or vile Pretenders; the former really taking their own Fancies
for the Operations of the Almighty, and so falling into shameful Familiarity
and nauseous Expressions; and the latter sort, having no Sense of Religion at
all, have by their Pretenses to the highest Things in it, imposed upon the
Society they lived in, and sometimes subjected them to their Dominion and
Tyranny: as in the case of John of Leyden and others. Hence the Cry of
Enthusiasm, heated Imagination, and the like. Hence the Love of God is put in
opposition to all Affection, and confined to a simple Acknowledgment of the
divine Attributes, and (perhaps) a desire of keeping the divine Commandments,
which may be more from a Regard to ourselves than the Deity. True Love leads
naturally to the keeping of the Commands of God: and our Savior only makes it
the Test of Love, to undeceive any who may vainly think they love him without
that inward Disposition and outward Mark.

ANOTHER thing that may have frighted People from the pure Love of God, is
their imagining it must cut off all natural and lawful Affections. But this
Fear is groundless: Husbands love your Wives, says the Apostle. Though God is to
be loved with all our Heart, yet we may and ought to love some inferior
things, if we love them in the due Order and Measure: even Self-Love may stand,
if it be turned down to its proper Station.

BUT as our Happiness does not consist in the Love of ourselves, but in the
Enjoyment of things suited to our several Faculties; so the supreme Happiness
and Perfection of all intelligent Natures must consist only in the Love and
Adoration of the eternal Goodness. No words can express the Perfections of the
Divine Nature, and Mortals when they speak of it should be afraid of speaking
absurdly. The Heavens are not pure in his sight, and he charges the Angels with
Folly. What is Man, wretched Man, that he should presume to open his Mouth on
such a Subject? But the Love of God is a known Expression, and a thing of all
things the most reasonable; and yet unfortunately disputed! By the Love of God
must be meant the whole of Man's Duty and Happiness; two distinct Ideas, but
inseparably connected together.

ST. Augustine gives a Reason for that great Duty, besides the point of
Justice, from the Design of our Existence and the Nature of our Soul. He says,
-- fecisti nos ad te, and inquietum est Cor nostrum donec requiescat in te.
Confess. Lib. I. Cap. 1.
"God has made us for himself, and our Heart must be unquiet till it rests in
him." Mr. Pascal likewise (after taking a View of all the Hurry and Amusement
we are engaged in, and the different Springs that move us) concludes, No. VII.
"That Man can find no Rest, neither in himself nor in the Creatures, but in God
alone."

IT IS true, Moses lays it down with the Authority of a Lawgiver, Thou shall
love the Lord with all thy Heart, etc. But the Command carries its Reason
within it, if the Mind is but attentive. For without doubt the most proper
Object of our Love must be, that which is in itself the most perfect; that
which, though we love ever so much, we can never love up to its worth, having
still new and greater Cause to love it: and this can be nothing else but the
alone uncreated, the infinite and eternal Beauty. Plato's Method of Ascent from
the Love of Beauty, which we see in the Body, to that which we see in the Soul,
and from that to the immense Ocean of Beauty, is very remarkable.

THERE are some who do not deny, that God ought to be loved with all the Heart,
or the Affection, in the Words of Moses; but then they would make Self-Interest
the only Foundation of all Love, which seems not at all reasonable; and, as it
was observed before, Dr. Henry More sufficiently exposes the Opinion. I know
Moses, though he speaks as a Lawgiver, begins yet with an Encouragement: Hear
therefore, O Israel, and observe to do it, that it may be well with thee, etc.
But the highest Encouragement that can be given to excite Men to their Duty,
cannot take away the Principle of it, otherwise Duty would be subservient to
Interest, or a Man's highest Duty would be to himself, which no Christian ever
asserted in plain Terms: and the Idea even Horace gives of a Nec furtum feci,
nec fugi, si mihi dicat
Servus; habes pretium, loris non ureris aio.
Non hominem occidi: non pasces in cruce corvos.
Sum bonus and frugi: renuit negat atque Sabellus.
Cautus enim metuit foveam lupus, accipiterque
Suspectos laqueos, and opertum milvius humum.
Oderunt peccare boni virtutis amore.

good Man, shows how much he was of another opinion; for the Difference between
a good Man and a bad, must consist in some other things than a Regard to
themselves, since the bad are afraid of Hurt, and desirous of Happiness, as
well as the good; and no body would bestow the Epithet of Virtue or Goodness
upon Kites and Foxes.

THERE is still a Principle of Justice, and it is the adhering more or less to
it, at makes the difference between the good and the bad. Prudence is one
Virtue, and Justice another; the former indeed respecting ourselves, the latter
somewhat else. And Cicero says, Justitia nihil expetit pretii, nihil praemii:
per se igitur expetitur. De Legibus.
Justice desires neither Price nor Reward, but is desired upon its own account.
If there is any Beauty in Virtue, any Loveliness in moral Characters, the
Charms must be independent of any Profit, since they strike before such Views
or Expectations can enter.

THE greatest part of what has been said in this Article, has been to settle a
Point of Speculation or bare Philosophy, rather than to make Encomiums on the
thing itself: for there need none to those who feel it; and those who feel it
not, will hardly be affected with Words. All a Person can do, who presumes to
say any thing of it without feeling it, is to ask pardon of those that do or
wish to feel it. And perhaps the Pardon will be granted, when it is considered
that this Doctrine has been so much decry'd of late, and the opposite Doctrine
magnified as the highest Virtue, and made the Foundation of Religion: a
miserable Foundation! it has contributed to the disparagement of Christianity,
and given a handle for Ridicule and Triumph to its Opposers, not to be answered
but by owning the disinterested Principle, and placing Religion upon that solid
and cleanly Foundation.

THE Reader may see how far the Ridicule has been carried in the
Characteristicks, by the Quotation in the Margin Modern Projectors, I know,
would willingly rid their hands of these natural Materials, and would fain
build after a more uniform way. They would new frame the human Heart; and have
a mighty fancy to reduce all its Motions, Balances, and Weights, to that one
Principle and Foundation of a cool and deliberate Selfishness. Men, it seems,
are unwilling to think they can be so outwitted, and imposed on by Nature, as
to be made to serve her Purposes, rather than their own. They are ashamed to be
drawn thus out of themselves, and forced from what they esteem their true
Interest.
, and indeed with good Sense as well as Severity. But the Blame falls only upon
the modern Projectors, not upon the Christian Doctrine, which ought not to
suffer from the weakness of some who meddle to explain it: and one thing is
remarkable, that the Deists sometimes agree with those very Projectors they had
despised; for their System of calm Benevolence and Self-Approbation is much
about one with the cool deliberate Selfishness of the other Party.

BUT the unquiet Heart of Man must have somewhat else to satisfy it than its
own Approbation, as may easily appear from the Insufficiency of created Beings,
and the restless Pursuits of Men. And here one cannot but observe, how this
Set of the Deists and some of the Clergy distress each other on the Article of
Self-Love; the Deists charging the Clergy with a finer sort of Epicurism; since
the most corrupt Person in the World is willing to renounce smaller Pleasures
for greater. And, on the other hand, the Clergy object against the Deists,
"That it Self-Approbation is their principal Aim, they must hug a Phantom. And
not only so, but their Pride, which fills them with the Notion of their own
Excellency, must render them incapable of those Joys and Perfections only
inherent in the Deity, and only communicable to such Spirits, as are
dispossessed of such imaginary Fullness and real Arrogance."

BY the by, this Stoical old-fashioned Pride has been of late dressed up into a
kind of System, by which the defective Nature of Man (to say no worse of it)
and the whole visible Creation, are represented as quite free of Imperfection
and Evil. Now though it is difficult to argue against Experience, or to talk
People out of their Senses; yet it is possible some Minds of a certain Cast may
at length imagine their own particular Nature to be of such Perfection, as to
stand in need of no Helps but what they have from within themselves; or, in
other words, that their Reason is a sufficient Guide for all Purposes of Belief
and Practice; and consequently that they are not obliged to assent to any thing
but what they see clearly by this light: nay, that it were absurd even to be in
suspense about it, but immediately to reject it; and that, as to Practice,
their Inclinations being free from any wrong Biass or Tendency, there can be no
better Guides than these neither! From hence proceeds the Aversion to all
Revelation, and to the Clergy or Priests of all Religions, whom they look upon
as too cunning for the rest of Mankind, and sometimes do them the honor to
call them, the Compilers of the Sacred Records themselves; not adverting to the
Demonstration of the Facts, nor the Purity of the Doctrines, from which indeed
the Lives of the Clergy as well as the Laity are very different, to the hearty
Regret of the sincere among all Ranks. And there is nothing but Insincerity (a
hard Supposition) or plain Delusion, that can account for such a strange
Representation of the Excellency of human Nature, as to reject all Necessity of
a Mediator, Revelation, and the continual Influences of the Divine Spirit on
the impure fallible Spirits of Men, who are Blunderers in the commonest
Affairs. When one thinks of the Ignorance and Corruption of human Nature, one
is almost in danger of falling in with the opposite Party of Deists, (and
perhaps the Name is too good for either Party) who allow nothing at all to
Mankind that is good, not so much as the least Approbation of Virtue, nor any
Virtue and Decency, but what the fantastical Humor of People happens to
establish. But it is hard to say which of the Extremes is worst: And some
Persons have been very unsuccessful when they undertook to go the middle way,
and would needs lay the Foundation of Religion and all Duty upon Self-Love; the
very thing, which Religion designs to extirpate; that is, the selfish Principle
in which a Man's Good is his highest Motive, or himself the Center of all his
Aims. But to return.

THE Asserters of the disinterested Principle have this to support their
Doctrine, that if one was to consider Love, as it is in the divine Nature, the
first Idea that would probably occur, would be that of a free Communication of
Good; as the Sun sends forth its Light and its Heat.

THE Source of Joy and Bliss can want nothing for himself: so that the Design
of making Creatures, is to impart Happiness or Good to them. And it is very
remarkable that St. John says, God is Love, and God is Light; as if he had
designed to exhibit the Deity to our imperfect Conception under the Characters
of disinterested Goodness and diffusive Joy.

IT IS true, God is said Prove. xvi. 4.
to have made every thing for himself: for every thing must be made for some
end by an intelligent Agent: and the Source of all Power, Wisdom, and Beauty,
and whatever is excellent, must be an End to itself; since there can be no End
higher. Again, we hear of the arbitrary Pleasure of God; Revel. iv.
He has created all things, and for his Pleasure they are and were created.
But the Idea of Goodness is inseparable from that Pleasure.

SUCH is truly the inexpressible Love of God, that he may be said to hire us
to do good to ourselves. He has annexed Pleasure even to those low things
Eating and Drinking, as if we were to be bribed to support our own poor
Fabric, as well as to replenish the Earth. Nor are these Pleasures denied to
the inferior Creatures: Every thing living has its Enjoyments. So that though
the common way of speaking be true, "God has made every Creature for his own
Glory, and all things here on Earth for the Use of Man;" yet it is no less
true, that he makes every Creature that has Life for its own good. And if we
might suppose greater and lesser Motives in the incomprehensible God, we would
have reason to conclude that the good of Creatures is his greatest Motive in
creating them. He has no need of us, and we have need of every thing from Him.

WE are farther told, that Mankind stands in a near Relation to the Deity: For
we are his Offspring, as St. Paul says from a Greek Poet, which was the fittest
Authority he could bring to those he was arguing with; though it was a bold
stroke enough in that Poet: but it is supported by Moses, who says, God made
Man after his own Image; and Jesus Christ has enjoined us to be perfect, as our
Father in Heaven is perfect; showing us at once our Relation and our Duty.

THIS Relation (which we could not have supposed without the greatest
Arrogance) makes the Duty the more apparent. We ought to imitate the Divine
Nature, and be perfect as far as we are able. Now where can this Perfection lie
in us, but in Disinterestedness? It Is the only thing wherein we can imitate the
Almighty, who (we are told again) does good even to the wicked and unthankful.
Love must be disinterested, or interested, or mixed: it is undisputedly
disinterested toward ourselves, and is enjoined to be so toward others, even
the Wicked: how much more so ought it to be toward the Fountain of all Good?
This seems to be plain Reasoning, and no high Flight, as the pure Love of God
has been unfortunately called by some Professors of Christianity, and thence a
handle given the Enemies of that Religion to disparage it.

IF God then loves us disinterestedly, it is reasonable to think we ought to
love him after the same manner: and if Love implies Union, that Condition of
loving purely cannot be wanting; as it is only in Purity or Disinterestedness
that we can find the Idea of Justice, by which every thing has its due, and is
loved for its own Worth.

THE two Objections against the pure Love of God (for a third can hardly be
imagined) are first, that our Nature cannot attain to it; and secondly, that it
is not required of us. If the first were true, the second would be so of
course; for impossible things would not be required by the God of
Righteousness. But it is plainly required in the Old Testament, that we should
love God with all our Heart; and by our Savior in the New, who makes it the
Sum of the Law and the Prophets. The annexing Promises and Threats, appears
easily a Condescension to human Weakness.

LET our Nature be called as weak and corrupt as any body has a mind, for it is
certainly in a very pitiful Condition; but let not the Capacity be denied of
being transformed into a new Nature by the Power of God, or what is called
Grace, as being out of the number of ordinary or moral Virtues, which must be
owned to come from above also. It Is for Grace that Prayers are so often put up
by the Clergy of all Denominations, and the Love of God is prayed for in
express terms. Properly Grace means Favor, and the Love of God to us is the
highest Favor that can be vouchsafed; as our Love to him is the greatest
Tribute we can offer, and at the same time the most perfect State we can be in,
and the happiest for ourselves. By Grace is farther understood the Removal of
those Impediments and Obstructions which hinder the divine Influences from
operating on the Hearts of Men; and so the Prayer runs, Cleanse our Hearts by
the Inspirations of thy holy Spirit, etc. For the Divine Nature may be compared
to the Sun, than which we have no visible Object of more Force and Efficacy.
And what can be more necessary to be done away, than that selfish Disposition
of Heart, which has no Reason either for its Love or Aversion, but the
Appearance of Gain or Loss to itself?

THIS Article of the Love of God has been drawn out to a much greater length
than was designed, and it is pity any thing should have been mixed with it that
looks like Wrangling: But, as was before observed, the Advocates for
Self-Interest have raised it so high, as to make it the only Principle of
acting, not only among common Men, but the Apostles and Ambassadors from
Heaven. They have like wise perplexed the Matter by substituting Self-Love for
Self-Interest, and so have rendered it an unfavourable thing to differ from
them; since it is so natural to love ourselves, and even to consult our
Interest. But they are to understand, that there is no difference but in this
single Point, "Whether God is to be loved principally for his sake or our own."

IT is not to be denied, that Rewards and Punishments are laid before us in the
Scripture, and that many of its Arguments are accommodated to Hope and Fear:
But Religion designs also that our Hopes and Fears should have a just and
reasonable Foundation; in which case they are of great service to us, as the
Spur and the Bridle, to animate our Dullness, or restrain our Forwardness.

BUT though Hope and Fear have their Place in Religion, they are not to have the
highest Place. St. John has assured us, that 1 John iv.
perfect Love casts out Fear: And St. Paul has very decisively given Charity
(that is, Love) the preference above all Gifts and Graces 1 Cor. xiii.
.

BOTH Hope and Fear may be considered either as divine Virtues, or natural
Dispositions, Qualities, or what other Term the Reader shall choose.

THE Objects of our Hope and Fear are Pleasure and Pain in the general. And
though Fear serves as a Restraint upon our Actions, yet it serves also as an
Inducement; the shunning of Pain being often as strong a Motive, as the
procuring of Pleasure.

AGAIN, it is chiefly with reference to Pleasure and Pain in this Life, that our
Hopes and Fears are awakened: so that our present Quiet or Security as to the
next Life is very much owing to our Stupidity. And the Pain that we are
principally afraid of in this World, is the Censure of others, who we cannot
but see will take the same liberty with our Character, that we take with
theirs; and thus we pass our few Days in Dread and Slavery: this certainly will
be owned by the polite Part of Mankind, and there is hardly the meanest Person
but has his Fears and his Pride.

WHAT is shameful in the Fear of Censure is the Excess of it, and when we are
convinced our Judges are ignorant. What is shameful in the Fear of Death, or
bodily Pain, or Loss of Goods, is when we are too much disconcerted, and
especially when we are frightened out of our Virtue.

WHEN Hope and Fear are directed to the next World, they must continue in such
a Station (with every thing that God has planted) as perfect Love shall assign
them. We are told it casts out Fear, that is, any Apprehension about
ourselves; for by Fear is meant also Honor and Reverence, which can never be
cast out: And this divine Hope is founded on a Sense of the infinite Goodness,
and not on Self-Love, for this were but Presumption. We may see nothing worthy
of Love in ourselves, and yet have a great Confidence in the divine Mercy. And
we are never fit Objects of that Mercy, 'till we lose our good Opinion of
ourselves, and see our own Insufficiency and Corruption. For God resists the
Proud.

THE pure Love of God may be called an Element, which we can never breathe in
till we get free of Self-Love: or, these two Loves having (as St. Augustine
says) No. VIII,
made two Cities, a Man cannot at the same time be an Inhabitant of them both.
But a very little Reflection may show us, which of the two Cities or Elements
can afford us most Pleasure: for the highest Pleasure is to love; and the
highest Perfection is to love what is most excellent.

WHATEVER Helps we can think of, to excite our Love to the Deity, whether it be
the Consideration of his Goodness or his Power, Hopes or Fears, Gratitude,
Prudence, or any thing that can occur to a reasonable Mind, should all be made
use of in their order, and conspire to lead us to that indispensible Duty;
which though it be our insallible Interest, is yet to be pursued chiefly as our
Duty: otherwise we have neither the true Notion of Love nor Justice, nor even
of our own Interest, but confusedly jumble all three together, or perversely
give Interest the preference, and set up ourselves in the place of God, and
consequently fall into the Element of Trouble, or (at most) into a delusive
Quiet while it lasts.

ADDITIONS.
No. I. SELF-LOVE, PLEASURE, HAPPINESS, INTEREST.
SELF-LOVE is a compounded sort of a Word, the Lover and the Beloved being one
and the same, and the Object and the Faculty linked together; as (in Dr. More's
Phrase) Ginger-bread-Love, Money-Love, etc. It Is true, these Expressions are
not used in our Language. We say, the Love of Money, Brotherly Love, and the
like: but other Languages make but one word of two, as (...), (...), (...).

WHEN the French speak of a reasonable Self-Love (which they seldom do) and
make it the Foundation of Virtue, they only mean The Reader may see the Preface
to a little Collection of Thoughts sometimes joined with the Duke of
Rochefoucault's, and the three first Maxims themselves, which serve pretty well
for settling the Ideas and Limits of Self-Love and Virtue.
human Virtue, or such virtuous Actions as aim only at the Rewards of this
Life; of which sort of Virtue, Self is undoubtedly the Foundation, and it must
be allowed to be a very unstable one.

THE Self-Love that is argued for by wellintention'd Persons, as the Foundation
of all Duties both in Morality and Religion, is that Self-Affection which
Nature has planted in us: But all manner of Affection, and the Desire of all
manner of Rewards must be regulated by Justice.

IT seems fittest therefore to understand Self-Love (according to the most
current acceptance) as the Sink of all Vices, or as a bad Tree, which, if the
Branches are lopt off upon one side, will put forth new ones upon another, so
long as the Ax is not laid to the Root.

THE Argument against cutting down what God has planted, has no place in this
Idea of Self-Love; for God plants nothing that is ill: And therefore nothing
that he has planted is to be destroyed in an absolute Sense; though several
things are so to perish, as to make way for what is more perfect. Meat for the
Belly, and the Belly for Meat; but God shall destroy both. Here is a kind of
Destruction: and yet the Works of God can never perish. Our Savior says, He
that loses his Life, shall find it: the Meaning is obvious. And thus Self Love,
or lawful Affection for ourselves, may be conceived as a thing not to be
extinguished, or lost in a Physical Sense, but swallowed up by a siner
Principle, as a River is lost in the Sea.

Pleasure.
PLEASURE consists in the Agreement of Objects with our Faculties: so to have
agreeable Sensations or Perceptions, is to have Pleasure. Reflections are also
capable of giving Pleasure, though sainter.

IN the mere Sensation of Pleasure there is neither Vice nor Virtue, Shame nor
Praise; for we are but passive under the Impression.

THE Love of Pleasure and Self-Love are far from being convertible Terms. We
love Pleasure for our own sake; and, if we are but pleased, we are indifferent
what the Object be; and we readily quit one, from the view of more Pleasure in
another: and all this is reasonable, provided we do not transgress the Limits
of Justice.

PLEASURE is often taken for the lower kinds of Gratification; A Man of
Pleasure: Lovers of Pleasures, more than Lovers of God.

IT is from the different Pleasures Men follow, that they are to be called
childish, fantastic, brutal, dishonest, impious; or the reverse of all these.
For, besides the Pleasures of the five Senses, there are the Pleasures of the
Understanding, and the Pleasures of the Heart, the Pleasures of Speculation,
and the Pleasures of Practice; with an infinite Number of little Pleasures
depending on the animal Spirits, as Exercises, Diversions, Mirth, etc. all
which are very good in their own order.

FALSE Pleasures must be allowed to have a certain Reality in them, since they
actually do please; but the Pleasure is owing to a vitiated Taste: for
instance, the Delight in hearing of other People's Defects, even when we have
no design to exalt ourselves.

Happiness.
HAPPINESS and Pleasure may be used promiscuously, without much Impropriety of
Discourse: for whatever Pleasure Men eagerly pursue, they have no other Notion
of Happiness at that time.

THUS the revengeful Man's Revenge is his Happiness, the luxurious Man's Luxury
is his Happiness; and a Man will sometimes be happy with the smallest matter in
the world.

Interest.
MUCH the same may be said of Interest; it is not confined to Money-matters: but
whatever the Heart is set upon, that is Interest.

THUS Men forego small Pleasures, or little Interests, for greater; or
willingly suffer Pain from the Hopes of Pleasure afterward, or take their
hazard of excessive Pain afterward for a short Pleasure in the mean time: and
it is not easy to calculate either the Degrees of the Intenseness or the
Duration. But it is enough to suppose in general, that it is the Prospect of
greater Interest that determines us to such Changes.

THE right Notion of Interest, and the Pursuit of it, upon a deliberate
Examination, is Prudence: for often Men are hurried on without any
Consideration at all, and often they are very confused in their Deliberations.

BUT the Ideas of Interest and Justice are diametrically opposite. Our Interest
often suggests to keep what Justice would require us to give away.

YET nothing is our true Interest, but what is just; or nothing is really
profitable, but what is honest.

AND thus some Moralists had reason to make Honesty and Profit inseparable; and
they had this View likewise in forbidding us to separate them, because we are
so ready to go over to the profitable side: as See No. IX.
Arrian upon Epictetus argues very handsomely.

No. II. Description of SELF-LOVE.
"SELF-LOVE is the Love of one's self, and of every thing for the sake of one's
self; it makes Men Idolizers of themselves, and would make them Tyrants to
others, if Fortune furnished them with the means of doing it: it never takes
any rest but within itself, or dwells longer on any other Objects, than Bees do
upon Flowers, to extract what may be to its advantage." Nothing is so impetuous
as its Desires, nothing so secret as its Designs, nothing so artful as its
Conduct. In Agility, it surpasses all Representation; in transforming itself,
it exceeds all the Metamorphoses; and in refining, goes beyond all the Art of
Chemistry: There Is no fathoming the Depth, or piercing through the Darkness of
its Abyss. Here it is concealed from the most penetrating Eyes, and makes a
thousand insensible turnings and windings: Here it is often visible to itself,
and conceives and breeds up a vast number of Inclinations and Aversions unknown
to itself; some of which are to monstrous, that when they are brought forth, it
does not know them, or cannot be prevailed on to own them. From this obscurity,
with which it is overcast, arise the ridiculous Conceits that it has of itself;
hence proceed the Errors, Ignorance, the gross and silly Mistakes it entertains
of itself; hence it is, that it fancies those Passions dead in it, which are
only laid to sleep, that it imagines it has laid aside the Desire of pursuing,
when it does but rest to take breath; and thinks it has lost the Appetites,
which it has only satisfied for the present. And yet this Obscurity, thick as
it is, to hide it from itself, hinders it not from seeing perfectly the things
which are without itself; in which it is like our Eyes, which perceive all
things, and are only blind with respect to themselves. Indeed in its greatest
Concerns and most important Affairs, where the Violence of its Desires summons
all its Attention, it sees, and feels, and hears, and imagines, and suspects,
and penetrates, and foresees every thing so well, that a Man would be tempted
to believe, that every one of its Passions was quieted by a sort of Magic
peculiar to it. Nothing is so close and strong as its Engagements, which, in
vain it attempts to break at the sight of great and threatening Disasters. Yet
sometimes it effects that in a little time, and with little pains, which it
could not effect in the course of many Years with all its Endeavors; from
whence it may probably enough be concluded, that its Desires are kindled by
itself, rather than by the Beauty, or Merits of its Objects; that its own
Palate gives them the value that enhances them, and the Gloss that sets them
off; that itself is the thing it pursues, and its own Humor what it follows,
when it follows the Objects that suit its Humor. It Is made up of
Contraricties, it is imperious and submissive, sincere and hypocritical,
compassionate and cruel, timorous and audacious: It puts on different
Inclinations, according to the different Tempers that dispose and devote it
sometimes to Glory, sometimes to Riches, and sometimes to Pleasure; all which
too it changes, as our Age, Fortune or Experience change: but as to itself,
it is indifferent whether it has many or but one, because it divides itself into
many, and collects itself into one, as its Pleasure or Necessity requires. It Is
inconstant not only from the Changes produced by foreign Causes, but from a
thousand others, that spring from itself; it is inconstant from Inconstancy,
Levity, Love, Weariness, and Disgust; it is whimsical, and may be observed
sometimes to labor with the utmost Vehemence, and with incredible Pains to
obtain those things that are not only of no advantage, but are hurtful; which
yet pursue it will, merely because it will. It Is fantastical, and often sets
all its Application at work about the most frivolous Employments; takes delight
in the most insipid things, and preserves all its Haughtiness in the most
contemptible Circumstances. It enters into all States and Conditions of Life:
It lives in every place, it lives upon every thing, nay, it lives upon nothing:
It makes itself easy either with the Enjoyment of things, or with the Want of
them: It takes part with the People that make war upon it, engages in their
Designs; and what is wonderful, joins with them in hating itself, conspires its
own Destruction, and works its own Ruin: In short, its whole Care is to exist,
and provided it does but exist, is content to be its own Enemy. We ought not
therefore to be surpised, to see it associating itself with the most rigid
Austerity, and entering boldly in league with its Adversary to destroy itself,
because at the same time that it loses in one place, it gains in another. When
we think it renounces its Pleasure, it only suspends or changes it; and when
it is so conquered, that we fancy it entirely routed, we find it triumphing in
its own defeat. Behold the true Picture of Self-Love! the whole Life of which
is but one great and long Agitation: the Sea is a very sensible Image of it;
the Waves of which, in their Flux and Reflux, faithfully express the turbulent
succession of its Thoughts, and the eternal Commotions of its Mind.

No. III. VICE, SIN, EVIL.
VICE implies both Defect and Corruption.

SIN and EVIL, that is, moral Evil, are of the same signification with Vice;
and all the three words stand in such an opposition to Virtue, as Darkness to
Light, Confusion to Order, Sickness to Health.

THERE are many other words used for Sin, as Iniquity, Transgression, Trespass,
etc.

INIQUITY, though a negative sort of term, implies a positive Breach of Justice
and Order: and so long as the Mind is in the selfish Principle, it is in the
State of Iniquity, even when it does not break out into Actions.

THE Idea of Sin must be hateful, because it implies a Violation of Order,
which is lovely.

THE Fear of Punishment and the Abhorrence of Sin are different things.

IF Self-Love, in the best sense it can have, were the Principle of Religion,
the greatest Sin would be against ourselves.

A Man is indeed unjust to himself, when he acts not up to the Dignity of his
Nature; and he is cruel to himself, when he brings Shame and Punishment upon
his own Head: But the Notion of Offense and Crime still supposes a higher
Person injured.

SIN or Vice is the only thing that is hateful. Personal Hatred is hateful
itself, and can only spring from some Disease of the Mind.

Evil.
PHYSICAL or natural Evil (as a thing felt) is but another term for Pain, which
is also the Consequence of moral Evil. Those who deny Evil and Pain, must only
have a Quarrel at the words; and any other words might indeed do as well, if
they were as current for expressing the opposite things to Good and Pleasure.

MORAL Evil may produce both natural Pain (as Sickness after a Debauch) and
Remorse, which may be called moral Pain: and both these follow upon Sin, by the
natural Establishment of things.

THUS Men are said to encompass themselves with Sparks of their own kindling:
And thus God has made the wicked for the Day of Evil.

No. IV. From H. MORE's Letters.
Let. 4.
"MOREOVER, as the Object of the Intellect is that which is simply true, and is
assented to as such, and not as true to this particular Intellect that
contemplates it: (For this is not the Sense of such an Assent, but that it is
simply and absolutely true, and cannot but appear so to all Intellects that are
fitted to contemplate it) so there is an Object that is simply good and lovely,
and to be loved as such, without regard to the Party that thus loves it; but
ought to be loved of all, without regard to themselves, but upon the account
that it is so universally good. Insomuch that if God should love all
intellectual Beings, except One that were at the same time to be damned for his
excessive and unparalled Wickedness, and Contumacy against God; it were yet
an immense Specimen of his Goodness: And He were infinitely good, and were so
to be acknowledged, even by that intellectual Creature that was to be damned;
and ought to be loved by it, (though this wicked sunk Condition makes it
incapable of so fit a Duty) as well as a true Proposition is to be assented to
by him, whose Disinterest it were that it should be found true. And a Man may
as well say, that there is no Reason but what arises from self-interested
Understanding, as no Love but what arises from Self-Love. There is that which
is absolutely lovely, and to which Love, without any Self-Regard, is due; as
well as there is that which is absolutely true, and which every Understanding
ought to subscribe to, if not some Default in itself hinder."

"AND that Things and Persons are lovely without Consideration of our own
Utility, methinks is further evident from that Pleasure and Content we take in
the History of worthy Persons, and their excellent Virtues and famous Exploits
in former Ages, and in far remote Countries, without any Reflection upon any
Interest or Profit we have in their Virtues or Actions; but we love them, and
rejoice in their Memory, as absolute Objects of deserved Love, from those
lovely Perfections in them."...... "And where Cicero says, that if Virtue could
be seen with outward Eyes, mirabiles amores sui excitaret; can we understand
such Love as is grounded upon Self-Love, not rather such Love as ravishes one
out of Himself, and transports him to the Object?"

"BUT to pass by Reason, and the Sense of Philosophers.......... That main Duty
of every Christian, THOU SHALL LOVE THE LORD THY GOD, WITH ALL THY HEART, AND
ALL THY SOUL, AND THY NEIGHBOR AS THY SELF, to me is not easy Sense, if
Self-Love is to be at the bottom; into which, as the very Principle, all Love
is to be resolved........ The former part of this Precept is... such an
Injunction, that takes a Man quite off from himself and all Self-Love. For how
can I love God with all my Heart, and all my Soul, if that Love be resolvible
into the Love of myself, and subordinate to it? Here is a piece of
barbarous-like Philosophy very well applied.
Propter quod unumquodque est tale, id magis est tale. Suppose then my Love to
God how ardent you will, my Love to myself will be much more ardent. So that
God is so far from having our whole Heart or Soul, that he does not so much as
go halves with us....... Wherefore it is manifest, we are entirely and
absolutely to love God first, and to love ourselves in reference to him, as
also the rest of our Fellow Creatures: all which Love being in reference to God
[rapportant a Dieu, as M. Pascal says] it hinders not but that God is still
loved with all our Hearts and Souls; and the Love of ourselves, and of our
Neighbor as ourselves, is but the Fruit of our entire Love to God; and we
shall be sure then to love our Neighbor as ourselves, and so as we ought to
do."

It Is hard to know what to leave out of those Letters: here are yet some more
strokes of them.

"... WHO can endure to think.... or where St. John says, Perfect Love casts
out Fear, that he understands perfect Self-Love casts out Fear; which is rather
the Source of all Jealousy, Anxiety and Distraction of Mind?"

"LET me offer one Passage more out of our Savior's Sermon on the Mount, Love
your Enemies, etc. Now it seems to me a mavelous unnatural Analyze, to
resolve the Love of our Enemies into Self-Love, or Love of ourselves. The
Hatred indeed of them is evidently resolvible into that."

1 Cor. xiii.
AGAIN, "How can this transcendent Grace of Charity be lodged so low as in
Self-Love? Or, if it be so, how can the Apostle undertake for it, that it will
not seek its own," etc.

"THERE is a Fear of God, and there is a mercenary Love of God; and these
indeed are resolvible into Self-Love: And the Scripture often applies itself to
this Principle, to hale us out of the Hurry and Dirt of this World, by forcible
Arguments upon those Passions."

Let. 5
HE acknowledges in the next Letter, "That Self-Love may be an occasional
Beginning, or Excitement to Religion; making a familiar Comparison of
Gingerbread given to a Boy, to make him in love with his Book: But Self-Love
(he says) is a Default, and Blemish, and Rottenness in Religion and Virtue,
rather than an essential Principle or Basis thereof."

HIS Opponent had said, That Religion does not extirpate Self-Love, but raises
and ennobles it, and keeps it from sinking into the animal Life.

"BUT this (replies the Doctor) is impossible; for as much as Self-Love is the
Sink and Fetulency of the animal Life. I understand here by Self-Love, loving
one's self as self: and therefore Religion does at last quite extirpate it."

HE intimates afterward (as most Christian Divines do) that the Extirpation of
Self-Love must cost Mankind very dear: the Old and the New Man, in the Language
of the Scripture, signifying two opposite Principles, one of which must
unavoidably be destroyed, in order to recover our lost Happiness.

No. V. RELIGION, CHARITY.
ST. James defines Religion thus: Pure Religion and undefiled before God and
the Father is this; To visit the Fatherless and Widows in their Affliction, and
to keep ourselves unspotted from the World. We see what Practices are most
recommended by that Apostle: and the keeping ourselves unspotted from the
World, implies all that is forbidden by Religion, both as to our Ac^ons and our
Heart.

RELIGION further requires the Observance of other Practices, either supposed
to be instituted by God, or appointed by those to whom the Regulation of such
things belongs.

THE End of Religion is the same thing with the End of the Commandment, which
is Charity.

ALL external Practices of Religion are designed for promoting that internal
Disposition of Mind, both with respect to God and our Neighbor, and from it
they derive all their Value. And this Religion is often called a spiritual and
new Life.

THAT which is called the Religion of a Country, with respect to Forms, Usages
and Opinions, resembles the municipal Laws of a Country, which are peculiar to
it. "And so (Mr. Pascal says) Orthodoxy on the one side of the Pyrenees may be
Heresy on the other." Whereas among Christians there is properly but one
Religion.

THE Christian Religion therefore may be considered as a Body of Doctrine and
Precepts delivered from Heaven, which Men ought to follow as the universal
Standard, and according to which they ought to form their particular Societies.

BUT there is this Difference between the Religion and the Laws of a Country,
that a Man must submit to these of necessity; but not always to the Religion:
as an Englishman may dissent safely from the Church of England.

WHEN People talk of the Cruelties of Religion, Christianity has nothing to
answer for in that Charge. And when the Clergy are accused of Pride, the
Accusation lies properly against the defective Nature of Men.

MOST Men allow there is a Distinction between the End of Religion, and the
Means; they allow also a Distinction among the Means themselves, as to Weight
or Importance: But the mortal Dispute remains, what the weightiest are; and the
End is often forgot in the Controversy.

THE End of Religion is therefore to be considered both as the Point to arrive
at, and the principal Thing in the Affair.

SOME things may be called Parts of Religion, as well as Helps to it; as Faith,
Prayer, Temperance, and whatsoever Jesus Christ has ordered to be done and
believed.

PARTICULAR Forms of Religion, that is, such things as are but the Inventions
of Men, may be called Helps to it, but not Parts; no more than the Clothes are
Parts of the Body, though they are of indispensable use to it. And in Religion
the very Observance of particular Modes comes to be a Duty, that, besides their
Usefulness, there may be no offense given to the Society one adheres to. The
Parallel between Religion and Clothes cannot be expected to run exactly.

IT IS with reference to religious Forms and Speculations, that Zeal (a good
thing in itself) becomes both ridiculous and tragical.

AGAIN, as no human Inventions are perfect, to a scornful Temper they appear
more imperfect than they are.

Charity.
CHARITY is taken sometimes only for giving of Alms, sometimes for having a
favorable Opinion of others: but the proper Interpretation of the word is
Love, and St. Paul has fixed the Meaning of it, and clearly shown its effects.
1 Cor. xiii.

IF we believe that God can reward us hereafter, this shows that we have Faith:
if we suffer on a prospect of Reward, this shows that we have Hope: But if we
go no farther, where is our Charity? Or where is our Religion? The Devils
believe and tremble; and Hope without Charity, were but Presumption.

RELIGION not only requires a change of the Objects of our Affections, but a
change of the Principle likewise.

THAT which is not loved for itself (says St. Augustine) is not loved at all: it
is only wanted for its Usefulness.

THUS Charity and Self-Love are ever to be considered as two opposite
Principles: and whatever the Apostle says of the one, the reverse is to be said
of the other. For instance, Charity seeks not its own, suffers long, and is
kind, thinks no Evil, rejoiceth not in Iniquity, etc. Self-Love is
interested, impatient, unkind, and delighted with Scandal.

No. VI. See No. X.
VIRTUE, JUSTICE, DISINTERESTEDNESS.
VIRTUE is sometimes taken only for some natural good Quality in Things. Thus
it is said, such a Thing has a Virtue, or it has lost its Virtue, the Virtue of
Medicines, etc.

VIRTUE in Persons is meant of the Integrity of their Intentions and Actions;
and it may be considered too as a Line or Rule by which they are to be examined.

VIRTUE considered in itself, abstractly from Things and Persons, has its
Existence only in the Mind, and is called an Abstraction of the Mind; as a
mathematical Line is considered without any Breadth: and thus People talk of
Color, Beauty, Proportion, and an infinite number of Qualities, without regard
to any particular Subject.

WHEN some Persons talk of the Deceitfulness of Virtue, they do not mean that
the Rule is fallacious or uncertain, but that Men act not from the Motives they
pretend to. The Duke of Rochefoucault says, Max. 207.
"What the World calls Virtue, is commonly but a Phantom formed by our Passions."

THIS is far from denying there is such a thing as Virtue: on the contrary,
that same Author says, Max. 263.
"Hypocrisy is an Homage which Vice renders to Virtue."

IF a Man denies there is any Virtue in the world, he is only supposed to speak
for himself and his own Club.

CICERO makes all Virtues to center in Justice: and St. Augustine Quod si Virtus
ad beatam vitam nos ducit, nihil omnino esse Virtutem affirmaverim nisi summum
amorem Dei. Namque illud quod quadripartita dicitur Virtus, ex ipsius amoris
vario quodam affectu, quantum intelligo, dicitur. Itaque illas qua^^^ virtures,
quarum utinam ita sit in mentibus vis, ut nomina in ore sunt omnium, sic etiam
definire non dubitem: ut Temperantiam dicamus esse Amorem, Deo sese integrum
incorruptumque servantem: Fortitudinem Amorem omnia propter Deum facilc
perferentem: Justitiom Amorem Dco tantum servientem, and ab hoc been imperantem
caeteris quae homini subjecta sunt: Prudentiam amorem been discernentem ca
quibus adjuvetur in Deum ab iis quibus impediri potest. De moribus Eccl. Cath.
L. 1. Cap. 15.
makes them all to center in the Love of God, which may be called the highest
Justice.

VIRTUE, according to the oldest acceptance of the word, is particularly
reckoned a Force of Mind: and the Inclinations of Man being much corrupted, it
consists much in the struggle with these Inclinations. But yet no body denies
that Virtue has Charms and Attractions.

Justice.
JUSTICE or Righteousness is another abstract Term, that is considered sometimes
without regard to Actions: but it is only from it that they can have their Worth.

MAN is so framed as to see Justice, and even to love it, naturally: and to
have no Sense of Justice, is the same as to have no Conscience.

THUS the Sense of Justice, Conscience, moral Sense, are Words of the same
signification; and the moral Sense is as natural to Man, as any of the Senses
that belong to his Body.

Disinterestedness.
DISINTERESTEDNESS is that upright State of Mind by which a Man acts from a
higher View than that of his own Good: or a disinterested Man may be said to
have no Bias that is capable to turn him aside from his Duty.

HOWEVER Duty and Interest may unite in the Event, yet they differ widely as to
the Motives.

THE disinterested State goes indeed higher than we are aware of, but it is
still a real one, not Chimerical.

DISINTERESTEDNESS may at least be considered as Health, by which the Functions
of the animal Life are performed with easiness.

AND as Health is considered as a Foundation for bodily Pleasure, so
Disinterestedness (which is a Soundness of the Mind) may be reckoned a
Foundation for those Pleasures that are called Virtuous and Spiritual.

AGAIN, when Disinterestedness is called the Soul of Friendship, the Life of
Religion, and the like, it is indeed considered in a positive Sense, and as a
Principle itself; though, strictly speaking, it is but the Effect of a higher
Principle.

IT may be called a disinterested Action, which the Agent would have done just
the same way, though he had foreseen no Profit in it to himself.

No. VII. From Mr. PASCAL. Sect. 26.
"MANKIND having no infallible Remedy against Ignorance, Misery, and Death,
imagine that some Respite, some Shelter may at least be found, by agreeing to
banish them from their Meditation. This is the only Comfort they have been able
to invent under their numerous Calamities. But a most miserable Comfort it
proves; because it does not tend to the removal of these Evils, but only to the
concealment of them for a short season; and because in thus concealing them, it
hinders us from applying such proper means as should remove them."

"THUS by a strange Revolution in the Nature of Man, that Grief and inward
Disquiet, which he dreads as the greatest of sensible Evils, is in one respect
his greatest Good; because it might contribute, more than all things besides,
to the putting him in a successful method of Recovery. On the other hand, his
By Recreation Mr. Pascal means not only Men's Diversions (and some harmless
ones cannot be condemned) but the serious Business of their Lives, as will
appear by the Strain of the whole Section. And that serious Business St.
Augustine puts upon a level with the Plays of Children. Majorum Nugae Negotia
vocantur.
Recreation, which he seems to prize as his sovereign Good, is indeed his
greatest Evil: because it is of all things the most effectual in making him
negligent under his Distemper. And both the one and the other are admirable
Proofs, as of Man's Misery and Corruption, so of his Greatness and Dignity. For
the reason why he grows sick and weary of every Object, and engages in such a
multitude of Pursuits, is, because he still retains the Idea of his lost
Happiness; which not finding within himself, he seeks it through the whole Circle
of external things: but always seeks without success, because it is indeed to
be found, not in ourselves, nor in the Creatures, but in God alone."

Mr. Kennet's Translation. No. VIII.
CIVITATES duas fecerunt Amores duo: Civitatem Mundi, quae and Babylonia
dicitur, Amor sui, usque ad contemptum Dei; Civitatem Dei, quae and Jerusalem
dicitur, Amor Dei, usque ad contemptum sui. St. Aug. de Civit. Dei.

SAPIENTISSIMUS vitae nostrae Magister, nempe and Auctor, unicum dedit ad
vivendum Documentum, UT AMEMUS; gnarus vitam nostram, si amemus fore
faelicissimam, nec aliis opus Legibus. Nihil faelicius quam amare: Idcirco Deus
and Angeli faelicissimi, quia amant omnia. Infaelicius nihil quam non amare,
quo affectu miserrimi sunt Diaboli. L. VIVES Introductio ad veram Sapientiam.

No. IX. ARRIAN, Lib. II. Cap. XXII.
THIS Philosopher (after Cicero and Socrates) considering the Force that
Profit, or what appears profitable, has over Mankind; and designing to
recommend Virtue to their earnest Pursuit, labors to persuade them that
nothing is profitable but what is virtuous: he affirms, that it is only Wisdom
to love what is really good and useful; but that we have such a Bias to
ourselves, that if we shall place Virtue and Utility on different sides, we
shall of consequence betake ourselves to the side we think profitable. So
Arrian designs in this Chapter concerning Friendship to inform our Judgment as
to our Duties, and to give us a view of our innate Selfishness. The whole
Chapter should be read, and it will appear whether this good Heathen has been
an Advocate for the interested Principle or not.

IT IS true, he says no Creature is so much reconciled to another, as to its own
Profit; which no doubt is the Case with Men in the common State of Nature: But
those who own Christianity, as they are still more persuaded of this
Corruption, so they see a greater difficulty of getting free of it, for the
Heart is corrupted as well as the Understanding is darkened; and it was to this
latter Faculty that the Stoics chiefly applied themselves, thinking if the
Understanding was rightly informed, all the work was done.

BUT it does not infer, that they thought Interest the chief Principle that
should determine Men, because they pointed out where the true Interest lies; no
more than the Scriptures can be brought to support that Principle, because in
teaching Men the way to Happiness, they sometimes make use of Arguments from
Hope and Fear.

IN the same manner, some great Men among the Heathens have condescended to the
Weakness of those they were endeavoring to instruct. They knew that Virtue is
not perfect, nor such at it ought to be, while Interest is the Motive; and they
themselves could be virtuous without regard to it: but they knew likewise the
Disorders of Human Nature, and that Profit was the chief Bait; and have
therefore taken pains to show that Virtue and Profit are inseparable. But if we
would judge of the Purity of their Sentiments, it must be from the Places where
the Dispositions of their own Hearts are marked. The following Words of
Epictetus may be considered, and they add a great Luster to the Doctrine of the
Stoics.

"IS it thy Will that I continue in Life? I will continue in it, and in a free
and generous manner, as it pleases thee; for thou have created me of such a
nature, that I cannot be constrained in what concerns me."

"BUT have thou no more for me to do? Blessed be thy Name! It is for thee, and
for thee alone, that I have lived unto this Hour; and now I go away, in
obedience to thee."

"How would thou go thy ways? I go my ways as it pleases thee, as thy
Servant, as having had the advantage of knowing what thou command, and what
thou forbiddest."

"But what Station do thou appoint me, while I live and converse among thy
Works? A Prince, or a private Person? A Senator, or one of the common People? A
Soldier, Captain, Schoolmaster, or Father of a Family? The Place and the
Station which thou have assigned to me, I will maintain, and die a thousand
Deaths rather than desert it. I go where thou would have me; to Rome or
Athens, to Thebes or to the Gyarae-Islands; I go willingly. Only be thou there
mindful of me. If thou sendest me where Men cannot naturally live, I will not
leave it contrary to thy Will: I will wait till thou command me to retire: I
will not forsake thee; I will think thou have no more occasion for my Service."
Arrian, Book III. Chap. XXIV.

ONE might easily heap up Quotations of the same kind from this and other
Authors, but it would be to no purpose: for allowing Defects in the Heathen
Philosophy, the Christian Doctrine is still out of the reach of Censure, and
Disinterestedness is one of its distinguishing Characters.

No. X. TRUTH.
TRUTH is of the same import or signification with Reality: so that to know the
Truth, is to know the Value of Things.

TRUTH (says Sir Francis Bacon) is a naked and open Daylight, that does not
show the Masks, and Mummeries, and Triumphs of this World half so stately and
daintily as Cande-lights. Essays. I. The same Thought is very well expressed in
another way by a later Author.......How fading and insipid do all Objects
accost us, that are not conveyed in the Vehicle of Delusion! How shrunk is
every thing, as it appears in the Glass of Nature! so that if it were not for
the assistance of artificial Mediums, false Lights, refracted Angles, Varnish
and Tinsel; there would be a mighty level in the Felicity and Enjoyment of
mortal Men. Tale of a Tub.


THE Love of Truth (considered morally) is the same with the Love of Justice.
Thus the Apostle says, Charity rejoiceth not in Iniquity, but rejoiceth in the
Truth.

ALL Truths are equal as to their Reality, but very unequal as to their
Importance: and the Knowledge of the highest Truths, if it goes no farther than
bare Speculation, is but Amusement.

THE opposite things to Truth and Reality are Falsehood, Error, Lies, Delusion;
and the Mind takes pleasure in the one side or the other, according to the
Disposition it is in.

THE greatest Breach of Truth, or the worst kind of Lying, consists in the
Intention to deceive or injure. A Lie that has no End to serve, is not very
conceivable; but there are Ends which must be owned to be very frivolous.

MAN'S Love of Truth, is an Argument of his Dignity.

HONOR is properly a Regard for Truth. False Honor is a sort of
Contradiction, or at best it is but a Regard for Punctilio's. But even this
common Honor of the World is a considerable Guard against several kinds of
Prostitution and Falsehood.

No. XI. Why the Words (HEB. XII.) are supposed to mean instead of the Joy set
before him, etc. rather than because of the Joy, etc.
PASSING by all the Arguments that might be brought to prove the Sufferings of
JESUS CHRIST to have been the Effect of his Pity to Mankind, and not for any
Advantage to himself, or the Prospect of Interest; such Arguments seeming
derogatory, as well as superfluous, from the Instances of Moses and St. Paul,
who went such lengths for their Brethren as cannot naturally be resolved into
Self-Interest, however People may differ as to the meaning of these
Expressions, Blotted out of the Book of Life, and the like: I say, waving all
these Arguments, I shall confine myself to the words themselves, as they stand
with relation to other words not far from them; the Text being still best
explained by the Context.

I shall not insist neither on the common Acceptance of the Preposition (...),
since if at any time it be found in a different meaning, it may be contended to
have that meaning here. However, Castellio's Translation runs pro laetitia sibi
proposita; Beza has it pro sibi proposito gaudio; and the vulgar Latin,
suppressing the Preposition entirely, renders it proposito sibi gaudio: but
perhaps the word proposito has been designed to be divided, and the Preposition
to stand. Beza's Note or Paraphrase on the Margin is still more remarkable: Qui
quum omne genus Beatitatis in manu ac potestate haberet, tamen ultro ignominiam
Crucis subiit. Which is also to be sound in English on the Margin of our Bibles.

BUT let us look at the end of the first Verse of that Chapter, and we shall
find the same words repeated in the second; and consequently they are to have
the same Interpretation, in order to make out the Parallel or Comparison, by
which the Apostle exhorts Christians to run the Race, or undergo the Conflict,
appointed or set before them, as our Savior endured the Cross instead of the
Joy that was appointed or set before him. The same words set before appear in
both Verses, and it is just so in the (...)
(...)

Greek: which shows that the Joy set before our Savior was not a thing at a
distance, or proposed to him as the Condition of his enduring the Cross; but
that he chose to bear the Suffering when he was already secure of the Joy, or
had it before him. His Example is indeed recommended to us, that we may not be
wearied; and his Recompense is also represented to us ( in his sitting at the
right hand of God) as a Motive to make us run that Race without fainting: but
there can be no Inference that he needed such a Motive; and here the Comparison
fails between him and Mortals, the Joy having been still in his power.

WE see also a Choice made by Moses, in the former Chapter, rather to suffer
Affliction with the People of God, than to enjoy the Pleasures of Sin for a
season. We must suppose a Difference in the Pleasures set before Moses and
JESUS CHRIST: it was but the Pleasures of Egypt that were proposed to Moses,
and these he rejected. The Joy proposed to JESUS CHRIST, or set before him, was
at a distance from Moses; and we are only told he had an Eye to it, as the
Reward of his Choice.

IT is observable, that JESUS CHRIST is not included by St. Paul in that Cloud
of Witnesses, as being in a superior order. He is the Author and Finisher of
our Faith, and sat down at the right hand of God, as taking possession himself
of his recompense, or reassuming what he had left for a while, and what he
always might have kept.

I need not run through all the Parallel between our Savior and Moses: it will
easily appear wherein it agrees and wherein it differs, as all Comparisons do
differ in something. It is not indeed in that Instance of Moses's rejecting the
Pleasures of Egypt, that we find such Proof of his Disinterestedness as of his
Wisdom; though still there may be an Eye to a Recompense consistent with the Love
of Justice: and this Prospect and Love of Reward may be so far from excluding
the Love of Justice, that upon occasions all views of Interest may be
extinguished in the same Person, and Justice remain the only Motive or
Consideration: as in the instance of Moses's offering to suffer for his
Brethren. Inferior Motives may certainly consist with superior ones, and the
former may sometimes give way, as they always ought to do when Order requires
it. It Is opposite things only (like Fire and Water) that cannot be united, or
consist together; superior and inferior Motives are not opposite, but different.

BUT I will not trouble the Reader with any more reasoning upon that Point,
having only designed here a sort of Criticism upon a Text of Scripture, to
support a Reading that all foreign Churches agree to; and it cannot be affirmed
that our English Translators (though they have left it a little doubtful) have
positively designed that their Translation for the Joy should be understood to
signify because of the Joy. We see in other places, that for very often
signifies instead of, or in exchange; as they rewarded me Evil for Good, and
the like. Nay, the Translation of Beza's Qui quum, etc. Whereas he had all kind
of Blessedness in his hand or power, yet suffered willingly the Ignominy of the
Cross.

This Note is much supported by a remarkable Text, Phil. ii. 5..... 8.


Note (on the Margin of our larger Bibles) is a fair presumption, that they have
meant as he meant.

MILTON makes the Sense of that Particle very plain, when he regrets the loss
of his Sight in such moving Terms: But Cloud instead, and ever-during Dark
Surrounds me, from the cheerful ways of Men
Cut off, and for the Book of Knowledge fair
Presented with an universal Blank.


No. XII.
AMOR (ex quo Amicitia nominata) princeps est ad Benevolentiam conjungendam:
nam Utilitates quidem etiam ab iis percipiuntur saepe, qui simulatione
Amicitiae coluntur, and observantur temporis causa. In Amicitia autem nihil
fictum est, nihil simulatum; and quicquid in Amicitia est, id verum est and
voluntarium.... Quapropter a Natura mihi videtur potius quam ab indigentia orta
Amicitia, applicatione magis animi cum quodam sensu amandi, quam cogitatione
quantum illa res utilitatis esset habitura...... Non igitur utilitatem
Amicitia, sed utilitas Amicitiam consecuta est..... Sed plerique Amicos tanquam
pecudes, eos potissimum diligunt ex quibus sperant se maximum fructum esse
capturos. Itaque pulcherrima illa and maxim naturali carent Amicitia per se
and propter se expetenda. Nec ipsi sibi exemplo sunt, haec vis Amicitiae qualis
and quanta sit. Ipse enim se quisque diligit, non ut aliter a seipso mercedem
exigat charitatis suae, sed quod per se sibi quisque charus est; quod nisi idem
in Amicitiam transferatur, verus Amicus nunquam reperietur. Est enim is Amicus
quidem, qui est tanquam alter idem...... Amare enim nihil aliud est nisi eum
ipsum diligere quem ames, nulla indigentia, nulla utilitate quaesita. Cic. de
Amicitia passim.

No. XIII.
WITH submission to the Duke of Rochefoucault, I Am unwilling to call by the
name of Self-Love all the Irregularities of Human Nature: neither the Violence
of our Passions, nor the Foolishness of our Imaginations are Self-Love. We feel
and imagine, and we cannot help it: Our Senses are all passive, and our
Imagination is often crowded with things we would gladly be rid of. Our
Understanding is in a manner passive too, as it sees by Intuition, like the
bodily Eye; its Activity consisting only in comparing things together, in
adding, substracting, weighing, measuring, and the like, all which are of the
Province of Reason; and thus Reason may be called both active and passive;
passive, as it perceives the Connections and Proportions of things; and active,
as it examines and lays things in order. But neither wrong Reasoning nor right
Reasoning is Self-Love; nor can the Disorders of any Faculty be imputed to the
Faculty itself. Reason is sure within its own Sphere, but is bewildered and
lost when it pretends to go father: And Self-Love is lawful within due
Allowances, but unlawful when it violates Order.

To know this Order, and what we are designed for, has been much at heart with
some good Heathens. Quid sumus, and quidnam victuri gignimur, Ordo
Quis datus --
They were faithful to their Light: what a Change would Revelation have made in
their Doctrine! How differently would the good Antoninus have writ, had he
heard of the Fall of Adam, and of the present Corruption of Nature! One Set of
the Deists borrow most of their Scheme from him....

THE Violation of Order would never happen in a sound Mind without some wrong
Biass toward Self...The Heart seems to be first corrupted...... So that
Interestedness may be called the Source of Disorder...... Nor is Self-Love and
Interestedness properly the same...... Much less is it true that has been
affirmed by some Persons, "That all Love must be interested, not excepting the
Love of God to his Creatures." It Is but very few that are of this Opinion, and
the ancient Persians had a quite different Notion of God, when they said, He is
the Author of all Good, and entirely disinterested.

DISINTERESTEDNESS may be considered as the Foundation of that active Principle
called Charity. All Love (strictly speaking) is disinterested; the Love we bear
to ourselves is certainly so, as Cicero observed, and ought to be the measure
of our Love toward our Neighbor. The Love of God is a higher Attainment.

THERE was one thing that gave a great Discouragement from this poor
Undertaking, viz. That what is said on the Love of God will be very insipid to
those, who have felt ever so little of the thing, or are acquainted with such
Authors as have wrote of it from their own Experience. But I have told all my
Design in the Introduction......

THOUGH the Enemies of Christianity have taken advantage of some Expressions of
the Clergy in favor of Self-Love, and the Sufficiency of Reason; yet neither
of these Doctrines is espoused by any Party in the gross, but rather rejected
by the greatest number of all Parties; Papists, Protestants, and all the
Branches of these last. "Be on your guard (says Dr. Evans) against Selfishness,
or such an Addictedness to yourselves, as shall confine your Regards within the
narrow Circle of Self. Such a Self-Love is the main Principle of all the Evils
and Disorders in the World; it makes Men undutiful to God, and useless if not
pernicious to those about them." And how finely has Mr. Butler of the Rolls
Chapel expressed himself against Self-Love in his Sermons! Evans says also of
the Love of God, "That it is indeed the first and great Commandment: it is
first in order of Nature, and in the Preeminence of the Object to which it
relates, etc."

AMONG the Writers of the Church of Rome the Expressions are no less remarkable
both against Self-Love, and for the pure Love of God. Citations might be
produced in great plenty from Writers in all Ages. Those who wrote the
earliest, gave their Testimony to pure Love, and no doubt had insisted more
upon it, but that the Doctrine of Self-Love had not then set up its Horns.
These Words of There is another Reason why good Men are afflicted with temporal
Evils, as in the Case of Job, that the Mind may be put to a Trial, and discover
the Force of its own Piety, or how much it loves God for nothing.
St. Augustine can hardly be forgot, "Habent aliam causam boniquare temporalibus
affligantur malis, qualem habuit Job: ut sibi-ipsi humanus animus sit probatus
and cognitus, quanta virtute pietatis gratis Deum diligat." As to Job, a
Question was indeed put by the Devil, Does Job serve God for naught? But the
following part of the History sufficiently showed Job's Disinterestedness as
well as his Patience.

.... No body can deny that the Scripture insists upon Rewards and Punishments,
as Arguments drawn from our own Interest: but Interest ought not to justle out
Duty, Justice, and Order; nor even to be preferred to these. Henry More had
reason to mention that Maxim of Aristotle, odd as it looks, propter quod
unumquodque est tale, etc. for it is certain, that whatever is regarded chiefly
for the sake of another thing, is the least regarded of the two. But it is
carefully to be remembered, that the Scripture is accommodated to the State of
Mortals, and speaks to the stronger and the weaker, to those of better
Dispositions, and those of worse; yet Jesus Christ says to all, Be ye perfect,
etc. We must observe farther, that the Promises annexed to our Duty are not
given barely as an Incitement to it, but also to show the Dispositions we must
be in, before we can attain to the Happiness designed for us; as for instance,
before we can see God we must be pure in Heart.

A modern Logician, Mons. Crousaz, says very well upon the different
Dispositions of People with respect to Virtue; it is to this purpose: "The bare
Knowledge of Virtue determines one Person to cleave to it; another needs the
Majesty of a Lawgiver to be added; a third has need of Promises; a fourth of
Threats; and a fifth of Blows." Here is a Gradation of Virtue from the highest
Form to the lowest: the lowest is very low, and the highest as high as Dr. More
or the Bishop of Cambray would demand. If Mons. Crousaz speaks sometimes
favorably of Self-Love (I mean the interested Principle) the like has happened
to very good Persons, even among the Clergy....... which led me into that
Criticism (No. XI.) and I Am not yet sure if it should stand: But it was owing
to a Sermon of Bishop Bull, which every body may see in print. It Is uneasy to
differ from a learned and good Man. But what shall one do when a greater number
of learned and good Men are on the other side of the Question? Here is another
Bishop of the same Church, Bishop Lake, he says in his Sermon on Math. xxii.
27. "If there be any thing that may be loved jointly with God, it must not
share equally with God, but keep its distance, and receive our Love by a
Reflection from God...... Thus if we love God......... we love him above all
things, and we love him for himself; for that must needs follow, when we love
him for no other thing, no not for our own selves, but are willing to hazard
all, even ourselves and all, for the Love of him." How far is Disinterestedness
carried in that Prayer of Give me, O Lord, a lively Faith, a firm Hope, and a
lively Charity; a Love of Thee incomparably above the Love of myself, that I
may love nothing to thy Displeasure, but every thing in order to thy
Satisfaction.

Give me, O Lord, a Longing to be with Thee, not for avoiding the Calamities of
this wretched World, nor so much for escaping the Pains of Purgatory, or those
of Hell, nor for attaining the Joys of Heaven with respect to my own Advantage,
as purely for the Love of Thee.


Sir Thomas More's!...... I have often wondered how this Principle should give
such Alarm, as if the Quiet of the World was in danger from it. In the first
place, it is not likely to be much practiced, and then it can never be so
interpreted, as if People were forbid to take due care of themselves; for if a
Man did not so, he would be ill taken care of, as the World is. But in dealing
with the World and Almighty God, the Rules are widely different: with him there
is no use for Caution and Reserve, but the more unlimited the Trust and
Dependence, so much the greater the Safety and Happiness. How agreeable is it
to reflect on the Constitution of Things, and to find Happiness result from the
Observance of Order and Duty!

How Disorder first entered into the World, is like to remain a Secret to
Mankind, and it seems to be of little use to go into Metaphysical Inquiries
about it; since whatever way the Question were resolved, it would make no
alteration either in our Duty, or in the Nature of Things: Disinterestedness
will always be our Dury, and our Duty will always be our Interest. But the
Ideas of these two are different, however they may coincide in the Event; and
in all Duties the Value will ever be measured by the Motive.

IN this Point even Christians and Deists seem to be agreed, for
Disinterestedness is a common Principle between them. And when any Christians
set up for Interestedness, the Deists make a handle of it to disparage
Christianity: Again, when Christians set up for the Sufficiency of Reason, the
Deists are fond of their Expressions, and quote them to prove Christianity an
useless thing...... One great Difference between Christianity and Deism is
this, Christianity represents human Nature in a state of Disorder, the
Understanding limited and confused, the Passions tumultuous, and the Heart
corrupted; and consequently a necessity of superior Assistance. Deism gives a
quite different Representation, as if every thing in Man was entire, and
nothing so easy as the balancing of the Passions, and all the rest. The
difference between Christianity and Deism in the point of Self-Denial follows
of course: Christians at least profess it. And if the Deists allege they are
not in earnest, and believe less than they pretend to; it can never come to a
Demonstration, and the Christians may allege, that the Deists believe more
than they own, the external and rational Evidences for Christianity being so
strong........ Nor is Christianity a Doctrine of Vexation and Sorrow: it only
sets things before us as they are; that we may not be deceived with false
Appearances. What Situation of Fortune can be sufficient to transport any
Person, that reflects on the Present State of the World, and the Variety of
Evils, both natural and moral?........ The World is felt to be what it is.
Philosophy is for the most part but Grimace.

BUT it is not so much the Insufficiency of things, as the Injustice of
Self-Love, that I had a mind to represent; that Principle by which a Man would
make himself the Center of the Universe! And I hope it will not be reckoned too
presumptuous, if I endeavor this once to state the Question concerning
Self-Love and the Love of God in such a way, that all Christians may (if
possible) agree in it.

THE Question here is not whether we are to love God, or whether it be our
Interest to love him, or whether it be the Will and the Glory of God, that he
should be loved by all intelligent Creatures, (for in these things all
Christians are agreed;) but the Question is, whether we are to love him from
the Motive of his Perfection, or from that of our own Indigence; whether we are
to love him for the sake of our own personal Advantage. be use we cannot be
happy without him, or because he is indeed the most amiable Object, without
considering our own Advantage whether we are to love him, because it is just
and right in itself, or because our own Hopes and Fears determine us? If it be
said, we ought to love him both because it is just in itself, and also because
it is our Interest; it may be answered, that as these Motives are not to be
equal, (otherwise we should love God and ourselves equally) the Question comes
to be, whether Interest shall give place to Justice, or Justice give place to
Interest? For however both these Motives may subsist together at first, yet the
lesser Motive will and ought to be swallowed up by the greater. Now if we will
but consider as carefully the Justice there is in loving God, as the particular
Profit that shall accrue to us by it, we shall at last be so penetrated with
the Sense of the Justice of the thing, as to reflect no more on our Profit; or
if we do, we shall find that though Profit accompanies our Love, yet it is no
longer worthy to be the Motive of it; and that as the least By-view to Interest
renders Love less perfect, so it is only that Love, which is without any such
View, that is absolutely pure and perfect: because in that Love, the Lover,
forgetting himself, wholly rejoices only in the Beloved. And this (however some
have called it a Refinement) is no more than what the Nature of the thing
requires, and what Cicero has even required in Friendship.

AGAIN, if we still love ourselves with a distinct Love, independent on that of
God, how shall we ever get so far out of the selfish State, as to love God with
all our Heart and all our Strength? And yet this great Duty is acknowledged by
all Christians, and the Practice of it in the full and literal Meaning of the
Words is the highest Perfection: for the End of the Commandment is Charity, and
Love is the fulfilling of the Law. Whatever inferior Motives therefore our
Imperfections, may stand in need of in the beginning, yet they must at last
give way to a more perfect Principle: so that if any shall take upon them to
condemn the pure disinterested Love of God, I see not how they can reconcile
this with their own Acknowledgement, that He is to be loved with all our Heart.

FINIS.
Books printed for J. Osborn and T. Longman.
I. INtroduction to Natural Philosophy: or, Philosophical Lectures read in the
University of Oxford, Anno Dom. 1700. To which are added, the Demonstrations of
Monsieur Huygens's Theorems, concerning the Centrifugal Force and Circular
Motion. By John Keil, M. D. Savilian Professor of Astronomy, F. R. S.
Translated from the last Edition of the Latin, 8vo. 2d Edit. II. The Religious
Philosopher: Or, the right Use of Contemplating the Works of the Creator, 1. In
the wonderful Structure of Animal Bodies, and in particular Man. 2. In the no
less wonderful and wise Formation of the Elements. 3. In the most amazing
Structure of the Heavens, with all its Furniture. Designed for the Conviction
of Atheists and Infidels; throughout which, all the late Discoveries in
Anatomy, Philosophy, and Astronomy, together with the various Experiments made
use of to Illustrate the same, are most copiously handled, by that learned
Mathematician Dr. Nieuwenlytt. Translated from the Low Dutch. To which is
prefixed a Letter to the Translator, by Dr. Desaguliers. The Third Edition,
adorned with Cuts, in Two Volumes, 4to. III. An Analytick Treatise of Conick
Sections, and their Use for resolving of Equations in determinate Problems;
being the Posthumous Works of the Marquis de L' Hospital, Honorary Fellow of
the Academy Royal of Sciences. Made English by E. Stone, F. R. S. 4to. IV.
Mathematical Elements of Natural Philosophy, confirmed by Experiments: Or, an
Introduction to Sir Isaac Newton's Philosophy. Written in Latin by William
James's Gravesande, Doctor of Laws, and Philosophy, Professor of Mathematics,
and Astronomy, at Leyden. Translated into English by Dr. Desaguliers, in Two
Volumes, 8vo. The 2d Edit. corrected. V. A New Method of Chemistry; including
the Theory and Practice of that Art: Laid down on Mechanical Principles, and
accommodated to the Uses of Life. The whole making a Clear and Rational System
of Chemical Philosophy. To which is prefixed a Critical History of Chemistry
and Chemists, from the Origin of the Art to the present Time. Done from the
Original of the very learned H. Boerhaave, Professor of Chemistry, Botany, and
Medicine, in the University of Leyden, and Member of the Royal Academy of
Sciences at Paris. With additional Notes and Sculptures. By P. Shaw, M. D. and
E. Chambers, Gent. 4to. VI. Medical Essays and Observations, revised and
published by a Society in Edinburgh, containing an Account of the State of the
Air and Epidemical Diseases, Tracts on Drugs, Chemistry, Anatomy, Animal
Economy, Theory and Practice of Surgery and Medicine, with the New
Improvements made, and Books published any where else on all the Parts of
Physic. VII. The Anatomy of the Human Bones; to which are added, an Anatomical
Treatise of the Nerves; An Account of the reciprocal Motions of the Heart, and
a Description of the Human Lacteal Sac and Duct; by Alexander Monro, Professor
of Anatomy in the University of Edinburgh, F. R. S. The Second Edition
corrected and enlarged. VIII. Pharmacopoeia Officinalis and Extemporanea; or, a
complete English Dispensatory, in Four Parts. Containing, I. The Theory of
Pharmacy, and the several Processes therein. II. A Description of the Officinal
Simples, with their Virtues and Preparations, Galenical and Chemical. III. The
Officinal Compositions, according to the last Alterations of the College:
Together with some others of uncommon Efficacy, taken from the most celebrated
Authors. IV. Extemporaneous Prescriptions, distributed into Classes suitable to
their Intentions in Cure. To which is added, An Account of the Common
Adulterations both of Simples and Compounds; with some Marks to detect them by.
By John Quincy, M. D. The Ninth Edition, much enlarged and corrected. N. B. In
this Ninth Edition, the Part relating to the Simples is improved; the Officinal
Part is compared anew with the London Dispensatory; and somewhat enlarged: and
to prevent Mistakes, the Physicians Marks of Quantities, are changed for Words
at length. Many considerable Passages are added, from the Author's other Works;
some other Additions are occasionally made; all which are distinguished by an
Italick Letter; and the whole Work is carefully corrected.

IX. A New Practice of Physic; wherein the various Diseases incident to the
Human Body are orderly described, their Causes assigned, their Diagnostics and
Prognostics enumerated, and the Regimen proper in each delivered; with a
competent Number of Medicines for every Stage and Symptom thereof, prescribed
after the Manner of the most eminent Physicians among the Moderns, and
particularly those of London. The whole formed on the Model of Dr. Sydenham,
and completing the Design of his Processus Integri. In Two Volumes. By Peter
Shaw, M. D. 8vo. 2d Edit. X. Sir Isaac Newton's Mathematical Philosophy, more
easily demonstrated; with Dr. Halley's Account of Comets, Illustrated. Being
Forty Lectures read in the public Schools at Cambridge. By W. Whiston, M. A.
for the use of the young Students there. The Third Edition, 8vo.

