PAMELA: OR, VIRTUE Rewarded. In a SERIES of FAMILIAR LETTERS FROM A Beautiful
Young DAMSEL, To her PARENTS. Now first Published In order to cultivate the
Principles of VIRTUE and RELIGION in the Minds of the YOUTH of BOTH SEXES.

A Narrative which has its Foundation in TRUTH and NATURE; and at the same time
that it agreeably entertains, by a Variety of curious and affecting INCIDENTS,
is entirely divested of all those Images, which, in too many Pieces calculated
for Amusement only, tend to inflame the Minds they should instruct.

In Two VOLUMES.

The THIRD EDITION. To which are prefixed, EXTRACTS from several curious
LETTERS written to the Editor on the Subject.

VOL. I.

LONDON: Printed for C. RIVINGTON, in St. Paul's Churchyard; and J. OSBORN, in
Paternoster Row.

M DCC XLI.

PREFACE BY THE EDITOR.
IF to Divert and Entertain, and at the same time to Instruct, and Improve the
Minds of the YOUTH of both Sexes:

IF to inculcate Religion and Morality in so easy and agreeable a manner, as
shall render them equally delightful and profitable to the younger Class of
Readers, as well as worthy of the Attention of Persons of maturer Years and
Understandings:

IF to set forth in the most exemplary Lights, the Parental, the Filial, and
the Social Duties, and that from low to high Life:

IF to paint VICE in its proper Colors, to make it deservedly Odious; and to
set VIRTUE in its own amiable Light, to make it truly Lovely:

IF to draw Characters justly, and to support them equally:

IF to raise a Distress from natural Causes, and to excite Compassion from
proper Motives:

IF to teach the Man of Fortune how to use it; the Man of Passion how to subdue
it; and the Man of Intrigue, how, gracefully, and with Honor to himself, to
reclaim:

IF to give practical Examples, worthy to be followed in the most critical and
affecting Cases, by the modest Virgin, the chaste Bride, and the obliging Wife:

IF to-effect all these good Ends, in so probable, so natural, so lively a
manner, as shall engage the Passions of every sensible Reader, and strongly
interest them in the edifying Story:

AND all without raising a single Idea throughout the Whole, that shall shock
the exactest Purity, even in those tender Instances where the exactest Purity
would be most apprehensive:

IF these, (embellished with a great Variety of entertaining Incidents) be
laudable or worthy Recommendations of any Work, the Editor of the following
Letters, which have their Foundation in Truth and Nature, ventures to assert,
that all these desirable Ends are obtained in these Sheets: And as he is
therefore confident of the favorable Reception which he boldly bespeaks for
this little Work; he thinks any further Preface or Apology for it, unnecessary:
And the rather for two Reasons, 1st. Because he can Appeal from his own
Passions, (which have been uncommonly moved in perusing these engaging Scenes)
to the Passions of Every one who shall read them with the least Attention: And,
in the next place, because an Editor may reasonably be supposed to judge with
an Impartiality which is rarely to be met with in an Author toward his own
Works.

The Editor.

To the Editor of the Piece entitled, PAMELA; or, VIRTUE Rewarded.
Dear SIR,
I HAVE had inexpressible Pleasure in the Perusal of your PAMELA. It entirely
answers the Character you give of it in your Preface; nor have you said one
Word too much in Commendation of a Piece that has Advantages and Excellencies
peculiar to itself. For, besides the beautiful Simplicity of the Style, and a
happy Propriety and Clearness of Expression (the Letters being written under
the immediate Impression of every Circumstance which occasioned them, and that
to those who had a Right to know the fair Writer's most secret Thoughts) the
several Passions of the Mind must, of course, be more affectingly described,
and Nature may be traced in her undisguised Inclinations with much more
Propriety and Exactness, than can possibly be found in a Detail of Actions long
past, which are never recollected with the same Affections, Hopes, and Dreads,
with which they were felt when they occurred.

This little Book will infallibly be looked upon as the hitherto much-wanted
Standard or Pattern for this Kind of Writing. For it abounds with lively Images
and Pictures; with Incidents natural, surprising, and perfectly adapted to the
Story; with Circumstances interesting to Persons in common Life, as well as to
those in exalted Stations. The greatest Regard is every where paid in it to
Decency, and to every Duty of Life: There is a constant Fitness of the Style to
the Persons and Characters described; Pleasure and Instruction here always go
hand in hand: Vice and Virtue are set in constant Opposition, and Religion
everywhere inculcated in its native Beauty and cheerful Amiableness; not
dressed up in stiff, melancholy, or gloomy Forms, on one hand, nor yet, on the
other, debased below its due Dignity and noble Requisites, in Compliment to a
too fashionable but depraved Taste. And this I will boldly say, that if its
numerous Beauties are added to its excellent Tendency, it will be found worthy
a Place, not only in all Families (especially such as have in them young
Persons of either Sex) but in the Collections of the most curious and polite
Readers. For, as it borrows none of its Excellencies from the romantic Flights
of unnatural Fancy, its being founded in Truth and Nature, and built upon
Experience, will be a lasting Recommendation to the Discerning and Judicious;
while the agreeable Variety of Occurrences and Characters, in which it abounds,
will not fail to engage the Attention of the gay and more sprightly Readers.

The moral Reflections and Uses to be drawn from the several Parts of this
admirable History, are so happily deduced from a Crowd of different Events and
Characters, in the Conclusion of the Work, that I shall say the less on that
Head. But I think, the Hints you have given me, should also prefatorily be
given to the Public; viz. That it will appear from several Things mentioned in
the Letters, that the Story must have happened within these Thirty Years past:
That you have been obliged to vary some of the Names of Persons, Places, etc.
and to disguise a few of the Circumstances, in order to avoid giving Offense to
some Persons, who would not choose to be pointed out too plainly in it; though
they would be glad it may do the Good so laudably intended by the Publication.
And as you have in Confidence submitted to my Opinion some of those Variations,
I am much pleased that you have so managed the Matter, as to make no Alteration
in the Facts; and, at the same time, have avoided the digressive Prolixity too
frequently used on such Occasions.

Little Book, charming PAMELA! face the World, and never doubt of finding
Friends and Admirers, not only in thine own Country, but far from Home; where
thou may give an Example of Purity to the Writers of a neighboring Nation;
which now shall have an Opportunity to receive English Bullion in Exchange for
its own Dross, which has so long passed current among us in Pieces abounding
with all the Levities of its volatile Inhabitants. The reigning Depravity of
the Times has yet left Virtue many Votaries. Of their Protection you need not
despair. May every headstrong Libertine whose Hands you reach, be reclaimed;
and every tempted Virgin who reads you, imitate the Virtue, and meet the Reward
of the high-meriting, though low-descended, PAMELA. I am, Sir,

Your most Obedient, and Faithful Servant, J. B. D. F.

To my worthy Friend, the Editor of PAMELA.
SIR,
I RETURN the Manuscript of Pamela by the Bearer, which I have read with a
great deal of Pleasure. It is written with that Spirit of Truth and agreeable
Simplicity, which, though much wanted, is seldom found in those Pieces which are
calculated for the Entertainment and Instruction of the Public. It carries
Conviction in every Part of it; and the Incidents are so natural and
interesting, that I have gone hand-in-hand, and sympathiz'd with the pretty
Heroine in all her Sufferings, and been extremely anxious for her Safety, under
the Apprehensions of the bad Consequences which I expected, every Page, would
ensue from the laudable Resistance she made. I have interested myself in all
her Schemes of Escape; been alternately pleased and angry with her in her
Restraint; pleased with the little Machinations and Contrivances she set on
foot for her Release, and angry for suffering her Fears to defeat them; always
lamenting, with a most sensible Concern, the Miscarriages of her Hopes and
Projects. In short, the whole is so affecting, that there is no reading it
without uncommon Concern and Emotion. Thus far only as to the Entertainment it
gives.

As to Instruction and Morality, the Piece is full of both. It shows Virtue in
the strongest Light, and renders the Practice of it amiable and lovely. The
beautiful Sufferer keeps it ever in her View, without the least Ostentation, or
Pride; she has it so strongly implanted in her, that through the whole Course of
her Sufferings, she does not so much as hesitate once, whether she shall
sacrifice it to Liberty and Ambition, or not; but, as if there were no other
way to free and save herself, carries on a determined Purpose to persevere in
her Innocence, and wade with it throughout all Difficulties and Temptations, or
perish under them. It is an astonishing Matter, and well worth our most serious
Consideration, that a young beautiful Girl, in the low Scene of Life and
Circumstance in which Fortune placed her, without the Advantage of a Friend
capable to relieve and protect her, or any other Education than what occurred
to her from her own Observation and little Reading, in the Course of her
Attendance on her excellent Mistress and Benefactress, could, after having a
Taste of Ease and Plenty in a higher Sphere of Life than what she was born and
first brought up in, resolve to return to her primitive Poverty, rather than
give up her Innocence, I say, it is surprising, that a young Person, so
circumstanced, could, in Contempt of proffered Grandeur on the one side, and in
Defiance of Penury on the other, so happily and prudently conduct herself through
such a Series of Perplexities and Troubles, and withstand the alluring Baits,
and almost irresistible Offers of a fine Gentleman, so universally admired and
esteemed, for the Agreeableness of his Person and good Qualities, among all his
Acquaintance; defeat all his Measures with so much Address, and oblige him, at
last, to give over his vain Pursuit, and sacrifice his Pride and Ambition to
Virtue, and become the Protector of that Innocence which he so long and so
indefatigably labored to supplant: And all this without ever having
entertained the least previous Design or Thought for that Purpose: No Art used
to inflame him, no Coquetry practiced to tempt or entice him, and no Prudery or
Affectation to tamper with his Passions; but, on the contrary, artless and
unpractised in the Wiles of the World, all her Endeavors, and even all her
Wishes, tended only to render herself as un-amiable as she could in his Eyes:
Though at the same time she is so far from having any Aversion to his Person,
that she seems rather prepossessed in his Favor, and admires his Excellencies,
whilst she condemns his Passion for her. A glorious Instance of Self-denial!
Thus her very Repulses became Attractions: The more she resisted, the more she
charmed; and the very Means she used to guard her Virtue, the more endangered
it, by inflaming his Passions: Till, at last, by Perseverance, and a brave and
resolute Defense, the Besieged not only obtained a glorious Victory over the
Besieger, but took him Prisoner too.

I am charmed with the beautiful Reflections she makes in the Course of her
Distresses; her Soliloquies and little Reasonings with herself, are exceeding
pretty and entertaining: She pours out all her Soul in them before her Parents
without Disguise; so that one may judge of, nay, almost see, the inmost
Recesses of her Mind. A pure clear Fountain of Truth and Innocence; a Magazine
of Virtue and unblemished Thoughts!

I cannot conceive why you should hesitate a Moment as to the Publication of
this very natural and uncommon Piece. I could wish to see it out in its own
native Simplicity, which will affect and please the Reader beyond all the
Strokes of Oratory in the World; for those will but spoil it: and, should you
permit such a murdering Hand to be laid upon it, to gloss and tinge it over
with superfluous and needless Decorations, which, like too much Drapery in
Sculpture and Statuary, will but encumber it; it may disguise the Facts, mar
the Reflections, and unnaturalize the Incidents, so as to be lost in a
Multiplicity of fine idle Words and Phrases, and reduce our Sterling Substance
into an empty Shadow, or rather frenchify our English Solidity into Froth and
Whip-syllabub. No; let us have Pamela as Pamela wrote it; in her own Words,
without Amputation, or Addition. Produce her to us in her neat Country Apparel,
such as she appeared in, on her intended Departure to her Parents; for such
best becomes her Innocence, and beautiful Simplicity. Such a Dress will best
edify and entertain. The flowing Robes of Oratory may indeed amuse and amaze,
but will never strike the Mind with solid Attention.

In short, Sir, a Piece of this Kind is much wanted in the World, which is but
too much, as well as too early, debauched by pernicious Novels. I know nothing
Entertaining of that Kind that one might venture to recommend to the Perusal
(much less the Imitation) of the Youth of either Sex: All that I have hitherto
read, tends only to corrupt their Principles, mislead their Judgments, and
initiate them into Gallantry, and loose Pleasures.

Publish then, this good, this edifying and instructive little Piece for their
sakes. The Honor of Pamela's Sex demands Pamela at your Hands, to show the
World an Heroine, almost beyond Example, in an unusual Scene of Life, whom no
Temptations, or Sufferings, could subdue. It is a fine, and glorious Original,
for the Fair to copy out and imitate. Our own Sex, too, require it of you, to
free us, in some measure, from the Imputation of being incapable of the
Impressions of Virtue and Honor; and to show the Ladies, that we are not
inflexible while they are so.

In short, the Cause of Virtue calls for the Publication of such a Piece as
this. Oblige then, Sir, the concurrent Voices of both Sexes, and give us Pamela
for the Benefit of Mankind: And as I believe its Excellencies cannot be long
unknown to the World, and that there will not be a Family without it; so I make
no Doubt but every Family that has it, will be much improved and bettered by
it. 'Twill form the tender Minds of Youth for the Reception and Practice of
Virtue and Honor; confirm and establish those of maturer Years on good and
steady Principles; reclaim the Vicious, and mend the Age in general; insomuch
that as I doubt not Pamela will become the bright Example and Imitation of all
the fashionable young Ladies of Great Britain; so the truly generous Benefactor
and Rewarder of her exemplary Virtue, will be no less admired and imitated
among the Beau Monde of our own Sex. I am

Your affectionate Friend, etc.

INTRODUCTION TO THE SECOND EDITION.
THE kind Reception which this Piece has met with from the Public, (a large
Impression having been carried off in less than Three Months) deserves not only
Acknowledgment, but that some Notice should be taken of the Objections that
have hitherto come to hand against a few Passages in it, that so the Work may
be rendered as unexceptionable as possible, and, of consequence, the fitter to
answer the general Design of it; which is to promote Virtue, and cultivate the
Minds of the Youth of both Sexes.

But Difficulties having arisen from the different Opinions of Gentlemen, some
of whom applauded the very Things that others found Fault with, it was thought
proper to submit the Whole to the Judgment of a Gentleman of the most
distinguished Taste and Abilities; the Result of which will be seen in the
subsequent Pages.

We begin with the following Letter, at the Desire of several Gentlemen, to
whom, on a very particular Occasion, it was communicated, and who wished to see
it prefixed to the New Edition, It was directed, To the Editor of PAMELA.
Dear Sir,
YOU have agreeably deceived me into a Surprise, which it will be as hard to
express, as the Beauties of PAMELA. Though I opened this powerful little Piece
with more Expectation than from common Designs, of like Promise, because it
came from your Hands, for my Daughters, yet, who could have dreamt, he should
find, under the modest Disguise of a Novel, all the Soul of Religion,
Good-breeding, Discretion, Goodnature, Wit, Fancy, Fine Thought, and Morality?
-- I have done nothing but read it to others, and hear others again read it, to
me, ever since it came into my Hands; and I find I am likely to do nothing
else, for I know not how long yet to come: because, if I lay the Book down, it
comes after me. -- When it has dwelt all Day long upon the Ear, It takes
Possession, all Night, of the Fancy. -- It has Witchcraft in every Page of it:
but it is the Witchcraft of Passion and Meaning. Who is there that will not
despise the false, empty Pomp of the Poets, when he observes in this little,
unpretending, mild Triumph of Nature, the whole Force of Invention and Genius,
creating new Powers of Emotion, and transplanting Ideas of Pleasure into that
unweeded low Garden the Heart, from the dry and sharp Summit of Reason?

YET, I confess, there is One, in the World, of whom I think with still greater
Respect, than of PAMELA: and That is, of the wonderful AUTHOR of PAMELA. --
Pray, Who is he, Dear Sir? and where, and how, has he been able to hide,
hitherto, such an encircling and all-mastering Spirit? He possesses every
Quality that ART could have charmed by: yet, has lent it to, and concealed it
in. NATURE. -- The Comprehensiveness of his Imagination must be truly
prodigious! -- It has stretched out this diminutive mere Grain of Mustard Seed,
(a poor Girl's little, innocent, Story) into a Resemblance of That Heaven,
which the Best of Good Books has compared it to. -- All. the Passions are His,
in their most close and abstracted Recesses: and by selecting the most
delicate, and yet, at the same time, most powerful, of their Springs, thereby
to act, wind, and manage, the Heart, He moves us, every where, with the Force
of a TRAGEDY.

WHAT is there, throughout the Whole, that I do not sincerely admire! -- I
admire, in it, the strong distinguished Variety, and picturesque glowing
Likeness to Life, of the Characters. I know, hear, see, and live among 'em All:
and, if I could paint, could return you their Faces. I admire, in it, the noble
Simplicity, Force, Aptness, and Truth, of so many modest, oeconomical, moral,
prudential, religious, satirical, and cautionary, Lessons; which are introduced
with such seasonable Dexterity, and with so polished and exquisite a Delicacy,
of Expression and Sentiment, that I am only apprehensive, for the Interests of
Virtue, lest some of the finest, and most touching, of those elegant Strokes of
Good-breeding, Generosity, and Reflection, should be lost, under the too gross
Discernment of an unfeeling Majority of Readers; for whose Coarseness, however,
they were kindly designed, as the most useful and charitable Correctives.

ONE of the best-judg'd Peculiars, of the Plan, is, that These Instructions
being conveyed, as in a Kind of Dramatical Representation, by those beautiful
Scenes, Her own Letters and Journals, who acts the most moving and suffering
Part, we feel the Force in a threefold Effect, -- from the Motive, the Act, and
the Consequence.

BUT what, above All, I am charmed with, is the amiable Goodnature of the
AUTHOR, who, I am convinced, has one of the best, and most generous Hearts, of
Mankind: because, mis-measuring other Minds, by His Own, he can draw Every
thing, to Perfection, but Wickedness. -- I became inextricably in Love with
this delightful Defect of his Malice; -- for, I found it owing to an Excess in
his Honesty. Only observe, Sir, with what virtuous Reluctance he complies with
the Demands of his Story, when he stands in need of some blameable Characters.
Though his Judgment compels him to mark 'em with disagreeable Colorings, so that
they make an odious Appearance at first, He cannot forbear, by an unexpected and
gradual Decline from Themselves, to soften and transmute all the Horror
conceived for their Baseness, till we are arrived, through insensible Stages,
at an Inclination to forgive it entirely.

I MUST venture to add, without mincing the matter, what I really believe, of
this Book. -- It will live on, through Posterity, with such unbounded Extent of
Good Consequences, that Twenty Ages to come may be the Better and Wiser, for
its Influence. It will steal first, imperceptibly, into the Hearts of the Young
and the Tender: where It will afterward guide and moderate their Reflections
and Resolves, when grown Older. And, so, a gradual moral Sunshine, of
un-austere and compassionate Virtue, shall break out upon the World, from this
TRIFLE (for such, I dare answer for the Author, His Modesty misguides him to
think it). -- No Applause therefore can be too high, for such Merit. And, let
me abominate the contemptible Reserves of mean-spirited Men, who while they but
hesitate their Esteem, with Restraint, can be fluent and uncheck'd in their
Envy. -- In an Age so deficient in Goodness, Every such Virtue, as That of this
Author, is a salutary Angel, in Sodom. And One who could stoop to conceal, a
Delight he receives from the Worthy, would be equally capable of submitting to
an Approbation of the Praise of the Wicked.

I WAS thinking, just now, as I returned from a Walk in the Snow, on that Old
Roman Policy, of Exemptions in Favor of Men, who had given a few, bodily,
Children to the Republic. -- What superior Distinction ought our Country to
find (but that Policy and We are at Variance) for Reward of this Father, of
Millions of MINDS, which are to owe new Formation to the future Effect of his
Influence!

UPON the whole, as I never met with so pleasing, so honest, and so truly
deserving a Book, I should never have done, if I explained All my Reasons for
admiring its Author. -- If it is not a Secret, oblige me so far as to tell me
his Name: for since I feel him the Friend of my Soul, it would be a Kind of
Violation to retain him a Stranger. -- I am not able to thank you enough, for
this highly acceptable Present. And, as for my Daughters, They have taken into
their Own Hands the Acknowledgment due from their Gratitude. I am,

DEAR SIR, Your, etc.
Dec. 17, 1740.

Abstract of a second Letter from the same Gentleman.
' -- NO Sentiments which I have here, or in my last, expressed, of the sweet
Pamela, being more than the bare Truth, which every Man must feel, who lends
his Ear to the enchanting Prattler, why does the Author's Modesty mislead his
Judgment, to suspect the Style wants Polishing? -- No, Sir, there is an Ease, a
natural Air, a dignified Simplicity, and measured Fullness, in it, that,
resembling Life, outglows it! He has reconciled the Pleasing to the Proper. The
Thought is everywhere exactly clothed by the Expression: And becomes its
Dress as roundly, and as close, as Pamela her Country-habit. Remember, though she
put it on with humble Prospect, of descending to the Level of her Purpose, it
adorned her, with such unpresum'd Increase of Loveliness; sat with such neat
Propriety of Elegant Neglect about her, that it threw out All her Charms, with
tenfold, and resistless Influence. -- And so, dear Sir, it will be always
found. -- When modest Beauty seeks to hide itself by casting off the Pride of
Ornament, it but displays itself without a Covering: And so, becoming more
distinguished, by its Want of Drapery, grows stronger, from its purposed
Weakness.'

There were formed by an anonymous Gentleman, the following Objections to some
Passages in the Work.

1. That the Style ought to be a little raised, at least so soon as Pamela
knows the Gentleman's Love is honorable, and when his Diffidence is changed to
Ease: And from about the fourth Day after Marriage, it should be equal to the
Rank she is raised to, and charged to fill becomingly.

2. That to avoid the Idea apt to be joined with the Word ' Squire, the
Gentleman should be styled Sir James, or Sir John, etc. and Lady Davers in a
new Edition might procure for him the Title of a Baronet.

3. That if the sacred Name were seldomer repeated, it would be better; for
that the Wise Man's Advice is, Be not righteous overmuch.

4. That the Penance which Pamela suffers from Lady Davers might be shortened:
That she is too timorous after owning her Marriage to that Lady, and ought to
have a little more Spirit, and get away sooner out at the Window, or call her
own Servants to protect, and carry her to her Husband's Appointment.

5. That Females are too apt to be struck with Images of Beauty; and that the
Passage where the Gentleman is said to span the Waist of Pamela with his Hand,
is enough to ruin a Nation of Women by Tight-lacing.

6. That the Word naughty had better be changed to some other, as Bad, Faulty,
Wicked, Vile, Abominable, Scandalous: Which in most Places would give an
Emphasis, for which recourse must otherwise be had to the innocent Simplicity
of the Writer; an Idea not necessary to the Moral of the Story, nor of
Advantage to the Character of the Heroine.

7. That the Words, p. 305. Foolish Thing that I am, had better be Foolish that
I am. The same Gentleman observes by way of Postscript, that Jokes are often
more severe, and do more Mischief, than more solid Objections; and would have
one or two Passages altered, to avoid giving Occasion for the Supposition of a
double Entendre, particularly in two Places which he mentions, viz. p. 175. and
181.

He is pleased to take notice of several other Things of less Moment, some of
which are merely typographical; and very kindly expresses, on the Whole, a high
Opinion of the Performance, and thinks it may do a great deal of Good: For all
which, as well as for his Objections, the Editor gives him very sincere Thanks.

Others are of Opinion, That the Scenes in many Places, in the Beginning
especially, are too low; and that the Passions of Lady Davers, in particular,
are carried too high, and above Nature.

And others have intimated, That Pamela ought, for Example sake, to have
discharged Mrs. Jewkes from her Service.

These are the most material Objections that have come to hand, all which are
considered in the following Extracts from some of the most beautiful Letters
that have been written in any Language:

'The Gentleman's Advice, not to alter Pamela at all, was both friendly, and
solidly just. I run in, with full Sail, to his Anchorage, that the low Scenes
are no more out of Nature, than the high Passions of proud Lady Davers. Out of
Nature, do they say? It Is my Astonishment how Men of Letters can read with such
absent Attention! They are so far from Out of Nature, They are absolute Nature
herself! or, if they must be confessed her Resemblance; they are such a
Resemblance, at least, as our true Face gives our Face in the Looking-glass.

'I wonder indeed, what it is, that the Gentlemen, who talk of Low Scenes,
would desire should be understood by the Epithet? -- Nothing, properly
speaking, is low, that suits well with the Place it is raised to. -- The
Passions of Nature are the same, in the Lord, and his Coachman. All, that
makes them seem different consists in the Degrees, in the Means, and the Air,
whereto or wherewith they indulge 'em. If, in painting Distinctions like these,
(which arise but from the Forms of Men's Manners, drawn from Birth, Education,
and Custom) a Writer falls short of his Characters, there his Scene is a low
one, indeed, whatever high Fortune it flattered. But, to imagine that Persons
of Rank are above a Concern for what is thought, felt, or acted, by others, of
their Species, between whom and themselves is no Difference, except such as was
owing to Accident, is to reduce Human Nature to a Lowness, -- too low for the
Truth of her Frailty. --

'In Pamela, in particular, we owe All to her Lowness. It is to the docile
Effects of this Lowness of that amiable Girl, in her Birth, her Condition, her
Hopes, and her Vanities, in every thing, in short, but her Virtue, -- that her
Readers are indebted, for the moral Reward, of that Virtue. And if we are to
look for the Low among the Rest of the Servants, less lovely though they are,
than a Pamela, there is something however, so glowingly painted, in the Lines
whereby the Author has marked their Distinctions -- Something, so movingly
forceful, in the Grief at their Parting, and Joy at the happy Return, --
Something so finely, at once, and so strongly and feelingly, varied, even in
the smallest and least promising, little Family Incidents! that I need only
appeal from the Heads, to the Hearts of the Objectors themselves, whether these
are low Scenes to be censured?

'And as for the opposite Extreme they would quarrel with, the high-passion'd,
and un-tam'd Lady Davers, -- I could direct 'em to a Dozen or two of Quality
Originals, from whom (with Exception perhaps of her Wit) one would swear the
Author had taken her Copy. -- What a Sum might these Objectors ensure, to be
paid, by the Husbands and Sons, of such termagant, hermaphrodite Minds, upon
their making due Proof, that they were no longer to be found, in the Kingdom!

'I know, you are too just to imagine me capable of giving any other Opinion
than my best-weigh'd and true one. But, because it is fit you should have
Reasons, in Support of a Judgment that can neither deserve nor expect an
implicit Reception, I will run over the Anonymous Letter I herewith return you;
and note with what Lightness even Men of good-natured Intention fall into
Mistakes, by Neglect in too hasty Perusals, which their Benevolence would take
Pleasure in blushing at, when they discover their Weakness, in a cooler Revisal.

'The Writer of this Letter is for having the Style raised, after Pamela's
Advance in her Fortune. But surely, This was hasty Advice: because, as the
Letters are writ to her Parents, it would have looked like forgetting, and, in
some sort, insulting, the Lowliness of their inferior Condition, to have
assumed a new Air in her Language, in Place of retaining a steady Humility.
But, here, it must not be passed unobserved, that in her Reports of
Conversations that followed her Marriage, she does, aptly and beautifully,
heighten her Style, and her Phrases: still returning however to her decent
Simplicity, in her Addresses to her Father and Mother.

'I am against giving a Gentleman (who has ennobled himself, by reforming his
Vices, and rewarding the Worth of the Friendless) the unnecessary new Toy of a
Title. It is all strong in Nature, as it stands in the Letters: and I don't see
how Greatness, from Titles, can add Likeness or Power, to the Passions. So
complete a Resemblance of Truth stands in need of no borrowed Pretensions.

'The Only of this Writer's Objections, which, I think, carries Weight, is
That, which advises some little Contraction of the Prayers, and Appeals to the
Deity. I say little Contraction: for they are nobly and sincerely pathetic. And
I say it only in Fear, lest, if fansied too long, by the fashionably Averse to
the Subject, Minds, which most want the purposed Impression, might hazard the
Loss of its Benefit, by passing over those pious Reflections, which, if
shorter, would catch their Attention.

'Certainly, the Gentleman's Objection against the Persecution that Pamela
suffers from Lady Davers, in respect to the Relation this Mad-woman bears to
the Brother, is the rashest of All his Advices! And when he thinks she ought
rather to have assumed the Protection of her Servants, he seems unaware of the
probable Consequence; where there was a Puppy, of Quality, in the Case, who
had, even without Provocation, drawn his Sword on the poor passive PAMELA. Far
from bearing a Thought of exciting an abler Resentment, to the Danger of a
Quarrel with so worthless a Coxcomb, how charmingly natural, apprehensive, and
generous, is her Silence (during the Recital she makes of her Sufferings) with
regard to this masculine Part of the Insult! as also her Prevention of Mrs.
Jewkes's less delicate Bluntness, when she was beginning to complain of the
whelp Lord's Impertinence!

'If I were not afraid of a Pun, I should tell the anonymous Letter-writer,
that he made a too tight-laced Objection, where he quarrels with the spann'd
Waist of Pamela. What, in the Name of Unshapeliness! could he find, to complain
of, in a beautiful Girl of Sixteen, who was born out of Germany, and had not,
yet, reached ungraspable Roundness! -- These are wonderful Sinkings from
Purpose, where a Man is considering such mental, and passionate Beauties, as
this Gentleman professed to be touched by!

'But, when he goes on, to object against the Word naughty, (as applied in the
Phrase naughty Master) I grow mortified, in Fear for our human Sufficiency,
compared with our Aptness to blunder! For, here, it is plain, this Director of
Another's Discernment is quite blind, Himself, to an Elegance, one would have
thought it impossible not to be struck by? -- Faulty, wicked, abominable,
scandalous, (which are the angry Adjectives, he prefers to that sweet one)
would have carried Marks of her Rage, not Affliction -- whereas naughty
contains, in One single significant Petulance, twenty thousand inexpressible
Delicacies! -- It insinuates, at once, all the beautiful Struggle, between her
Contempt of his Purpose, and tender Regard for his Person; her Gratitude to
Himself and his Family; her Recollection of his superior Condition. -- There is
in the elegant Choice of this half-kind, half-peevish, Word, a never-enough to
be praised speaking Picture of the Conflict betwixt her Disdain, and her
Reverence! See, Sir, the Reason I had, for apprehending some Danger that the
refined Generosity in many of the most charming of the Sentiments would be
lost, upon the too coarse Conception of some, for whose Use the Author intended
them.

'It is the same Case again, in foolish Thing that I am! which this nice,
un-nice, Gentleman would advise you to change, into foolish that I am! He does
not seem to have tasted the pretty Contempt of Herself, the submissive
Diminutive, so distant from Vanity, yet allayed by the gentle Reluctance in
Self-condemnation; -- and the other fine Touches of Nature: which would All
have been lost, in the grave, sober Sound of his Dutch Emendation.

'As to his Paragraph in Postscript, I shall say the less of it, because the
Gentleman's own good Sense seems to confess, by the Place he has chosen to rank
it in, that it ought to be turned out of Doors, as too dirty for the rest of
his Letter. -- In the Occasions he is pleased to discover for Jokes, I either
find not, that he has any Signification at all, or such vulgar, coarse-tasted
Allusions to loose low-life Idioms, that not to understand what he means, is
both the cleanliest, and prudentest Way of confuting him.

'And now, Sir, you will easily gather how far I am from thinking it needful to
change any thing in Pamela. I would not scratch such a beautiful Face, for the
Indies!

'You can hardly imagine how it charms me to hear of a Second Edition already!
but the News of still new upon new ones, will be found no Subject of Wonder. As
it is sure, that no Family is without Sisters, or Brothers, or Daughters, or
Sons, who can read; or wants Fathers, or Mothers, or Friends, who can think; so
equally certain it is, that the Train to a Parcel of Powder does not run on
with more natural Tendency, till it sets the whole Heap in a Blaze, than that
Pamela, enchanting from Family to Family, will overspread all the Hearts of the
Kingdom.

'As to the Objection of those warm Friends to Honesty, who are for having
Pamela dismiss Mrs. Jewkes; there is not One, among All these benevolent
Complainers, who would not discern himself to have been, laudably, in the
wrong, were he only to be asked this plain Question -- Whether a Step, both
ill-judg'd, and undutiful, had not been the Reverse of a PAMELA's Character? --
Two or three times over, Mr. B -- had informed her, that Mrs. Jewkes and
Himself having been equally involved in One Guilt, she must forgive, or
condemn, Both together. After this, it grew manifest Duty not to treat her with
Marks of Resentment. -- And, as here was a visible Necessity to appear not
desirous of turning her away, so, in point of mere Moral Regard to the bad
Woman Herself, it was nobler, to retain her, with a Prospect of correcting, in
Time, her loose Habit of thinking, than, by casting her off, to the licentious
Results of her Temper, abandon her to Temptations and Danger, which a Virtue
like PAMELA's could not wish her exposed to.'

The Manner in which this admirable Gentleman gives his Opinion of the Piece,
and runs through the principal Characters, is so masterly, that the Readers of
Pamela will be charmed by it, though they should suppose, that his inimitable
Benevolence has overvalu'd the Piece itself.

'Inspir'd, without doubt, by some Skill, more than human, and comprehending in
an humble, and seemingly artless, Narration, a Force that can tear up the
Heart Strings, this Author has prepared an enamouring Philtre for the Mind,
which will excite such a Passion for Virtue, as scarce to leave it in the Power
of the Will to neglect her.

' Longinus, I remember, distinguishing by what Marks we may know the Sublime,
says, it is chiefly from an Effect that will follow the Reading it: a
delightfully-adhering Idea, that clings fast to the Memory; and from which it
is difficult for a Man to disengage his Attention. -- If this is a Proof of the
Sublime, there was never Sublimity so lastingly felt, as in PAMELA!

'Not the Charmer's own prattling Idea stuck so close to the Heart of her
Master, as the Incidents of her Story to the Thoughts of a Reader. -- The
Author transports, and transforms, with a Power more extensive than Horace
requires, in his POET! --

'Mr. B --, and the Turns of his Passions -- and the Softness, yet Strength, of
their amiable Object -- after having given us the most masterly Image of
Nature, that ever was painted! take Possession of, and dwell in, the Memory.'

'And there, too, broods the kind and the credulous Parson WILLIAMS'S Dove,
(without serpentine Mixture) hatching Pity and Affection, for an Honesty so
sincere, and so silly!

'There too, take their Places All the lower 'Supports of this beautiful
Fabric. --

'I am sometimes transformed into plain Goodman ANDREWS, and sometimes the good
Woman, his Wife.

'As for old Mr. LONGMAN, and JONATHAN, the Butler, they are sure of me both,
in their Turns.

'Now and-then, I am COLBRAND the Swiss: but, as broad as I stride, in that
Character, I can never escape Mrs. JEWKES: who often keeps me awake in the
Night --

'Till the Ghost of Lady DAVERS, drawing open the Curtains, scares the Scarer,
of me, and of PAMELA! --

'And, then, I take Shelter with poor penitent JOHN, and the rest of the Men
and the Maids, of all whom I may say, with compassionate Marcia,

' -- The Youths DIVIDE their Reader.'

And this fine Writer adds:

'I am glad I made War, in my last, upon the Notion of altering the Style: for,
having read it twice over since then, (and to Audiences, where the Tears were
applausively eloquent) I could hardly, here and there, find a Place, where one
Word can be changed for a better. There are some indeed, where 'twere possible
to leave out, a few, without making a Breach in the Building. But, in short,
the Author has put so bewitching a Mixture together, of the Raised with the
Natural, and the Soft with the Strong and the Eloquent -- that never Sentiments
were finer, and fuller of Life! never any were uttered so sweetly! -- Even in
what relates to the pious and frequent Addresses to God, I now retract (on
these two last Revisals) the Consent I half gave, on a former, to the anonymous
Writer's Proposal, who advised the Author to shorten those Beauties. -- Whoever
considers his Pamela with a View to find Matter for Censure, is in the
Condition of a passionate Lover, who breaks in upon his Mistress, without Fear
or Wit, with Intent to accuse her, and quarrel -- He came to her with Pique in
his Purpose; but his Heart is too hard for his Malice -- and he goes away more
enslaved, for complaining.'

The following delightful Story, so admirably related, will give great Pleasure
to the Reader; and we take the Liberty of inserting it, for that very Reason.

'What a never-to-be satisfied Length has this Subject always the Power of
attracting me into! And yet, before I have done, I must by your means tell the
Author a Story, which a Judge not so skilful in Nature as he is, might be in
Danger perhaps of mistaking, for a trifling and silly one. I expect it should
give him the clearest Conviction, in a Case he is subject to question.

'We have a lively little Boy in the Family, about seven Years old -- but, alas
for him, poor Child! quite unfriended; and born to no Prospect. He is the Son
of an honest, poor Soldier, by a Wife, grave, unmeaning, and innocent. Yet the
Boy, (see the Power of connubial Simplicity) is so pretty, so genteel, and
gay-spirited, that we have made him, and designed him, our own, ever since he
could totter, and waddle. The wanton Rogue is half Air: and every Motion he
acts by has a Spring, like Pamela's when she threw down the Card-table. All
this Quickness, however, is tempered by a good-natured Modesty: so that the
wildest of his Flights are thought rather diverting than troublesome. He is an
hourly Foundation for Laughter, from the Top of the House to the Parlours: and,
to borrow an Attribute from the Reverend Mr. Peter's, (though without any Note of
his Music) plays a very good FIDDLE in the Family. I have told you the History
of this Tom-tit of a Prater, because, ever since my first reading of PAMELA, he
puts in for a Right to be one of her Hearers; and, having got half her Sayings
by heart, talks in no other Language but hers: and, what really surprises, and
has charmed me into a certain Fore-taste of her Influence, he is, at once,
become fond of his Book; which (before) he could never be brought to attend to
-- that he may read PAMELA, he says, without stopping. The first Discovery we
made of this Power over so unripe and unfix'd an Attention, was, one Evening,
when I was reading her Reflections at the Pond to some Company. The little
rampant Intruder, being kept out by the Extent of the Circle, had crept under
my Chair, and was sitting before me, on the Carpet, with his Head almost
touching the Book, and his Face bowing down toward the Fire. -- He had sat for
some time in this Posture, with a Stillness, that made us conclude him asleep:
when, on a sudden, we heard a Succession of heart-heaving Sobs; which while he
strove to conceal from our Notice, his little Sides swelled, as if they would
burst, with the throbbing Restraint of his Sorrow. I turned his innocent Face,
to look toward me; but his Eyes were quite lost, in his Tears: which running
down from his Cheeks in free Currents, had formed two sincere little Fountains,
on that Part of the Carpet he hung over. All the Ladies in Company were ready
to devour him with Kisses: and he has, since, become doubly a Favorite -- and
is perhaps the youngest of Pamela's Converts.

The same incomparable Writer has favored us with an Objection, that is more
material than any we have mentioned; which cannot be better stated nor
answered, than in his own beautiful Words; viz.

'An Objection is come into my Thoughts, which I should be glad the Author
would think proper to obviate in the Front of the Second Edition.

'There are Mothers, or Grandmothers, in all Families of affluent Fortune, who,
though they may have none of Lady Davers's Insolence, will be apt to feel one of
her Fears, -- that the Example of a Gentleman so amiable as Mr. B -- may be
followed, by the Jackies, their Sons, with too blind and unreflecting a
Readiness. Nor does the Answer of that Gentleman to his Sister's Reproach come
quite up to the Point they will rest on. For, though indeed it is true, all the
World would acquit the best Gentleman in it, if he married such a Waiting-maid
as Pamela, yet, there is an ill-discerning Partiality, in Passion, that will
overthrow all the Force of that Argument: because every beloved Maid will be
PAMELA, in a Judgment obscured by her Influence.

'And, since the Ground of this Fear will seem solid, I don't know how to be
easy, till it is shown (nor ought it to be left to the Author's Modesty) that
they who consider his Design in that Light will be found but short-sighted
Observers.

'Request it of him then to suffer it to be told them, that not a limited, but
general, Excitement to Virtue was the first and great End to his Story: And
that this Excitement must have been deficient, and very imperfectly offered, if
he had not looked quite as low as he could for his Example: because if there
had been any Degree or Condition, more remote from the Prospect than that which
he had chosen to work on, that Degree might have seemed out of Reach of the
Hope, which it was his generous Purpose to encourage. -- And, so, he was under
an evident Necessity to find such a Jewel in a Cottage: and exposed, too, as
she was, to the severest Distresses of Fortune, with Parents unable to support
their own Lives, but from the daily hard Product of Labor.

'Nor would it have been sufficient to have placed her thus low and
distressful, if he had not also supposed her a Servant: and that too in some
elegant Family; for if she had always remained a Fellow-cottager with her
Father, it must have carried an Air of Romantic Improbability to account for
her polite Education.

'If she had wanted those Improvements, which she found means to acquire in her
Service, it would have been very unlikely, that she should have succeeded so
well; and had destroyed one great Use of the Story, to have allowed such
uncommon Felicity to the Effect of mere personal Beauty. -- And it had not been
judicious to have represented her as educated in a superior Condition of Life
with the proper Accomplishments, before she became reduced by Misfortunes, and
so not a Servant, but rather an Orphan under hopeless Distresses -- because
Opportunities which had made it no Wonder how she came to be so winningly
qualified, would have lessened her Merit in being so. And besides, where had
then been the purposed Excitement of Persons in PAMELA's Condition of Life, by
an Emulation of her Sweetness, Humility, Modesty, Patience, and Industry, to
attain some faint Hope of arriving, in time, within View of her Happiness? --
And what a delightful Reformation should we see, in all Families, where the
Vanity of their Maids took no Turn toward Ambition to please, but by such
innocent Measures, as PAMELA's!

'As it is clear, then, the Author was under a Necessity to suppose her a
Servant, he is not to be accountable for mistaken Impressions, which the Charms
he has given her may happen to make, on wrong Heads, or weak Hearts, though in
Favor of Maids the Reverse of her Likeness.

'What is it then (they may say) that the Lowness, and Distance of Pamela's
Condition from the Gentleman's who married her, proposes to teach the Gay
World, and the Fortunate? -- It is this -- By Comparison with that infinite
Remoteness of her Condition from the Reward which her Virtue procured her, one
great Proof is derived, (which is Part of the Moral of PAMELA) that Advantages
from Birth, and Distinction of Fortune, have no Power at all, when considered
against those from Behavior, and Temper of Mind: because where the Last are
not added, all the First will be boasted in vain. Whereas she who possesses the
Last finds no Want of the First, in her Influence.

'In that Light alone let the Ladies of Rank look at PAMELA. -- Such an
alarming Reflection as that will, at the same time that it raises the Hope and
Ambition of the Humble, correct and mortify the Disdain of the Proud. For it
will compel them to observe, and acknowledge, that it is the Turn of their Mind,
not the Claims of their Quality, by which (and which only) Women's Charms can be
lasting: And that, while the haughty Expectations, inseparable from an elevated
Rank, serve but to multiply its Complaints and Afflictions, the Condescensions
of accomplished Humility, attracting Pity, Affection, and Reverence, secure an
hourly Increase of Felicity. -- So that the moral Meaning of PAMELA's
Good-fortune, far from tempting young Gentlemen to marry such Maids as are
found in their Families, is, by teaching Maids to deserve to be Mistresses, to
stir up Mistresses to support their Distinction.'

We shall only add, That it was intended to prefix two neat Frontispieces to
this Edition, (and to present them to the Purchasers of the first) and one was
actually finished for that Purpose; but there not being Time for the other,
from the Demand for the new Impression; and the Engraving Part of that which
was done (though no Expense was spared) having fallen very short of the Spirit of
the Passages they were intended to represent, the Proprietors were advised to
lay them aside. And were the rather induced to do so, from the following
Observation of a most ingenious Gentleman, in a Letter to the Editor. 'I am so
jealous, says he, in Behalf of our inward Idea of PAMELA's Person, that I dread
any figured Pretense to Resemblance. For it will be pity to look at an Air, and
imagine it Hers, that does not carry some such elegant Perfection of
Amiableness, as will be sure to find place in the Fancy.'




VERSES, sent to the Bookseller, for the Unknown Author of the beautiful new
Piece called PAMELA.
Blessed be thy powerful Pen, whoever thou art,
Thou skilled, great Moulder of the mastered Heart!
Where have thou lain concealed! -- or why thought fit,
At this dire Period, to unveil thy Wit?
O! late befriended Isle! had this broad Blaze,
With earlier Beamings, blessed our Fathers Days,
The Pilot Radiance, pointing out the Source,
Whence public Health derives its vital Course,
Each timely Draught some healing Power had shown,
Ere general Gangrene blackened, to the Bone.
But, fest'ring now, beyond all Sense of Pain,
It Is hopeless: and the Helper's Hand is vain.
Sweet Pamela! forever-blooming Maid!
Thou dear, unliving, yet immortal, Shade!
Why are thy Virtues scattered to the Wind?
Why are thy Beauties flashed upon the Blind?
What, though thy fluttering Sex might learn, from thee,
That Merit forms a Rank, above Degree?
That Pride, too conscious, falls, from every Claim,
While humble Sweetness climbs, beyond its Aim?
What, though Religion, smiling from thy Eyes,
Shows her plain Power, and charms without Disguise?
What, though thy warmly-pleasing moral Scheme
Gives livelier Rapture, than the Loose can dream?
What, though thou build'st, by thy persuasive Life,
Maid, Child, Friend, Mistress, Mother, Neighbor, Wife?
Though Taste like thine each Void of Time, can fill,
Unsunk by Spleen, unquicken'd by Quadrille!
What, though it is thine to bless the lengthened Hour!
Give Permanence to Joy, and Use to Power?
Lend late-felt Blushes to the Vain and Smart?
And squeeze cramped Pity from the Miser's Heart?
What, though it is thine to hush the Marriage Breeze,
Teach Liberty to tire, and Chains to please?
Thine though, from Stiffness to divest Restraint,
And, to the Charmer, reconcile the Saint?
Though Smiles and Tears obey thy moving Skill,
And Passion's ruffled Empire waits thy Will?
Though thine the fansy'd Fields of flowery Wit,
Thine, Art's whole Power, in Nature's Language writ!
Thine, to convey strong Thought, with modest Ease,
And, copying Converse, teach its Style to please?
Though thine each Virtue, that a God could lend?
Thine, every Help, that every Heart, can mend?
It Is Thine in vain! -- Thou wak'st a dying Land:
And lift'st departed Hope, with fruitless Hand:
Death has NO CURE. Thou have mis-tim'd thy Aim;
Rome had her GOTHS: and all, beyond, was Shame.
PAMELA; OR, VIRTUE Rewarded. In a Series of FAMILIAR LETTERS, etc.
LETTER I.
Dear Father and Mother,
I Have great Trouble and some Comfort, to acquaint you with. The Trouble is,
that my good Lady died of the Illness I mentioned to you, and left us all much
grieved for her Loss; for she was a dear good Lady, and kind to all us her
Servants. Much I feared, that as I was taken by her Ladyship to wait upon her
Person, I should be quite destitute again, and forced to return to you and my
poor Mother, who have enough to do to maintain yourselves; and, as my Lady's
Goodness had put me to write and cast Accounts, and made me a little expert at
my Needle, and other Qualifications above my Degree, it would have been no easy
Matter to find a Place that your poor Pamela was fit for: But God, whose
Graciousness to us we have so often experienced at a Pinch, put it into my good
Lady's Heart, on her Deathbed, just an Hour before she expired, to recommend
to my young Master all her Servants, one by one; and when it came to my Turn to
be recommended, (for I was sobbing and crying at her Pillow) she could only
say, My dear Son! -- and so broke off a little; and then recovering -- Remember
my poor Pamela! -- And these were some of her last Words! O how my Eyes run! --
Don't wonder to see the Paper so blotted!

Well, but God's Will must be done! -- and so comes the Comfort, that I shall
not be obliged to return back to be a Clog upon my dear Parents! For my Master
said, I will take care of you all, my Lasses; and for you, Pamela, (and took me
by the Hand; yes, he took my Hand before them all) for my dear Mother's sake, I
will be a Friend to you, and you shall take care of my Linen. God bless him!
and pray with me, my dear Father and Mother, for a Blessing upon him: For he
has given Mourning and a Year's Wages to all my Lady's Servants; and I having
no Wages as yet, my Lady having said she would do for me as I deserved, ordered
the Housekeeper to give me Mourning with the rest, and gave me with his own
Hand Four golden Guineas, and some Silver, which were, in my old Lady's Pocket
when she died; and said, If I was a good Girl, and faithful and diligent, he
would be a Friend to me, for his Mother's sake. And so I send you these four
Guineas for your Comfort; for Providence will not let me want: And so you may
pay some old Debt with Part; and keep the other Part to comfort you both. If I
get more, I am sure it is my Duty, and it shall be my Care, to love and cherish
you both; for you have loved and cherished me, when I could do nothing for
myself: And so you have for us all, or what must have become of us! I send it
by John our Footman, who goes your way; but he does not know what he carries;
because I seal it up in one of the little Pill boxes which my Lady had, wrapped
close in Paper, that it may not chink; and be sure don't open it before him.

I know, dear Father and Mother, I must give you both Grief and Pleasure; and
so I will only say, Pray for your Pamela; who will ever be

Your most dutiful Daughter.
I have been scared out of my Senses; for just now, as I was folding this
Letter, in my late Lady's Dressing Room, in comes my young Master! Good Sirs!
how was I frightened! I went to hide the Letter in my Bosom, and he seeing me
tremble, said, smiling, Who have you been writing to, Pamela? -- I said, in my
Confusion, Pray your Honor forgive me! -- Only to my Father and Mother. He
said, Well then, Let me see how you are come on in your Writing! O how ashamed
I was! -- He, in my Fright, took it, without saying more, and read it quite
through, and then gave it me again; -- and I said, Pray your Honor forgive me!
-- Yet I know not for what: For he was always dutiful to his Parents; and why
should he be angry, that I was so to mine! And indeed he was not angry: for he
took me by the Hand, and said, You are a good Girl, Pamela, to be kind to your
aged Father and Mother. I am not angry with you. Be faithful and diligent; and
do as you should do, and I like you the better for this. And then he said, Why,
Pamela, you write a very pretty Hand, and spell tolerably too. I see my good
Mother's Care in your Learning has not been thrown away upon you. She used to
say, you loved reading; you may look into any of her Books to improve yourself,
so you take care of them. To be sure I did nothing but curtesy and cry, and was
all in Confusion, at his Goodness. Indeed he is the best of Gentlemen, I think!
But I am making another long Letter. So will only say further, that I shall
ever be

Your dutiful Daughter, PAMELA ANDREWS.



LETTER II. In Answer to the preceding.
Dear PAMELA,
YOUR Letter was indeed a great Trouble, and some Comfort to me and your poor
Mother. We are troubled, to be sure, for your good Lady's Death, who took such
Care of you, and gave you Learning, and for Three or Four Years past has always
been giving you Clothes and Linen, and every thing that a Gentlewoman need not
be ashamed to appear in. But our chief Trouble is, and indeed a very great one,
for fear you should be brought to any thing dishonest or wicked, by being set
so above yourself. Every body talks how you have come on, and what a genteel
Girl you are, and some say, you are very pretty; and indeed, Six Months since,
when I saw you last, I should have thought so too, if you was not our Child.
But what avails all this, if you are to be ruined and undone! -- Indeed, my
dear Child, we begin to be in great Fear for you; for what signify all the
Riches in the World, with a bad Conscience, and to be dishonest? We are, it is
true, very poor, and find it hard enough to live; though once, as you know, it
was better with us. But we would sooner live upon the Water and Clay of the
Ditches I am forced to dig, than to live better at the Price of our dear
Child's Ruin.

I hope the good 'Squire has no Design; but when he has given you so much
Money, and speaks so kindly to you, and praises your coming on; and Oh! that
fatal Word, that he would be kind to you, if you would do as you should do,
almost kills us with Fears.

I have spoken to good old Widow Mumford about it, who, you know, has formerly
lived in good Families, and she puts us in some Comfort; for she says, it is
not unusual, when a Lady dies, to give what she has about her Person to her
Waiting-maid, and to such as sit up with her in her Illness. But then, why
should he smile so kindly upon you? Why should he take such a poor Girl as you
by the Hand, as your Letter says he has done twice? Why should he stoop to read
your Letter to us; and commend your Writing and Spelling? And, why should he
give you Leave to read his Mother's Books! -- Indeed, indeed, my dearest Child,
our Hearts ache for you; and then you seem so full of Joy at his Goodness, so
taken with his kind Expressions, which, truly, are very great Favors, if he
means well, that we fear -- Yes, my dear Child, we fear -- you should be too
grateful, -- and reward him with that Jewel, your Virtue which no Riches, nor
Favor, nor any thing in this Life, can make up to you.

I, too, have written a long Letter; but will say one Thing more; and that is,
That in the Midst of our Poverty and Misfortunes, we have trusted in God's
Goodness, and been honest, and doubt not to be happy hereafter, if we continue
to be good, though our Lot is hard here; but the Loss of our dear Child's Virtue,
would be a Grief that we could not bear, and would bring our gray Hairs to the
Grave at once.

If, then, you love us, if you value God's Blessing, and your own future
Happiness, we both charge you to stand upon your Guard; and, if you find the
least Attempt made upon your Virtue, be sure you leave every thing behind you,
and come away to us; for we had rather see you all covered with Rags, and even
follow you to the Churchyard, than have it said, a Child of ours preferred any
worldly Conveniences to her Virtue.

We accept kindly of your dutiful Present; but 'till we are out of our Pain,
cannot make use of it, for fear we should partake of the Price of our poor
Daughter's Shame: So have laid it up in a Rag among the Thatch, over the
Window, for a while, lest we should be robbed. With our Blessings and our
hearty Prayers for you, we remain,

Your careful, but loving Father and Mother, JOHN and ELIZABETH ANDREWS.

LETTER III.
Dear Father,
I Must needs say, your Letter has filled me with much Trouble. For it has made
my Heart, which was overflowing with Gratitude for my Master's Goodness,
suspicious and fearful; and yet, I hope I shall never find him to act unworthy
of his Character; for what could he get by ruining such a poor young Creature
as me? But that which gives me most Trouble is, that you seem to mistrust the
Honesty of your Child. No, my dear Father and Mother, be assured, that, by
God's Grace, I never will do any thing that shall bring your gray Hairs with
Sorrow to the Grave. I will die a thousand Deaths, rather than be dishonest any
way. Of that be assured, and set your Hearts at Rest; for although I have lived
above myself for some Time past, yet I can be content with Rags and Poverty,
and Bread and Water, and will embrace them, rather than forfeit my good Name,
let who will be the Tempter. And of this rest satisfied, and think better of

Your dutiful Daughter till Death.
My Master continues to be very affable to me. As yet I see no Cause to fear
any thing. Mrs. Jervis the Housekeeper too is very civil to me, and I have the
Love of every body. Sure they cannot all have Designs against me because they
are civil! I hope I shall always behave so as to be respected by every one; and
that nobody would do me more Hurt, than I am sure I would do them. Our John so
often goes your way, that I will always get him to call, that you may hear from
me, either by Writing, (for it brings my Hand in) or by Word of Mouth.



LETTER IV.
Dear Mother,
FOR the last Letter was to my Father, in Answer to his Letter; and so I will
now write to you; though I have nothing to say but what will make me look more
like a vain Hussy, than any thing else: Yet I hope I shall not be so proud as to
forget myself. Yet there is a secret Pleasure one has to hear one's self
praised. You must know then, that my Lady Davers, who, I need not tell you, is
my Master's Sister, has been a Month at our House, and has taken great Notice
of me, and given me good Advice to keep myself to myself; she told me I was a
very pretty Wench; and that every body gave me a very good Character, and loved
me; and bid me take care to keep the Fellows at a Distance; and said, that I
might do, and be more valued for it, even by themselves.

But what pleased me much, was what I am going to tell you; for at Table, as
Mrs. Jervis says, my Master and her Ladyship talking of me, she told him, she
thought me the prettiest Wench she ever saw in her Life; and that I was too
pretty to live in a Batchelor's House; since no Lady he might marry, would care
to continue me with her. He said, I was vastly improved, and had a good Share
of Prudence, and Sense above my Years; and it would be Pity, that what was my
Merit, should be my Misfortune. -- No, says my good Lady, Pamela shall come and
live with me, I think. He said, Withal his Heart; he should be glad to have me
so well provided for. Well, said she, I Will consult my Lord about it. She asked,
How old I was; and Mrs. Jervis said, I was Fifteen last February. O! says she,
if the Wench (for so she calls all us Maiden Servants) takes care of herself,
she will improve yet more and more, as well in her Person as Mind.

Now, my dear Father and Mother, though this may look too vain to be repeated by
me, yet are you not rejoiced as well as I, to see my Master so willing to part
with me? -- This shows that he has nothing bad in his Heart. But John is just
going away, and so I have only to say, that I am, and will always be,

Your honest as well as dutiful Daughter.
Pray make use of the Money. You may now do it safely.



LETTER V.
My dear Father and Mother,
JOHN being to go your way, I am willing to write, because he is so willing to
carry any thing for me. He says it does him good at his Heart to see you both,
and to hear you talk. He says you are both so sensible, and so honest, that he
always learns something from you to the Purpose. It is a thousand Pities, he
says, that such worthy Hearts should not have better Luck in the World! and
wonders, that you, my Father, who are so well able to teach, and write so good
a Hand, succeeded no better in the School you attempted to set up; but was
forced to go to such hard Labor. But this is more Pride to me, that I am come
of such honest Parents, than if I had been born a Lady.

I hear nothing yet of going to Lady Davers. And I am very easy at present
here. For Mrs. Jervis uses me as if I were her own Daughter, and is a very good
Woman, and makes my Master's Interest her own. She is always giving me good
Counsel, and I love her, next to you two, I think best of any body. She keeps
so good Rule and Order, she is mightily respected by us all; and takes Delight
to hear me read to her: and all she loves to hear read, is good Books, which we
read whenever we are alone; so that I think I am at home with you. She heard
one of our Men, Harry, who is no better than he should be, speak freely to me;
I think he called me his pretty Pamela, and took hold of me, as if he would
have kissed me; for which, you may be sure, I was very angry; and she took him
to Task, and was as angry at him as could be, and told me she was very well
pleased to see my Prudence and Modesty, and that I kept all the Fellows at a
Distance. And indeed I am sure I am not proud, and carry it civilly to every
body; but yet, methinks I cannot bear to be looked upon by these Menservants;
for they seem as if they would look one through; and, as I genereally breakfast,
dine, and sup with Mrs. Jervis, so good she is to me, I am very easy that I
have so little to say to them. Not but they are very civil to me in the main,
for Mrs. Jervis's sake, who they see loves me; and they stand in Awe of her,
knowing her to be a Gentlewoman born, though she has had Misfortunes.

I am going on again with a long Letter; for I love Writing, and shall tire
you. But when I began, I only intended to say, that I am quite fearless of any
Danger now: And indeed can but wonder at myself, (though your Caution to me was
your watchful Love) that I should be so foolish as to be so uneasy as I have
been: For I am sure my Master would not demean himself so, as to think upon
such a poor Girl as I, for my Harm. For such a thing would ruin his Credit as
well as mine, you know: Who, to be sure, may expect one of the best Ladies in
the Land. So no more at present; but that I am

Your ever-dutiful Daughter.

LETTER VI.
Dear Father and Mother,
MY Master has been very kind since my last; for he has given me a Suit of my
late Lady's Clothes, and half a Dozen of her Shifts, and Six fine
Handkerchiefs, and Three of her Cambrick Aprons, and Four Holland ones. The
Clothes are fine Silk, and too rich and too good for me, to be sure. I wish it
was no Affront to him to make Money of them, and send it to you; it would do me
more good.

You will be full of Fears, I warrant now, of some Design upon me, till I tell
you, that he was with Mrs. Jervis when he gave them me; and he gave her a Mort
of good Things at the same Time, and bid her wear them in Remembrance of her
good Friend, my Lady, his Mother. And when he gave me these fine Things, he
said, These, Pamela, are for you; have them made fit for you, when your
Mourning is laid by, and wear them for your good Mistress's sake. Mrs. Jervis
gives you a very good Word; and I would have you continue to behave as
prudently as you have done hitherto, and every body will be your Friend.

I was so surprised at his Goodness, that I could not tell what to say. I
curtesy'd to him, and to Mrs. Jervis for her good Word; and said, I wished I
might be deserving of his Favor: And nothing should be wanting in me, to the
best of my Knowledge.

O how amiable a Thing is doing Good! -- It is all I envy great Folks for!

I always thought my young Master a fine Gentleman, as every body says he is:
But he gave these good Things to us both with such a Graciousness, as I thought
he looked like an Angel.

Mrs. Jervis says, he asked her, If I kept the Men at a Distance; for he said,
I was very pretty, and to be drawn in to have any of them, might be my Ruin,
and make me poor and miserable betimes. She never is wanting to give me a good
Word, and took Occasion to launch out in my Praise, she says. But I hope she
said no more than I shall try to deserve, though I may not at present. I am sure I
will always love her next to you and my dear Mother. So I rest

Your ever-dutiful Daughter.

LETTER VII.
Dear Father,
SINCE my last, my Master gave me more fine Things. He called me up to my late
Lady's Closer, and pulling out her Drawers, he gave me Two Suits of fine
Flanders laced Headcloaths, Three Pair of fine Silk Shoes, two hardly the
worse, and just fit for me, and the other with rich Silver Buckles in them (for
my Lady had a very little Foot); and several Ribbands and Topknots of all
Colors; Four Pair of fine white Cotton Stockens, and Three Pair of fine Silk
ones; and two Pair of rich Stays. I was quite astonished, and unable to speak
for a while; but yet I was inwardly ashamed to take the Stockens; for Mrs.
Jervis was not there: If she had, it would have been nothing. I believe I
received them very awkwardly; for he smiled at my Awkwardness, and said, Don't
blush, Pamela: Do think I don't know pretty Maids wear Shoes and Stockens?

I was so confounded at these Words, you might have beat me down with a
Feather. For, you must think, there was no Answer to be made to this: So, like
a Fool, I was ready to cry; and went away curtesying and blushing, I am sure,
up to the Ears; for, though there was no Harm in what he said, yet I did not know
how to take it. But I went and told all to Mrs. Jervis, who said, God put it
into his Heart to be good to me; and I must double my Diligence. It looked to
her, she said, as if he would fit me in Dress for a Waiting-maid's Place on
Lady Davers's own Person.

But still your kind fatherly Cautions came into my Head, and made all these
Gifts nothing near to me what they would have been. But yet, I hope, there is
no Reason; for what Good could it do to him to harm such a simple Maiden as me?
Besides, to be sure, no Lady would look upon him, if he should so disgrace,
himself. So I will make myself easy; and indeed, I should never have been
otherwise, if you had not put it into my Head; for my Good, I know very well.
But, may-be, without these Uneasinesses to mingle with these Benefits, I might
be too much puffed up: So I will conclude. All that happens is sor our Good;
and so, God bless you, my dear Father and Mother; and I know you constantly
pray for a Blessing upon me; who am, and shall always be,

Your dutiful Daughter.

LETTER VIII.
Dear PAMELA,
I Cannot but renew my Cautions to you on your Master's Kindness to you, and
his free Expression to you about the Stockens. Yet there may not be, and I hope
there is not, any thing in it. But when I reflect, that there possibly may, and
that if there should, no less depends upon it than my Child's everlasting
Happiness in this World and the next; it is enough to make one fearful for you.
Arm yourself, my dear Child, for the worst; and resolve to lose your Life
sooner than your Virtue. What though the Doubts I filled you with, lessen the
Pleasure you would have had in your Master's Kindness, yet what signify the
Delights that arise from a few paltry fine Clothes, in Comparison with a good
Conscience?

These are indeed very great Favors that he heaps upon you, but so much the
more to be suspected; and when you say he looked so amiably, and like an Angel,
how afraid I am, that they should make too great an Impression upon you; For,
though you are blessed with Sense and Prudence above your Years, yet I tremble to
think what a sad Hazard a poor Maiden of little more than Fifteen Years of Age
stands against the Temptations of this World, and a designing young Gentleman,
if he should prove so; who has so much Power to oblige, and has a kind of
Authority to command as your Master.

I charge you, my dear Child, on both our Blessings, poor as we are, to be on
your Guard; there can be no Harm in that: and since Mrs. Jervis is so good a
Gentlewoman, and so kind to you, I am the easier a great deal, and so is your
Mother, and we hope you will hide nothing from her* and take her Counsel in
every thing. So, with our Blessings and assured Prayers for you, more than for
ourselves, we remain

Your loving Father and Mother.
Besure don't let People's telling you you are pretty, puff you up: for you did
not make yourself, and so can have no Praise due to you for it. It is Virtue
and Goodness only, that make the true Beauty. Remember that, Pamela.



LETTER IX.
Dear Father and Mother,
I Am sorry to write you Word, that the Hopes I had of going to wait on Lady
Davers are quite over. My Lady would have had me; but my Master, as I heard
by-the-bye, would not consent to it. He said, her Nephew might be taken with
me, and I might draw him in, or be drawn in by him; and he thought, as his
Mother loved me, and committed me to his Care, he ought to continue me with
him; and Mrs. Jervis would be a Mother to me. Mrs. Jervis tells me, the Lady
shook her Head, and said, Ah! Brother! and that was all. And as you have made
me fearful by your Cautions, my Heart at times misgives me. But I say nothing
yet of your Caution, or my own Uneasiness, to Mrs Jervis; not that I mistrust
her, but for fear she should think me presumptuous, and vain, and conceited, to
have any Fears about the matter, from the great Distance between so great a
Man, and so poor a Girl. But yet Mrs. Jervis seemed to build something upon
Lady Davers' shaking her Head, and saying, Ah! Brother, and no more! God, I
hope, will give me his Grace; and so I will not, if I can help it, make myself
too uneasy; for I hope there is no Occasion But every little matter that
happens, I will acquaint you with, that you shall continue to me your good
Advice, and pray for

Your sad-hearted PAMELA.

LETTER X.
Dear Mother,
YOU and my good Father may wonder you have not had a Letter from me in so many
Weeks; but a sad, sad Scene has been the Occasion of it. For, to be sure, now
it is too plain, that all your Cautions were well-grounded. O my dear Mother! I
am miserable, truly miserable! -- But yet, don't be frighted, I am honest; --
God, of his Goodness, keep me so!

O this Angel of a Master! this fine Gentleman! this gracious Benefactor to
your poor Pamela! who was to take care of me at the Prayer of his good dying
Mother; who was so careful of me, lest I should be drawn in by Lord Davers's
Nephew, that he would not let me go to Lady Davers's: This very Gentleman (yes,
I must call him Gentleman, though he has fallen from the Merit of that Title) has
degraded himself to offer Freedoms to his poor Servant! He has now showed
himself in his true Colors, and to me, nothing appears so black and so
frightful.

I have not been idle; but have writ from time to time, how he, by sly mean
Degrees, exposed his wicked Views: But somebody stole my Letter, and I know not
what has become of it. It was a very long one. I fear that he who was mean
enough to do bad things, in one respect, did not stick at this; but be it as it
will, all the Use he can make of it will be, that he may be ashamed of his
Part; I not of mine. For he will see I was resolved to be virtuous, and gloried
in the Honesty of my poor Parents.

I will tell you all, the next Opportunity; for I am watched very narrowly; and
he says to Mrs. Jervis, This Girl is always scribbling; I think she may be
better employed. And yet I work all Hours with my Needle, upon his Linen, and
the fine Linen of the Family; and am besides about flowering him a Waistcoat.
-- But, Oh! my Heart's broke almost; for what am I likely to have for my
Reward, but Shame and Disgrace, or else ill Words, and hard Treatment! I Will
tell you all soon, and hope I shall find my long Letter.

Your most afflicted Daughter.
I must he and him him now; for he has lost his Dignity with me.



LETTER XI.
Dear Mother,
WELL, I cannot find my Letter, and so I Will tell you all, as briefly as I can.
All went well enough in the main for some time after my last Letter but one. At
last, I saw some Reason to suspect; for he would look upon me, whenever he saw
me, in such a manner, as showed not well; and at last he came to me, as I was
in the Summer House in the little Garden, at work with my Needle, and Mrs.
Jervis was just gone from he; and I would have gone out; but he said, No, don't
go, Pamela; I have something to say to you; and you always fly me, when I come
near you, as if you were afraid of me.

I was much out of Countenance, you may well think: but said at last, It does
not become your poor Servant to stay in your Presence, Sir, without your
Business required it; and I hope I shall alway^ know my Place.

Well, says he, my Business does require it some times, and I have a Mind you
should stay to hear what I have to say to you.

I stood all confounded, and began to tremble, and the more when he took me by
the Hand; for now no Soul was near us.

My Sister Davers, said he (and seemed, I thought, to-be as much at a Loss for
Words as I) would have had you live with her; but she would not do for you what
I am resolved to do, if you continue faithful and obliging. What say thou,
my Girl? said he, with some Eagerness; had thou not rather stay with me, than
go to my Sister Davers? He looked so, as filled me with Affrightment; I don't
know how; wildly, I thought.

I said, when I could speak, Your Honor will forgive me; but as you have no
Lady for me to wait upon, and my good Lady has been now dead this Twelvemonth,
I had rather, if it would not displease you, wait upon Lady Davers, because --

I was proceeding, and he said a little hastily -- Because you are a little
Fool, and know not what is good for yourself. I tell you, I will make a
Gentlewoman of you, if you be obliging, and don't stand in your own Light, and
so saying, he put his Arm about me, and kissed me!

Now you will say, all his Wickedness appeared plainly. I struggled, and
trembled, and was so benumbed with Terror, that I sunk down, not in a Fit, and
yet not myself; and I found myself in his Arms, quite void of Strength; and he
kissed me two or three times, with frightful Eagerness. -- At last I burst from
him, and was getting out of the Summer House; but he held me back, and shut the
Door.

I would have given my Life for a Farthing. And he said, I Will do you no Harm,
Pamela; don't be afraid of me, I said, I will not stay. You will not, Hussy! said he:
Do you know whom you speak to? I lost all Fear, and all Respect, and said, Yes,
I do, Sir, too well! -- Well may I forget that I am your Servant, when you
forget what belongs to a Master.

I sobb'd and cried most sadly. What a foolish Hussy you are! said he; have I
done you any Harm? -- Yes, Sir, said I, the greatest Harm in the World: You
have taught me to forget myself, and what belongs to me, and have lessened the
Distance that Fortune has made between us, by demeaning yourself, to be so free
to a poor Servant. Yet, Sir, I will be bold to say, I am honest, though poor: And
if you was a Prince, I would not be otherwise.

He was angry, and said, Who would have you otherwise, you foolish Slut! Cease
your Blubbering. I own I have demeaned myself; but it was only to try you: If
you can keep this Matter secret, you will give me the better Opinion of your
Prudence; and here is something, said he, putting some Gold in my Hand, to make
you Amends for the Fright I put you in. Go, take a Walk in the Garden, and
don't go in till your Blubbering is over: And I charge you say nothing of what
has past, and all shall be well, and I Will forgive you.

I will not take the Money, indeed, Sir, said I; poor as I am: I will not take it.
For, to say Truth, I thought it looked like taking Earnest; and so I put it
upon the Bench; and as he seemed vexed and confused at what he had done, I took
the Opportunity to open the Door, and went out of the Summer House.

He called to me, and said, Be secret, I charge you, Pamela; and don't go in
yet, as I told you.

O how poor and mean must those Actions be, and how little must they make the
best of Gentlemen look, when they offer such things as are unworthy of
themselves, and put it into the Power of their Inferiors to be greater than
they!

I took a Turn or two in the Garden, but in Sight of the House for fear of the
worst; and breathed upon my Hand to dry my Eyes, because I would not be too
disobedient. My next shall tell you more.

Pray for me, my dear Father and Mother; and don't be angry. I have not yet run
away from this House, so late my Comfort and Delight, but now my Terror and
Anguish. I am forced to break off hastily,

Your dutiful and honest Daughter.

LETTER XII.
Dear Mother,
WELL, I will now proceed with my sad Story. And so, after I had dried my Eyes,
I went in, and began to ruminate with myself what I had best to do. Sometimes I
thought I would leave the House, and go to the next Town, and wait an
Opportunity to get to you; but then I was at a Loss to resolve whether to take
away the Things he had given me or no, and how to take them away: Sometimes I
thought to leave them behind me, and only go with the Clothes on my Back; but
then I had two Miles and a half, and a By-way to the Town; and being pretty
well dressed, I might come to some Harm, almost as bad as what I would run away
from; and then may-be, thought I, it will be reported, I have stolen something,
and so was forced to run away; and to carry a bad Name back with me to my dear
Parents, would be a sad thing indeed! -- O how I wished for my gray Russet
again, and my poor honest Dress, with which you fitted me out, (and hard enough
too you had to do it!) for going to this Place, when I was not twelve Years
old, in my good Lady's Days! Sometimes I thought of telling Mrs. Jervis, and
taking her Advice, and only feared his Command to be secret; for, thought I, he
may be ashamed of his Actions, and never attempt the like again: And as poor
Mrs. Jervis depended upon him, through Misfortunes that had attended her, I
thought it would be a sad thing to bring his Displeasure upon her for my sake.

In this Quandary, now considering, now crying, and not knowing what to do, I
passed the Time in my Chamber till Evening; when desiring to be excused going
to Supper, Mrs. Jervis came up to me; and said, Why must I sup without you,
Pamela? Come, I see you are troubled at something; tell me what is the Matter.

I begged I might be permitted to lie with her on Nights; for I was afraid of
Spirits, and they would not hurt such a good Person as she. That was a silly
Excuse, she said; for why was you not afraid of Spirits before? -- (Indeed I
did not think of that). But you shall be my Bedfellow with all my Heart, added
she, let your Reason be what it will; only come down to Supper. I begged to be
excused; for, said I, I have been crying so, that it will be taken Notice of by
my Fellow Servants; and I will hide nothing from you, Mrs. Jervis, when we are
a-bed.

She was so good to indulge me, and went down to Supper; but made more Haste to
come up to-bed; and told the Servants, that I should lie with her, because she
could not rest well, and she would get me to read her to sleep; for she knew I
loved reading, as she said.

When we were alone, I told her all that had passed; for I thought, though he
had bid me not, yet if he should come to know I had told, it would be no worse;
for to keep a Secret of such a Nature, would be, as I apprehended, to deprive
myself of the good Advice which I never wanted more; and might encourage him to
think I did not resent it as I ought, and would keep worse Secrets, and so make
him do worse by me. Was I right, my dear Mother?

Mrs. Jervis could not help mingling Tears with my Tears; for I cried all the
Time I told her the Story, and begged her to advise me what to do; and I showed
her my dear Father's two Letters, and she praised the Honesty and Inditing of
them, and said pleasing Things to me of you both. But she begged I would not
think of leaving my Service; for, says she, in all Likelihood, you behaved so
virtuously, that he will be ashamed of what he has done, and never offer the
like to you again: Though, my dear Pamela, said she, I fear more for your
Prettiness than for any thing else; because the best Man in the Land might love
you; so she was pleased to say. She said she wished it was in her Power to live
independent; that then she would take a little private House, and I should live
with her like her Daughter.

And so, as you ordered me to take her Advice, I resolved to tarry to see how
Things went, without he was to turn me away; although, in your first Letter, you
ordered me to come away the Moment I had any Reason to be apprehensive. So,
dear Father and Mother, it is not Disobedience, I hope, that I stay; for I
could not expect a Blessing, or the good Fruits of your Prayers for me, if I
was disobedient.

All the next Day I was very sad, and began to write my long Letter. He saw me
writing, and said (as I mentioned) to Mrs. Jervis, That Girl is always
scribbling; methinks she might find something else to do; or to that purpose.
And when I had finished my Letter, I put it under the Toilet, in my late Lady's
Dressing Room, whither nobody comes but myself and Mrs. Jervis, besides my
Master; but when I came up again to seal it up, to my great Concern, it was
gone; and Mrs. Jervis knew nothing of it; and nobody knew of my Master's having
been near the Place in the Time; so I have been sadly troubled about it: But
Mrs. Jervis, as well as I, thinks he has it, some how or other; and he appears
cross and angry, and seems to shun me, as much as he said I did him. It had
better be so than worse!

But he has ordered Mrs. Jervis to bid me not pass so much Time in writing;
which is a poor Matter for such a Gentleman as he to take Notice of, as I am
not idle other-ways, if he did not resent what he thought I wrote upon. And
this has no very good Look.

But I am a good deal easier since I lie with Mrs. Jervis; though after all, the
Fears I live in on one Side, and his Frowning and Displeasure at what I do on
the other, make me more miserable than enough.

O that I had never left my Rags and my Poverty, to be thus exposed to
Temptations on one hand, or Disgusts on the other! How happy was I a while ago!
How contrary now! -- Pity and pray for

Your afflicted PAMELA.

LETTER XIII.
My Dearest Child,
OUR Hearts bleed for your Distress, and the Temptations you are tried with.
You have our hourly Prayers; and we would have you flee this evil Great House
and Man, if you find he renews his Attempts. You ought to have done it at
first, had you nor had Mrs. Jervis to advise with. We can find no Fault in your
Conduct hitherto: But it makes our Hearts ache for fear of the worst. O my
Child! Temptations are sore Things; but yet, without them, we know not
ourselves, nor what we are able to do.

Your Temptations are very great; for you have Riches, Youth, and a fine
Gentleman, as the World reckons him, to withstand; but how great will be your
Honor to withstand them! And when we consider your past Conduct, and your
virtuous Education, and that you have been bred to be more ashamed of
Dishonesty than Poverty, we trust in God, that He will enable you to overcome.
Yet, as we cannot see but your Life must be a Burden to you, through the great
Apprehensions always upon you; and that it may be presumptious to trust: too
much to your own Strength; and that you are but very young; and the Devil may
put into his Head to use some Stratagem, of which great Men are full, to decoy
you; I think you had better come home to share our Poverty with Safety, than to
live with so much Discontent in a Plenty, that itself may be dangerous. God
direct you for the best! While you have Mrs. Jervis for an Adviser, and
Bedsellow, (and, O my dear Child, that was prudently done of you!) we are
easier than we should be; and so committing you to the Divine Protection, remain

Your truly loving, but careful, Father and Mother.

LETTER XIV.
Dear Father and Mother,
MRS. Jervis and I have lived very comfortably together for this Fortnight
past; for my Master was all that time at his Lincolnshire Estate, and at his
Sister's the Lady Davers. But he came home Yesterday. He had some Talk with
Mrs. Jervis soon after he came home; and mostly about me. He said to her, it
seems, Well, Mrs. Jervis, I know Pamela has your good Word; but do you think
her of any Use in the Family? She told me, she was surprised at the Question;
but said, That I was one of the most virtuous and industrious young Creatures
that ever she knew. Why that Word virtuous, said he, I pray you? Was there any
Reason to suppose her otherwise? Or has any body taken it into their Heads to
try her? -- I wonder, Sir, says she, you ask such a Question! Who dare offer
any thing to her in such an orderly and well-governed House as yours, and under
a Master of so good a Character for Virtue and Honor? Your Servant, Mrs.
Jervis, says he, for your good Opinion; but pray, if any body did, do you think
Pamela would let you know it? Why, Sir, said she, she is a poor innocent young
Creature, and I believe has so much Confidence in me, that she would take my
Advice as soon as she would her Mother's. Innocent! again; and virtuous, I
warrant! Well, Mrs. Jervis, you abound with your Epithets; but I take her to be
an artful young Baggage; and had I a young handsome Butler or Steward, she would
soon make her Market of one of them, if she thought it worth while to snap at
him for a Husband. Alack-a-day, Sir, said she, it is early Days with Pamela; and
she does not yet think of a Husband, I dare say: And your Steward and Butler
are both Men in Years, and think nothing of the Matter No, said he, if they
were younger, they would have more Wit than to think of such a Girl. I Will tell you
my Mind of her, Mrs. Jervis: I don't think this same Favorite of yours so very
artless a Girl, as you imagine. I am not to dispute with your Honor, said Mrs.
Jervis; but I dare say, if the Men will let her alone, she will never trouble
herself about them. Why, Mrs. Jervis, said he, are there any Men that will not
let her alone, that you know of? No, indeed, Sir, said she; she keeps herself
so much to herself, and yet behaves so prudently, that they all esteem her, and
show her as great Respect, as if she was a Gentlewoman born.

Ay, says he, that is her Art, that I was speaking of: But let me tell you, the
Girl has Vanity and Conceit, and Pride too, or I am mistaken; and, perhaps, I
could give you an Instance of it. Sir, said she, you can see further than such
a poor silly Woman as I; but I never saw any thing but Innocence in her. -- And
Virtue too, I Will warrant ye! said he. But suppose I could give you an Instance,
where she has talked a little too freely of the Kindnesses that have been
showed her from a certain Quarter; and has had the Vanity to impute a few kind
Words, uttered in mere Compassion to her Youth and Circumstances, into a Design
upon her, and even dared to make free with Names that she ought never to
mention but with Reverence and Gratitude; what would you say to that? -- Say,
Sir! said she, I cannot tell what to say. But I hope Pamela incapable of such
Ingratitude.

Well, no more of this silly Girl, says he; you may only advise her, as you are
her Friend, not to give herself too much License upon the Favors she meets
with; and if she stays here, that she will not write the Affairs of my Family
purely for an Exercise to her Pen and her Invention. I tell you, she is a
subtle artful Gypsey, and Time will show it you.

Was ever the like heard, my dear Father and Mother? It is plain he did not
expect to meet with such a Repulse, and mistrusts that I have told Mrs. Jervis,
and has my long Letter too, that I intended for you; and so is vexed to the
Heart. But I cannot help it. I had better be thought artful and subtle, than be
so, in his Sense; and as light as he makes of the Words Virtue and Innocence in
me, he would have made a less angry Construction, had I less deserved that he
should do so; for then, may-be, my Crime would have been my Virtue with him;
naughty Gentleman as he is is! --

I will soon write again; but must now end with saying, That I am, and shall
always be,

Your honest Daughter.

LETTER XV.
Dear Mother,
I Broke off abruptly my last Letter; for I feared he was coming; and so it
happened. I put the Letter into my Bosom, and took up my Work, which lay by me;
but I had so little of the Artful, as he called it, that I looked as confused,
as if I had been doing some great Harm.

Sit still, Pamela, said he, and mind your Work, for all me. -- You don't tell
me I am welcome home after my Journey to Lincolnshire. It would be hard, Sir,
said I, if you was not always welcome to your Honor's own House.

I would have gone; but he said, Don't run away, I tell you. I have a Word or
two to say to you. Good Sirs, how my Heart went pit-a-pat! When I was a little
kind to you, said he, in the Summer House, and you carried yourself so
foolishly upon it, as if I had intended to do you great Harm, did I not tell
you, you should take no Notice of what passed, to any Creature? And yet you
have made a common Talk of the Matter, not considering either my Reputation, or
your own. -- I made a common Talk of it, Sir! said I: I have nobody to talk to,
hardly.

He interrupted me, and said. Hardly! you little Equivocator! what do you mean
by hardly? Let me ask you, Have you not told Mrs. Jervis for one? Pray your
Honor, said I, all in Agitation, let me go down; for it is not for me to hold
an Argument with your Honor. Equivocator, again! said he, and took my Hand,
what do you talk of an Argument? Is it holding an Argument with me, to answer a
plain Question? Answer me what I asked. O good Sir, said I, let me beg you will
not urge me further, for fear I forget myself again, and be saucy.

Answer me then, I bid you, says he, Have you not told Mrs. Jervis? It will be
saucy in you, if you don't answer me directly to what I ask. Sir, said I, and
fain would have pulled my Hand away, perhaps I should be for answering you by
another Question, and that would not become me. What is it you would say?
replies be, speak out.

Then, Sir, said I, why should your Honor be so angry I should tell Mrs.
Jervis, or any body else, what passed, if you intended no Harm?

Well said, pretty Innocent and Artless! as Mrs. Jervis calls you, said he; and
is it thus you taunt and retort upon me, insolent as you are! But still I will
be answered directly to my Question? Why then, Sir, said I, I will not tell a
Lie for the World: I did tell Mrs. Jervis; for my Heart was almost broken; but
I opened not my Mouth to any other. Very well, Bold-face, said he, and
Equivocator again! You did not open your Mouth to any other; but did you not
write to some other? Why now, and please your Honor, said I, (for I was quite
courageous just then) you could not have asked me this Question if you had not
taken from me my Letter to my Father and Mother, in which I own I had broken my
Mind freely to them, and asked their Advice, and poured forth my Griefs!

And so I am to be exposed, am I, said he, in my House, and out of my House, to
the whole World, by such a Saucebox as you? No, good, Sir, said I, and I hope
your Honor will not be angry with me; it is not I that expose you, if I say
nothing but the Truth. So, taunting again! Assurance as you are! said he: I
will not be thus talked to!

Pray, Sir, said I, whom can a poor Girl take Advice of, if it must not be of
her Father and Mother, and such a good Woman as Mrs. Jervis, who, for her
Sex-sake, should give it me when asked! Insolence! said he, and stamped with
his Foot, Am I to be questioned thus by such an one as you? I fell down on my
Knees, and said, For Heaven's sake, your Honor, pity a poor Creature, that
knows nothing of her Duty, but how to cherish her Virtue and good Name: I have
nothing else to trust to: and though poor and friendless here, yet I have always
been taught to value Honesty above my Life. Here Is ado with your Honesty, said
he, foolish Girl! Is it not one Part of Honesty, to be dutiful and grateful to
your Master, do you think? Indeed, Sir, said I, it is impossible I should be
ungrateful to your Honor, or disobedient, or deserve the Names of Bold-face
and Insolent, which you call me, but when your Commands are contrary to that
first Duty, which shall ever be the Principle of my Life!

He seemed to be moved, and rose up, and walked into the great Chamber two or
three Turns, leaving me on my Knees; and I threw my Apron over my Face, and
laid my Head on a Chair, and cried as if my Heart would break, having no Power
to stir.

At last he came in again, but, alas! with Mischief in his Heart! and raising
me up, he said, Rise, Pamela, rise; you are your own Enemy. Your perverse Folly
will be your Ruin: I tell you this, that I am very much displeased with the
Freedoms you have taken with my Name to my Housekeeper, as also to your Father
and Mother; and you may as well have real Cause to take these Freedoms with me,
as to make my Name suffer for imaginary ones. And saying so, he offered to take
me on his Knee, with some Force. O how I was terrified! I said, like as I had
read in a Book a Night or two before, Angels, and Saints, and all the Host of
Heaven, defend me! And may I never survive one Moment, that fatal one in which
I shall forfeit my Innocence. Pretty Fool! said he, how will you forfeit your
Innocence, if you are obliged to yield to a Force you cannot withstand? Be
easy, said he; for let the worst happen that can, you will have the Merit, and I
the Blame; and it will be a good Subject for Letters to your Father and Mother,
and a Tale into the Bargain for Mrs. Jervis.

He by Force kissed my Neck and Lips; and said, Who ever blamed Lucretia, but
the Ravisher only? And I am content to take all the Blame upon me; as I have
already borne too great a Share for what I have deserved. May I, said I,
Lucretia like, justify myself with my Death, if I am used barbarously? O my
good Girl! said he, tauntingly, you are well read, I see; and we shall make out
between us, before we have done, a pretty Story in Romance, I warrant ye.

He then put his Hand in my Bosom, and the Indignation gave me double Strength,
and I got loose from him by a sudden Spring, and ran out of the Room; and the
next Chamber being open, I made shift to get into it, and threw-to the Door,
and the Key being on the Inside, it locked; but he followed me so close, he got
hold of my Gown, and tore a Piece off, which hung without the Door.

I just remember I got into the Room; for I knew nothing further of the Matter
till afterward; for I fell into a Fit with my Fright and Terror, and there I
lay, till he, as I suppose, looking through the Keyhole, spied me lying all
along upon the Floor, stretched out at my Length; and then he called Mrs.
Jervis to me, who, by his Assistance, bursting open the Door, he went away,
seeing me coming to myself; and bid her say nothing of the Matter, if she was
wise.

Poor Mrs. Jervis thought it was worse, and cried over me like as if she was my
Mother; and I was two Hours before I came to myself; and just as I got a little
up on my Feet, he coming in, I went away again with the Terror; and so he
withdrew: But he staid in the next Room to let nobody come near us, that his
foul Proceedings might not be known.

Mrs. Jervis gave me her Smelling-bottle, and had cut my Laces, and far me in a
great Chair, and he called her to him: How is the Girl? said he: I never saw
such a Fool in my Life. I did nothing at all to her. Mrs. Jervis could not
speak for crying. So he said, She has told you, it seems, that I was kind to
her in the Summer House, though I Will assure you, I was quite innocent then as
well as now, and I desire you to keep this Matter to yourself, and let me not
be named in it.

O, Sir, said she, for your Honor's sake, and for Christ's sake -- But he
would not hear her, and said -- For your own sake, I tell you, Mrs. Jervis, say
not a Word more. I have done her no Harm. And I will not have her stay in my
House; prating, perverse Fool, as she is! But since she is so apt to fall into
Fits, or at least pretend to do so, prepare her to see me Tomorrow after
Dinner, in my Mother's Closet, and do you be with her, and you shall hear what
passes between us.

And so he went out in a Pet, and ordered his Chariot and Four to be got ready,
and went a Visiting somewhere.

Mrs. Jervis then came to me, and I told her all that had happened, and said I
was resolved not to stay in the House: And she saying, He seemed to threaten as
much; I said, I am glad of that; then I shall be easy. So she told me all be
had said to her, as I have mentioned above.

Mrs. Jervis is very loath I should go; and yet, poor Woman! she begins to be
afraid for herself; but would not have me ruined for the World. She says, To be
sure he means no Good; but may-be, now he sees me so resolute, he will give
over all Attempts: And that I shall better know what to do after Tomorrow,
when I am to appear before a very bad Judge, I doubt.

O how I dread this Tomorrow's Appearance! But be assured, my dear Parents, of
the Honesty of your poor Child: As I am sure I am of your Prayers for

Your dutiful Daughter.
O this frightful Tomorrow! how I dread it!



LETTER XVI.
My dear Parents,
I Know you longed to hear from me soon. I send as soon as I could.

Well, you may believe how uneasily I passed the Time, till his appointed Hour
came. Every Minute, as it grew nearer, my Terrors increased; and sometimes I
had great Courage, and sometimes none at all; and I thought I should faint when
it came to the Time my Master had dined. I could neither eat nor drink for my
part; and do what I could, my Eyes were swelled with crying.

At last he went up to the Closet, which was my good Lady's Dressing Room; a
Room I once loved, but then as much hated.

Don't your Heart ache for me? -- I am sure mine fluttered about like a
new-caught Bird in a Cage. O Pamela, said I to myself, why art thou so foolish
and fearful! Thou have done no Harm! What, if thou fear an unjust Judge,
when thou art innocent, would thou do before a just one, if thou were guilty?
Have Courage, Pamela, thou know the worst! And how easy a Choice Poverty and
Honesty is, rather than Plenty and Wickedness?

So I cheered myself; but yet my poor Heart sunk, and my Spirits were quite
broken. Every thing that stirred, I thought was to call me to my Account. I
dreaded it, and yet I wished it to come.

Well, at last he rung the Bell; O, thought I, that it was my Passing Bell!
Mrs. Jervis went up, with a full Heart enough, poor good Woman! He said,
Where Is Pamela? Let her come up, and do you come with her. She came to me: I
was ready to come with my Feet, but my Heart was with my dear Father and
Mother, wishing to share your Poverty and Happiness. But I went.

O how can wicked Men seem so steady and untouched, with such black Hearts,
while poor Innocents look like Malefactors before them!

He looked so stern, that my Heart failed me, and I wished myself any-where but
there, though I had before been summoning up all my Courage. Good Heaven, said I
to myself, give me Courage to stand before this naughty Master! O soften him,
or harden me!

Come in, Fool, said he, angrily, as soon as he saw me (and snatched my Hand
with a Pull); you may well be ashamed to see me, after your Noise and Nonsense,
and exposing me as you have done. I ashamed to see you! thought I: Very pretty
indeed! -- But I said nothing.

Mrs. Jervis, said he, here you are both together, Do you sit down; but let her
stand if she will: Ay thought I, if I can; for my Knees beat one against
another. Did you not think, when you saw the Girl in the Way you found her in,
that I had given her the greatest Occasion that could possibly be given any
Woman? And that I had actually ruined her, as she calls it? Tell me, could you
think any thing less? Indeed, said she, I feared so at first. Has she told you
what I did to her, and all I did to her, to occasion all this Folly, by which
my Reputation might have suffered in your Opinion, and in that of all the
Family? -- Inform me, what has she told you?

She was a little too much frighted, as she owned afterward, at his Sternness,
and said. Indeed she told me you only pulled her on your Knee, and kissed her.

Then I plucked up my Spirit a little. Only! Mrs. Jervis, said I; and was not
that enough to show me what I had to fear? When a Master of his Honor's Degree
demeans himself to be so free as that to such a poor Servant as me, what is the
next to be expected? -- But your Honor went further, so you did; and
threatened me what you would do, and talked of Lucretia, and her hard Fate. --
Your Honor knows you went too far for a Master to a Servant, or even to his
Equal; and I cannot bear it. So I fell a crying most sadly.

Mrs. Jervis began to excuse me, and to beg he would pity a poor Maiden, that
had such a Value for her Reputation. He said, I speak it to her Face, I think
her very pretty, and I thought her humble, and one that would not grow upon my
Favors, or the Notice I took of her, but I abhor the Thought of forcing her to
any thing. I know myself better, said he, and what, belongs to me: And to be
sure I have enough demeaned myself to take Notice of such a one as she; but I
was bewitched by her, I think, to be freer than became me; though I had no
Intention to carry the Jest farther.

What poor Stuff was all this, my dear Mother, from a Man of his Sense! But see
how a bad Cause and bad Actions confound the greatest Wits! -- It gave me a
little more Courage then; for Innocence, I find, in a weak mind, has many
Advantages over Guilt, with all its Riches and Wisdom.

So I said, Your Honor may call this Jest or Sport, or what you please; but
indeed, Sir, it is not a Jest that becomes the Distance between a Master and a
Servant. Do you hear, Mrs. Jervis? said he: Do you hear the Pertness of the
Creature? I had a good deal of this Sort before in the Summer House, and
Yesterday too, which made me rougher with her than perhaps I had otherwise been.

Says Mrs. Jervis, Pamela, don't be pert to his Honor? You should know your
Distance; you see his Honor was only in Jest. -- O dear Mrs. Jervis, said I,
don't you blame me too. It is very difficult to keep one's Distance to the
greatest of Men, when they will not keep it themselves to their meanest Servants.

See again, said he; could you believe this of the young Baggage, if you had
not heard it? Good your Honor, said the well-meaning Gentlewoman, pity and
forgive the poor Girl; she is but a Girl, and her Virtue is very dear to her;
and I will pawn my Life for her, she will never be pert to your Honor, if
you will be so good as to molest her no more, nor frighten her again. Said she,
You see how, by her Fit, she was in Terror; she could not help it; and though
your Honor intended her no Harm, yet the Apprehension was almost Death to her:
And I had much ado to bring her to herself again. O the little Hypocrite! said
he; she has all the Arts of her Sex; they are born with her; and I told you
awhile ago, you did not know her. But, said he, this was not the Reason
principally of my calling you before me both together: I find I am likely to
suffer in my Reputation by the Perverseness and Folly of this Girl. She has
told you all, and perhaps more than all; nay, I make no Doubt of it; and she
has written Letters (for I find she is a mighty Letter-writer!) to her Father
and Mother, and others, as far as I know; in which she makes herself an Angel
of Light, and me, her kind Master and Benefactor, a Devil incarnate. -- (O how
People will sometimes, thought I, call themselves by their right Names! --) And
all this I will not bear; and so I am resolved she shall return to the Distresses
and Poverty she was taken from; and let her take care how she uses my Name with
Freedom, when she is gone from me.

I was brightened up at once with these welcome Words: And I threw myself upon
my Knees at his Feet, with a most sincere, glad Heart, and I said, May your
Honor be for ever blessed for your Resolution! Now I shall be happy. And
permit me, on my bended Knees, to thank you for all the Benefits and Favors
you have heaped upon me; for the Opportunities I have had of Improvement and
Learning, through my good Lady's Means, and yours. I will now forget all your
Honor has offered to me: And I promise you, that I will never take your Name
in my Lips, but with Reverence and Gratitude: And so God Almighty bless your
Honor, for ever and ever, Amen!

Then rising from my Knees, I went away with another-guise sort of Heart than I
came into his Presence with: And so I fell to writing this Letter. And thus all
is happily over.

And now, my dearest Father and Mother, expect to see soon your poor Daughter,
with an humble and dutiful Mind returned to you: And don't fear but I know how
to be happy with you as ever: For I will lie in the Loft, as I used to do; and
pray let the little Bed be got ready; and I have a little Money, which will buy
me a Suit of Clothes, fitter for my Condition than what I have; and I will get
Mrs. Mumford to help me to some Needle Work; and fear not that I shall be a
Burden to you, if my Health continues; and I know I shall be blessed, if not
for my own sake, for both your sakes, who have, in all your Trials and
Misfortunes, preserved so much Integrity, as makes every body speak well of you
both. But I hope he will let good Mrs. Jervis give me a Character, for fear it
should be thought I was turned away for Dishonesty.

And so, my dear Parents, may you be blessed for me, and I for you! And I will
always pray for my Master and Mrs. Jervis. So good Night; for it is late, and I
shall be soon called to-bed.

I hope Mrs. Jervis is not angry with me, because she has not called me to
Supper with her; though I could eat nothing if she had. But I make no Doubt I
shall sleep purely Tonight, and dream that I am with you, in my dear, dear,
happy Loft once more.

So good Night again, my dear Father and Mother, says

Your honest poor Daughter.
May-hap I may not come this Week, because I must get up the Linen, and leave in
Order every thing belonging to my Place. So send me a Line if you can, to let
me know if I shall be welcome, by John, who will call for it as he returns. But
say nothing of my coming away to him, as yet: For it will be said I blab every
thing.



LETTER XVII.
My dearest Daughter,
WELCOME, welcome, ten times welcome, shall you be to us; for you come to us
innocent, and happy, and honest; and you are the Staff of our old Age, and our
Comfort too. And though we cannot do for you as we would, yet we doubt not we
shall live comfortably together, and what with my diligent Labor, and your
poor Mother's Spinning, and your Needle Work, I make no Doubt we shall live
better and better. Only your poor Mother's Eyes begin to fail her; though I bless
God, I am as strong, and able, and willing to labor as ever; and O my dear
Child, your Virtue has made me, I think, stronger and better than I was before.
What blessed Things are Trials and Temptations to us, when they be overcome!

But I am thinking about those same four Guineas: I think you should give them
back again to your Master; and yet I have broke them. Alas! I have only three
left; but I will borrow it, if I can, Part upon my Wages, and Part of Mrs.
Mumford, and send it to you, that you may return it, against John comes next,
if he comes again, before you.

I want to know how you come. I fancy honest John will be glad to bear you
Company Part of the Way, if your Master is not so cross as to forbid him. And
if I know time enough, your Mother will go one five Miles, and I will go ten on
the Way, or till I meet you, as far as one Holiday will go; for that I can get
Leave for: And we shall receive you with more Pleasure than we had at your
Birth, when all the worst was over; or than we ever had in our Lives.

And so God bless you, till the happy Time comes! say both your Mother and I;
which is all at present, from

Your truly loving Parents.

LETTER XVIII.
Dear Father and Mother,
I Thank you a thousand times for your Goodness to me, expressed in your last
Letter. I now long to get my Business done, and come to my new-old Lot, again,
as I may call it. I have been quite another thing since my Master has turned me
off; and as I shall come to you an honest Daughter, what Pleasure it is to what
I should have had, if I could not have seen you but as a guilty one! Well, my
writing Time will soon be over, and so I will make use of it now, and tell you
all that has happened since my last Letter.

I wondered Mrs. Jervis did not call me to sup with her, and feared she was
angry; and when I had finished my Letter, I longed for her coming to Bed. At
last she came up, but seemed shy and reserved; and I said, O my dear Mrs.
Jervis, I am glad to see you: You are not angry with me, I hope. She said she
was sorry Things had gone so far; and that she had a great deal of Talk with my
Master after I was gone; that he seemed moved at what I said, and at my falling
on my Knees to him, and my Prayer for him, at my going away. He said, I was a
strange Girl; he knew not what to make of me: And is she gone? said he: I
intended to say something else to her, but she behaved so oddly, that I had not
Power to stop her. She asked, If she should call me again? He said, Yes; and
then, No, let her go; it is best for her and me too, that she shall go now I
have given her Warning. But where she had it, I cannot tell; but I never met
with the Fellow of her in my Life, at any Age. She said, he had ordered her not
to tell me all: But she believed he never would offer any thing to me again,
and I might stay, she fansy'd, if I would beg it as a Favor; though she was not
sure neither.

I stay! dear Mrs. Jervis, said I; why it is the best News that could have come
to me, that he will let me go. I do nothing but long to go back again to my
Poverty and Distress, as he said I should; for, though I am sure of the Poverty,
I shall not have half the Distress I have had for some Months past, I Will assure
you.

Mrs. Jervis, dear good Soul! wept over me, and said, Well, well, Pamela, I did
not think I had showed so little Love to you, as that you should express so
much Joy to leave me. I am sure I never had a Child half so dear to me as you.

I wept to hear her so good to me, as indeed she has always been; and said,
What would you have me to do, dear Mrs. Jervis? I love you next to my own
Father and Mother, and to leave you is the chief Concern I have at quitting
this Place; but I am sure it is certain Ruin if I stay. After such Offers, and
such Threatenings, and his comparing himself to a wicked Ravisher, in the very
Time of his last Offer; and making a Jest of me, that we should make a pretty
Story in Romance; can I stay, and be safe? Has he not demeaned himself twice?
And it behooves me to beware of the third time, for fear he should lay his
Snares surer; for may-hap he did not expect a poor Servant would resist her
Master so much. And must it not be looked upon as a sort of Warrant for such
Actions, if I stay after this? For I think, when one of our Sex finds she is
attempted, it is an Encouragement to a Person to proceed, if one puts one's
self in the Way of it, when one can help it; and it shows one can forgive what
in short, ought not to be forgiven: Which is no small Countenance to foul
Actions, I Will assure you.

She hugged me to her, and said, I Will assure you! Pretty-face, where gottest
thou all thy Knowledge, and thy good Notions, at these Years? Thou art a
Miracle for thy Age, and I shall always love thee. -- But, do you resolve to
leave us, Pamela?

Yes, my dear Mrs. Jervis, said I; for, as Matters stand, how can I do
otherwise? -- But I Will do all the Duties of my Place first, if I may. And hope
you will give me a Character as to my Honesty, that it may not be thought I was
turned away for any Harm. Ay, that I will, said she; I will give thee such a
Character as never Girl at thy Years deserved. And, I am sure, said I, I will
always love and honor you, as my third best Friend, wherever I go, or
whatever becomes of me.

And so we went to Bed, and I never waked 'till 'twas Time to rise; which I
did, as blythe as a Bird, and went about my Business with great Pleasure.

But I believe my Master is fearfully angry with me; for he passed by me two or
three times, and would not speak to me; and toward Evening he met me in the
Passage, going into the Garden, and said such a Word to me as I never heard in
my Life from him, to Man, Woman or Child; for he first said, This Creature's
always in my way, I think. I said, standing up as close as I could (and the
Entry was wide enough for a Coach too) I hope I shall not be long in your Honor's
Way. D -- n you! said he (that was the hard Word) for a little Witch; I have no
Patience with you.

I profess, I trembled to hear him say so; but I saw he was vexed; and as I am
going away, I minded it the less. But I see, my dear Parents, that when a
Person will do wicked Things, it is no Wonder he will speak wicked Words. And
so I rest

Your dutiful Daughter.

LETTER XIX.
Dear Father and Mother,
OUR John having no Opportunity to go your Way, I write again, and send both
Letters at once. I cannot say, yet, when I shall get away, nor how I shall come;
because Mrs. Jervis showed my Master the Waistcoat I am flowering for him, and
he said. It looks well enough: I think the Creature had best stay till she has
finished it.

There is some private Talk carried on betwixt him and Mrs. Jervis, that she
don't tell me of; but yet she is very kind to me, and I don't mistrust her at
all. I should be very base if I did. But, to be sure, she must oblige him, and
keep all his lawful Commands; and other, I dare say, she will not keep: She is too
good, and loves me too well; but she must stay when I am gone, and so must get
no Ill Will.

She has been at me again to ask to stay, and humble myself, as she calls it.
But what have I done, Mrs. Jervis? said I: If I have been a Sauce-box, and a
Bold-face, and Pert, and a Creature, as he calls me, have I not had Reason? Do
you think I should ever have forgot myself, if he had not forgot to act as my
Master? Tell me, from your own Heart, dear Mrs. Jervis, said I, if you think I
could stay and be safe: What would you think, or how would you act, in my Case?

My dear Pamela, said she, and kissed me, I don't know how I should act, or
what I should think. I hope I should act as you do. But I know nobody else that
would. My Master is a fine Gentleman; he has a great deal of Wit and Sense, and
is admired, as I know, by half a dozen Ladies, who would think themselves happy
in his Addresses. He has a noble Estate; and yet I believe he loves my good
Maiden, though his Servant, better than all the Ladies in the Land; and he has
tried to overcome it, because he knows you are so much his Inferior; and it is
my Opinion he finds he cannot; and that vexes his proud Heart, and makes him
resolve you shall not stay; and so he speaks so to cross you, when he sees you by
Accident.

Well, but, Mrs. Jervis, said I, let me ask you, if he can stoop to like such a
poor Girl as I, as perhaps he may (for I have read of Things almost as strange,
from great Men to poor Damsels) What can it be for? -- He may condescend,
may-hap, to think I may be good enough for his Harlot; and those Things don't
disgrace Men, that ruin poor Women, as the World goes. And so, if I was wicked
enough, he would keep me till I was undone, and 'till his Mind changed; for
even wicked Men, I have read, soon grow weary of Wickedness of one Sort, and
love Variety. Well then, poor Pamela must be turned off, and looked upon as a
vile abandoned Creature, and every body would despise her; ay, and justly too,
Mrs. Jervis; for she that cannot keep her Virtue, ought to live in Disgrace.

But, Mrs. Jervis, continued I, let me tell you, that I hope, if I was sure he
would always be kind to me, and never turn me off at all, that I shall have so
much Grace, as to hate and withstand his Temptations, were he not only my
Master, but my King; and that for the Sin's sake. This my poor dear Parents
have always taught me; and I should be a sad wicked Creature indeed, if, for
the sake of Riches or Favor, I should forfeit my good Name: yea, and worse
than any other young body of my Sex; because I can so contentedly return to my
Poverty again, and think it less Disgrace to be obliged to wear Rags, and live
upon Rye-bread and Water, as I used to do, than to be a Harlot to the greatest
Man in the World.

Mrs. Jervis lifted up her Hands, and had her Eyes full of Tears. God bless
you, my dear Love! said she; you are my Admiration and Delight. -- How shall I
do to part with you!

Well, good Mrs. Jervis, said I, let me ask you now: -- You and he have had
some Talk, and you may not be suffered to tell me all. But, do you think, if I
was to ask to stay, that he is sorry for what he has done? ay, and ashamed of
it too? for I am sure he ought, considering his high Degree, and my low Degree,
and how I have nothing in the World to trust to but my Honesty: Do you think in
your own Conscience now (pray answer me truly) that he would never offer any
thing to me again, and that I could be safe?

Alas! my dear Child, said she, don't put thy home Questions to me, with that
pretty becoming Earnestness in thy Look. I know this, that he is vexed at what
he has done; he was vexed the first time, more vexed the second time.

Yes, said I, and so he will be vexed, I suppose, the third, and the fourth
time too, 'till he has quite ruined your poor Maiden; and who will have Cause
to be vexed then?

Nay, Pamela, said she, don't imagine that I would be accessory to your Ruin
for the World. I only can say, that he has, yet, done you no Hurt; and it is no
Wonder he should love you, you are so pretty; though so much beneath him: But I
dare swear for him, he never will offer you any Force.

You say, said I, that he was sorry for his first Offer in the Summer House;
well, and how long did his Sorrow last? -- Only 'till he found me by myself;
and then he was worse than before: and so became sorry again. And if he has
deigned to love me, and you say cannot help it, why he cannot help it neither, if
he should have an Opportunity, a third time to distress me. And I have read,
that many a Man has been ashamed of his Wickedness at a Repulse, that never
would, had he succeeded. Besides, Mrs. Jervis, if he really intends to offer no
Force, What does that mean? -- While you say he cannot help liking me, for Love
it cannot be -- Does it not imply, that he hopes to ruin me by my own Consent?
I think, said I, (and I hope I should have Grace to do so) that I should not
give way to his Temptations on any Account; but it would be very presumptuous
in me to rely upon my own Strength, against a Gentleman of his Qualifications
and Estate, and who is my Master; and thinks himself entitled to call me
Bold-face, and what not? only for standing on my necessary Defense: And that
where the Good of my Soul and Body, and my Duty to God, and my Parents, are all
concerned. How then, Mrs. Jervis, said I, can I ask or wish to stay?

Well, well, says she, as he seems very desirous you should not stay, I hope it
is from a good Motive; for fear he should be tempted to disgrace himself as
well as you. No, no, Mrs. Jervis, said I; I have thought of that too; for I
would be glad to think of him with that Duty that becomes me: But then he would
have let me gone to Lady Davers, and not have hindered my Preferment. And he
would not have said, I should return to my Poverty and Distress, when, by his
Mother's Goodness, I had been lifted out of it; but that he intended to fright
me, and punish me, as he thought, for not complying with his Wickedness: and
this shows me enough what I have to expect from his future Goodness, except I
will deserve it at his own dear, dear Price.

She was silent, and I said, Well, there is no more to be said; I must go,
that is certain: All my Concern will be how to part with you: And indeed, next
to you, with every body; for all my Fellow Servants have loved me, and you and
they will cost me a Sigh, and a Tear, too, now-and-then, I am sure. And so I
fell a-crying: I could not help it. For it is a pleasant Thing to one to be in
a House among a great many Fellow Servants, and be beloved by them all.

Nay, I should have told you before now, how kind and civil Mr. Longman our
Steward is; vastly courteous, indeed, on all Occasions! And he said once to
Mrs. Jervis, he wished he was a young Man for my sake; I should be his Wife,
and he would settle all he had upon me on Marriage; and, you must know, he is
reckoned worth a Power of Money.

I take no Pride in this; but bless God, and your good Example, my dear
Parents, that I have been enabled so to carry myself, as to have every body's
good Word. Not but that our Cook one Day, who is a little snappish and cross
sometimes, said once to me, Why this Pamela of ours goes as fine as a Lady. See
what it is to have a fine Face! -- I wonder what the Girl will come to at last!

She was hot with her Work; and I sneaked away; for I seldom go down into the
Kitchen; and I heard the Butler say, Why, Jane, nobody has your good Word: What
has Mrs. Pamela done to you? I am sure she offends nobody. And what, said the
peevish Wench, have I said to her, Foolatum; but that she was pretty? They
quarreled afterward, I heard: I was sorry for it, but troubled myself no more
about it. Forgive this silly Prattle, from

Your dutiful Daughter.
O! I forgot to say, that I would stay to finish the Waistcoat; I never did a
prettier Piece of Work; and I am up early and late to gee it done; for I long
to come to you.



LETTER XX.
My dear Father and Mother,
I Did not send my last Letters so soon as I hoped, because John (whether my
Master mistrusts or no, I cannot say) had been sent to Lady Davers's, instead of
Isaac, who used to go; and I could not be so free with, nor so well trust
Isaac; though he is very civil to me too. So I was forced to stay 'till John
returned.

As I may not have Opportunity to send again soon, and yet as I know you keep
my Letters, and read them over and over, (so John told me) when you have done
Work, (so much does your Kindness make you love all that comes from your poor
Daughter) and as it may be some little Pleasure to me, may-hap, to read them
myself, when I am come to you, to remind me what I have gone through, and how
great God's Goodness has been to me (which, I hope, will further strengthen my
good Resolutions, that I may not hereafter, from my bad Conduct, have Reason to
condemn myself from my own Hand as it were): For all these Reasons, I say, I
will write as I have Time, and as Matters happen, and send the Scribble to you
as I have Opportunity; and if I don't every time, in Form, subscribe as I
ought, I am sure you will always believe, that it is not for want of Duty. So I
will begin where I left off about the Talk between Mrs. Jervis and me, for me
to ask to stay.

Unknown to Mrs. Jervis, I put a Project, as I may call it, in Practice. I
thought with myself some Days ago, Here I shall go home to my poor Father and
Mother, and have nothing on my Back, that will be fit for my Condition; for how
should your poor Daughter look with a Silk Nightgown, Silken Petticoats,
Cambrick Head-cloaths, fine Holland Linen, laced Shoes, that were my Lady's,
and fine Stockens! And how in a little while must they have looked, like old
Cast-offs indeed, and I looked so for wearing them! And People would have said,
(for poor Folks are envious, as well as rich) See there Goody Andrews's
Daughter, turned home from her fine Place! What a tawdry Figure she makes! And
how well that Garb becomes her poor Parents Circumstances! -- And how would
they look upon me, thought I to myself, when they come to be threadbare and
worn out? And how should I look, even if I could get homespun Clothes, to
dwindle into them one by one, as I could get them? -- May-be, an old Silk Gown,
and a Linsey-woolsey Petticoat, and the like. So, thought I, I had better get
myself at once 'quipt in the Dress that will become my Condition; and though it
may look but poor to what I have been used to wear of late Days, yet it will
serve me, when I am with you, for a good Holiday and Sunday Suit, and what, by
a Blessing on my Industry, I may, perhaps, make shift to keep up to.

So, as I was saying, unknown to any body, I bought of Farmer Nichols's Wife
and Daughters, a good sad-colour'd Stuff, of their own Spinning, enough to make
me a Gown and two Petticoats; and I made Robings and Facings of a pretty Bit of
printed Calico, I had by me.

I had a pretty good Camblet quilted Coat, that I thought might do tolerably
well; and I bought two Flanel Under-coats; not so good as my Swan-skin and fine
Linen ones, but what will keep me warm, if any Neighbor should get me to go
out to help 'em to milk, now-and-then, as sometimes I used to do formerly; for
I am resolved to do all your good Neighbors what Kindness I can; and hope to
make myself as much beloved about you, as I am here.

I got some pretty good Scots Cloth, and made me, at Mornings and Nights, when
nobody saw me, two Shifts; and I have enough left for two Shirts, and two
Shifts, for you, my dear Father and Mother. When I come home, I Will make 'em for
you, and desire your Acceptance as my first Present.

Then I bought of a Pedlar, two pretty enough round-ear'd Caps, a little
Straw-hat, and a Pair of knit Mittens, turned up with white Calico; and two
Pair of ordinary blue Worsted Hose, that make a smartish Appearance, with white
Clocks, I Will assure you; and two Yards of black Ribband for my Shift Sleeves,
and to serve as a Necklace; and when I had 'em all come home, I went and looked
upon them once in two Hours, for two Days together: For, you must know, though I
lie with Mrs. Jervis, I keep my own little Apartment still for my Clothes; and
nobody goes thither but myself. You Will say, I was no bad Housewife to have
saved so much Money; but my dear good Lady was always giving me something.

I believed myself the more obliged to do this, because, as I was turned away
for what my good Master thought Want of Duty; and, as he expected other Returns
for his Presents, than I intended to make him; so I thought it was but just to
leave his Presents behind me when I went away; for, you know, if I would not
earn his Wages, why should I have them?

Don't trouble yourself, now I think of it, about the Four Guineas, nor borrow
to make them up; for they were given me, with some Silver, as I told you, as a
Perquisite, being what my Lady had about her when she died; and, as I hope for
no other Wages, I am so vain as to think I have deserved them in the fourteen
Months, since my Lady's Death: For she, good Soul! overpaid me before, in
Learning and other Kindnesses. -- Had she lived, none of these Things might
have happened! -- But I ought to be thankful it is no worse. Every thing will
turn about for the best; that is my Confidence.

So, as I was saying, I have provided a new and more suitable Dress, and I long
to appear in it, more than ever I did in any new Clothes in my Life; for then I
shall be soon after with you, and at Ease in my Mind. -- But, mum -- I am, etc.

LETTER XXI.
My dear Father and Mother,
I WAS forced to break off; for I feared my Master was coming; but it proved to
be only Mrs. Jervis. She came to me, and said, I cannot endure you should be so
much by yourself, Pamela. And I, said I, dread nothing so much as Company; for
my Heart was up at my Mouth now, for fear my Master was coming. But I always
rejoice to see my dear Mrs. Jervis.

Said she, I have had a World of Talk with my Master about you. I am sorry for
it, said I, that I am made of so much Consequence as to be talked of by him. O,
said she, I must not tell you all; but you are of more Consequence to him, than
you think for --

Or wish for, said I; for the Fruits of being of Consequence to him, would make
me of none to myself, or any body else.

Said she, Thou art as witty as any Lady in the Land: I wonder where thou
gottest it. But they must be poor Ladies, with such great Opportunities, I am
sure, if they have no more than I. -- But let that pass.

I suppose, said I, that I am of so much Consequence, however, as to vex him,
if it be but to think, he cannot make a Fool of such a one as I; and that is
nothing at all, but a Rebuke to the Pride of his high Condition, which he did
not expect, and knows not how to put up with.

There is something in that, may-be, said she; but indeed, Pamela, he is very
angry at you too; and calls you twenty perverse Things; wonders at his own
Folly, to have shown you so much Favor, as he calls it; which he was first
inclined to, he says, for his Mother's sake, and would have persisted to show
you for your own, if you was not your own Enemy.

Nay, now I shall not love you, Mrs. Jervis, said I; you are going to persuade me
to ask to stay, though you know the Hazards I run. -- No, said she, he says you
shall go; for he thinks it will not be for his Reputation to keep you: But he
wished (don't speak of it for the World, Pamela) that he knew a Lady of Birth,
just such another as yourself, in Person and Mind, and he would marry her
Tomorrow.

I colored up to the Ears at this Word; but said, Yet if I was the Lady of
Birth, and he would offer to be rude first, as he has twice done to poor me, I
don't know whether I would have him: For she that can bear an Insult of that
kind, I should think not worthy to be any Gentleman's Wife; any more than he
would be a Gentleman that would offer it.

Nay, now, Pamela, said she, thou carriest thy Notions a great way. Well, dear
Mrs. Jervis, said I, very seriously, for I could not help it, I am more full of
Fears than ever. I have only to beg of you, as one of the best Friends I have
in the World, to say nothing of my asking to stay. To say my Master likes me,
when I know what End he aims at, is Abomination to my Ears; and I shall not think
myself safe till I am at my poor Father's and Mother's.

She was a little angry at me, 'till I assured her, that I had not the least
Uneasiness on her Account, but thought myself safe under her Protection and
Friendship. And so we dropped the Discourse for that Time.

I hope to have finished this ugly Waistcoat in two Days; after which, I have
only some Linen to get up, and do something to, and shall then let you know how
I shall contrive as to my Passage; for the heavy Rains will make it sad
traveling on Foot: But maybe I may get a Place to --, which is ten Miles of
the Way, in Farmer Nichols's close Cart; for I cannot sit a Horse well at all.
And may-be nobody will be suffered to see me on upon the Way. But I hope to let
you know more,

From, etc.

LETTER XXII.
My dear Father and Mother,
ALL my Fellow Servants have now some Notion, that I am to go away; but cannot
imagine for what. Mrs. Jervis tells them, that my Father and Mother, growing in
Years, cannot live without me; and so I go to them, to help to comfort their
old Age; but they seem not to believe it.

What they found it out by, was, the Butler heard him say to me, as I passed by
him, in the Entry leading to the Hall, Who Is that is? Pamela, Sir, said I*
Pamela! said he, How long are you to stay here? -- Only, please your Honor,
said I, till I have done the Waistcoat; and it is almost done. -- You might,
says he, (very roughly indeed) have finished that long enough ago, I should
have thought. Indeed, and please your Honor, said I, I have worked early and
late upon it; there is a great deal of Work in it. -- Work in it! said he; yes,
you mind your Pen more than your Needle; I don't want such idle Sluts to stay
in my House.

He seemed startled, when he saw the Butler. As he entered the Hall, where Mr.
Jonathan stood, What do you here? said he. -- The Butler was as much confounded
as I; for I, never having been taxed so roughly, could not help crying sadly;
and got out of both their ways to Mrs. Jervis, and told my Complaint. This
Love, said she, is the D -- -- -- l! in how many strange Shapes does it make
People show themselves? And in some the farthest from their Hearts.

So one, and then another, has been since whispering, Pray, Mrs. Jervis, are we
to lose Mrs. Pamela? as they always call me -- What has she done? And then she
tells them as above, about going home to you.

She said afterward to me, Well, Pamela, you have made our Master, from the
sweetest-temper'd Gentleman in the World, one of the most peevish. But you have
it in your Power to make him as sweet-temper'd as ever; though I hope you will
never do it on his Terms.

This was very good in Mrs. Jervis; but it intimated, that she thought as ill
of his Designs as I; and as she knew his Mind more than I, it convinced me,
that I ought to get away as fast as I could.

My Master came in, just now, to speak to Mrs. Jervis about Household Matters,
having some Company to dine with him Tomorrow; and I stood up, and having,
been crying, at his Roughness in the Entry, I turned away my Face.

You may well, said he, turn away your cursed Face; I wish I had never seen it!
-- Mrs. Jervis, how long is she to be about this Waistcoat?

Sir, said I, if your Honor had pleased, I would have taken it with me; and
though it would be now finished in a few Hours, I will do so still; and remove
this hated poor Pamela out of your House and Sight for ever.

Mrs. Jervis said he, not speaking to me, I believe this little Slut has the
Power of Witchcraft, if ever there was a Witch; for she inchants all that come
near her. She makes even you, who should know better what the World is, think
her an Angel of Light.

I offered to go away; for I believed he wanted me to ask to stay in my Place,
for all this his great Wrath; and he said, Stay here! stay here, when I bid
you! and snatched my Hand. I trembled, and said, I will! I will! for he hurt my
Fingers, he grasped me so hard.

He seemed to have a mind to say something to me; but broke off abruptly, and
said, Begone! And away I tripp'd, as fast as I could; and he and Mrs. Jervis
had a deal of Talk, as she told me; and among the rest, he expressed himself
vexed to have spoken in Mr. Jonathan's Hearing.

Now you must know, that Mr. Jonathan, our Butler, is a very grave good sort of
old Man, with his Hair as white as Silver! and an honest worthy Man he is. I
was hurrying out with a Flea in my Ear, as the Saying is, and going down Stairs
into the Parlour, met him. He took hold of my Hand, (in a gentler manner though
than my Master) with both his; and he said, Ah! sweet, sweet Mrs. Pamela! what
is it I heard just now! -- I am sorry at my Heart; but I am sure I will sooner
believe any body in Fault than you. Thank you, Mr. Jonathan, said I; but as you
value your Place, don't be seen speaking to such a one as me. I cried too; and
slipped away as fast as I could from him, for his own sake, lest he should be
seen to pity me.

And now I will give you an Instance how much I am in Mr. Longman's Esteem also.

I had lost my Pen some-how; and my Paper being written out, I stepped to Mr.
Longman's our Steward's Office, to beg him to give me a Pen or two, and a Sheet
or two of Paper. He said, Ay, that I will, my sweet Maiden! And gave me three
Pens, some Wafers, a Stick of Wax, and twelve Sheets of Paper; and coming from
his Desk, where be was writing, he said, Let me have a Word or two with you, my
sweet little Mistress (for so these two good old Gentlemen often call me; for I
believe they love me dearly): I hear bad News; that we are going to lose you: I
hope it is not true? Yes, it is, Sir, said I; but I was in Hopes it would not
be known till I went away.

What a D -- l, said he, ails our Master of late! I never saw such an
Alteration in any Man in my Life! He is pleased with nobody, as I see; And by
what Mr. Jonathan tells me just now, he was quite out of the way with you. What
could you have done to him, tro'? Only Mrs. Jervis is a very good Woman; or I
should have feared she had been your Enemy.

No, said I, nothing like it. Mrs. Jervis is a just good Woman, and, next to my
Father and Mother, the best Friend I have in the World. -- Well then, said he,
it must be worse. Shall I guess? You are too pretty, my sweet Mistress, and,
may-be, too virtuous. Ah! have I not hit it? No, good Mr. Longman, said I,
don't think any thing amiss of my Master; he is cross and angry with me indeed,
that is true; but I may have given Occasion for it, may-be; and because I am
obliged to go to my Father and Mother, rather than stay here, may-hap, he may
think me ungrateful. But, you know, Sir, said I, that a Father and Mother's
Comfort is the dearest thing to a good Child that can be. Sweet Excellence!
said he, this becomes you; but I know the World and Mankind too well; though I
must hear, and see, and say nothing! And a Blessing attend my little Sweeting,
said he, wherever you go! And away went I, with a Curt'sy and Thanks.

Now this pleases one, my dear Father and Mother, to be so beloved. -- How much
better, by good Fame and Integrity, is it to get every one's good Word but one,
than by pleasing that one, to make every one else one's Enemy, and be an
execrable Creature besides! I am, etc.

LETTER XXIII.
My dear Father and Mother,
WE had a great many neighboring Gentlemen, and their Ladies, this Day at
Dinner; and my Master made a fine Entertainment for them. And Isaac, and Mr.
Jonathan, and Benjamin, waited at Table. And Isaac tells Mrs. Jervis, that the
Ladies will by-and-by come to see the House, and have the Curiosity to see me;
for it seems, they said to my Master, when the Jokes flew about, Well, Mr. B
--, we understand, you have a Servant-maid, who is the greatest Beauty in the
County; and we promise ourselves to see her before we go.

The Wench is well enough, said he; but no such Beauty as you talk of, I Will
assure ye. She was my Mother's Waiting-maid, who, on her Deathbed, engaged me
to be kind to her, She is young, and every thing is pretty that is young.

Ay, ay, said one of the Ladies, that is true; but if your Mother had not
recommended her so strongly, there is so much Merit in Beauty, that I make no
doubt such a fine Gentleman would have wanted no such strong Inducement to be
kind.

They all laughed at my Master: And he, it seems, laughed for Company; but
said, I don't know how it is, but I see with different Eyes from other People;
for I have heard much more Talk of her Prettiness, than I think it deserves:
She is well enough, as I said; but I think her greatest Excellence is, that she
is humble, and courteous, and faithful, and makes all her Fellow Servants love
her: My Housekeeper, in particular, doats upon her; and you know, Ladies, she
is a Woman of Discernment: And, as for Mr. Longman, and Jonathan, here, if they
thought themselves young enough, I am told, they would fight for her. Is it not
true, Jonathan? Troth, Sir, said he, an't please your Honor, I never knew her
Peer, and all your Honor's Family are of the same Mind. Do you hear now? said
my Master -- Well, said the Ladies, we will make a Visit to Mrs. Jervis
by-and-by, and hope to see this Paragon.

I believe they are coming; and will tell you more by-and-by. I wish they had
come, and were gone. Why cannot they make their Game without me?

Well, these fine Ladies have been here, and gone back again. I would have been
absent if I could, and did step into the Closet; so they saw me not when they
came in.

There were four of them, Lady Arthur at the great white House on the Hill,
Lady Brooks, Lady Towers, and the other, it seems, a Countess, of some hard
Name, I forget what.

So, Mrs. Jervis, says one of the Ladies, how do you do? We are all come to
inquire after your Health. I am much obliged to your Ladyships, said Mrs.
Jervis: Will your Ladyships please to sit down? But, said the Countess, we are
not only come to ask after Mrs. Jervis's Health neither; but we are come to see
a Rarity besides. Ay, says Lady Arthur, I have not seen your Pamela these two
Years, and they tell me she is grown wondrous pretty in that Time.

Then I wished I had not been in the Closet; for when I came out, they must
needs know I heard them: but I have often found, that bashful Bodies owe
themselves a Spite, and frequently confound themselves more, by endeavoring to
avoid Confusion.

Why, yes, says Mrs. Jervis, Pamela is very pretty indeed; she is but in the
Closet there: -- Pamela, pray step hither. I came out, all covered with
Blushes; and they smiled at one another.

The Countess took me by the Hand: Why, indeed, she was pleased to say, Report
has not been too lavish, I Will assure you. Don't be ashamed, Child (and star'd
full in my Face); I wish I had just such a Face to be ashamed of. O how like a
Fool I looked!

Lady Arthur said, Ay, my good Pamela, I say as her Ladyship says: Don't be so
confused; though indeed it becomes you too. I think your good Lady departed made
a sweet Choice of such a pretty Attendant. She would have been mighty proud of
you, as she always was praising you, had she lived till now.

Ah! Madam, said Lady Brooks, do you think, that so dutiful a Son as our
Neighbor, who always admired what his Mother loved, does not pride himself,
for all what he said at Table, in such a pretty Maiden?

She looked with such a malicious sneering Countenance, I cannot abide her.

Lady Towers said, with a free Air, (for it seems she is called a Wit) Well,
Mrs. Pamela, I cannot say I like you so well as these Ladies do; for I should
never care, if you were my Servant, to have you and your Master in the same
House together. Then they all set up a great Laugh.

I know what I could have said, if I durst. But they are Ladies -- and Ladies
may say any thing.

Says Lady Towers, Can the pretty Image speak, Mrs. Jervis? I vow she has
speaking Eyes! O you little Rogue, said she, and tapt me on the Cheek, you seem
born to undo, or to be undone!

God forbid, and please your Ladyship, said I, it should be either! -- I beg,
said I, to withdraw; for the Sense I have of my Unworthiness, renders me unfit
for such a Presence.

I then went away, with one of my best Curt'sies; and Lady Towers said, as I
went out, Prettily said, I vow! -- And Lady Brooks said, See that Shape! I
never saw such a Face and Shape in my Life; why she must be better descended
than you have told me!

And so, belike, their Clacks ran for half an Hour in my Praises; and glad was
I, when I got out of the Hearing of them.

But, it seems, they went down with such a Story to my Master, and so full of
me* that he had much ado to stand it; but as it was very little to my
Reputation, I am sure I could take no Pride in it; and I feared it would make
no better for me. This gives me another Cause for wishing myself out of this
House.

This is Thursday Morning, and next Thursday I hope to set out; for I have
finished my Task, and my Master is horrid cross! And I am vexed his Crossness
affects me so. If ever he had any Kindness toward me, I believe he now hates
me heartily.

Is it not strange, that Love borders so much upon Hate? But this wicked Love
is not like the true virtuous Love, to be sure: That and Hatred must be as far
off, as Light and Darkness. And how must this Hate have been increased, if he
had met with a base Compliance, after his wicked Will had been gratified?

Well, one may see by a little, what a great deal means: For if Innocence
cannot attract common Civility, what must Guilt expect, when Novelty had ceased
to have its Charms, and Changeableness had taken place of it? Thus we read in
Holy Writ, that wicked Amnon, when he had ruined poor Tamar, hated her more
than ever he loved her, and would have turned her out of Door!

How happy am I, to be turned out of Door, with that sweet Companion my
Innocence! -- O may that be always my Companion! And while I presume not upon
my own Strength, and am willing to avoid the Tempter, I hope the Divine Grace
will assist me.

Forgive me, that I repeat in my Letter Part of my hourly Prayer. I owe every
thing, next to God's Goodness, to your Piety and good Examples, my dear
Parents; my dear poor Parents, I will say, because your Poverty is my Pride, as
your Integrity shall be my Imitation.

As soon as I have dined, I will put on my new Clothes. I long to have them on.
I know I shall surprise Mrs. Jervis with them; for she shall not see me till I am
full-dress'd. -- John is come back, and I Will soon send you some of what I have
written. -- I find he is going early in the Morning; and so I Will close here,
that I am

Your most dutiful Daughter.
Don't lose your Time in meeting me; because I am so uncertain. It is hard, if
some-how or other, I cannot get a Passage to you. But may-be my Master will not
refuse to let John bring me. I can ride behind him, I believe, well enough; for
he is very careful, and very honest; and you know John as well as I; for he
loves you both. Besides, may-be, Mrs. Jervis can put me in some way.



LETTER XXIV.
Dear Father and Mother,
I Shall write on, as long as I stay, though I should have nothing but
Sillinesses to write; for I know you divert yourselves on Nights with what I
write, because it is mine. John tells me how much you long for my coming; but
he says, he told you, he hoped something would happen to hinder it.

I am glad you did not tell him the Occasion of my coming away; for if they
should guess, it were better so, than to have it from you or me: Besides, I
really am concerned, that my poor Master should cast such a Thought upon such a
Creature as me; for besides the Disgrace, it has quite turned his Temper; and I
begin to think he likes me, and cannot help it; and yet strives to conquer it,
and so finds no way but to be cross to me.

Don't think me presumptuous and conceited; for it is more my Concern than my
Pride, to see such a Gentleman so demean himself, and lessen the Regard he used
to have in the Eyes of all his Servants, on my Account. -- But I am to tell you
of my new Dress today.

And so, when I had dined, up Stairs I went, and locked myself into my little
Room. There I tricked myself up as well as I could in my new Garb, and put on
my round-ear'd ordinary Cap; but with a green Knot however, and my homespun
Gown and Petticoat, and plain-leather Shoes; but yet they are what they call
Spanish Leather, and my ordinary Hose, ordinary I mean to what I have been
lately used to; though I shall think good Yarn may do very well for every Day,
when I come home. A plain Muslin Tucker I put on, and my black Silk Necklace,
instead of the French Necklace my Lady gave me; and put the Earrings out of my
Ears; and when I was quite 'quipp'd, I took my Straw Hat in my Hand, with its
two blue Strings, and looked about me in the Glass, as proud as any thing. --
To say Truth, I never liked myself so well in my Life.

O the Pleasure of descending with Ease, Innocence and Resignation! -- Indeed
there is nothing like it! An humble Mind, I plainly see, cannot meet with any
very shocking Disappointment, let Fortune's Wheel turn round as it will.

So I went down to look for Mrs. Jervis, to see how she liked me.

I met, as I was upon the Stairs, our Rachel, who is the House-maid; and she
made me a low Curt'sy, and I found did not know me. So I smiled, and went to
the House-keeper's Parlour: And there sat good Mrs. Jervis at Work, making a
Shift: And, would you believe it? she did not know me at first; but rose up,
and pulled off her Spectacles; and said, Do you want me, forsooth? I could not
help laughing, and said. Hey-day! Mrs. Jervis, what! don't you know me? -- She
stood all in Amaze, and looked at me from Top to Toe; Why, you surprise me,
said she; what! Pamela! thus metamorphos'd! How came this about?

As it happened, in stepped my Master; and my Back being to him, he thought it
was a Stranger speaking to Mrs. Jervis, and withdrew again; and did not hear
her ask, If his Honor had any Commands with her? -- She turned me about and
about, and I showed her all my Dress, to my Under-petticoat; and she said,
sitting down, Why, I am all in Amaze: I must sit down. What can all this mean.
I told her, I had no Clothes suitable to my Condition when I returned to my
Father's; and so it was better to begin here, as I was soon to go away, that
all my Fellow Servants might see I knew how to suit myself to the State I was
returning to.

Well, said she, I never knew the like of thee. But this sad Preparation for
going away (for now I see you are quite in Earnest) is what I know not how to
get over. O my dear Pamela, how can I part with you!

My Master rung in the Back-parlour, and so I withdrew, and Mrs. Jervis went to
attend him. It seems he said to her, I was coming in to let you know that I
shall go to Lincolnshire, and may-be to my Sister Davers's, and be absent some
Weeks. But, pray, what pretty neat Damsel was with you? She says, she smiled,
and asked, If his Honor did not know who it was? No, said he, I never saw her
before. Farmer Nichols, or Farmer Brady, have neither of them such a tight prim
Lass for a Daughter; have they? -- Though I did not see her Face neither, said
he. If your Honor will not be angry, said she, I will introduce her into your
Presence; for, I think, says she, she out-does our Pamela.

Now I did not thank her for this, as I told her afterward (for it brought a
great deal of Trouble upon me, as well as Crossness, as you shall hear). That
cannot be, he was pleased to say. But if you can find an Excuse for it, let her
come in.

At that she stepped to me, and told me, I must go in with her to my Master; but,
said she, for Goodness sake, let him find you out; for he don't know you. O
fie, Mrs. Jervis, said I, how could you serve me so? Besides, it looks too free
both in me, and to him. I tell you, said she, you shall come in; and pray don't
reveal yourself till he finds you out.

So I went in, foolish as I was; though I must have been seen by him another
time, if I had not then. And she would make me take my Straw-hat in my Hand.

I dropped a low Curt'sy, but said never a Word. I dare say, he knew me as soon
as he saw my Face; but was as cunning as Lucifer. He came up to me, and took me
by the Hand, and said, Whose pretty Maiden are you? -- I dare say you are
Pamela's Sister, you are so like her. So neat, so clean, so pretty! Why, Child,
you far surpass your Sister Pamela!

I was all Confusion, and would have spoken; but he took me about the Neck;
Why, said he, you are very pretty, Child; I would not be so free with your
Sister, you may believe; but I must kiss you.

O Sir, said I, I am Pamela, indeed I am: Indeed I am Pamela, her own self!

He kissed me for all I could do; and said, Impossible! you are a lovelier Girl
by half than Pamela; and sure I may be innocently free with you, though I would
not do her so much Favor.

This was a sad Bite upon me indeed, and what I could not expect; and Mrs.
Jervis looked like a Fool as much as I, for her Officiousness -- At last I got
away, and ran out of the Parlour, most sadly vexed, as you may well think.

He talked a good deal to Mrs. Jervis, and at last ordered me to come in to
him. Come in, said he, you little Villain! for so he called me; good Sirs! what
a Name was there! Who is it you put your Tricks upon? I was resolved never to
honor your Unworthines, said he, with so much Notice again; and so you must
disguise yourself, to attract me, and yet pretend, like an Hypocrite as you are
--

I was out of Patience, then; Hold, good Sir, said I; don't impure Disguise and
Hypocrisy to me, above all things; for hate them both, mean as I am I have put
on no Disguise. -- What, a-plague, said he, for that was his Word, do you mean
then by this Dress? -- Why, and please your Honor, said I, I mean one of the
honestest things in the World. I have been in Disguise indeed ever since my
good Lady your Mother took me from my poor Parents. I came to her Ladyship so
poor and mean, that these Clothes I have on, are a princely-Suit, to those I
had then. And her Goodness heaped upon me rich Clothes, and other Bounties: And
as I am now returning to my poor Parents again so soon, I cannot wear those
good things without being whooted at; and so have bought what will be more
suitable to my Degree, and be a good Holiday Suit too, when I get home.

He then took me in his Arms, and presently pushed me from him. Mrs. Jervis,
said he, take the little Witch from me; I can neither bear, nor forbear her!
(Strange Words these!) -- But stay; you shall not go! -- Yet begone! -- No, come
back again.

I thought he was mad, for my Share; for he knew not what he would have. But I
was going however, and he stepped after me, and took hold of my Arm, and brought
me in again: I am sure he made my Arm black and blue; for the Marks are upon it
still. Sir, Sir, said I, pray have Mercy; I will, I will come in!

He sat down, and looked at me, and, as I thought afterward, as sillily as
such a poor Girl as I. At last, he said. Well, Mrs. Jervis, as I was telling
you, you may permit her to stay a little longer, till I see if my Sister Davers
will have her; if, mean time, she humble herself, and ask this as a Favor, and
is sorry for her Pertness, and the Liberty she has taken with my Character, out
of the House and in the House. Your Honor indeed told me so, said Mrs. Jervis;
but I never found her inclinable to think herself in a Fault. Pride and
Perverseness, said he, with a Vengeance! Yet this is your Doating-piece! --
Well, for once I Will submit myself, to tell you, Hussy, said he to me, you may
stay a Fortnight longer, till I see my Sister Davers: Do you hear what I say to
you, Statue! Can you neither speak, nor be thankful? -- Your Honor frights me
so, said I, that I can hardly speak: But I will venture to say, that I have
only to beg, as a Favor, that I may go to my Father and Mother. -- Why, Fool,
said he, will not you like to go to wait on my Sister Davers? Sir, said I, I was
once fond of that Honor; but you were pleased to say, I might be in Danger
from her Ladyship's Nephew, or he from me. -- D -- d Impertinence! said he; do
you hear, Mrs. Jervis, do you hear, how she retorts upon me? Was ever such
matchless Assurance! --

I then fell a weeping; for Mrs. Jervis said, Fie, Pamela, fie! -- And I said,
My Lot is very hard indeed! I am sure I would hurt nobody; and I have been, it
seems, guilty of Indiscretions, which have cost me my Place, and my Master's
Favor, and so have been turned away. And when the Time is come, that I should
return to my poor Parents, I am not suffered to go quietly. Good your Honor,
what have I done, that I must be used worse than if I had robbed you! -- Robbed
me! said he, why so you have, Hussy; you have robbed me. Who! I, Sir! said I;
have I robbed you? Why then you are a Justice of Peace, and may send me to
Gaol, if you please, and bring me to a Trial for my Life! If you can prove that
I have robbed you, I am sure I ought to die.

Now I was quite ignorant of his Meaning; though I did not like it, when it was
afterward explained, neither; and, well, thought I, what will this come to at
last, if poor Pamela is esteemed a Thief! Then I thought, in an Instant, how I
should show my Face to my honest poor Parents, if I was but suspected.

But, Sir, said I, let me ask you but one Question, and pray don't let me be
called Names for it; for I don't mean disrespectfully; Why, if I have done
amiss, am I not left to be discharged by your Housekeeper, as the other Maids
have been? And if Jane, or Rachel, or Hannah, were to offend, would your Honor
stoop to take Notice of them? And why should you so demean yourself to take
Notice of me? Pray, Sir, if I have not been worse than others, why should I
suffer more than others? and why should I not be turned away, and there is an
End of it? For indeed I am not of Consequence enough for my Master to concern
himself and be angry about such a Creature as me.

Do you hear, Mrs. Jervis, cried he again, how pertly I am interrrogated by
this saucy Slut? Why, Sauce-box, says he, did not my good Mother desire me to
take care of you? And have you not been always distinguished by me, above a
common Servant? And does your Ingratitude upbraid me for this?

I said something mutteringly, and he vowed he would hear it. I begged Excuse;
but he insisted upon it. Why then, said I, if your Honor must know, I said,
That my good Lady did not desire your Care to extend to the Summer House and
her Dressing Room.

Well, this was a little saucy, you will say! -- And he flew into such a Passion,
that I was forced to run sor it; and Mrs. Jervis said, It was happy I got out
of his Way.

Why what makes him provoke one so, then? -- I Am almost sorry for it; but I
would be glad to get away at any rate. For I begin to be more fearful now.

Just now Mr. Jonathan sent me these Lines -- (Bless me! what shall I do?)

"Dear Mrs. Pamela, Take care of yourself; for Rachel heard my Master say to
Mrs. Jervis, who, she believes, was pleading for you, Say no more, Mrs Jervis;
for by G -- I will have her. Burn this instantly."

O pray for your poor Daughter. I am called to go to-bed by Mrs. Jervis, for it
is past Eleven; and I am sure she shall hear of it; for all this is owing to
her, though she did not mean any Harm. But I have been, and am, in a strange
Fluster; and I suppose too, she will say, I have been full pert.

O my dear Father and Mother, Power and Riches never want Advocates! But, poor
Gentlewoman, she cannot live without him: And he has been very good to her.

So Goodnight. May-be I shall send this in the Morning; but may-be not; so
will not conclude: though yet I must say, I am (with great Apprehensions)

Your most dutiful Daughter.

LETTER XXV.
My dear Parents,
O Let me take up my Complaint, and say, Never was poor Creature so unhappy,
and so barbarously used, as poor Pamela! O my dear Father and Mother, my
Heart's just broke! I can neither write as I should do, nor let it alone; for
to whom but you can I vent my Griefs, and keep my poor Heart from bursting!
Wicked, wicked Man! -- I have no Patience left me! -- But yet, don't be
frighted -- for -- I hope -- I hope, I am honest! -- But if my Head and my
Heart will let me, you shall hear all. -- Is there no Constable nor
Headborough, though, to take me out of his House? for I am sure I can safely
swear the Peace against him: But, alas! he is greater than any Constable, and
is a Justice himself; such a Justice, deliver me from! -- But God Almighty, I
hope, in time, will right me! -- For he knows the Innocence of my Heart!

John went your way in the Morning; but I have been too much distracted to send
by him; and have seen nobody but Mrs. Jervis, and Rachel, and one I hate to
see: And indeed I hate now to see any body. Strange things I have to tell you,
that happened since last Night, that good Mr. Jonathan's Letter, and my
Master's Harshness, put me into such a Fluster. But I will no more preambulate.

I went to Mrs. Jervis's Chamber; and, O my dear Father and Mother, my wicked
Master had hid himself, base Gentleman as he is! in her Closet, where she has a
few Books, and Chest of Drawers, and suchlike. I little suspected it; though I
used, till this sad Night, always to look into that Closet, and another in the
Room, and under the Bed, ever since the Summer House Trick, but never found any
thing; and so I did not do it then, being fully resolved to be angry with Mrs.
Jervis for what had happened in the Day, and so thought of nothing else.

I sat myself down on one Side of the Bed, and she on the other, and we began
to undress ourselves; but she on that Side next the wicked Closet, that held
the worst Heart in the World. So, said Mrs. Jervis, you will not speak to me,
Pamela! I find you are angry with me. Why, Mrs. Jervis, said I, so I am, a
little; it is a Folly to deny it. You see what I have suffered by your forcing
me in to my Master: And a Gentlewoman of your Years and Experience must needs
know, that it was not fit for me to pretend to be any body else for my own
sake, nor with regard to my Master.

But, said she, who would have thought it would have turned out so? Ay, said I,
little thinking who heard me, Lucifer always is ready to promote his own Work
and Workmen. You see, presently, what Use he made of it, pretending not to know
me, on purpose to be free with me: And when he took upon himself to know me, to
quarrel with me, and use me hardly; And you too, said I, to cry, Fie, fie,
Pamela! cut me to the Heart: For that encouraged him.

Do you think, my Dear, said she, that I would encourage him? -- I never said
so to you before; but since you force it from me, I must tell you, that ever
since you consulted me, I have used my utmost Endeavors to divert him from his
wicked Purposes: And he has promised fair; but, to say all in a Word, he doats
upon you; and I begin to see it is not in his Power to help it.

I luckily said nothing of the Note from Mr. Jonathan; for I began to suspect
all the World almost: But I said, to try Mrs. Jervis, Well then, what would you
have me do? You see he is for having me wait on Lady Davers now.

Why, I Will tell you freely, my dear Pamela, said she, and I trust to your
Discretion to conceal what I say: My Master has been often desiring me to put
you upon asking him to let you stay. --

Yes, said I, Mrs. Jervis, let me interrupt you: I will tell you why I could
not think of that: It was not the Pride of my Heart; but the Pride of my
Honesty: For, what must have been the Case? Here my Master has been very rude
to me, once and twice; and you say he cannot help it, though he pretends to be
sorry for it: Well, he has given me Warning to leave my Place, and uses me very
harshly; perhaps, to frighten me to his Purposes, as he supposes I would be
fond of staying (as indeed I should, if I could be safe; for I love you and all
the House, and value him, if he would act as my Master). Well then, as I know
his Designs, and that he owns he cannot help it; must I not have asked to stay,
knowing he would attempt me again? for all you could assure me of, was, he
would do nothing by Force; so I, a poor weak Girl, was to be left to my own
Strength! And was not this to allow him to tempt me, as one may say? and to
encourage him to go on in his wicked Devices? -- How then, Mrs. Jervis, could I
ask or wish to stay?

You say well, my dear Child, says she; and you have a Justness of Thought
above your Years; and for all these Considerations, and for what I have heard
this Day, after you ran away, (and I am glad you went as you did) I cannot
persuade you to stay; and I shall be glad, which is what I never thought I
could have said, that you were well at your Father's; for if Lady Davers will
entertain you, she may as well have you from thence as here. There Is my good
Mrs. Jervis! said I; God will bless you for your good Counsel to a poor Maiden,
that is hard beset. But pray what did he say, when I was gone.? Why, says she,
he was very angry with you. But he would hear it I said I: I think it was a
little bold; but then he provoked me to it. And had not my Honesty been in the
Case, I would not by any means have been so saucy. Besides, Mrs. Jervis,
consider, it was the Truth; if he does not love to hear of the Summer House and
the Dressing Room, why should he not be ashamed to continue in the same Mind?
But, said she, when you had muttered this to yourself, you might have told him
any thing else. Well, said I, I cannot tell a wilful Lie, and so there is an End
of it. But I find you now give him up, and think there is Danger in staying. --
Lord bless me! I wish I was well our of the House; so it was at the Bottom of a
wet Ditch, on the wildest Common in England.

Why, said she, it signifies nothing to tell you all he said; but it was enough
to make me fear you would not be so safe as I could wish; and, upon my Word,
Pamela, I don't wonder he loves you; for, without Flattery, you are a charming
Girl! and I never saw you look more lovely in my Life, than in that same new
Dress of yours. And then it was such a Surprise upon us all! -- I believe
truly, you owe some of your Danger to the lovely Appearance you made. Then,
said I, I wish the Clothes in the Fire. I expected no Effect from them; but if
any, a quite contrary one.

Hush! said I, Mrs. Jervis, did you not hear something stir in the Closet? No,
silly Girl! said she; your Fears are always awake. -- But indeed, said I, I
think I heard something rustle. -- May-be, says she, the Cat may be got there:
But I hear nothing.

I was hush; but she said, Pr'ythee, my good Girl, make haste to-bed. See if
the Door be fast. So I did, and was thinking to look in the Closet; but hearing
no more Noise, thought it needless, and so went again and sat myself down on
the Bedside, and went on undressing myself. And Mrs. Jervis, being by this
time undressed, stepped into Bed, and bid me hasten, for she was sleepy.

I don't know what was the Matter; but my Heart sadly misgave me; but Mr.
Jonathan's Note was enough to make it do so, with what Mrs. Jervis had said. I
pulled off my Stays, and my Stockens, and all my Clothes to an Under-petticoat;
and then hearing a rustling again in the Closet, I said, Heaven protect us! but
before I say my Prayers, I must look into this Closet. And so was going to it
slip-shod, when, O dreadful out rushed my Master, in a rich silk and silver
Morning Gown.

I scream'd, and ran to the Bed; and Mrs. Jervis scream'd too; and he said,
I Will do you no Harm, if you forbear this Noise; but otherwise take what follows.

Instantly he came to the Bed, (for I had crept into it, to Mrs. Jervis, with
my Coat on, and my Shoes) and, taking me in his Arms, said, Mrs. Jervis, rise,
and just step up Stairs, to keep the Maids from coming down at this Noise; I Will
do no Harm to this Rebel.

O, for Heaven's sake! for Pity's sake! Mrs. Jervis, said I, if I am not
betrayed, don't leave me; and, I beseech you, raise all the House. No, said
Mrs. Jervis, I will not stir, my dear Lamb; I will not leave you. I wonder at
you, Sir, said she; and kindly threw herself upon my Coat, clasping me round
the Waist; you shall not hurt this Innocent, said she; for I will lose my Life
in her Defense. Are there not, said she, enough wicked ones in the World, for
your base Purpose, but you must attempt such a Lamb as this?

He was desperate angry, and threatened to throw her out of the Window; and to
turn her out of the House the next Morning. You need not, Sir, said she; for I
will not stay in it. God defend my poor Pamela till Tomorrow, and we will both
go together. -- Says he, let me but expostulate a Word or two with you, Pamela.
Pray, Pamela, said Mrs. Jervis, don't hear a Word, except he leaves the Bed,
and goes to the other End of the Room. Ay, out of the Room, said I; expostulate
Tomorrow, if you must expostulate!

I found his Hand in my Bosom, and when my Fright let me know it, I was ready
to die; and I sighed, and screamed, and fainted away. And still he had his Arms
about my Neck; and Mrs. Jervis was about my Feet, and upon my Coat. And all in
a cold, clammy Sweat was I. Pamela! Pamela! said Mrs. Jervis, as she tells me
since, O -- h, and gave another Shriek, my poor Pamela is dead for certain! --
And so, to be sure, I was for a time; for I knew nothing more of the Matter,
one Fit following another, till about three Hours after, as it proved to be, I
found myself in Bed, and Mrs. Jervis sitting up on one side, with her Wrapper
about her, and Rachel on the other; and no Master, for the wicked Wretch was
gone. But I was so overjoyed, that I hardly could believe myself; and I said,
which were my first Words, Mrs. Jervis, Mrs. Rachel, can I be sure it is you?
Tell me! can I? -- Where have I been? Hush, my Dear, said Mrs. Jervis; you have
been in Fit after Fit. I never saw any body so frightful in my Life!

By this I judged Mrs. Rachel knew nothing of the Matter; and it seems my
wicked Master had, upon Mrs. Jervis's second Noise on my fainting away, slipped
out, and, as if he had come from his own Chamber, disturbed by the Screaming,
went up to the Maids Room, (who hearing the Noise, lay trembling, and afraid to
stir) and bid them go down and see what was the Matter with Mrs. Jervis and me.
And he charged Mrs. Jervis, and promised to forgive her for what she had said
and done, if she would conceal the Matter. So the Maids came down; for the Men
lie in the Outhouses; and all went up again, when I came to myself a little,
except Rachel, who staid to sit up with me, and bear Mrs. Jervis Company. I
believe they all guess the Matter to be bad enough; though they dare not say any
thing.

When I think of my Danger, and the Freedoms he actually took, though I believe
Mrs. Jervis saved me from worse, and she says he did, (though what can I think,
who was in a Fit, and knew nothing of the Matter?) I am almost distracted.

At first I was afraid of Mrs. Jervis; but I am fully satisfied she is very
good, and I should have been lost but for her; and she takes on grievously
about it. What would have become of me, had she gone out of the Room, to still
the Maids, as he bid her. He Would certainly have shut her out, and then, Mercy on
me! what would have become of your poor Pamela?

I must leave off a little; for my Eyes and my Head are sadly bad. -- This was
a dreadful Trial! This was the worst of all! Oh! that I was out of the Power of
this dreadfully wicked Man! Pray for

Your distressed Daughter.

LETTER XXV.
My dear Father and Mother,
I Did not rise till Ten o'Clock, and I had all the Concerns and Wishes of the
Family, and Multitudes of Inquiries about me. My wicked Master went out early
to hunt; but left Word, he would be in to Breakfast. And so he was.

He came up to our Chamber about Eleven, and had nothing to do to be sorry: for
he was our Master, and so put on sharp Anger at first.

I had great Emotions at his entering the Room, and threw my Apron over my
Head, and fell a crying, as if my Heart would break.

Mrs. Jervis, said he, since I know you, and you me so well, I don't know how
we shall live together for the future. Sir, said she, I will take the Liberty
to say what I think is best for both. I have so much Grief, that you should
attempt to do any Injury to this poor Girl, and especially in my Chamber, that
I should think myself accessory to the Mischief, if I was not to take Notice of
it. Though my Ruin therefore may depend upon it, I desire not to stay; but pray
let poor Pamela and me go together. With all my Heart, said he, and the sooner,
the better. She fell a crying. I find, says he, this Girl has made a Party of
the whole House in her Favor against me. Her Innocence deserves it of us all,
said she very kindly: And I never could have thought, that the Son of my dear
good Lady departed, could have so forfeited his Honor, as to endeavor to
destroy a Virtue he ought to protect. No more of this, Mrs. Jervis, said he; I
will not bear it. As for Pamela, she has a lucky Knack at falling into Fits,
when she pleases. But the cursed Yellings of you both made me not myself. I
intended no Harm to her, as I told you both, if you would have left your
Squallings; and I did no Harm neither, but to myself; for I raised a Hornet's
Nest about my Ears, that, as far as I know, may have stung to Death my
Reputation. Sir, said Mrs. Jervis, then I beg Mr. Longman may take my Accounts,
and I will go away as soon as I can. As for Pamela, she is at her Liberty, I
hope, to go away next Thursday, as she intends?

I sat still; for I could not speak, nor look up, and his Presence discomposed
me extremely; but I was sorry to hear myself the unhappy Occasion of Mrs.
Jervis's losing her Place, and hope that may be still made up.

Well, said he, let Mr. Longman make up your Accounts, as soon as you will; and
Mrs. Jewkes (who is his Housekeeper in Lincolnshire) shall come hither in your
Place, and will not be less obliging, I dare say, than you have been. Said she, I
have never disobliged you till now; and let me tell you, Sir, if you knew what
belonged to your own Reputation or Honor -- No more, no more, said he, of
these antiquated Topics. I have been no bad Friend to you; and I shall always
esteem you, though you have not been so faithful to my Secrets, as I could have
wished, and have laid me open to this Girl, which has made her more afraid of
me than she had Occasion. Well, Sir, said she, after what passed Yesterday, and
last Night, I think I went rather too far in Favor of your Injunctions than
otherwise; and I should have deserved every body's Censure, as the basest of
Creatures, had I been capable of contributing to your lawless Attempts. Still,
Mrs. Jervis, still reflecting upon me, and all for imaginary Faults! for what
Harm have I done the Girl? -- I will not bear it, I Will assure you. But yet, in
Respect to my Mother, I am willing to part friendly with you: Though you ought
both of you to reflect on the Freedom of your Conversation, in relation to me;
which I should have resented more than I do, but that I am conscious I had no
Business to demean myself so as to be in your Closet, where I might have
expected to hear a Multitude of impertinence between you.

Well, Sir, said she, you have no Objection, I hope, to Pamela's going away on
Thursday next? You are mighty solicitous, said he, about Pamela: But, no, not
I; let her go as soon as she will: She is a naughty Girl, and has brought all
this upon herself; and upon me more Trouble than she can have had from me: But
I have overcome it all, and will never concern myself about her.

I have a Proposal made me, added he, since I have been out this Morning, that
I shall go near to embrace; and so wish only, that a discreet Use may be made
of what is past; and there is an End of every thing with me, as to Pamela, I Will
assure you.

I clasped my Hands together through my Apron, overjoyed at this, though I was soon
to go away: For, naughty as he has been to me, I wish his Prosperity with all
my Heart, for my good old Lady's sake.

Well, Pamela, said he, you need not now be afraid to speak to me; tell me what
you lifted up your Hands at? I said not a Word. Says he, If you like what I
have said, give me your Hand upon it. I held my Hand upon my Apron; for I could
not speak to him; and he took hold of it, and pressed it, though less hard than
he did my Arm the Day before. What does the little Fool cover her Face for?
said he: Pull your Apron away; and let me see how you look, after your Freedom
of Speech of me last Night. No wonder you're ashamed to see me. You know you
were very free with my Character.

I could not stand this harbarous Insult, at I took it to be, considering his
Behavior to me; and I then spoke and said, O the Difference between the Minds
of thy Creatures, good God! How shall some be cast down in their Innocence,
while others shall triumph in their Guilt!

And so saying, I went up Stairs to my Chamber, and wrote all this; for though he
vexed me at his Taunting, yet I was pleased to hear he was likely to be
married, and that his wicked Intentions were so happily overcome as to me; and
this made me a little easier. And I hope I have passed the Worst; or else it is
very hard. And yet I shall not think myself at Ease quite, till I am with you.
For, methinks, after all, his Repentance and Amendment are mighty suddenly
resolved upon. But the Divine Grace is not confined to Space; and Remorse may,
and I hope has smitten him to the Heart at once, for his Injuries to poor me!
Yet I will not be too secure neither.

Having Opportunity, I send now what I know will grieve you to the Heart. But I
hope I shall bring my next Scribble myself; and so conclude, though half
brokenhearted,

Your ever-dutiful Daughter.

LETTER XXVI.
Dear Father and Mother,
I Am glad I desired you not to meet me, and John says you will not; for he says,
he told you, he is sure I shall get a Passage well enough, either behind some
one of my Fellow Servants on Horseback, or by Farmer Nichols's Means: But as
for the Chariot he talked to you of, I cannot expect that Favor, to be sure;
and I should not care for it, because it would look so much above me. But
Farmer Brady, they say, has a Chaise with one Horse, and we hope to borrow
that, or hire it rather than fail; though Money runs a little lowish, after what
I have laid out; but I don't care to say so here: though I warrant I might have
what I would of Mrs. Jervis, or Mr. Jonathan, or Mr. Longman; but then how
shall I pay it, you will say? And besides, I don't love to be beholden.

But the chief Reason I Am glad you don't set out to meet me, is the
Uncertainty; for it seems I must stay another Week still, and hope certainly to
go Thursday after. For poor Mrs. Jervis will go at the same time, she says, and
cannot be ready before.

Oh! that I was once well with you! -- Though he is very civil too at present,
and not so cross as he was; and yet he is as vexatious another way, as you
shall hear. For Yesterday he had a rich Suit of Clothes brought home, which
they call a Birthday Suit; for he intends to go to London against next
Birthday, to see the Court, and our Folks will have it he is to be made a
Lord. -- I wish they may make him an honest Man, as he was always thought; but
I have not found it so, Alas for me!

And so, as I was saying, he had these Clothes come home, and he tried them on.
And before he pulled them off, he sent for me, when nobody else was in the
Parlour with him: Pamela, said he, you are so neat and so nice in your own
Dress, (AlacK-a-day, I did'n't know I was!) that you must be a Judge of ours.
How are these Clothes made? Do they fit me? -- I am no Judge, said I, and
please your Honor; but I think they look very fine.

His Waistcoat stood an End with Gold Lace, and he looked very grand. But what
he did last, has made me very serious, and I could make him no Compliments.
Said he, Why don't you wear your usual Clothes? Though I think every thing looks
well upon you (For I still continue in my new Dress). I said, I have no
Clothes, Sir, I ought to call my own, but these: And it is no Matter what such
a one as I wears. Said he, Why, you look very serious, Pamela. I see you can
bear Malice. -- Yes, so I can, Sir, said I, according to the Occasion! Why,
said he, your Eyes always look red, I think. Are you not a Fool to take my last
Freedom so much at Heart? I am sure, you, and that Fool Mrs Jervis, frightened
me, by your hideous Squalling, as much as I could frighten you. That is all we
had for it, said I; and if you could be so afraid of your own Servants knowing
of your Attempts upon a poor unworthy Creature, that is under your Protection
while I stay, surely your Honor ought to be more afraid of God Almighty, in
whose Presence we all stand, in every Action of our Lives, and to whom the
Greatest, as well as the Least, must be accountable, let them think what they
list.

He took my Hand, in a kind of good-humored Mockery, and said, Well said, my
pretty Preacher I When my Lincolnshire Chaplain dies, I Will put thee on a Gown
and Cassock, and thou wilt make a good Figure in his Place! -- I wish, said I, a
little vexed at his Jeer, your Honor's Conscience would be your Preacher, and
then you would need no other Chaplain. Well, well, Pamela, said he, no more of
this unfashionable Jargon. I did not send for you so much for your Opinion of
my new Suit, as to tell you, you are welcome to stay, since Mrs. Jervis desires
it, till she goes. I welcome! said I; I am sure I shall rejoice when I am out
of the House!

Well, said he, you are an ungrateful Baggage; but I am thinking it would be
Pity, with these fair soft Hands, and that lovely Skin, (as he called it, and
took hold of my Hand) that you should return again to hard Work, as you must,
if you go to your Father's; and so I would advise her to take a House in
London, and let Lodgings to us Members of Parliament, when we come to Town; and
such a pretty Daughter as you may pass for, will always fill her House, and
she will get a great deal of Money.

I was sadly vexed at this barbarous Joke; but was ready to cry before, and I
gushed out into Tears, and (endeavoring to get my Hand from him, but in vain)
said, I can expect no better from such a rude Gentleman: Your Behavior, Sir,
to me has been just of a Piece with these Words; nay, I will say it, though you
were to be ever so angry. -- I angry, Pamela! No, no, said he, I have overcome
all that; and as you are to go away, I look upon you now as Mrs. Jervis's
Guest, while you both stay, and not as my Servant; and so you may say what you
will. But I Will tell you, Pamela, why you need not take this Matter in such high
Disdain I -- You have a very pretty romantic Turn for Virtue, and all that. --
And I don't suppose but you will hold it still; and nobody will be able to
prevail upon you. But, my Child, (fleeringly he spoke it) do but consider what
a fine Opportunity you will then have, for a Tale every Day to good Mother
Jervis, and what Subjects for Letter-writing to your Father and Mother, and
what pretty Preachments you may hold forth to the young Gentlemen. Ad's my
Hear.! I think it would be the best Thing you and she could do.

You do well, Sir, said I, to even your Wit to such a poor Maiden as me. But,
Sir, let me say, that if you was not rich and great, and I poor and little, you
would not insult me thus. -- Let me ask you, Sir, if you think this becomes
your fine Clothes, and a Master's Station? Why so serious, my pretty Pamela?
said he; Why so grave? And would kiss me; but my Heart was full, and I said,
Let me alone! I will tell you, if you was a King, and said to me what you have
done, that you are no Gentleman: And I will not stay to be used thus! I will go to
the next Farmer's, and there wait for Mrs. Jervis, if she must go: And I Would have
you know, Sir, that I can stoop to the ordinariest Work of your Scullions, for
all these nasty soft Hands, sooner than bear such ungentlemanly Imputations.

Well, said he, I sent for you in, in high good Humor; but it is impossible to
hold it with such an Impertinent: However I Will keep my Temper. But while I see
you here, pray don't put on those dismal grave Looks; Why, Girl, you should
forbear 'em, if it were but for your Pride-sake; for the Family will think you
are grieving to leave the House. Then, Sir, said I, I will try to convince them
of the contrary, as well as your Honor; for I will endeavor to be more
cheerful while I stay, for that very Reason.

Well, said he, I will set this down by itself, as the first Time that ever
what I advised had any Weight with you. And I will say, said I, as the first
Advice you have given me of late, that was fit to be followed! -- I wish, said
he, (I Am almost ashamed to write it, impudent Gentleman as he is! I wish) I had
thee as quick another Way, as thou art in thy Repartees -- And he laughed, and
I snatched my Hand from him, and I tripp'd away as fast as I could. Ah! thought
I, married? I Am sure it is time you were married, or at this Rate no honest
Maiden ought to live with you!

Why, dear Father and Mother, to be sure he grows quite a Rake! Well, you see,
how easy it is to go from bad to worse, when once People give way to Vice.

How would my poor Lady, had she lived, have grieved to see it! But may-be he
would have been better then! -- Though, it seems, he told Mrs. Jervis, he had an
Eye upon me in his Mother's Lifetime; and he intended to let me know as much
by the bye, he told her! Here Is Shamelessness for you! Sure the World must be
near at an End! for all the Gentlemen about are as bad as he almost, as far as
I can hear! -- And see the Fruits of such bad Examples! There is 'Squire Martin
in the Grove, has had three Lyings-in, it seems, in his House, in three Months
past; one by himself; and one by his Coachman; and one by his Woodmen; and yet
he has turned none of them away. Indeed, how can he, when they but follow his
own vile Example? There is he, and two or three more such as he, within ten
Miles of us; who keep Company, and hunt with our fine Master, truly; and I
suppose he is never the better for their Examples. But, Heaven bless me, say I,
and send me out of this wicked House!

But, dear Father and Mother, what Sort of Creatures must the Womenkind be, do
you think, to give way to such Wickedness? Why, this it is that makes every one
be thought of alike: And, alack-a-day! what a World we live in! for it is grown
more a Wonder that the Men are resisted, than that the Women comply. This, I
suppose, makes me such a Sauce-box, and Bold-face, and a Creature; and all
because I will not be a Sauce-box and Bold-face indeed.

But I am sorry for these Things; one don't know what Arts and Stratagems these
Men may devise to gain their vile Ends; and so I will think as well as I can of
these poor Creatures, and pity them. For you see by my sad Story, and narrow
Escapes, what Hardships poor Maidens go through, whose Lot it is to go out to
Service; especially to Houses where there is not the Fear of God, and good Rule
kept by the Heads of the Family.

You see I am quite grown grave and serious; so it becomes

Your dutiful Daughter.

LETTER XXVII.
Dear Father and Mother,
JOHN says you wept when you read my last Letter, that he carried. I am sorry
you let him see that; for they all mistrust already how Matters are; and as it
is no Credit that I have been attempted, though it is that I have resisted; yet I
am sorry they have Cause to think so evil of my Master from any of us:

Mrs. Jervis has made up her Accounts with Mr. Longman, and will stay in her
Place. I am glad of it, for her own sake, and for my Master's; for she has a
good Master of him; so indeed all have, but poor me! -- and he has a good
Housekeeper in her.

Mr. Longman, it seems, took upon him to talk to my Master, how faithful and
careful of his Interests she was, and how exact in her Accounts; and he told
him, there was no Comparison between her Accounts and Mrs. Jewkers's, at the
Lincolnshire Estate. He said so many fine Things, it seems, of Mrs. Jervis,
that my Master sent for her in Mr. Longman's Presence, and said Pamela might
come along with her: I suppose to mortify me, that I must go, while she was to
stay: But as, when I go away, I am not to go with her, nor was she to go with
me; so I did not matter it much; only it would have been creditable to such a
poor Girl, that the Housekeeper would bear me Company, if I went.

Said he to her, Well, Mrs. Jervis, Mr. Longman says you have made up your
Accounts with him, with your usual Fidelity and Exactness. I had a good mind to
make you an Offer of continuing with me, if you can be a little sorry for your
hasty Words, which indeed were not so respectful as I have deserved at your
Hands. She seemed at a sad Loss what to say, because Mr. Longman was there; and
she could not speak of the Occasion of those Words, which was me.

Indeed, said Mr. Longman, I must needs say before your Face, that since I have
known my Master's Family, I have never found such good Management in it, nor so
much Love and Harmony neither. I wish the Lincolnshire Estate was as well
served! -- No more of that, said my Master; but Mrs. Jervis may stay, if she
will; and here, Mrs. Jervis, pray accept of this, which at the Close of every
Year's Accounts I will present you with, besides your Salary, as long as I find
your Care so useful and agreeable. And he gave her five Guineas. -- She made
him a low Curt'sy, and thanking him, looked to me, as if she would have spoken
to me.

He took her Meaning, I believe; for he said, -- Indeed I love to encourage
Merit and Obligingness, Mr. Longman; but I can never be equally kind to those
who don't deserve it at my Hands, as to those who do; and then he looked full
at me. Mr. Longman, continued he, I said that Girl might come in with Mrs.
Jervis, because they love to be always together. For Mrs. Jervis is very good
to her, and loves her as well as if she was her Daughter. But else -- Mr.
Longman, interrupting him, said, Good to Mrs. Pamela! Ay, Sir, and so she is,
to be sure! But every body must be good to her; for --

He was going on. But my Master said, No more, no more, Mr. Longman. I see old
Men are taken with pretty young Girls, as well as other Folks; and fair Looks
hide many a Fault, where a Person has the Art to behave obligingly. Why, and
please your Honor, said Mr. Longman, every body -- and was going on, I believe
to say something more in my Praise; but he interrupted him, and said, Not a
Word more of this Pamela. I cannot let her stay, I Will assure you; not only for
her own Freedom of Speech, but her Letter-writing of all the Secrets of my
Family. Ay! said the good old Man; I Am sorry for that too! But, Sir -- No more,
I say, said my Master; for my Reputation's so well known, (mighty fine, thought
I!) that I care not what any body writes or says of me: But to tell you the
Truth, (not that it need go further, I think of changing my Condition soon;
and, you know, young Ladies of Birth and Fortune will choose their own Servants,
and that is my chief Reason why Pamela cannot stay. As for the rest, said he, the
Girl is a good sort of Body, take her all together; though I must needs say, a
little pert, since my Mother's Death, in her Answers, and gives me two Words
for one; which I cannot bear; nor is there Reason I should, you know, Mr.
Longman. No, to be sure, Sir, said he; but it is strange methinks, she should be
so mild and meek to every one of us in the House, and forget herself so where
she should show most Respect! Very true, Mr. Longman, said he; but so it is,
I Will assure you; and it was from her Pertness, that Mrs. Jervis and I had the
Words: And I should mind it the less, but that the Girl (there she stands, I
say it to her Face) has Wit and Sense above her Years, and knows better.

I was in great Pain to say something, but yet I knew not what, before Mr.
Longman, and Mrs. Jervis, looked at me, and walked to the Window to hide her
Concern for me. At last, I said, It is for you, Sir, to say what you please;
and for me only to say, God bless your Honor!

Poor Mr. Longman falter'd in his Speech, and was ready to cry. Said my
insulting Master to me, Why pr'ythee, Pamela, now, show thyself as thou art,
before Mr. Longman. Can not give him a Specimen of that Pertness which thou
have exercised upon me sometimes?

Did he not, my dear Father and Mother, deserve all the Truth to be told? Yet I
overcame myself so far, as to say, Well, your Honor may play upon a poor Girl,
that you can answer you, but dare not.

Why, pr'ythee now, Insinuator, said he, say the worst you can before Mr.
Longman and Mrs. Jervis. I challenge the utmost of thy Impertinence; and as you
are going away, and have the Love of every body, I would be a little justified
to my Family, that you have no Reason to complain of Hardships from me, as I
have of pert saucy Answers from you, besides exposing me by your Letters.

Surely, Sir, said I, I am of no Consequence equal to this, in your Honor's
Family, that such a great Gentleman as you, my Master, should need to justify
yourself about me. I am glad Mrs. Jervis stays with your Honor; and I know I
have not deserved to stay; and more than that, I don't desire to stay.

Ads-bobbers! said Mr. Longman, and ran to me; don't say so, don't say so, dear
Mrs. Pamela! We all love you dearly; and pray down of your Knees, and ask his
Honor Pardon, and we will all become Pleaders in a Body, and I, and Mrs.
Jervis too, at the Head of it, to beg his Honor's Pardon, and to continue you,
at least till his Honor marries. -- No, Mr. Longman, said I, I cannot ask; nor
will I stay, if I might. All I desire, is, to return to my poor Father and
Mother; and though I love you all, I will not stay. -- O well-a-day, well-a-day!
said the good old Man, I did not expect this? -- When I had got Matters thus
far, and had made all up for Mrs. Jervis, I was in Hopes to have got a double
Holiday of Joy for all the Family, in your Pardon too. Well, said my Master,
this is a little Specimen of what I told you, Mr. Longman. You see there is a
Spirit you did not expect.

Mr. Jervis told me after, that she could stay no longer, to hear me so hardly
used, and must have spoken, had she stayed, what would never have been forgiven
her; so she went out. I looked after her to go too; but my Master said, Come,
Pamela, give another Specimen, I desire you, to Mr. Longman: I am sure you
must, if you will but speak. Well, Sir, said I, since it seems your Greatness
wants to be justified by my Lowness, and I have no Desire you should suffer in
the Sight of your Family, I will say, on my bended Knees, (and so I kneeled
down) that I have been a very faulty, and a very ungrateful Creature to the
best of Masters: I have been very perverse and saucy; and have deserved nothing
at your Hands, but to be turned out of your Family with Shame and Disgrace. I,
therefore, have nothing to say for myself, but that I am not worthy to stay,
and so cannot wish to stay, and will not stay: And so God Almighty bless you,
and you, Mr. Longman, and good Mrs Jervis, and every living Soul of the Family!
and I will pray for you as long as I live. -- And so I rose up, and was forced
to lean upon my Master's Elbow-chair, or I should have sunk down.

The poor old Man wept more than I, and said, Ads-bobbers, was ever the like
heard! It Is too much, too much; I cannot bear it. As I hope to live, I am quite
melted. Dear Sir, forgive her: The poor Thing prays for you; she prays for us
all! She owns her Fault; yet will not be forgiven! I profess I know not what to
make of it.

My Master himself, hardened Wretch as he was, seemed a little moved, and took
his Handkerchief out of his Pocket, and walked to the Window: What Sort of a
Day is it? said he. -- And then getting a little more Hard-heartedness, he
said, Well, you may be gone from my Presence, thou strange Medley of
Inconsistence! but you shall not stay after your Time in the House.

Nay, pray, Sir, pray, Sir, said the good old Man, relent a little.
Ads-heartlikins! you young Gentlemen are made of Iron and Steel, I think: I Am
sure, said he, my Heart's turned into Butter, and is running away at my Eyes. I
never felt the like before. -- Said my Master, with an imperious Tone, Get out
of my Presence, Hussy; I cannot bear you in my Sight. Sir, said I, I Am going as
fast as I can.

But indeed, my dear Father and Mother, my Head was so giddy, and my Limbs
trembled so, that I was forced to go holding by the Wainscot all the way with
both my Hands, and thought I should not have got to the Door: But when I did,
as I hoped this would be my last Interview with this terrible hard-hearted
Master, I turned about, and made a low Curt'sy, and said, God bless you, Sir!
God bless you, Mr. Longman! And I went into the Lobby leading to the great
Hall, and dropped into the first Chair; for I could get no further a good while.

I leave all these Things to your Reflection, my dear Parents; but I can write
no more. My poor Heart's almost broken! Indeed it is -- O when shall I get
away! -- Send me, good God, in Safety, once more to my poor Father's peaceful
Cot! -- and there the worst that can happen will be Joy in Perfection to what I
now bear! -- O pity

Your distressed Daughter.

LETTER XXVIII.
My dear Father and Mother,
I Must write on, though I shall come so soon; for now I have hardly any thing
else to do. For I have finished all that lay upon me to do, and only wait the
good Time of setting out. Mrs. Jervis said, I must be low in Pocket, for what I
had laid out; and so would have presented me with two Guineas of her Five; but
I could not take them of her, because, poor Gentlewoman, she pays old Debts for
her Children that were extravagant, and wants them herself. This, though, was
very good in her.

I am sorry, I shall have but little to bring with me; but I know you will not,
you are so good! -- and I will work the harder, when I come home, if I can get
a little Plain-work, or any thing to do. But all your Neighborhood is so poor,
that I fear I shall want Work; but may-be Dame Mumford can help me to
something, from some good Family she is acquainted with.

Here, what a sad Thing it is! I have been brought up wrong, as Matters stand.
For, you know, my good Lady, now in Heaven, loved Singing and Dancing; and, as
she would have it I had a Voice, she made me learn both; and often and often
has she made me sing her an innocent Song, and a good Psalm too, and dance
before her. And I must learn to flower and draw too, and to work fine Work with
my Needle; why, all this too I have got pretty tolerably at my Fingers End, as
they say; and she used to praise me, and was a good Judge of such Matters.

Well now, what is all this to the Purpose, as Things have turned about?

Why, no more nor less, than that I am like the Grasshopper in the Fable, which
I have read of in my Lady's Books: and I will write it down, in the very Words:
"As the Ants were airing their Provisions one Winter, a hungry Grasshopper (as
suppose it was poor I) begged a Charity of them. They told him, That he should
have wrought in Summer, if he would not have wanted in Winter. Well, says the
Grasshopper, but I was not idle neither; for I sung out the whole Season. Nay,
then, said they, you will even do well to make a merry Year of it, and dance in
Winter to the Tune you sung in Summer."

So I shall make a fine Figure with my Singing and my Dancing, when I come home
to you! Nay, I doubt, I shall even be unfit for a May Day Holiday-time; for
these Minuits, Rigadoons, and French Dances, that I have been practicing, will
make me but ill Company for my rural Milk-maid Companions that are to be. To be
sure I had better, as Things stand, have learned to wash and scour, and brew
and bake, and suchlike. But I hope, if I cannot get Work, and can get a Place,
to learn these soon, if any body will have the Goodness to bear with me, till I
can learn. For, I bless God, I have an humble and a teachable Mind, for all
what my Master says; and, next to his Grace, that is all my Comfort: For I
shall think nothing too mean that is honest. It may be a little hard at first,
but woe to my proud Heart, if I shall find it so, on Trial! for I will make it
bend to its Condition, or will break it.

I have read of a good Bishop that was to be burnt for his Religion; and he
tried how he could bear it, by putting his Fingers into the lighted Candle: So
I, the other Day, tried, when Rachel's Back was turned, if I could not scour the
Pewter Plate she had begun. I see I could do it by Degrees; though I blister'd my
Hand in two Places.

All the Matter is, if I could get Needle Work enough, I would not spoil my
Fingers by this rough Work. But if I cannot, I hope to make my Hands as red as a
Blood-pudden, and as hard as a Beechen Trencher, to accommodate them to my
Condition. -- But I must break off, here is somebody coming.

It Is only our Hannah with a Message from Mrs. Jervis. -- But, hold, here is
somebody else. -- Well, it is only Rachel.

I am as much frighted as were the City Mouse and the Country Mouse, in the
same Book of Fables, at every thing that stirs. Oh! I have a Power of these
Things to entertain you with in Winter Evenings, when I come home. If I can but
get Work, with a little Time for Reading, I hope we shall be very happy, over
our Peat Fires.

What made me hint to you, that I should bring but little with me, is this:

You must know, I did intend to do, as I have this Afternoon: And that is, I
took all my Clothes, and all my Linen, and I divided them into three Parcels,
as I had before told Mrs. Jervis I intended to do; and I said, It is now
Monday, Mrs. Jervis, and I am to go away on Thursday Morning betimes; so, though
I know you don't doubt my Honesty, I beg you will look over my poor Matters,
and let every one have what belongs to them; for, said I, you know I am
resolved to take with me only what I can properly call my own.

Said she, (I did not know her Drift then; to be sure she meant well; but I did
not thank her for it, when I did know it) Let your Things be brought down into
the Green-room, and I will do any thing you would have me do.

With all my Heart, said I, Green-room or anywhere; but I think you might step
up, and see 'em as they lie.

However, I fetched 'em down, and laid them in three Parcels, as before; and,
when I had done, I went down to call her up to look at them.

Now, it seems, she had prepared my Master for this Scene, unknown to me; and
in this Green-room was a Closet, with a Sash-door and a Curtain before it; for
there she puts her Sweetmeats and such Things; and she did it, it seems, to
turn his Heart, as knowing what I intended, I suppose that he should make me
take the Things; for if he had, I should have made Money of them, to help us
when we got together; for, to be sure, I could never have appeared in them.

Well, as I was saying, he had got, unknown to me, in this Closet; I suppose
while I went to call Mrs. Jervis: And she since told me, it was at his Desire,
when she told him something of what I intended, or else she would not have done
it: Though I have Reason, I Am sure, to remember the last Closet-work.

So I said, when she came up, Here, Mrs. Jervis, is the first Parcel; I will
spread it all abroad. These are the Things my good Lady gave me. -- In the
first place, said I -- and so I went on describing the Clothes and Linen my
Lady had given me, mingling Blessings, as I proceeded, for her Goodness to me;
and when I had turned over that Parcel, I said, Well, so much for the first
Parcel, Mrs. Jervis; that was my Lady's Gifts.

Now I come to the Presents of my dear virtuous Master: Hay, you know, Closet
for that! Mrs. Jervis. She laughed, and said, I never saw such a comical Girl
in my Life. But go on. I will, Mrs. Jervis, said I, as soon as I have opened
the Bundle; for I was as brisk and as pert as could be, little thinking who
heard me.

Now here, Mrs. Jervis, said I, are my ever worthy Master's Presents; and then
I particularized all those in the second Bundle.

After which, I turned to my own, and said,

Now, Mrs. Jervis, comes poor Pamela's Bundle, and a little one it is, to the
others. First, here is a Calico Nightgown, that I used to wear of Mornings.
'Twill be rather too good for me when I get home; but I must have something.
Then there is a quilted Calimanco Coat, and a Pair of Stockens I bought of the
Pedlar, and my Straw-hat with blue Strings; and a Remnant of Scots Cloth, which
will make two Shirts and two Shifts, the same I have on, for my poor Father and
Mother. And here are four other Shifts, one the Fellow to that I have on;
another pretty good one, and the other two old fine ones, that will serve me to
turn and wind with at home, for they are not worth leaving behind me; and here
are two Pair of Shoes; I have taken the Lace off, which I will burn, and may-be
will fetch me some little Matter at a Pinch, with an old silver Buckle or two.

What do you laugh for, Mrs. Jervis? said I. -- Why you are like an April Day;
you cry and laugh in a Breath.

Well, let me seen; ay, here is a Cotton Handkerchief I bought of the Pedlar;
there should be another somewhere. O here it is! And here too are my new-bought
knit Mittens. And this is my new Flannel Coat, the Fellow to that I have on And
in this Parcel pinned together, are several Pieces of printed Calico, Remnants
of Silks, and suchlike, that, if good Luck should happen, and I should get
Work, would serve for Robings and Facings, and suchlike Uses. And here too are
a Pair of Pockets; they are too fine for me; but I have no worse. Bless me!
said I, I did not think I had so many good Things!

Well, Mrs. Jervis, said I, you have seen all my Store, and I will now sit
down, and tell you a Piece of my Mind.

Be brief then, said she, my good Girl; for she was afraid, she said
afterward, that I should say too much.

Why then the Case is this: I am to enter upon a Point of Equity and
Conscience, Mrs. Jervis; and I must beg, if you love me, you would let me have my
own Way. Those Things there of my Lady's, I can have no Claim to, so as to take
them away; for she gave them me, supposing I was to wear them in her Service,
and to do Credit to her bountiful Heart. But since I am to be turned away, you
know, I cannot wear them at my poor Father's; for I should bring all the little
Village upon my Back: and so I resolve not to have them.

Then, Mrs. Jervis, said I, I have far less Right to these of my worthy
Master's. For you see what was his Intention in giving them to me. So they were
to be the Price of my Shame, and if I could make use of them, I should think I
should never prosper with them; and besides, you know, Mrs. Jervis, if I would
not do the good Gentleman's Work, why should I take his Wages? So in
Conscience, in Honor, in every thing, I have nothing to say to thee, thou
second wicked Bundle!

But, said I, come to my Arms, my dear third Parcel, the Companion of my
Poverty, and the Witness of my Honesty; and may I never deserve the least Rag
that is contained in thee, when I forfeit a Title to that Innocence that I hope
will ever be the Pride of my Life! and then I am sure it will be my highest
Comfort at my Death, when all the Riches and Pomps of the World will be worse
than the vilest Rags that can be worn by Beggars! And so I hugged my third
Bundle.

But, said I, Mrs. Jervis, (and she wept to hear me) one thing more I have to
trouble you with, and that is all.

There are Four Guineas, you know, that came out of my good Lady's Pocket, when
she died, that, with some Silver, my Master gave me: Now these same Four
Guineas I sent to my poor Father and Mother, and they have broken them; but
would make them up, if I would: And if you think it should be so, it shall. But
pray tell me honestly your Mind: As to the Three Years before my Lady's Death,
do you think, as I had no Wages, I may be supposed to be Quits? -- By Quits, I
cannot mean, that my poor Services should be equal to my Lady's Goodness; for
that is impossible. But as all her Learning and Education of me, as Matters have
turned, will be of little Service to me now; for it had been better for me to
have been brought up to hard Labor to be sure; for that I must turn to at
last, if I cannot get a Place (and you know, in Places too, one is subject to
such Temptations as are dreadful to think of): So I say, by Quits, I only mean,
as I return all the good Things she gave me, whether I may not set my little
Services against my Keeping; because, as I said, my Learning is not now in the
Question; and I am sure my dear good Lady would have thought so, had she lived:
But that, too, is now out of the Question. Well then, if so, I would ask,
whether in above this Year that I have lived with my Master, as I am resolved
to leave all his Gifts behind me, I may not have earned, besides my Keeping,
these Four Guineas, and these poor Clothes here upon my Back, and in my third
Bundle? Now tell me your Mind freely without Favor or Affection.

Alas! my dear Maiden, said she, you make me unable to speak to you at all: To
be sure, it will be the highest Affront that can be offered, for you to leave
any of these Things behind you; and you must take all your Bundles with you, or
my Master will never forgive you.

Well, well, Mrs. Jervis, said I, I don't care; I have been too much used to be
snubb'd and hardly treated by my Master, of late. I have done him no Harm; and
I shall always pray for him, and wish him happy. But I don't deserve these
Things, I know I don't. Then I cannot wear them, if I should take them; so they
can be of no Use to me: And I trust I shall not want the poor Pittance, that is
all I desire to keep Life and Soul together. Bread and Water I can live upon,
Mrs. Jervis, with Content. Water I shall get any-where; and if I cannot get me
Bread, I will live like a Bird in Winter upon Hips and Haws, and at other times
upon Pig-nuts, and Potatoes, or Turnips, or any thing. So what Occasion have I
for these Things? -- But all I ask is about these Four Guineas, and if you
think I need not return them, that is all I want to know. -- To be sure, my
Dear, you need not, said she; you have well earned them by that Waistcoat only.
No, I think not so, in that only; but in the Linen* and other Things, do you
think I have? Yes, yes, said she, and more. And my Keeping allowed for, I mean,
said I, and these poor Clothes on my Back, besides? Remember that, Mrs. Jervis.
Yes, my dear Odd-ones, no doubt you have! Well then, said I, I am as happy as a
Princess. I am quite as rich as I wish to be! And, once more, my dear third
Bundle, I will hug thee to my Bosom. And I beg you will say nothing of all this
till I am gone, that my Master may not be so angry, but that I may go in Peace;
for my Heart, without other Matters, will be ready to break to part with you
all.

Now, Mrs. Jervis, said I, as to one Matter more: And that is my Master's last
Usage of me, before Mr. Longman. -- Said she, Pr'ythee, dear Pamela, step to my
Chamber, and fetch me a Paper I left on my Table. I have something to show you
in it. I will, said I, and stepped down but that was only a Fetch to take the
Orders of my Master, I found. It seems he said, he thought two or three times
to have burst out upon me; but he could not stand it, and wished I might not
know he was there. But I tript up again so nimbly, (for there was no Paper)
that I just saw his Back, as if coming out of that Green Room, and going into
the next to it, the first Door that was open. -- I whipped in, and shut the Door
and bolted it. O Mrs. Jervis, said I, what have you done by me? -- I see I
cannot confide in any body. I am beset on all Hands! Wretched, wretched Pamela!
where shall thou expect a Friend, if Mrs. Jervis joins to betray me thus? --
She made so many Protestations, (telling me all, and that he owned I had made
him wipe his Eyes two or three times, and said she hoped it would have a good
Effect, and remembered me, that I had said nothing but would rather move
Compassion than Resentment) that I forgave her. But O! that I was safe from
this House! for never poor Creature sure was so fluster'd as I have been for so
many Months together! -- I am called down from this most tedious Scribble. I
wonder what will next befall

Your dutiful Daughter.
Mrs. Jervis says, she is sure I shall have the Chariot to carry me home to
you. Though this will look too great for me, yet it will show as if I was not
turned away quite in Disgrace. The traveling Chariot is come from
Lincolnshire, and I fansy I shall go in that; for the other is quite grand.



LETTER XXIX.
My dear Father and Mother,
I Write again, though, may-be, I shall bring it to you in my Pocket myself. For
I shall have no Writeing, nor Writing-time, I hope, when I come to you. This is
Wednesday Morning, and I shall, I hope, set out to you Tomorrow Morning; but I
have had more Trials, and more Vexation; but of another Complexion too a
little, though all from the same Quarter.

Yesterday my Master, after he came from Hunting, sent for me. I went with
great Terror; for I expected he would storm, and be in a fine Passion with me
for my Freedom of Speech before: So I was resolved to begin first, with
Submission, to disarm his Anger; and I fell upon my Knees as soon as I saw him;
and I said, Good Sir, let me beseech you, as you hope to be forgiven yourself,
and for the sake of my dear good Lady your Mother, who recommended me to you
with her last Words, to forgive me all my Faults: And only grant me this
Favor, the last I have to ask you, that you will let me depart your House with
Peace and Quietness of Mind, that I may take such a Leave of my dear
Fellow Servants as befits me; and that my Heart be not quite broken.

He took me up, in a kinder manner, than ever I had known; and he said, Shut
the Door, Pamela, and come to me in my Closet: I want to have a little serious
Talk with you. How can I, Sir, said I, how can I? and wrung my Hands! O pray,
Sir, let me go out of your Presence, I beseech you. By the God that made me,
said he, I Will do you no Harm. Shut the Parlour-door, and come to me in my
Library.

He then went into his Closet, which is his Library, and full of rich Pictures
besides; a noble Apartment, though called a Closet, and next the private Garden,
into which it has a Door that opens. I shut the Parlour-door, as he bid me; but
stood at it irresolute. Place some Confidence in me surely, said he, you may,
when I have spoken thus solemnly. So I crept toward him with trembling Feet,
and my Heart throbbing through my Handkerchief. Come in, said he, when I bid
you. I did so. Pray, Sir, said I, pity and spare me. I will, said he, as I
hoped to be saved. He sat down upon a rich Settee; and took hold of my Hand,
and said, Don't doubt me, Pamela. From this Moment I will no more consider you
as my Servant; and I desire you will not use me with Ingratitude for the Kindness
I am going to express toward you. This a little emboldened me; and he said,
holding both my Hands in his, You have too much Wit and good Sense not to
discover, that I, in spite of my Heart, and all the Pride of it, cannot but
love you. Yes, look up to me, my sweet-fac'd Girl! I must say I love you; and
have put on a Behavior to you, that was much against my Heart, in hopes to
frighten you to my Purposes. You see I own it ingenuously; and don't play your
Sex upon me for it.

I was unable to speak, and he seeing me too much oppressed with Confusion to
go on in that Strain, said, Well, Pamela, let me know in what Situation of Life
is your Father: I know he is a poor Man; but is he as low and as honest, as he
was when my Mother took you?

Then I could speak a little, and with a down Look, (and I felt my Face glow
like Fire) I said, Yes, Sir, as poor and as honest too; and that is my Pride.
Says he, I will do something for him, if it be not your Fault, and make all
your Family happy. Ah! Sir, said I, he is happier already than ever he can be,
if his Daughter's Innocence is to be the Price of your Favor. And I beg you
will not speak to me on the only Side that can wound me. I have no Design of
that sort, said he. O Sir, said I, tell me not so, tell me not so! -- It Is
easy, said he, for me to be the Making of your Father, without injuring you.
Well, Sir, said I, if this can be done, let me know how; and all I can do with
Innocence shall be the Study and Practice of my Life. -- But Oh! what can such
a poor Creature as I do, and do my Duty? -- Said he, I would have you stay a
Week or a Fortnight only, and behave yourself with Kindness to me: I stoop to
beg it of you, and you shall see all shall turn out beyond your Expectation. I
see, said he, you are going to answer otherwise than I would have you; and I
begin to be vexed I should thus meanly sue; and so I will say, that your
Behavior before honest Longman, when I used you as I did, and you could so
well have vindicated yourself, has quite charmed me. And though I am not pleased
with all you said Yesterday while I was in the Closer, yet you have moved me
more to admire you than before; and I am awakened to see more Worthiness in
you, than ever I saw in any Lady in the World. All the Servants, from the
highest to the lowest, dote upon you, instead of envying you; and look upon you
in so superior a Light, as speaks what you ought to be. I have seen more of
your Letters than you imagine, (This surprised me!) and am quite overcome with
your charming Manner of Writing, so free, so easy, and many of your Sentiments
so much above your Years, and your Sex; and all put together, makes me, as I
tell you, love you to Extravagance. Now, Pamela, when I have stooped so low as
to acknowledge all this, oblige me only to stay another Week or Fortnight, to
give me time to bring about some certain Affairs; and you shall see how much
you shall find your Account in it.

I trembled to find my poor Heart giving Way. -- O good Sir, said I, spare a
poor Maiden, that cannot look up to you, and speak. My Heart is full: And why
should you wish to undo me! -- Only oblige me, said he, to stay a Fortnight
longer, and John shall carry Word to your Father, that I will see him in the
Time, either here or at the Swan in his Village. O Sir, said I, my Heart will
burst; but on my bended Knees, I beg you to let me go Tomorrow, as I designed:
And don't offer to tempt a poor Creature, whose whole Will would be to do
yours, if my Virtue would permit. -- It shall permit it, said he; for I intend
no Injury to you, God is my Witness! -- Impossible! said I; I cannot, Sir,
believe you, after what has passed: How many Ways are there to undo poor
Creatures! Good God, protect me this one Time, and send me but to my dear
Father's Cot in Safety! -- Strange, damned Fate! says he, that when I speak so
solemnly, I cannot be believed! -- What should I believe, Sir? said I; what can
I believe? What have you said, but that I am to stay a Fortnight longer? and
what then is to become of me? -- My Pride of Birth and Fortune (damn them both!
said he, since they cannot obtain Credit with you, but must add to your
Suspicions) will not let me stoop at once; and I ask you but a Fortnight's
Stay, that after this Declaration, I may pacify those proud Demands upon me.

O how my Heart throbb'd! and I began, for I did not know what I did, to say
the Lord's Prayer. None of your Beads to me, Pamela! said he; thou art a
perfect Nun, I think.

But I said aloud, with my Eyes lifted up to Heaven, Lead me not into
Temptation. But deliver me from Evil, O my good God! He hugged me in his Arms,
and said, Well, my dear Girl, then you stay this Fortnight, and you shall see
what I will do for you. -- I Will leave you a Moment, and walk into the next
Room, to give you time to think of it, and to show you I have no Design upon
you. Well, this, I thought, did not look amiss.

He went out, and I was tortured with twenty different Thoughts in a Minute;
sometimes I thought, that to stay a Week or Fortnight longer in this House to
obey him, while Mrs. Jervis was with me could do no great Harm: But then,
thought I, how do I know what I may be able to do? I have withstood his Anger;
but may I not relent at his Kindness? -- How shall I stand that! -- Well, I
hope, thought I, by the same protecting Grace in which I will always confide!
-- But then, what has he promised? Why he will make my poor Father and Mother's
Life comfortable. O, said I to myself, that is a rich Thought; but let me not
dwell upon it, for fear I should indulge it to my Ruin. -- What can he do for
me, poor Girl as I am! -- What can his Greatness stoop to! He talks, thought I,
of his Pride of Heart, and Pride of Condition; O these are in his Head, and in
his Heart too, or he would not confess them to me at such an Instant. Well
then, thought I, this can be only to seduce me! -- He has promised nothing. --
But I am to see what he will do, if I stay a Fortnight; and this Fortnight,
thought I again, is no such great Matter; and I shall see in a few Days, how he
carries it. -- But then, when I again reflected upon the Distance between him
and me, and his now open Declaration of Love, as he called it, and that after
this, he would talk with me on that Subject more plainly than ever, and I
should be less armed, may-be, to withstand him; and then I bethought myself,
why, if he meant no Dishonor, he should not speak before Mrs. Jervis; and the
odious frightful Closet came again into my Head, and my narrow Escape upon it;
and how easy it might be for him to send Mrs. Jervis and the Maids out of the
way; and so that all the Mischief he designed me might be brought about in less
than that Time; I resolved to go away, and trust all to Providence, and nothing
to myself. And how ought I to be thankful for this Resolution! -- as you shall
hear.

But just as I have writ to this Place, John sends me Word, that he is going
this Minute your Way; and so I will send so far as I have written, and hope, by
tomorrow Night, to ask your Blessings, at your own poor, but happy Abode, and
tell you the rest by Word of Mouth; and so I rest, 'till then, and for ever,

Your dutiful Daughter.

LETTER XXX.
My dear Father and Mother,
I Will continue my Writing still, because, may-be, I shall like to read it,
when I am with you, to see what Dangers I have been enabled to escape; and though
I bring it along with me.

I told you my Resolution, my happy Resolution, as I have Reason to think it:
And just then he came in again, with great Kindness in his Looks, and said, I
make no Doubt, Pamela, you will stay this Fortnight to oblige me. I knew not
how to frame my Words so as to deny, and yet not make him storm. But, said I,
Forgive, Sir, your poor distressed Maiden. I know I cannot possibly deserve any
Favor at your Hands, consistent with Virtue; and I beg you will let me go to
my poor Father. Why, said he, thou art the veriest Fool that I ever knew. I
tell you I will see your Father; I Will send for him hither tomorrow, in my
traveling Chariot, if you will; and I Will let him know what I intend to do for
him and you. What, Sir, may I ask you, can that be? Your Honor's noble Estate
may easily make him happy, and not unuseful perhaps to you in some respect or
other. But what Price am I to pay for all this? -- You shall be happy as you
can wish, said he, I do assure you: And here I will now give you this Purse, in
which are Fifty Guineas, which I will allow your Father yearly, and find an
Employ suitable to his Liking, to deserve that and more: Pamela, he shall never
want, depend upon it. I would have given you still more for him; but that
perhaps you would suspect I intended it as a Design upon you. -- O Sir, said I,
take back your Guineas; I will not touch one, nor will my Father, I am sure,
till he knows what is to be done for them; and particularly what is to become
of me. Why then, Pamela, said he, suppose I find a Man of Probity and genteel
Calling for a Husband for you, that shall make you a Gentlewoman as long as you
live? -- I want no Husband, Sir, said I; for now I began to see him in all his
black Colors! -- But being in his Power so, I thought I would a little
dissemble. But, said he, you are so pretty, that go where you will, you will
never be free from the Designs of some or other of our Sex; and I shall think I
don't answer the Care of my dying Mother for you, who committed you to me, if I
don't provide you a Husband to protect your Virtue and your Innocence; and a
worthy one I have thought of for you.

O black, perfidious Creature! thought I, what an Implement art thou in the
Hands of Lucifer, to ruin the innocent Heart! -- But still I dissembled; for I
feared much both him and the Place I was in. But, whom, pray, Sir, have you
thought of? -- Why, said be, young Mr. Williams, my Chaplain, in Lincolnshire,
who will make you happy. Does he know, Sir, said I, any thing of your Honor's
Intentions? -- No, my Girl, said he, and kissed me (much against my Will; for
his very Breath was now Poison to me); but his Dependence upon my Favor, and
your Beauty and Merit, will make him rejoice at my Kindness to him. Well, Sir,
said I, then it is time enough to consider of this Matter; and this cannot
hinder me from going to my Father's: For what will staying a Fortnight longer
signify to this? Your Honor's Care and Goodness may extend to me there as well
as here; and Mr. Williams, and all the World, shall know that I am not ashamed
of my Father's Poverty.

He would kiss me again, and I said, if I am to think of Mr. Williams, or any
body, I beg you will not be so free with me: That is not pretty, I Am sure. Well,
said he, but you stay this next Fortnight, and in that time I Will have both
Williams and your Father here; for I will have the Match concluded in my House;
and when I have brought it on, you shall settle it as you please together. Mean
time take and send only these Fifty Pieces to your Father, as an Earnest of my
Favor, and I Will make you all happy. -- Sir, said I, I beg at least two Hours
to consider of this. I shall, said he, be gone out in one Hour; and I would
have you write to your Father, what I propose, and John shall carry it on
purpose, and he shall take the Purse with him for the good old Man, if you
approve it. Sir, said I, I will then let you know in one Hour my Resolution. Do
so, said he; and gave me another Kiss, and let me go.

O how I rejoiced I had got out of his Clutches! -- So I write you this, that
you may see how Matters stand; for I am resolved to come away if possible.
Base, wicked, treacherous Gentleman, as he is!

So here was a Trap laid for your poor Pamela! I tremble to think of it! O what
a Scene of Wickedness was here laid down for all my wretched Life!
Black-hearted Wretch! how I hate him? -- For at first, as you will see by what I
have written, he would have made me believe other Things; and this of Mr.
Williams, I believe, came into his Head after he walked out from his Closet, as
I suppose, to give himself time to think how to delude me better: But the
Covering was now too thin, and easy to be seen through.

I went to my Chamber, and the first thing I did, was to write to him; for I
thought it was best not to see him again, if I could help it; and I put it
under his Parlour-door, after I had copied it, as follows: 'Honour'd Sir,
'YOUR last Proposal to me convinces me, that I ought not to stay; but to go to
my Father, if it were but to ask his Advice about Mr. Williams. And I am so set
upon it, that I am not to be persuaded. So, honored Sir, with a thousand
Thanks for all Favors, I will set out tomorrow early; and the Honor you
designed me, as Mrs. Jervis tells me, of your Chariot, there will be no
Occasion for; because I can hire, I believe, Farmer Brady's Chaise. So, begging
you will not take it amiss, I shall ever be

'Your dutiful Servant.
'As to the Purse, Sir, my poor Father, to be sure, will not forgive me, if I take
it, 'till he can know how to deserve it. Which is impossible.'

So he has just now sent Mrs. Jervis to tell me, That since I am resolved to
go, go I may, and the traveling Chariot shall be ready; but it shall be worse
for me; for that he will never trouble himself about me as long as he lives.
Well, so I get out of the House, I care not; only I should have been glad I
could, with innocence, have made you, my dear Parents, happy.

I cannot imagine the Reason of it, but John, who I thought was gone with my
last, is but now going; and he sends to know if I have any thing else to carry.
So I break off to send you this with the former.

I am now preparing for my Journey, and about taking Leave of my good
Fellow Servants. And if I have not time to write, I must tell you the rest,
when I am so happy as to be with you.

One Word more, I slip in a Paper of Verses, on my going; sad poor Stuff! but
as they come from me, you will not dislike them, may-be. I showed them to Mrs.
Jewkes, and she liked them; and took a Copy; and made me sing them to her, and
in the Green Room too; but I looked into the Closet first. I will only add,
that I am

Your dutiful Daughter.






Let me just say, That he has this Moment sent me Five Guineas by Mrs. Jervis,
as a Present for my Pocket: So I shall be very rich; for as she brought them, I
thought I might take them. He says he will not see me: And I may go when I will in
the Morning. And Lincolnshire Robin shall drive me; but he is so angry, he
orders that nobody shall go out at the Door with me, not so much as into the
Coach-yard. Well! I cannot help it, not I* but does not this expose himself more
than me?

But John waits, and I would have brought this and the other myself; but he
says, he has put it up among other things, and so can take both as well as one.

John is very good, and very honest; I am under great Obligations to him! I Would
give him a Guinea, now I Am so rich, if I thought he would take it. I hear nothing
of my Lady's Clothes, and those my Master gave me: For I told Mrs. Jervis, I
would not take them; but I fansy, by a Word or two that was dropped, they will be
sent after me, Dear Sirs! what a rich Pamela you will have, if they should! But
as I cannot wear them, if they do, I don't desire them; and, if I have them,
will turn them into Money, as I can have Opportunity. Well, no more -- I Am in a
fearful Hurry!

VERSES on my going away.
I
MY Fellow Servants dear, attend
To these few Lines, which I have penned:
I Am sure they are from your honest Friend,
And Wisher-well, poor Pamela.
II.
I from a State of low Degree
Was taken by our good Lady.
Some say it better had been for me,
I Would still been rustic Pamela.
III.
But yet, my Friends, I hope not so:
For, though I to my Station low
Again return, I joyful go,
And think no Shame to Pamela.
IV.
For what makes out true Happiness,
But Innocence, and inward Peace?
And that, thank God, I do possess:
O happy, happy Pamela!
V.
My future Lot I cannot know:
But this, I Am sure, wherever I go,
Whatever I am, whatever I do,
I Will be the grateful Pamela.
VI.
No sad Regrets my Heart annoy.
I Will pray for all your Peace and Joy,
From Master high, to Scullion Boy,
For all your Loves to Pamela:
VII.
One thing or two I Have more to say;
God's holy Will, be sure, obey;
And for our Master always pray,
As ever shall poor Pamela.
VIII.
For, Oh! we pity should the Great,
Instead of envying their Estate;
Temptations always on 'em wait,
Exempt from which are such as we.
IX.
Their Riches often are a Snare;
At best, a pampered weighty Care:
Their Servants far more happy are:
At least, so thinks Pamela.
X.
Your Parents and Relations love:
Let them your Duty ever prove;
And you will be blessed from above,
As will, I hope, poor Pamela.
XI.
For if ashamed I should be
Of my dear Parents low Degree,
I Am sure it would been worse for me,
God had not blessed Pamela.
XII.
Thrice happy may you ever be,
Each one in his and her Degree;
And, Sirs, whenever you think of me,
Pray for Content to Pamela.
XIII.
Yes, pray for my Content and Peace;
For, rest assured, I Will never cease
To pray for all your Joys Increase,
While Life is lent to Pamela.
XIV.
On God all future Good depends:
Him let us serve. My Sonnet ends,
With Thank-ye, thank-ye, honest Friends,
For all your Loves to Pamela.
HERE it is necessary to observe, that the fair Pamela's Trials were not yet
over; but the worst of all were to come, at a Time when she thought them at an
End, and that she was returning to her Father: For when her Master found her
Virtue was not to be subdued, and he had in vain tried to conquer his Passion
for her, being a Gentleman of Pleasure and Intrigue, he had ordered his
Lincolnshire Coachman to bring his traveling Chariot from thence, not caring
to trust his Body Coachman, who, with the rest of the Servants, so greatly
loved and honored the fair Damsel; and having given him Instructions
accordingly, and prohibited his other Servants, on Pretense of resenting
Pamela's Behavior, from accompanying her any Part of the Way, he drove her
Five Miles on the Way to her Father's; and then turning off, crossed the
Country, and carried her onward toward his Lincolnshire Estate.

It is also to be observed, that the Messenger of her Letters to her Father,
who so often pretended Business that way, was an Implement in his Master's
Hands, and employed by him for that Purpose; and who always gave her Letters
first to him, and his Master used to open and read them, and then send them on;
by which means, as he hints to her, (as she observes in one of her Letters, p.
104.) he was no Stranger to what she wrote. Thus every way was the poor Virgin
beset: And the Whole will show the base Arts of designing Men to gain their
wicked Ends; and how much it behooves the Fair Sex to stand upon their Guard
against their artful Contrivances, especially when Riches and Power conspire
against Innocence and a low Estate.

A few Words more will be necessary to make the Sequel better understood. The
intriguing Gentleman thought fit, however, to keep back from her Father her
Three last Letters; in which she mentions his concealing himself to hear her
partitioning out her Clothes, his last Effort to induce her to stay a
Fortnight, his pretended Proposal of the Chaplain, and her Hopes of speedily
seeing them, as also her Verses; and to send himself a Letter to her Father,
which is as follows: 'Goodman ANDREWS,
'YOU will wonder to receive a Letter from me. But I think I am obliged to let
you know, that I have discovered the strange Correspondence carried on between
you and your Daughter, so injurious to my Honor and Reputation, and which, I
think, you should not have encouraged, till you knew there were sufficient
Grounds for these Aspersions, which she so plentifuly casts upon me. Something
possibly there might be in what she has written from time to time; but believe
me, with all her pretended Simplicity and Innocence, I never knew so much
romantic Invention as she is Mistress of. In short, the Girl's Head's turned
by Romances, and such idle Stuff to which she has given herself up, ever since
her kind Lady's Death. And she assumes such Airs, as if she was a Mirror of
Perfection, and believed every body had a Design upon her.

'Don't mistake me however; I believe her very honest, and very virtuous* but I
have found out also, that she is carrying on a sort of Correspondence, or Love
Affair, with a young Clergyman, that I hope in time to provide for; but who, at
present, is destitute of any Subsistence but my Favor: And what would be the
Consequence, can you think, of two young Folks, who have nothing in the World
to trust to of their own, to come together with a Family multiplying upon them,
before they have Bread to eat?

'For my Part, I have too much Kindness to them both, not to endeavor to
prevent it, if I can: And for this Reason I have sent her out of his Way for a
little while, till I can bring them to better Consideration; and I would not
therefore have you be surprised you don't see your Daughter so soon as you
might possibly expect.

'Yet, I do assure you, upon my Honor, that she shall be safe and inviolate;
and I hope you don't doubt me, notwithstanding any Airs she may have given
herself, upon my jocular Pleasantry to her, and perhaps a little innocent
Romping with her, so usual with young Folks of the two Sexes, when they have
been long acquainted, and grown up together; for Pride is not my Talent.

'As she is a mighty Letter-writer, I hope she has had the Duty to apprize you
of her Intrigue with the young Clergyman; and I know not whether it meets with
your Countenance: But now she is absent for a little while, (for I know he
would have followed her to your Village, if she had gone home; and there
perhaps they would have ruined one another, by marrying) I doubt not I shall
bring him to see his Interest, and that he engages not before he knows how to
provide for a Wife: And when that can be done, let them come together in God's
Name, for me.

'I expect not to be answered on this Head, but by your good Opinion, and the
Confidence you may repose in my Honor; being

'Your hearty Friend to serve you.
' P. S. I find my Man John has been the Manager of the Correspondence, in
which such Liberties have been taken with me. I shall soon let the saucy Fellow
know how much I resent his Part of the Affair, in a manner that becomes me. It
is a hard thing, that a Man of my Character in the World, should be used thus
freely by his own Servants.'






It is easy to guess at the poor old Man's Concern upon reading this Letter,
from a Gentleman of so much Consideration. He knew not what Course to take, and
had no manner of Doubt of his poor Daughter's Innocence, and that foul Play was
designed her. Yet he sometimes hoped the best, and was ready to believe the
surmised Correspondence between the Clergyman and her, having not received the
Letters she wrote, which would have cleared up that Affair.

But after all, he resolved, as well to quiet his own as his Wife's Uneasiness,
to undertake a Journey to the 'Squire's; and leaving his poor Wife to excuse
him to the Farmer who employed him, he set out that very Evening, late as it
was; and traveling all Night, found himself, soon after Daylight, at the Gate
of the Gentleman, before the Family was up: And there he sat down to rest
himself, till he should see somebody stirring.

The Grooms were the first he saw, coming out to water their Horses; and he
asked, in so distressful a manner, what was become of Pamela, that they thought
him crasy; and said, Why, what have you to do with Pamela, old Fellow? Get out
of the Horse's Way. -- Where is your Master? said the poor Man; pray,
Gentlemen, don't be angry: My Heart's almost broke. -- He never gives any thing
at the Door, I assure you, says one of the Grooms; so you will lose your Labor.
-- I am not a Beggar yet, said the poor old Man; I want nothing of him, but my
Pamela! -- O my Child! my Child!

I Will be hanged, says one of them, if this is not Mrs. Pamela's Father! --
Indeed, indeed, said he, wringing his Hands, I am; and weeping, Where is my
Child? Where is my Pamela? -- Why, Father, said one of them, we beg your
Pardon; but she is gone home to you! How long have you been come from home? --
O! but last Night, said he; I have traveled all Night! Is the 'Squire at home,
or is he not? -- Yes, but he is not stirring though, said the Grooms, as yet.
Thank God for that, said he! thank God for that! Then I hope I may be permitted
to speak to him anon. They asked him to go in, and he stepped into the Stable,
and sat down on the Stairs there, wiping his Eyes, and sighing so sadly, that
it grieved the Servants to hear him.

The Family was soon raised, with the Report of Pamela's Father coming to
inquire after his Daughter; and the Maids would fain have had him go into the
Kitchen. But Mrs. Jervis, having been told of his coming, arose, and hastened
down to her Parlour, and took him in with her, and there heard all his sad
Story, and read the Letter. She wept bitterly; but yet endeavored before him
to hide her Concern; and said, Well, Goodman Andrews, I cannot help weeping at
your Grief; but I hope there is no Occasion; let nobody see this Letter,
whatever you do. I dare say your Daughter's safe.

Well, but, said he, I see you, Madam, know nothing about her! -- If all was
right, so good a Gentlewoman as you are, would not have been a Stranger to
this. To be sure you thought she was with me!

Said she, My Master does not always inform his Servants of his Proceedings;
but you need not doubt his Honor. You have his Hand for it. And you may see he
can have no Design upon her, because he is not from hence, and does not talk of
going hence. O that is all I have to hope for! said he; that is all, indeed! --
But, said he -- and was going on, when the Report of his coming had reached the
'Squire, who came down in his Morning-gown and Slippers, into the Parlour,
where he and Mrs. Jervis were.

What Is the Matter, Goodman Andrews? said he, what is the Matter? O my Child!
said the good old Man, give me my Child, I beseech you, Sir, -- Why, I thought,
says the 'Squire, that I had satisfied you about her; sure you have not a
Letter I sent you, written with my own Hand. Yes, yes, but I have, Sir, said
he, and that brought me hither; and I have walked all Night. Poor Man! returned
he, with great seeming Compassion, I am sorry for it, truly! Why your Daughter
has made a strange Racket in my Family; and if I thought it would have
disturbed you so much, I would have even let her gone home; but what I did was
to serve her and you too. She is very safe, I do assure you, Goodman Andrews;
And you may take my Honor for it, I would not injure her for the World. Do you
think I would, Mrs Jervis? No, I hope not, Sir! said she. -- Hope not! said the
poor Man, so do I; but pray, Sir, give me my Child; that is all I desire; and
I Will take care no Clergyman shall come near her.

Why, London is a great way off, said the 'Squire, and I cannot send for her
back presently. What, then, said he, have you sent my poor Pamela to London? I
would not have it said so, says the 'Squire; but I assure you, upon my Honor,
she is quite safe and satisfied, and will quickly inform you of as much by
Letter. I am sure she is in a reputable Family, no less than a Bishop's; and
will wait on his Lady till I get this Matter over, that I mentioned to you

O how shall I know this? replied he -- What! said the 'Squire, pretending
Anger, am I to be doubted? -- Do you believe I can have any View upon your
Daughter? And if I had, do you think I would take such Methods as these to
effect it? Why, Man, you know not whom you talk to! -- O Sir, said he, I beg
your Pardon; but consider, my dear Child is in the Case: Let me know what
Bishop, and where; and I will travel to London barefoot, to see my Daughter,
and then shall be satisfied.

Why, Goodman Andrews, I think thou have read Romances as well as thy Daughter,
and thy Head's turned with them. May I not have my Word taken? Do you think,
once more, I would offer any thing to your Daughter? Is there any thing looks
like it? -- Pr'ythee, Man, consider a little who I am; and if I am not to be
believed, what signifies talking? Why, Sir, said he, pray forgive me; but there
is no Harm to say, What Bishop's, or whereabouts? What, and so you would go
troubling his Lordship with your impertinent Fears and Stories! Will you be
satisfied if you have a Letter from her within a Week, it may be less, if she
be not negligent, to assure you all is well with her? Why, that, said the poor
Man, will be a Comfort. Well then, said the Gentleman, I cannot answer for her
Negligence, if she don't; but she will send a Letter to you, Mrs. Jervis; for I
desire not to see it; I have had Trouble enough about her already; and be sure
you send it by a Man and Horse the Moment you receive it. To be sure I will,
said she. Thank your Honor, said the good Man: And then I must wait with as
much Patience as I can for a Week, which will be a Year to me.

I tell you, said the Gentleman, it must be her own Fault if she don't; for
it is what I insisted upon for my own Reputation; and I shall not stir from this
House, I assure you, till she is heard from, and that to Satisfaction. God
bless your Honor, said the poor Man, as you say and mean Truth. Amen, Amen,
Goodman Andrews, said he; you see I am not afraid to say Amen. So, Mrs. Jervis,
make the good Man as welcome as you can; and let me have no Uproar about the
Matter.

He then, whispering her, bid her give him a couple of Guineas to bear his
Charges home; telling him, he should be welcome to stay there till the Letter
came, if he would; and he should be a Witness, that he intended honorably, and
not to stir from his House for one while.

The poor old Man staid and dined with Mrs. Jervis, with some tolerable Ease of
Mind, in hopes to hear from his beloved Daughter in a few Days; and then
accepting the Present, returned for his own House; and resolved to be as
patient as possible for a few Days.

Mean time Mrs. Jervis, and all the Family, were in the utmost Grief for the
Trick put upon the poor Pamela and she and the Steward represented it to their
Master in as moving Terms as they durst: But were forced to rest satisfied with
his general Assurances of intending her no Harm; which, however, Mrs. Jervis
little believed, from the Pretense he had made in his Letter, of the
Correspondence between Pamela and the young Parson, which she knew to be all
Invention, though she durst not say so.

But the Week after she went away, they were made a little more easy, by the
following Letter, brought by an unknown Hand, and left for Mrs. Jervis; which
how procured, will be shown in the Sequel.

' Dear Mrs. Jervis,
'I Have been vilely tricked, and, instead of being driven by Robin to my dear
Father's, I am carried off, to where I have no Liberty to tell. However, I am
at present not used hardly in the main; and I write to beg of you to let my
dear Father and Mother (whose Hearts must be well-nigh broken) know, That I am
well, and that I am, and, by the Grace of God, ever will be, their dutiful and
honest Daughter, as well as

' Your obliged Friend, 'PAMELA ANDREWS.
' I must neither send Date nor Place. But have most solemn Assurances of
honorable Usage. This is the only Time my low Estate has been troublesome to
me, since it has subjected me to the Frights I have undergone. Love to your
good Self, and all my dear Fellow Servants. Adieu! Adieu! But pray for poor
PAMELA.'




This, though it quieted not entirely their Apprehensions, was shown to the whole
Family, and to the Gentleman himself, who pretended not to know how it came;
and Mrs. Jervis sent it away to the good old Folks, who at first suspected it
was forged, and not their Daughter's Hand; but finding the contrary, they were
a little easier to hear she was alive and well. And having inquired of all
their Acquaintance, what could be done, and no one being able to put them in a
Way how to proceed, with Effect, on so extraordinary an Occasion, against so
rich and daring a Gentleman; and being afraid to make Matters worse, (though they
saw plainly enough, that by this Letter she was in no Bishop's Family, and so
mistrusted all the rest of his Story) they applied themselves to Prayers for
their poor Daughter, and for a happy Issue to an Affair that almost distracted
them.

We shall now leave the honest old Pair, praying for their dear Pamela; and
return to the Account she herself gives of all this; having written it
Journal-wise, to amuse and employ her Time, in hopes some Opportunity might
offer to send is to her Friends, and, as was her constant View, that she might
afterward thankfully look back upon the Dangers she had escaped, when they
should be happily over-blown, as in Time she hoped they would be, and that then
she might examine, and either approve of, or repent for, her own Conduct in
them.

LETTER XXXI.
O my dearest Father and Mother,
LET me write and bewail my miserable hard Fate, though I have no Hope, that what
I write will be conveyed to your Hands! -- I have now nothing to do but write,
and weep, and fear,and pray! But yet what can I hope for, when I seem to be
devoted, as a Victim to the Will of a wicked Violator of all the Laws of God
and Man? -- But, gracious Heaven, forgive me my Rashness and Despondency! O let
me not sin against thee; for thou best know what is fittest for thy poor
Handmaid: -- And as thou suffer not thy poor Creatures to be tempted above
what they can bear, I will resign to thy good Pleasure. And still, I hope,
desperate as my Condition seems, that as those Trials are not of my own
seeking, nor the Effects of ray Presumption and Vanity, I shall be enabled to
overcome them, and, in God's own good Time, be delivered from them.

Thus do I pray, imperfectly as I am forced by my distracting Fears and
Apprehensions; and O join with me, my dear Parents! -- But, alas! how can you
know, how can I reveal to you, the dreadful Situation of your poor Daughter?
The unhappy Pamela may be undone, (which God forbid, and sooner deprive me of
Life I) before you can know my hard Lot.

O the unparalled Wickedness, Stratagems, and Devices of those who call
themselves Gentlemen, and pervert the Design of Providence, in giving them
ample Means to do Good, to their own Perdition, and to the Ruin of poor
oppressed Innocence!

But let me tell you what has befallen me; and yet, how shall you receive it?
For I have now no honest John to carry my Letters to you; but am likely to be
watched in all my Steps, till my hard Fate ripens his wicked Projects for my
Ruin. I will every Day now write my sad State; and some way, perhaps, may be
opened to send the melancholy Scribble to you. But if you know it, what will it
do but aggravate your Troubles? For, O! what can the abject Poor do against the
mighty Rich, when they are determined to oppress?

Well, but I will proceed to write what I had hoped to tell you in a few Hours,
that I believed I should receive your grateful Blessings, on my Return to you
from so many Hardships.

I will begin here with my Account from the last Letter I wrote you, in which I
enclosed my poor Stuff of Verses; and continue it at times, as I have
Opportunity; though, as I said, I know not how it can reach you now.

The long hop'd-for Thursday Morning came, that I was to set out. I had taken
my Leave of my Fellow Servants overnight; and a mournful Leave it was to us
all: For Men, as well as Women-servants, wept much to part with me; and, for my
Part, I was overwhelmed with Tears, and the affecting Instances of their
Esteem. They all would have made me little Presents, as Tokens of their Love;
but I would not take any thing from the lower Servants, to be sure. But Mr.
Longman made me a Present of several Yards of Holland, and a Silver Snuff Box,
and a Gold Ring, which he desired me to keep for his sake; and he wept over me;
but said, I am sure, so good a Maiden God will bless; and though you return to
your poor Father again, and his low Estate, yet Providence will find you out;
and one Day, though I may not live to see it, you will be rewarded.

I said, O dear Mr. Longman, you make me too rich, and too mody; and yet I must
be a Beggar before my Time: For I shall want often to be scribbling, (little
thinking it would be my only Employment so soon) and I will beg you, Sir, to
favor me with some Paper; and as soon as I get home, I will write you a
Letter, to thank you for all your Kindness to me; and a Letter to good Mrs.
Jervis too.

This was lucky; for I should have had none else, but at Pleasure of my
rough-natur'd Governess, as I may call her; but now I can write to ease my
Mind, though I cannot send it to you; and write what I please, for she knows not
how well I am provided. For good Mr. Longman gave me above forty Sheets of
Paper, and a dozen Pens, and a little Phial of Ink; which last I wrapped in
Paper, and put in my Pocket; and some Wax and Wafers.

O dear Sir, said I, you have set me up. How shall I requite you? He said, By a
Kiss, my fair Mistress; and I gave it very willingly; for he is a good old Man.

Rachel and Hannah cried sadly when I took my Leave, and Jane, who sometimes
used to be a little crossish, and Cicely too, wept sadly, and said they would
pray for me; but poor Jane, I doubt, seldom says her Prayers for herself:
More's the Pity!

Then Arthur the Gardener, our Robin the Coachman, and Lincolnshire Robin too,
who was to carry me, were very civil; and both had Tears in their Eyes; which I
thought then very good-natured in Lincolnshire Robin, because he knew but
little of me. -- But since, I find he might well be concerned; for he had then
his Instructions, it seems, and knew how he was to be a Means to entrap me.

Then our other three Footmen, Harry, Isaac, and Benjamin, and Grooms, and
Helpers, were very much affected likewise; and the poor little Scullion-boy,
Tommy, was ready to run over for Grief.

They had got all together overnight, expecting to be differently employed in
the Morning; and they all begged to shake Hands with me, and I kissed the
Maidens, and prayed to God to bless them all; and thanked them for all their
Love and Kindnesses to me: And indeed I was forced to leave them sooner than I
would, because I could not stand it: Indeed I could not. Harry (I could not
have thought it; for he is a little wildish, they say) cried till he sobb'd
again. John, poor honed John, was not then come back from you. But as for the
Butler, Mr. Jonathan, he could not stay in Company.

I thought to have told you a deal about this; but I have worse things to
employ my Thoughts.

Mrs. Jervis, good Mrs. Jervis, cried all Night long; and I comforted her all I
could: and she made me promise, that if my Master went to London to attend
Parliament, or to Lincolnshire, I would come and stay a Week with her. And she
would have given me Money; but: I would not take it.

Well, next Morning came, and I wondered I saw nothing of poor honest John; for
I waited to take Leave of him, and thank him for all his Civilities to me and
to you: But I suppose he was sent further by my Master, and so could not
return; and I desired to be remembered to him.

And when Mrs. Jervis told me, with a sad Heart, the Chariot was ready, with
four Horses to it, I was just upon sinking into the Ground, though I wanted to be
with you.

My Master was above Stairs, and never asked to see me. I was glad of it in the
main; but he knew, false Heart as he is! that I was not to be out of his Reach.
-- O preserve me. Heaven, from his Power, and from his Wickedness!

Well, they were not suffered to go with me one Step, as I writ to you before;
for he stood at the Window to see me go. And in the Passage to the Gate, out of
his Sight, there they stood all of them, in two Rows; and we could say nothing
on both Sides, but, God bless you! and God bless you! But Harry carried my own
Bundle, my third Bundle, as I was used to call it, to the Coach, and some
Plum-cakes, and Diet-bread, made for me overnight, and some Sweat-meats, and
six Bottles of Canary Wine, which Mrs. Jervis would make me take in a Basket,
to cheer our Hearts now-and-then when we got together, as she said. And I
kissed all the Maids again, and shook Hands with the Men again; but Mr.
Jonathan and Mr. Longman were not there; and then I tript down Steps to the
Chariot, Mrs. Jervis crying most sadly.

I looked up when I got to the Chariot, and I saw my Master at the Window, in
his Gown; and I curt'sy'd three times to him very low, and prayed for him with
my Hands lifted up; for I could not speak; indeed I was not able. And he bowed
his Head to me, which made me then very glad he would take such Notice of me;
and in I stepped, and was ready to burst with Grief; and could only, till Robin
began to drive, wave my white Handkerchief to them, wet with my Tears. And at
last away he drove, Jehu-like, as they say, out of the Courtyard: And I too
soon found I had Cause for greater and deeper Grief.

Well, said I to myself, at this rate I shall soon be with my dear Father and
Mother; and till I had got, as I supposed, halfway, I thought of the good
Friends I had left. And when, on stopping for a little Bait to the Horses,
Robin told me, I was near halfway, I thought it was high time to wipe my Eyes,
and think to whom I was going; as then, alack for me! I thought. So I began to
ponder what a Meeting I should have with you; how glad you would both be to see me
come safe and innocent to you, after all my Dangers; and so I began to comfort
myself, and to banish the other gloomy Side from my Mind; though, too, it
returned now-and-then; for I should be ungrateful not to love them, for their
Love.

Well, I believe, I set out about Eight o'Clock in the Morning; and I wondered,
and wondered, when it was about Two, as I saw by a Church-dial in a little
Village we passed through, that I was still more and more out of my Knowledge.
Hey-day! thought I, to drive this strange Pace, and to be so long a-going
little more than twenty Miles, is very odd! But, to be sure, thought I, Robin
knows the Way.

At last he stopped, and looked about him, as if he was at a Loss for the Way;
and I said, Mr. Robert, sure you are out of the Way! -- I Am afraid I am, said
he. But it cannot be much; I Will ask the first Person I see. Pray do, said I; and
he gave his Horses a Mouthful of Hay; and I gave him some Cake, and two Glasses
of Canary Wine; and stopped about half an Hour in all. Then he drove on very fast
again.

I had so much to think of, of the Dangers I now doubted not I had escaped, of
the loving Friends I had left, and my best Friends I was going to, and the many
things I had to relate to you; that I the less thought of the Way, till I was
startled out of my Meditations by the Sun beginning to set, and still the Man
driving on, and his Horses sweating and foaming; and then I began to be alarmed
all at once, and called to him; and he said he had horrid ill Luck, for he had
come several Miles out of the Way, but was now right, and should get in still
before it was quite dark. My Heart began then to misgive me a little, and I was
very much fatigued; for I had no Sleep for several Nights before, to signify;
and at last I said, Pray, Mr. Robert, there is a Town before us; what do you
call it? -- If we are so much out of the Way, we had better put up there; for
the Night comes on apace: And, Lord protect me! thought I, I shall have new
Dangers, may-hap, to encounter with the Man, who have escaped the Master --
little thinking of the base Contrivance of the latter. Says he, I am just
there, it is but a Mile on one Side of the Town before us -- Nay, said I, I may
be mistaken; for it is a good while since I was this Way; but I am sure the
Face of the Country here is nothing like what I remember it.

He pretended to be much out of Humor with himself for mistaking the Way, and
at last stopped at a Farm-house, about two Miles beyond the Village I had seen;
and it was then almost dark, and he alighted, and said, We must make shift
here; for I am quite out.

Lord, thought I, be good to the poor Pamela! More Trials still! -- What will
befall me next?

The Farmer's Wife, and Maid, and Daughter, came out; and the Wife said, What
brings you this Way at this time of Night, Mr. Robert? And with a Lady too? --
Then I began to be frightened out of my Wits; and laying Middle and both Ends
together, I fell a crying, and said, God give me Patience! I am undone for
certain I -- Pray, Mistress, said I, do you know Esquire B. of Bedfordshire?

The wicked Coachman would have prevented the answering me; but the simple
Daughter said, Know his Worship! yes, surely! why he is my Father's Landlord!
-- Well, said I, then I am undone, undone for ever! -- O wicked Wretch! what
have I done to you, said I to the Coachman, to serve me thus? -- Vile Tool of a
wicked Master! -- Faith, said the Fellow, I Am sorry this Task was put upon me:
But I could not help it. But make the best of it now; here are very civil,
reputable Folks; and you will be safe here, I Will assure you. -- Let me get out,
said I, and I Will walk back to the Town we came through, late as it is: -- For I
will not enter here.

Said the Farmer's Wife, You Will be very well used here, I Will assure you, young
Gentlewoman, and have better Conveniences than any-where in the Village. I
matter not Conveniences, said I: I am betrayed and undone! As you have a
Daughter of your own, pity me, and let me know, if your Landlord, as you call
him, be here! -- No, I Will assure you, he is not, said she.

And then came the Farmer, a good-like sort of Man, grave, and well-behav'd;
and he spoke to me in such sort, as made me a little pacified; and seeing no
Help for it, I went in; and the Wife immediately conducted me up Stairs to the
best Apartment, and told me, that was mine as long as I staid; and nobody
should come near me but when I called. I threw myself on the Bed in the Room,
tired, and frightened to Death almost, and gave way to the most excessive Fit
of Grief that I ever had.

The Daughter came up, and said, Mr. Robert had given her a Letter to give me;
and there it was. I raised myself, and saw it was the Hand and Seal of the
wicked Wretch my Master, directed To Mrs. Pamela Andrews. -- This was a little
better than to have him here; though, if he had, he must have been brought through
the Air; for I thought I was.

The good Woman (for I began to see Things about a little reputable, and no
Guile appearing in them, but rather a Face of Grief for my Grief) offered me a
Glass of some cordial Water, which I accepted, for I was ready to sink; and
then I sat up in a Chair a little, though very faintish: And they brought me two
Candles, and lighted a Brush-wood Fire; and said, If I called, I should be
waited upon instantly; and so left me to ruminate on my sad Condition, and to
read my Letter, which I was not able to do presently. After I had a little come
to myself, I found it to contain these Words: ' Dear PAMELA,
'THE Passion I have for you, and your Obstinacy, have constrained me to act by
you in a manner that I know will occasion you great Trouble and Fatigue, both
of Mind and Body. Yet, forgive me, my dear Girl; for though I have taken this
Step, I will, by all that is good and holy! use you honorably. Suffer not your
Fears to transport you to a Behavior that will be disreputable to us both. For
the Place where you will receive this, is a Farm that belongs to me; and the
People civil, honest and obliging.

'You will by this time be far on your way to the Place I have allotted for
your Abode for a few Weeks, till I have managed some Affairs, that will make me
show myself to you in a much different Light, than you may possibly apprehend
from this rash Action. And to convince you, that I mean you no Harm, I do
assure you, that the House you are going to, shall be so much at your Command,
that even I myself will not approach it without Leave from you. So make
yourself easy; be discreet and prudent; and a happier Turn shall reward these
your Troubles, than you may at present apprehend.

'Mean time I pity the Fatigue you will have, if this comes to your Hand in the
Place I have directed: And will write to your Father, to satisfy him, that
nothing but what is honorable shall be offered to you, by

'Your passionate Admirer, (so I 'must style myself) --
'Don't think hardly of poor Robin: You have so possessed all my Servants in
your Favor that I find they had rather serve you than me; and it is reluctantly
the Fellow undertook this Task; and I was forced to submit to assure him of my
honorable Intentions to you, which I am fully resolved to make good, if you
compel me not to a Conduct abhorrent to me at present.'






I but too well apprehended, that this Letter was only to pacify me for the
present; but as my Danger was not so immediate as I had Reason to dread, and he
had promised to forbear coming to me, and to write to you, my dear Parents, to
quiet your Concern, I was a little more easy than I was before: And I made
shift to eat a little Bit of boiled Chicken they had got for me, and drank a
Glass of my Sack, and made each of them do so too.

But after I had so done, I was again a little fluster'd; for in came the
Coachman with the Look of a Hangman, I thought, and Madam'd me up strangely;
telling me, he would beg me to get ready to pursue my Journey by Five in the
Morning, or else he should be late in. I was quite grieved at this; for I began
not to dislike my Company, considering how Things stood, and was in Hopes to
get a Party among them, and so to put myself into any worthy Protection in the
Neighborhood, rather than go forward.

When he withdrew, I began to tamper with the Farmer and his Wife. But, alas!
they had had a Letter delivered them at the same time I had; so securely had
Lucifer put it into his Head to do his Work; and they only shook their Heads,
and seemed to pity me; and so I was forced to give over that Hope.

However, the good Farmer showed me his Letter; which I copied as follows: For
it discovers the deep Arts of this wicked Master; and how resolved he seems to
be on my Ruin, by the Pains he took to deprive me of all Hopes of freeing
myself from his Power.

' Farmer Norton,
'I Send to your House, for one Night only, a young Gentlewoman, much against
her Will, who has deeply embarked in a Love Affair, which will be her Ruin, as
well as the Person's to whom she wants to betroth herself. I have, to oblige
her Father, ordered her to be carried to one of my Houses, where she will be
well used, to try if by Absence, and Expostulation with both, they can be
brought to know their own Interest. And I am sure you will use her kindly for
my sake. For, excepting this Matter, which she will not own, she does not want
Prudence and Discretion. I will acknowledge any Trouble you shall be at in this
Matter, the first Opportunity; and am

'Your Friend and Servant.'


He had said, too cunningly for me, that I would not own this pretended Love
Affair; so that he had provided them not to believe me, say what I would; and
as they were his Tenants, who all love him, (for he has some good Qualities,
and so he had need!) I saw all my Plot cut out, and so was forced to say the
less.

I wept bitterly, however; for I found he was too hard for me, as well in his
Contrivances as Riches; and so had recourse again to my only Refuge, that God,
who takes the innocent Heart into his Protection, and is alone able to baffle
and confound the Devices of the Mighty. Nay, the Farmer was so prepossessed
with the Contents of his Letter to him, that he began to praise his Care and
Concern for me, and to advise me against entertaining Addresses without my
Friends Advice and Consent, and made me the Subject of a Lesson for his
Daughter's Improvement. So I was glad to shut up this Discourse; for I saw I
was not likely to be believed.

I sent, however, to tell my Driver, that I was so fatigued, I could not set
out so soon the next Morning. But he insisted upon it, and said. It would make
my Day's Journey the lighter; and I found he was a more faithful Servant to his
Master, notwithstanding what he wrote of his Reluctance, than I could have
wished: So I saw still more and more, that all was deep Dissimulation, and
Contrivance worse and worse.

Indeed I might have shown them his Letter to me, as a full Confutation of his
to them; but I saw no Probability of engaging them in my Behalf; and so thought
it signified little, as I was to go away so soon, to enter more particularly
into the Matter with them; and besides, I saw they were not inclinable to let
me stay longer for fear of disobliging him: So I went to Bed, but had very
little Rest: And they would make their Servant-maid bear me Company in the
Chariot five Miles, early in the Morning, and she was to walk back.

I had contrived in my Thoughts, when I was on my Way in the Chariot, on Friday
Morning, that when we came into some Town, to bait, as he must do for the
Horses sake, I would, at the Inn, apply myself, if I saw I any way could, to
the Mistress of the Inn, and tell her the Case, and refuse to go farther,
having nobody but this wicked Coachman to contend with.

Well, I was very full of this Project, and was in great Hopes, some-how or
other, to extricare myself this way. But, Oh! the artful Wretch had provided
for even this last Resource of mine; for when we came to put up at a large Town
on the Way, to eat a Morsel for Dinner, and I was fully resolved to execure my
Project, who should be at the Inn that he put up at, but the wicked Mrs. Jewkes
expecting me! And her Sister-in-law was the Mistress of it; and she had
provided a little Entertainment for me.

And this I found, when I desired, as soon as I came in, to speak with the
Mistress of the House. She came to me, and I said, I am a poor unhappy young
Body, that want your Advice and Assistance; and you seem to be a good sort of
Gentlewoman, that would assist an oppressed innocent Person. Yes, Madam, said
she, I hope you guess right, and I have the Happiness to know something of the
Matter before you speak. Pray call my Sister Jewkes. -- Jewkes! Jewkes! thought
I; I have heard of that Name; I don't like it.

Then the wicked Creature appeared, whom I had never seen but once before, and
I was terrified out of my Wits. No Stratagem, thought I, not one! for a poor
innocent Girl; but every thing to turn out against me; that is hard indeed!

So I began to pull in my Horns, as they say; for I saw I was now worse off
than at the Farmer's.

The naughty Woman came up to me with an Air of Confidence, and kissed me: See,
Sister, said she, here is a charming Creature! Would she not tempt the best Lord
in the Land to run away with her? O frightfull thought I; here is an Avowal of
the Matter at once: I am now gone, that is certain. And so was quite silent and
confounded; and seeing no Help for it, (for she would not part with me out of
her Sight) I was forced to set out with her in the Chariot; for she came
thither on Horseback with a Manservant, who rode by us the rest of the Way,
with her Horse. And now I gave over all Thoughts of Redemption, and was in a
desponding Condition indeed.

Well, thought I, here are strange Pains taken to ruin a poor innocent,
helpless, and even worthless young Body. This Plot is laid too deep, and has
been too long a hatching, to be baffled, I fear. But then I put my Trust in
God, who I knew was able to do every thing for me, when all other possible
Means should fail: And in Him I was resolved to confide.

You may see -- (Yet, oh! that kills me; for I know not whether ever you may
see what I now write, or no -- Else you may see) what sort of Woman this Mrs,
Jewkes is, compared to good Mrs. Jervis, by this --

Every now-and-then she would be staring in my Face, in the Chariot, and
squeezing my Hand, and saying, Why, you are very pretty, my silent Dear! And
once she offered to kiss me. But I said, I don't like this Sort of Carriage,
Mrs. Jewkes; it is not like two Persons of one Sex. She fell a laughing very
confidently, and said, That Is prettily said, I vow! Then thou had rather be
kissed by the other Sex? 'Ifackins, I commend thee for that!

I was sadly tiez'd with her Impertinence, and bold Way; but no wonder; she was
an Inn-keeper's Housekeeper before she came to my Master; and those Sort of
Creatures don't want Confidence, you know. And indeed she made nothing to talk
boldly on twenty Occasions, and said two or three times, when she saw the Tears
every now-and-then, as we rid, trickle down my Checks, I was sorely hurt,
truly, to have the handsomest and finest young Gentleman in five Counties in
Love with me!

So I find I am got into the Hands of a wicked Procuress, and if I was not safe
with good Mrs. Jervis, and where every body loved me, what a dreadful Prospect
have I now before me, in the Hands of a Woman that seems to delight in
Filthiness!

O dear Sirs! what shall I do! What shall I do! -- Surely, I shall never be
equal to all these Things!

About Eight at Night, we entered the Courtyard of this handsome, large, old,
and lonely Mansion, that looks made for Solitude and Mischief, as I thought, by
its Appearance, with all its brown nodding Horrors of lofty Elms and Pines
about it: And here, said I to myself, I fear, is to be the Scene of my Ruin,
unless God protect me, who is all-sufficient!

I was very sick at entering it, partly from Fatigue, and partly from Dejection
of Spirits: And Mrs. Jewkes got me some mull'd Wine, and seemed mighty
officious to welcome me thither. And while she was absent, ordering the Wine,
the wicked Robin came in to me, and said, I beg a thousand Pardons for my Part
in this Affair, since I see your Grief, and your Distress; and I do assure you,
that I am sorry it fell to my Task.

Mighty well, Mr. Robert! said I; I never saw an Execution but once, and then
the Hangman asked the poor Creature's Pardon, and wiped his Mouth, as you do,
and pleaded his Duty, and then calmly tucked up the Criminal. But I am no
Criminal, as you all know: And if I could have thought it my Duty to obey a
wicked Master, in his unlawful Commands, I had saved you all the Merit of this
vile Service.

I am sorry, said he, you take it so. But every body don't think alike. Well,
said I, you have, done your Part, Mr. Robert, toward my Ruin, very faithfully;
and will have Cause to be sorry, may-be, at the Long-run, when you shall see
the Mischief that comes of it. -- Your Eyes were open, and you knew I was to be
carried to my Father's, and that I was barbarously tricked and betrayed; and I
can only, once more, thank you for your Part of it. God forgive you!

So he went away a little sad. What have you said to Robin, Madam? said Mrs.
Jewkes (who came in as he went out): The poor Fellow's ready to cry. I need not
be afraid of your following his Example, Mrs. Jewkes, said I: I have been
telling him, that he has done his Part to my Ruin: And he now cannot help it! So
his Repentance does me no Good; I wish it may him.

I Will assure you, Madam, said she, I should be as ready to cry as he, if I
should do you any Harm. It is not in his Power to help it now, said I; but your
Part is to come, and you may choose whether you will contribute to my Ruin or not.
-- Why, look ye, look ye, Madam, said she, I have a great Notion of doing my
Duty to my Master; and therefore you may depend upon it, if I can do that, and
serve you, I will: But, you must think, if your Desire, and his Will, come to
clash once, I shall do as he bids me, let it be what it will.

Pray, Mrs. Jewkes, said I, don't Madam me so: I am but a silly poor Girl, set
up by the Gambol of Fortune, for a May Game; and now am to be Something, and
now Nothing, just as that thinks fit to sport with me: And let you and me talk
upon a Foot together; for I am a Servant inferior to you, and so much the more
as I am turned out of Place.

Ay, ay, says she, I understand something of the Matter; you have so great
Power over my Master, that you may be soon Mistress of us all; and so I would
oblige you, if I could. And I must and will call you Madam; for I am instructed
to show you all Respect, I Will assure you.

Who instructed you to do so? said I. Who! my Master, to be sure, said she.
Why, said I, how can that be? You have not seen him lately. No, that is true,
said she; but I have been expecting you here some time (O the deep-laid
Wickedness* thought I); and besides, I have a Letter of Instructions by Robin;
but, may-be, I should not have said so much. If you would show them to me, said
I, I should be able to judge how far I could, or could not, expect Favor from
you, consistent with your Duty to our Master. I beg your Pardon, fair Mistress,
for that, said she; I am sufficiently instructed, and you may depend upon it, I
will observe my Orders; and so far as they will let me, so far will I oblige
you; and there is an End of it.

Well, said I, you will not, I hope, do an unlawful or wicked thing, for any
Master in the World. Look-ye, said she, he is my Master; and if he bids me do a
thing that I can do, I think I ought to do it; and let him, who has Power to
command me, look to the Lawfulness of it. Why, said I, suppose he should bid
you cut my Throat, would you do it? There Is no Danger of that, said she; but to
be sure I would not; for then I should be hanged; for that would be Murder.
Well, said I, and suppose he should resolve to ensnare a poor young Creature,
and ruin her, would you assist him in that? For to rob a Person of her Virtue,
is worse than cutting her Throat.

Why now, says she, how strangely you talk! Are not the two Sexes made for one
another? And is it not natural for a Gentleman to love a pretty Woman? And
suppose he can obtain his Desires, is that so bad as cutting her Throat? And
then the Wretch fell a laughing, and talked most impertinently, and showed me,
that I had nothing to expect from her Virtue or Conscience. And this gave me
great Mortification; for I was in hopes of working upon her by degrees.

So we ended our Discourse here, and I bid her show me where I must lie. --
Why, said she, lie where you list, Madam; I can tell you, I must lie with you
for the present. For the present! said I, and Torture then wrung my Heart! --
But is it in your Instructions that you must lie with me? Yes, indeed, said
she. I am sorry for it, said I. Why, said she, I am wholesome and cleanly too,
I Will assure you. Yes, said I, I don't doubt that; but I love to lie by myself.
How so? said she; was not Mrs. Jervis your Bedfellow at the other House?

Well, said I, quite sick of her, and my Condition, you must do as you are
instructed, I think. I cannot help myself; and am a most miserable Creature. She
repeated her insufferable Nonsense, mighty miserable indeed, to be so well
beloved by one of the finest Gentlemen in England!

I am now come down in my Writing to this present SATURDAY, and a deal I have
written.
MY wicked Bedfellow has very punctual Orders, it seems; for she locks me and
herself in, and ties the two Keys (for there is a double Door to the Room)
about her Wrist, when she goes to Bed. She talks of the House having been
attempted to be broken open two or three times; whether to fright me, I cannot
tell; but it makes me fearful; though not so much as I should be, if I had not
other and greater Fears.

I slept but little last Night, and got up, and pretended to sit by the Window
which looks into the spacious Gardens; but I was writing all the time, from
Break of Day, to her getting up, and after, when she was absent.

At Breakfast she presented the two Maids to me, the Cook and House-maid, poor
awkward Souls, that I can see no Hopes of, they seem so devoted to her and
Ignorance. Yet I am resolved, if possible, to find some way to escape, before
this wicked Master comes.

There are besides, of Servants, the Coachman Robert, a Groom, a Helper, a
Footman; all but Robert and he is accessory to my Ruin) strange Creatures, that
promise nothing; and all likewise devoted to this Woman. The Gardener looks
like a good honest Man; but he is kept at a Distance, and seems reserved.

I wondered I saw not Mr. Williams the Clergyman, but would not ask after him,
apprehending it might give her some Jealousy; but when I had beheld the rest,
he was the only one I had Hopes of; for I thought his Cloth would set him above
assisting in my Ruin -- But in the Afternoon he came; for it seems he has a
little Latin School in the neighboring Village, which he attends; and this
brings him in a little Matter, additional to my Master's Favor, till something
better falls, of which he has Hopes.

He is a sensible, sober young Gentleman; and when I saw him, I confirmed
myself in my Hopes of him; for he seemed to take great Notice of my Distress
and Grief (for I could not hide it); though he appeared fearful of Mrs. Jewkes,
who watched all our Motions and Words.

He has an Apartment in the House; but is mostly at a Lodging in the Town, for
Convenience of his little School; only on Saturday Afternoons and Sundays: And
he preaches sometimes for the Parson of the Village, which is about three Miles
off.

I hope to go to Church with him tomorrow: Sure it is not in her Instructions
to deny me! He cannot have thought of every thing! And something may strike out
for me there.

I have asked her, for a Feint, (because she shall not think I am so well
provided) to indulge me with Pen and Ink, though I have been using my own so
freely, when her Absence would let me; for I begged to be left to myself as
much as possible. She says she will let me have it, but then I must promise not
to send any Writing out of the House, without her seeing it. I said, It was
only to divert my Grief, when I was by myself, as I desired to be; for I loved
Writeing; but I had nobody to send to, she knew well enough.

No, not at present, may-be, said she; but I am told you are a great Writer,
and it is in my Instructions to see all you write; so, look you here, said she,
I will let you have a Pen and Ink, and two Sheets of Paper; for this Employment
will keep you out of worse Thoughts: But I must see them always when I ask,
written or not written. That Is very hard, said I; but may I not have to myself
the Closet in the Room where we lie, with the Key to lock up my Things? I
believe I may consent to that, said she; and I will set it in Order for you,
and leave the Key in the Door. And there is a Spinnet too, said she; if it be
in Tune, you may play to divert you now-and-then; for I know my old Lady learnt
you.

So I resolved to hide a Pen of my own here, and another there, for fear I
should come to be denied, and a little of my Ink in a broken China-cup, and a
little in another Cup; and a Sheet of Paper here-and-there among my Linen, with
a little Wax, and a few Wafers, in several Places, lest I should be searched;
and something I thought might happen to open a Way for my Deliverance, by these
or some other Means. O the Pride, thought I, I shall have, if I can secure my
Innocence, and escape the artful Wiles of this wicked Master! For, if he comes
hither, I am undone, to be sure! For this naughty Woman will assist him, rather
than fail, in the worst of his Attempts; and he will have no Occasion to send her
out of the Way, as he would have done Mrs. Jervis once. So I must set all my
little Wits at Work.

It is a Grief to me to write, and not to be able to send to you what I write;
but now it is all the Diversion I have, and if God will favor my Escape with
my Innocence, as I trust He graciously will, for all these black Prospects,
with what Pleasure shall I read them afterward!

I was going to say, Pray for your dutiful Daughter, as I used; but, alas! you
cannot know my Distress, though I am sure I have your Prayers, And I will write
on as Things happen, that if a Way should open, my Scribble may be ready to
send. For what I do, must be at a Jirk, to be sure.

O how I want such an obliging honest-hearted Man as John!

I am now come to SUNDAY.
WELL, here is a sad Thing! I am denied by this barbarous Woman to go to
Church, as I had built upon I might. And she has huffed poor Mr. Williams all
to-piece;, for pleading for me. I find he is to be forbid the House, if she
pleases. Poor Gentleman! all his Dependence is upon my Master, who has a very
good Living for him, if the Incumbent die; and he has kept his Bed these four
Months, of old Age and Dropsy.

He pays me great Respect, and I see pities me; and would perhaps assist my
Escape from these Dangers: But I have nobody to plead for me; and why should I
wish to ruin a poor Gentleman, by engaging him against his Interest? Yet one
would do any thing to preserve one's Innocence; and Providence would, perhaps,
make it up to him!

O judge (but how shall you see what I write!) my distracted Condition, to be
reduced to such a Pass as to desire to lay Traps for Mankind! -- But he wants
sadly to say something to me, as he whisperingly hinted.

The Wretch (I think I will always call her the Wretch henceforth) abuses me
more and more. I was but talking to one of the Maids just now, indeed a little
to tamper with her by degrees; and she popt upon us, and said -- Nay, Madam,
don't offer to tempt poor innocent Country Maidens from doing their Duty. You
wanted, I hear, she should take a Walk with you. But I charge you, Nan, never
stir with her, nor obey her, without letting me know it, in the smallest
Trisles. -- I say, walk with you! why, where would you go, I tro'? Why,
barbarous Mrs. Jewkes, said I, only to look a little up the Elm-walk, as you
would not let me go to Church.

Nan, said she, to show me how much they were all in her Power, pull off
Madam's Shoes, and bring them to me. I have taken care of her others. -- indeed
she shall not, said I. Nay, said Nan, but I must, if my Mistress bids me; so pray,
Madam, don't hinder me: And so indeed (would you believe it?) she took my Shoes
off, and left me barefoot; And, for my Share, I have been so frightened at
this, that I have not Power even to relieve my Mind by my Tears, I am quite
stupify'd, to be sure! -- Here I was forced to leave off.

Now I will give you a Picture of this Wretch: She is a broad, squat, pursy,
fat Thing, quite ugly, if any thing human can be so called; about forty Years
old. She has a huge Hand, and an Arm as thick as my Waist, I believe. Her Nose
is flat and crooked, and her Brows grow over her Eyes; a dead, spiteful, gray,
goggling Eye, to be sure she has. And her Face is flat and broad; and as to
Color, looks like as if it had been pickled a Month in Saltpeter: I dare say
she drinks! -- She has a hoarse man-like Voice, and is as thick as she is long;
and yet looks so deadly strong, that I am afraid she would dash me at her Foot
in an Instant, if I was to vex her. -- So that with a Heart more ugly than her
Face, she frightens me sadly; and I am undone, to be sure, if God does not
protect me; for she is very, very wicked -- indeed she is.

This is but poor helpless Spite in me: -- But the Picture is too near the
Truth notwithstanding. She sends me a Message just now, that I shall have my
Shoes again, if I will, accept of her Company, to walk with me in the Garden --
To waddle with me, rather, thought I.

Well, it is not my Business to quarrel with her downright. I shall be watched
the narrower, if I do; and so I will go with the hated Wretch. -- O for my dear
Mrs. Jervis! or rather, to be safe with my dear Father and Mother!

Oh! I Am out of my Wits for Joy! Just as I have got my Shoes on, I am told,
John, honest John, is come on Horseback! -- A Blessing on his faithful Heart!
What Joy is this! But I Will tell you more by-and-by. I must not let her know, I
am so glad to see this dear blessed John, to be sure! -- O but he looks sad, as
I see him out of the Window! What can be the Matter! -- I hope my dear Parents
are well, and Mrs. Jervis, and Mr. Longman, and every body, my naughty Master
not excepted; -- for I wish him to live, and repent of all his Wickedness to
poor me.

O dear Heart! what a World do we live in! -- I am now to take up my Pen again:
But I am in a sad Taking truly! Another puzzling Trial, to be sure!

Here is John, as I said; and the poor Man came to me, with Mrs. Jewkes, who
whispered, that I would say nothing about the Shoes, for my own sake, as she
said. The poor Man saw my Distress, and my red Eyes, and my haggard Looks, I
suppose; for I have had a sad Time of it, you must needs think; and though he
would have hid it if he could, yet his Eyes ran over. Oh Mrs. Pamela! said he;
Oh Mrs. Pamela! -- Well honest Fellow Servants, said I, I cannot help it at
present! I am obliged to your Honesty and Kindness, to be sure; and then he
wept more. Said I, (for my Heart was ready to break to see his Grief; for it is
a touching thing to see a Man cry) Tell me the worst! Is my Master coming? No,
no, said he, and sobb'd. -- Well, said I, is there any News of my poor Father
and Mother? How do they do? -- I hope, well, said he; I know nothing to the
contrary; There is no Mishap, I hope, to Mrs. Jervis, or Mr. Longman, or my
Fellow Servants! No -- said he, poor Man! with a long N -- o, as if his Heart
would burst. Well, thank God then! said I.

The Man's a Fool, said Mrs. Jewkes, I think; what ado is here! why sure
you are in Love, John. Do thou not see young Madam is well? What ails thee,
Man? Nothing at all, said he; but I am such a Fool, as to cry for Joy to see
good Mrs. Pamela: But I have a Letter for you.

I took it, and saw it was from my Master; so I put it in my Pocket. Mrs.
Jewkes, said I, you need not, I hope, see this. No, no, said she, I see whom it
comes from, well enough; or else, may-be, I must desire to see it.

And here is one for you, Mrs. Jewkes, said he; but yours, said he to me,
requires an Answer, which I must carry back early in the Morning, or tonight,
if I can.

You have no more, John, said Mrs. Jewkes, for Mrs. Pamela, have you? No, said
he, I have not; but every body's kind Love and Service. Ay, to us both, to be
sure, said she. John, said I, I will read the Letter, and pray take care of
yourself; for you are a good Man. God bless you; and I rejoice to see you, and
hear from you all. But I longed to say more, only that nasty Mrs. Jewkes --

So I went up, and locked myself in my Closet, and opened the Letter; and this
is a Copy of it: My dearest PAMELA,
'I Send purposely to you on an Affair that concerns you very much, and me
something, but chiefly for your sake. I am conscious, that I have proceeded by
you in such a manner as may justly alarm your Fears, and give Concern to your
honest Friends: And all my Pleasure is, that I can and will make you Amends for
all the Disturbance I have given you. As I promised, I sent to your Father the
Day after your Departure, that he might not be too much concerned for you; and
assured him of my Honor to you; and made an Excuse, such an one as ought to
have satisfied him, for your not coming to him. But this was not sufficient, it
seems; for he, poor Man! came to me next Morning, and set my Family almost in
an Uproar about you.

'O my dear Girl, what Trouble has not your Obstinacy given me, and yourself
too! I had no way to pacify him, but to promise, that he should see a Letter
written from you to Mrs. Jervis, to satisfy him you are well.

'Now all my Care in this Case is for your aged Parents, lest they should be
fatally touched with Grief; and for you, whose Duty and Affection for them I
know to be so strong and laudable: For this Reason I beg you will write a few
Lines to them, and let me prescribe the Form; which I have done, putting myself
as near as I can in your Place, and expressing your Sense, with a Warmth that I
doubt will have too much possessed you.

'After what is done, and which cannot now be helped, but which, I assure you,
shall turn out honorably for you, I expect not to be refused; because I cannot
possibly have any View in it, but to satisfy your Parents; which is more your
Concern than mine; and so I must beg you will not alter one Tittle of the
underneath. If you do, it will be impossible for me to send it, or that it
should answer the good End I propose by it.

'I have promised to you, that I will not approach you without your Leave: If I
find you easy, and not attempting to dispute or avoid your present Lot, I will
keep to my Word, though it is a Difficulty upon me. Nor shall the present
Restraint upon you last long: For I will assure you, that I am resolved very
soon to convince you, how ardently I am.

' Yours, etc.'




The Letter he prescribed for me was this: Dear Mrs. JERVIS,
'I Have, instead of being driven, by Robin, to my dear Father's, been carried
off to where I have no Liberty to tell. However, at present, I am not used
hardly; and I write to beg you to let my dear Father and Mother, whose Hearts
must be well-nigh broken, know, that I am well; and that I am, and, by the
Grace of God, ever will be, their dutiful and honest Daughter, as well as

'Your obliged Friend.
'I must neither send Date nor Place; but have most solemn Assurances of
honorable Usage.'






I knew not what to do on this most strange Request and Occasion. But my Heart
bled so much for you, my dear Father, who had taken the Pains to go yourself
and inquire after your poor Daughter, as well as for my dear Mother, that I
resolved to write, and pretty much in the above See p. 122; her Alterations are
in a different Character.
Form, that it might be sent to pacify you, till I could let you, some how or
other, know the true State of the Matter. And I wrote this to this strange
wicked Master himself: SIR,
'IF you knew but the Anguish of my Mind, and how much I suffer by your
dreadfully strange Usage of me, you would surely pity me, and consent to my
Deliverance. What have I done, that I should be the only Mark of your Cruelty?
I can have no Hope, no Desire of living left me, because I cannot have the
least Dependence, after what has passed, upon your solemn Assurances. -- It is
impossible, surely, they should be consistent with the honorable Designs you
profess.

'Nothing but your Promise of not seeing me here in my deplorable Bondage, can
give me the least Ray of Hope.

'Don't drive the poor distressed Pamela upon a Rock, I beseech you, that may
be the Destruction both of her Body and Soul! You don't know, Sir, how
dreadfully I dare, weak as I am of Mind and Intellect, when my Virtue is in
Danger. And, oh! hasten my Deliverance, that a poor unworthy Creature, below
the Notice of so great a Man, may not be made the Sport of a high Condition,
for no Reason in the World, but because she is not able to defend herself, nor
has a Friend that can right her.

'I have, Sir, in part to show my Obedience to you, but indeed, I own, more to
give Ease to the Minds of my poor distressed Parents, whose Poverty, one would
think, should screen them from Violences of this sort, as well as their poor
Daughter, followed pretty much the Form you have prescribed for me, to Mrs.
Jervis; and the Alterations I have made, (for I could not help a few) are of
such a Nature, as, though they show my Concern a little, yet must answer the End
you are pleased to say you propose by this Letter.

'For God's sake, good Sir, pity my lowly Condition, and my present great
Misery; and let me join with all the rest of your Servants to bless that
Goodness, which you have extended to every one, but the poor, afflicted,
heart-broken

'PAMELA.'




I thought, when I had written this Letter, and that which he had prescribed,
it would look like placing a Confidence in Mrs. Jewkes, to show them to her;
and I showed her at the same time my Master's Letter to me; for I believed, the
Value he expressed for me, would give me Credit with one who professed in every
thing to serve him right or wrong; though I had so little Reason, I fear, to
pride myself in it: And I was not mistaken; for it has seemed to influence her
not a little, and she is at present mighty obliging, and runs over in my
Praises; but is the less to be minded, because she praises as much the Author
of all my Miseries, and his honorable Intentions, as she calls them, when I
see, that she is capable of thinking;, as I fear he does, that every thing that
makes for his wicked Will, is honorable, though to the Ruin of the Innocent.
Pray God I may find it otherwise! I hope, whatever the wicked Gentleman may
intend, that I shall be at least rid of her impertinent bold way of Talk, when
she seems to think, by his Letter, that he means honorably.

I am now come to MONDAY, the 5th Day of my Bondage and Misery.
I Was in Hope to have an Opportunity to see John, and have a little private
Talk with him before he went away; but it could not be. The poor Man's
excessive Sorrow made Mrs. Jewkes take it into her Head, to think he loved me;
and so she brought up a Message to me from him this Morning, that he was going.
I desired he might come up to my Closet, as I called it; and she came with him:
And the honest Man, as I thought him, was as full of Concern as before, at
taking Leave. And I gave him my two Letters, the one for Mrs. Jervis, enclosed
in that for my Master: But Mrs. Jewkes would see me seal them up, for fear of
any other -- I was surprised, at the Man's going away, to see him drop a Bit of
Paper, just at the Head of the Stairs, which I took up without Mrs. Jewkes's
seeing me; but I was a thousand times more surprised, when I returned to my
Closet, and opening it, read as follows: Good Mrs. PAMELA,
'I AM grieved to tell you how much you have been deceived and betrayed, and
that by such a vile Dog as I. Little did I think it would come to this. But I
must say, if ever there was a Rogue in the World, it is me. I have all along
showed your Letters to my Master: He employed me for that Purpose; and he saw
every one before I carried them to your Father and Mother, and then sealed them
up, and sent me with them. I had some Business that way; but not half so often
as I pretended. And as soon as I heard how it was with you, I was ready to hang
myself. You may well think I could not stand in your Presence. O vile, vile
Wretch, to bring you to this! If you are ruined, I am the Rogue that caused it.
All the Justice I can do you, is, to tell you, you are in vile Hands; and I am
afraid will be undone in spite of all your sweet Innocence; and I believe I
shall never live after I know it. If you can forgive me, you are exceeding
good; but I shall never forgive myself, that is certain. Howsomever, it will do
you no good to make this known; and may-hap I may live to do you Service. If I
can, I will. I am sure I ought -- Master kept your last two or three Letters,
and did not send them at all. I am the most abandoned Wretch of Wretches,

'J. ARNOLD.
'You see your Undoing has been long hatching. Pray take care of your sweet
Self. Mrs. Jewkes is a Devil: But in my Master's the other House you have not one
false Heart, but myself. Out upon me for a Villain!'






My dear Father and Mother, when you come to this Place, I make no doubt your
Hair will stand on End, as mine does! -- O the Deceitfulness of the Heart of
Man! -- This John, that I took to be the honestest of Men; that you took for
the same; that was always praising you to me, and me to you, and for nothing so
much as for our honest Hearts; this very Fellow was all the while a vile
Hypocrite, and a perfidious Wretch, and helping to carry on my Ruin.

But he says enough of himself; and I can only sit down with this sad
Reflection, That Power and Riches never want Tools to promote their vilest
Ends, and that there is nothing so hard to be known as the Heart of Man! -- Yet
I can but pity the poor Wretch, since he seems to have some Remorse, and I
believe it best to keep his Wickedness secret, and, if it lies in my way, to
encourage his Penitence; for I may possibly make some Discoveries by it.

One thing I should mention in this Place; he brought down, in a Portmanteau,
all the Clothes and Things my Lady and Master had given me, and moreover two
Velvet Hoods, and a Velvet Scarf, that used to be worn by my Lady; but I have
no Comfort in them, or any thing else.

Mrs. Jewkes had the Portmanteau brought into my Closer, and she showed me what
was in it; but then locked it up, and said, she would let me have what I would
out of it, when I asked; but if I had the Key, it might make me want to go
abroad, may-be; and so the insolent Woman put it in her Pocket.

I gave myself over to sad Reflections upon this strange and surprising
Discovery of John's, and wept much for him, and for myself too; and now I see,
as he says, my Ruin has been so long a hatching, that I can make no Doubt what
my Master's honorable Professions will end in. What a Heap of Names does the
poor Fellow call himself! But what must they deserve, who set him to work? O
what has this wicked Master to answer for, to be so corrupt himself, and to
corrupt others, who would have been innocent; and all to carry on further a
more corrupt Scene, and to ruin a poor Creature, who never did him Harm, nor
wished him any; and who still can pray for his Happiness, and his Repentance?

I can but wonder what these Gentlemen, as they are called, can think of
themselves for these vile Doings? John had some Inducement; for he hoped to
please his Master, who rewarded him, and was bountiful to him; and the same may
be said, bad as she is, for this same odious Mrs. Jewkes. But what Inducement
has my Master for taking so much Pains to do the Devil's Work? -- If he loves
me, as it is falsely called, must he therefore lay Traps for me, to ruin me, and
to make me as bad as himself? I cannot imagine what Good the Undoing of such a
poor Creature as I can procure him! -- To be sure, I am a very worthless Body.
People indeed say I am handsome; but if I was so, should not a Gentleman prefer
an honest Servant to a guilty Harlot? -- And must he be more earnest to seduce
me, because I dread of all Things to be seduced, and would rather lose ray Life
than my Honesty!

Well, these are strange Things to me! I cannot account for them, for my Share;
but sure nobody will say, that these fine Gentlemen have any Tempter but their
own wicked Wills! -- This naughty Master could run away from me, when he
thought none but his Servants should know his base Attempts, in that sad Closet
Affair; but is it not strange, that he should not be afraid of the All-seeing
Eye, from which even that black poisonous Heart of his, and its most secret
Motions, could not be hid? -- But what avail me these sorrowful Reflections? He
is and will be wicked, and I am, I fear, to be a Victim to his lawless
Attempts, if the God in whom I trust, and to whom I hourly pray, prevent it not.

TUESDAY and WEDNESDAY.
I Have been hindered, by this wicked Woman's watching me too close, from
writing on Tuesday; and so I will put both these Days together. I have been a
little Turn with her, for an Airing, in the Chariot, and walked several times
in the Garden; but have always her at my Heels.

Mr. Williams came to see us, and look a Walk with us once; and while her Back
was just turned, (encouraged by the Hint he had before given me) I said, Sir, I
see two Tiles upon that Parsley-bed; cannot one cover them with Mould, with a
Note between them, on Occasion? -- A good Hint, said he; let that Sunflower by
the Backdoor of the Garden be the Place; I have a Key to that; for it is my
nearest way to the Town.

So I was forced to begin. O what Inventions will Necessity be the Parent of! I
hugged myself with the Thought; and she coming to us, he said, as if he was
continuing the Discourse we were in; No, not extraordinary pleasant. What Is
that? what is that? said Mrs. Jewkes. -- Only, said he, the Town, I Am saying, is
not very pleasant. No, indeed, said she, it is not; it is a poor Town, to my
thinking. Are there any Gentry in it? said I. And so we chatted on about the
Town, to deceive her. But my Deceit intended no Hurt to any body.

We then talked of the Garden, how large and pleasant, and the like; and sat
down on the turfted Slope of the fine Fish Pond, to see the Fishes play upon
the Surface of the Water; and she said, I should angle if I would.

I wish, said I, you would be so kind to fetch me a Rod and Baits. Pretty Mistress!
said she -- I know better than that, I Will assure you, at this time. -- I mean
no Harm, said I, indeed. Let me tell you, said she, I know no one that has
their Thoughts more about them than you. A body ought to look to it, where you
are. But we'll angle a little tomorrow. Mr. Williams, who is much afraid of
her, turned the Discourse to a general Subject. I saunter'd in, and left them
to talk by themselves; but he went away to Town, and she was soon after me.

I had got to my Pen and Ink; and I said, I want some Paper (putting what I was
about in my Bosom): You know I have written two Letters, and sent them by John
(O how his Name, poor guilty Fellow, grieves me!). Well, said she, you have
some left; one Sheet did for those two Letters. Yes, said I; but I used half
another for a Wrapper, you know; and see how I have scribbled the other Half;
and so I showed her a Parcel of broken Scraps of Verses, which I had tried to
recollect, and which I had written purposely that she might see, and think me
usually employed to such idle Purposes. Ay, said she, so you have; well, I Will
give you two Sheets more; but let me see how you dispose of them, either
written or blank. Well, thought I, I hope still, Argus, to be too hard for
thee. Now Argus, the Poets say, had an hundred Eyes, and was made to watch with
them all, as she does.

She brought me the Paper, and said, Now, Madam, let me see you write
something. I will, said I; and took the Pen, and wrote, "I wish Mrs. Jewkes
would be as good to me, as I would be to her, if I had it in my Power!" --
That Is pretty now! said she; well, I hope I am; but what then? "Why then (
wrote I) she would do me the Favor to let me know, what I have done to be made
her Prisoner; and what she thinks is to become of me." Well, and what then?
said she. "Why then, of Consequence, ( scribbled I) she would let me see her
Instructions, that I may know far to blame her, or acquit her."

Thus I fooled on, to show her my Fondness for scribbling; for I had no
Expectation of any Good from her; that so she might suppose I employed myself,
as I said, to no better Purpose at other Times: For she will have it, that I am
upon the some Plot, I am so silent, and love so much to be myself. -- She would
have me write on a little further. No, said I, you have not answered me. Why,
said she, what can you doubt, when my Master himself assures you of his Honor?
Ay, said I; but lay your Hand to your Heart, Mrs. Jewkes, and tell me, if you
yourself believe him. Yes, said she, to be sure I do. But, said I, what do you
call Honor? -- Why, said she, what does he call Honor, think you? -- Ruin!
Shame! Disgrace! said I, I fear. -- Pho, pho! said she; if you have any Doubt
about it, he can best explain his own Meaning: -- I Will send him Word to come to
satisfy you, if you will. -- Horrid Creature! said I, all in a Fright -- Can
thou not stab me to the Heart! I Would rather thou would, than say such another
Word! -- But I hope there is no Thought of his coming.

She had the Wickedness to say. No, no; he don't intend to come, as I know of:
-- But if I was he, I would not be long away. -- What means the Woman? said I.
-- Mean! said she (turning it off); why I mean, I would come, if I was he, and
put an End to all your Fears -- by making you as happy as you wish. It Is out of
his Power, said I, to make me happy, great and rich as he is! but by leaving me
innocent, and giving me Liberty to go to my dear Father and Mother.

She went away soon after, and I ended my Letter, in Hopes to have an
Opportunity to lay it in the appointed Place. So I went to her, and said; I
suppose, as it is not dark, I may take another Turn in the Garden. It Is too
late, said she; but if you will go, don't stay; and, Nan, see and attend Madam,
as she called me.

So I went toward the Pond, the Wench following me, and dropped purposely my
Hussy: And when I came near the Tiles, I said, Mrs. Ann, I have dropped my
Hussy; be so kind as to look for it: I had it by the Pond-side. The Wench went
to look, and I slipped the Note between the Tiles, and covered them as quick as I
could with the light Mould, quite unperceived; and the Maid finding the Hussy,
I took it, and saunter'd in again, and met Mrs. Jewkes coming to see after me.
What I wrote was this: 'Reverend Sir,
'THE want of Opportunity to speak my Mind to you, I am sure, will excuse this
Boldness in a poor Creature that is betrayed hither, I have Reason to think,
for the worst Purposes. You know something, to be sure, of my Story, my native
Poverty, which I am not ashamed of, my late Lady's Goodness, and my Master's
Designs upon me. It Is true, he promises Honor, and all that; but the Honor of
the Wicked is Disgrace and Shame to the Virtuous. And he may think he may keep
his Promises according to the Notions he may allow himself to hold; and yet,
according to mine, and every good Body's beside, basely ruin me.

'I am so wretched, and ill-treated by this Mrs. Jewkes, and she is so
ill-principled a Woman, that as I may soon want the Opportunity which the happy
Hint of this Day affords to my Hopes; so I throw myself at once upon your
Goodness, without the least Reserve; for I cannot be worse than I am, should
that fail me; which, I dare say, to your Power, it will not: For I see it, Sir,
in your Looks, I hope it from your Cloth, and I doubt it not from your
Inclination, in a Case circumstanced as my unhappy one is. For, Sir, in helping
me out of my present Distress, you perform all the Acts of Religion in one; and
the highest Mercy and Charity, both to a Body and a Soul of a poor Wretch,
that, believe me, Sir, has, at present, not so much as in Thought, swerved from
her Innocence.'

'Is there not some way to be found out for my Escape, without Danger to
yourself? Is there no Gentleman or Lady of Virtue in this Neighborhood, to
whom I may fly, only till I can find a way to get to my poor Father and Mother?
Cannot Lady Davers be made acquainted with my sad Story, by your conveying a
Letter to her? My poor Parents are so low in the World, they can do nothing but
break their Hearts for me; and that, I fear, will be the End of it.

'My Master promises, if I will be easy, as he calls it, in my present Lot, he
will not come down without my Consent. Alas! Sir, this is nothing. For what is
the Promise of a Person, who thinks himself at Liberty to act as he has done by
me? If he comes, it must be to ruin me; and come, to be sure, he will, when he
thinks he has silenced the Clamours of my Friends, and lulled me, as no doubt
he hopes, into a fatal Security.

'Now, therefore, Sir, is all the Time I have to work and struggle for the
Preservation of my Honesty. If I stay till becomes, I am undone. You have a Key
to the back Garden-door; I have great Hopes from that. Study, good Sir, and
contrive for me. I will faithfully keep your Secret. -- Yet I should be loath to
have you suffer for me!

'I say no more, but commit this to the happy Tiles, and to the Bosom of that
Earth in which I hope my Deliverance will take Root, and bring forth such
Fruit, as may turn to my inexpressible Joy, and your eternal Reward, both here
and hereafter. As shall ever pray,

'Your oppressed humble Servant.'




THURSDAY.
THIS completes a fatal Week since my setting out, as I hoped, to see you, my
dear Father and Mother. O how different were my Hopes then, from what they are
now! Yet who knows what these happy Tiles may produce!

But I must tell you, first, how I have been beaten by Mrs. Jewkes! It Is very
true! -- And thus it came about:

My Impatience was great to walk in the Garden, to see if any thing had
offered, answerable to my Hopes. But this wicked Mrs. Jewkes would not let me
go without her; and she said she was not at Leisure. We had a great many Words
about it; for I said, it was very hard I could not be trusted to walk by myself
in the Garden for a little Air; but must be dogged and watched worse than a
Thief.

She still pleaded her Instructions, and said she was not to trust me out of
her Sight: And you had better, said she, be easy and contented, I assure you;
for I have worse Orders than you have yet found. I remember, said she, your
asking Mr. Williams if, there were any Gentry in the Neighborhood: This makes
me suspect you want to get away to them, to tell your sad dismal Story, as you
call it.

My Heart was at my Mouth; for I feared by that Hint, she had seen my Letter
under the Tiles: O how uneasy I was! At last she said, Well, since you take so
on, you may take a Turn, and I will be with you in a Minute.

I went out; and when I was out of Sight of her Window, I speeded toward the
hopeful Place, but was soon forced to slacken my Pace, by her odious Voice;
Hey-day, why so nimble, and whither so fast? said she: What! are you upon a
Wager? I stopped for her, till her pursy Sides were waddled up to me; and she
held by my Arm, half out of Breath: So I was forced to pass by the dear Place,
without daring to look at it.

The Gardener was at Work a little further, and so we looked upon him, and I
began to talk about his Art; but she said softly. My Instructions are, not to
let you be so familiar with the Servants. Why, said I, are you afraid I should
confederate with them to commit a Robbery upon my Master? May-be I am, said the
odious Wretch; for to rob him of yourself, would be the worst that could happen
to him, in his Opinion.

And pray, said I, walking on, how came I to be his Property? What Right has he
in me, but such as a Thief may plead to stolen Goods? -- Why, was ever the like
heard, says she! -- This is downright Rebellion, I protest! -- Well, well,
Lambkin, (which the Foolish often calls me) if I was m his Place, he should not
have his Property in you long questionable. Why, what would you do, said I, if
you were he? -- Not. stand shill-I, shall-I, as he does; but put you and
himself both out of your Pain. -- Why, Jezebel, said I, (I could not help it)
would you ruin me by Force? -- Upon this she gave me a deadly Slap upon my
Shoulder: Take that, said she; whom do you call Jezebel?

I was so surprised, (for you never beat me, my dear Father and Mother, in your
Lives) that I was as one thunderstruck; and looked round, as if I wanted
somebody to help me; but, alas! I had nobody; and said, at last, rubbing my
Shoulder, Is this also in your Instructions? -- Alas! for me! am I to be beaten
too? And so I fell a-crying, and threw myself upon the Grass-walk we were upon.
-- Said she, in a great Pet, I will not be called such Names, I Will assure you.
Marry come up! I see you have a Spirit: You must and shall be kept under. I Will
manage such little provoking Things as you, I warrant ye! Come, come, we'll go
in Doors, and I Will lock you up, and you shall have no Shoes, nor any thing
else, if this is to be the Case.

I did not know what to do. This was a cruel thing to me, and I blamed myself
for my free Speech; for now I had given her some Pretense; and Oh! thought I,
here I have, by my Malpertness, ruined the only Project I had left.

The Gardener saw this Scene; but she called to him, Well, Jacob, what do you
stare at? Pray mind what you're upon. And away he walked, to another Quarter,
out of Sight.

Well, thought I, I must put on the Dissembler a little, I see. She took my
Hand roughly; Come, get up, said she, and come in Doors. -- I Will Jezebel you, I
warrant ye! -- Why, dear Mrs. Jewkes, said I -- None of your Dears and your
Coaxing? said she; why not Jezebel again? -- She was in a fearful Passion, I
saw, and I was out of my Wits. Thought I, I have often heard Women blamed for
their Tongues; I wish mine had been shorter. But I cannot go in, said I, indeed
I cannot! -- Why, said she, cannot you? I Will warrant I can take such a thin Body
as you are, under my Arm, and carry you in, if you will not walk. You don't know
my Strength. -- Yes, but I do, said I, too well; and will you not use me worse
when I come in? -- So I arose, and she muttered to herself all the way, She to
be a Jezebel with me, that had used me so well! and suchlike.

When I came near the House, I said, sitting down upon a Settle-bench, Well, I
will not go in, till you say, you will forgive me, Mrs. Jewkes. -- If you will
forgive my calling you that Name, I will forgive your beating me. -- She sat
down by me, and seemed in a great Pucker, and said, Well, come, I will forgive
you for this time; and so kissed me, as a Mark of Reconciliation. -- But pray,
said I, tell me where I am to walk, and go, and give me what Liberty you can;
and when I know the most you can favor me with, you shall see I will be as
content as I can, and not ask you for more.

Ay, said she, this is something like: I wish I could give you all the Liberty
you desire; for you must think it is no Pleasure to me to tie you to my
Petticoat, as it were, and not to let you stir without me -- But People that
will do their Duties, must have some Trouble; and what I do, is to serve as
good a Master, to be sure, as lives -- Yes, said I, to every body but me! -- He
loves you too well, to be sure, replied she, and that is the Reason; so you
ought to bear it. I say, love, said I! Come, said she, don't let the Wench see
you have been crying, nor tell her any Tales; for you will not tell them fairly, I
am sure; and I Will send her, and you shall take another Walk in the Garden, if
you will: May-be, said she, it will get you a Stomach to your Dinner; for you
don't eat enough to keep Life and Soul together. You are Beauty to the Bone,
added the strange Wretch, or you could not look so well as you do, with so
little Stomach, so little Rest, and so much pining and whining for nothing at
all. Well, thought I, say what thou will, so I can be rid of thy bad Tongue and
Company: And I hoped to find some Opportunity now, to come at my Sun-flower.
But I walked the other way, to take that in my Return, to avoid Suspicion.

I forced my Discourse to the Wench; but it was all upon general things; for I
find she is asked after every thing I say and do. When I came near the Place,
as I had been devising, I said, Pray, step to the Gardener, and ask him to
gather a Sallad for me to Dinner. She called out, Jacob! -- Said I, he cannot
hear you so far off; and pray tell him, I should like a Cucumber too, if he has
one. When she had stepped about a Bow-shot from me, I popt down, and whipped my
Fingers under the upper Tile, and pulled out a Letter, without Direction, and
thrust it in my Bosom, trembling for Joy. She was with me before I could well
secure it; and I was in such a taking, that I feared I should discover myself.
You seem frighted, Madam, said she: Why, said I, with a lucky Thought, (alas!
your poor Daughter will make an Intriguer by-and-by; but I hope an innocent
one!) I stooped to smell at the Sun-flower, and a great nasty Worm ran into,
the Ground, that startled me; for I don't love Worms. Said she, Sun-flowers
don't smell. So I find, replied I. And so we walked in; and Mrs. Jewkes said,
Well, you have made haste in. -- You shall go another time.

I went up to my Closet, locked myself in, and, opening my Letter, found in it
these Words: 'I Am infinitely concerned for your Distress. I most heartily wish
it may be in my Power to serve and save so much Innocence, Beauty and Merit. My
whole Dependence is upon Mr. B. and I have a near View of being provided for by
his Favor to me. But yet I would sooner forfeit all my Hopes from him,
(trusting in God for the rest) than not assist you, if possible. I never looked
upon Mr. B. in the Light he now appears in to me, in your Case. To be sure, he
is no professed Debauchee. But I am entirely of Opinion, you should, if
possible, get out of his Hands, and especially as you are in very bad ones in
Mrs. Jewkes's.

'We have here the Widow Lady Jones, Mistress of a good Fortune, and a Woman of
Virtue, I believe. We have also old Sir Simon Darnford, and his Lady, who is a
good Woman; and they have two Daughters, virtuous young Ladies. All the rest
are but middling People, and Traders, at best. I will try, if you please,
either Lady Jones, or Lady Darnford, if they will permit you to take Refuge
with them. I see no Probability of keeping myself concealed in this Matter; but
will, as I said, risque all things to serve you; for I never saw a Sweetness
and Innocence like yours; and your hard Case has attached me entirely to you;
for I know, as you so happily express, if I can serve you in this Case, I shall
thereby perform all the Acts of Religion in one.

'As to Lady Davers, I will convey a Letter, if you please, to her; but it must
not be from our Post House, I give you Caution; for the Man owes all his Bread
to Mr. B. and his Place too; and I believe, by something that dropped from him,
over a Can of Ale, has his Instructions. You don't know how you are surrounded;
all which confirms me in your Opinion, that no Honor is meant you, let what
will be professed; and I am glad you want no Caution on that Head.

'Give me Leave to say, that I had heard much in your Praise, both as to Person
and Mind; but I think greatly short of what you deserve: My Eyes convince me of
the one, your Letter of the other. For fear of losing the present lucky
Opportunity, I am longer than otherwise I should be. But I will not enlarge,
only to assure you, that I am, to the best of my Power,

' Your faithful Friend and Servant, 'ARTHUR WILLIAMS.
'I will come once every Morning, and once every Evening, after School-time, to
look for your Letters. I Will come in, and return without going into the House,
if I see the Coast clear: Otherwise, to avoid Suspicion, I Will come in.'






I instantly, to this pleasing Letter, wrote as follows: 'Reverend Sir,
'O How answerable to your Function, and your Character, is your kind Letter!
God bless you for it! I now think I am beginning to be happy. I should be sorry
you should suffer on my Account; but I hope it will be made up to you an
hundredfold, by that God whom you so faithfully serve, I should be too happy,
could I ever have it in my Power to contribute in the least to it. But, alas!
to serve me, must be for God's sake only; for I am poor and lowly in Fortune;
though in Mind, I hope, too high to do a mean or unworthy Deed, to gain a
Kingdom. But I lose Time. --

'Any way you think best, I shall be pleased with; for I know not the Persons,
nor in what manner it is best to apply to them. I am glad of the Hint you so
kindly give me of the Man at the Post House. I was thinking of opening a way
for myself by Letter, when I could have Opportunity; but I see more and more,
that I am indeed strangely surrounded with Dangers; and that there is no
Dependence to be made on my Master's Honor.

'I should think, Sir, if either of those Ladies would give Leave, I might some
way get out by Favor of your Key; and as it is impossible, watched as I am, to
know when it can be, suppose, Sir, you could get one made by it, and put it, by
the next Opportunity, under the Sun-flower? -- I am sure no Time is to be lost;
because it is rather my Wonder, that she is not thoughtful about this Key, than
otherwise; for she forgets not the minutest thing. But, Sir, if I had this Key,
I could, if these Ladies would not shelter me, run away any-where. And if I was
once out of the House, they could have no Pretense to force me in again; for I
have done no Harm, and hope to make my Story good to any compassionate Body;
and by this way you need not be known. Torture should not wring it from me, I
assure you.

'One thing more, good Sir. Have you no Correspondence with my Master's Family?
By that means, may-be, I could be informed of his Intentions of coming hither,
and when. I enclose you a Letter of a deceitful Wretch; for I can trust you
with anything, poor John Arnold. Its Contents will tell why I enclose it.
Perhaps, by his means, something may be discovered; for he seems willing to
atone for his Treachery to me, by the Intimation of future Service. I leave the
Hint for you to improve upon, and am, Reverend Sir,

' Your for ever obliged 'and thankful Servant.
'I hope, Sir, by your Favor, I could send a little Packet, now-and-then,
some-how, to my poor Father and Mother. I have a little Stock of Money, about
five or six Guineas: Shall I put half in your Hands, to defray a Man and Horse,
or any other Incidents?'






I had time but just to transcribe this, before I was called to Dinner; and I
put that for Mr. Williams, with a Wafer in it, in my Bosom, to get an
Opportunity to lay it in the dear Place.

O good Sirs! Of all the Flowers in the Garden, the Sun-flower, sure, is the
loveliest! -- It is a propitious one to me! How nobly my Plot succeeds! But I
begin to be afraid my Writings may be discovered; for they grow large: I stitch
them hitherto in my Under-coat, next my Linen. But if this Brute should search
me! -- I must try to please her, and then she will not.

Well, I am but just come off from a Walk in the Garden; and have deposited my
Letter by a simple Wile. I got some Horse-beans; and we took a Turn in the
Garden, to angle, as Mrs. Jewkes had promised me. She baited the Hook, and I
held it, and soon hooked a lovely Carp, Play it, play it, said she; I did, and
brought it to the Bank. A sad Thought just then came into my Head; and I took
it, and threw it in again; and O the Pleasure it seemed to have, to flounce in,
when at Liberty? -- Why this? says she. O Mrs. Jewkes! said I, I was thinking
this poor Carp was the unhappy Pamela. I was likening you and myself to my
naughty Master. As we hooked and deceived the poor Carp, so was I betrayed by
false Baits; and when you said, Play it, play it, it went to my Heart, to think
I should sport with the Destruction of the poor Fish I had betrayed; and I
could not but fling it in again: And did you not see the Joy with which the
happy Carp flounced from us! O! said I, may some good merciful Body procure me
my Liberty in the same manner; for, to be sure, I think my Danger equal!

Lord bless thee! said she, what a Thought is there! -- Well, said I, I can
angle no more. I Will try my Fortune, said she, and took the Rod. Well, said I, I
will plant Life then, if I can, while you are destroying it. I have some
Horse-beans here, and will go and stick them into one of the Borders, to see
how long they will be coming up; and I will call them my Garden.

So you see, dear Father and Mother, (I hope now you will soon see; for,
may-be, if I cannot get away so soon myself, I may send my Papers some-how; I
say, you will see) that this furnishes me with a good Excuse to look after my
Garden another time; and if the Mould should look a little freshish, it will not
be so much suspected. She mistrusted nothing of this; and I went and stuck in
here and there my Beans, for about the Length of five Else, of each side of the
Sun-flower; and easily reposited my Letter. And not a little proud am I of this
Contrivance. Sure something will do at last!

FRIDAY, SATURDAY.
I Have just now told you a Trick of mine; now I Will tell you a Trick of this
wicked Woman's. She comes up to me; says she, I have a Bill I cannot change
till Tomorrow; and a Tradesman wants his Money most sadly; and I don't love to
turn poor Trades-folks away without their Money: Have you any about you? I have
a little. How much will do? said I. Oh! said she, I want eight Pounds. Alack!
said I. I have but between five and six. Lend me that! said she, till
Tomorrow. I did so; and she went down Stairs: And when she came up, she
laughed, and said, Well, I have paid the Tradesman. Said I, I hope you will give
it me again Tomorrow. At that, the Assurance, laughing loud, said, Why, what
Occasion have you for Money? To tell you the Truth, Lambkin, I didn't want it.
I only feared you might make a bad Use of it; and now I can trust Nan with you
a little oftener, especially as I have got the Key of your Portmanteau; so that
you can neither corrupt her with Money or fine Things. Never did any body look
more silly than I! -- O how I fretted to be so foolishly outwitted! -- And the
more, as I had hinted to Mr. Williams, that I would put some in his Hands to
defray the Charges of my sending to you. I cried for Vexation! -- And now I
have not five Shillings left to support me, if I can get away! -- Was ever such
a Fool as I! I must be priding myself in my Contrivances, indeed! Said I, Was
this in your Instructions, Wolfkin? for she called me Lambkin. Jezebel, you
mean, Child! said she. -- Well, I now forgive you heartily; let us buss; and be
Friends! -- Out upon you! said I; cannot bear you. But I durst not call her
Names again; for I dread her huge Paw most sadly. The more I think of this
thing, the more do I regret it, and blame myself.

This Night the Man from the Post House brought a Letter for Mrs. Jewkes, in
which was one enclosed to me: She brought it me up. Said she, Well, my good
Master don't forget us. He has sent you a Letter; and see what he writes to me.
So she read, That he hoped her fair Charge was well, happy, and contented: Ay,
to be sure, said I, I cannot choose! -- That he did not doubt her Care and
Kindness to me; that I was very dear to him, and she could not use me too well;
and the like. There Is a Master for you, said she! Sure you will love and pray
for him. I desired her to read the rest. No, no, said she, but I wont. Said I,
Are there any Orders for taking my Shoes away, and for beating me? No, said
she, nor about Jezebel neither. Well, returned I, I cry Truce! for I have no
mind to be beat again. I thought, said she, we had forgiven one another.

My Letter is as follows: ' My dear PAMELA,
'I Begin to repent already, that I have bound myself, by Promise, not to see
you till you give me Leave; for I think the Time very tedious. Can you place so
much Confidence in me, as to invite me down? Assure yourself that your
Generosity shall not be thrown away upon me. I the rather would press this, as
I am uneasy for your Uneasiness; for Mrs. Jewkes acquaints me, that you take
your Restraint very heavily; and neither eat, drink, nor rest well; and I have
too great an Interest in your Health, not to wish to shorten the Time of this
Trial to you: which will be the Consequence of my coming down to you. John,
too, has intimated to me your Concern, with a Grief that hardly gave him leave
for Utterance, a Grief that a little alarmed my Tenderness for you. Not that I
fear any thing, but that your Disregard to me, which yet my proud Heart will
hardly permit me to own, may throw you upon some Rashness, that might encourage
a daring Hope: But how poorly do I descend, to be anxious about such a Menial
as he! -- I will only say one thing, that if you will give me Leave to attend
you at the Hall, (consider who it is that requests this from you as a Favor) I
solemnly declare, that you shall have Cause to be pleased with this obliging
Mark of your Confidence in me, and Consideration for me; and if I find Mrs.
Jewkes has not behaved to you with the Respect due to one I so dearly love, I
will put it entirely into your Power to discharge her the House, if you think
proper; and Mrs. Jervis, or who else you please, shall attend you in her place.
This I say on a Hint John gave me, as if you resented something from that
Quarter. Dearest Pamela, answer favorably this earnest Request of one that
cannot live without you, and on whose Honor to you, you may absolutely depend;
and so much the more, as you place a Confidence in it, I am, and assuredly ever
will be,

' Your faithful and affectionate, etc.
'You will be glad, I know, to hear your Father and Mother are well, and easy
upon your last Letter. That gave me a Pleasure that I am resolved you shall not
repent. Mrs. Jewkes will convey to me your Answer.'






I but slightly read this Letter for the present, to give way to one I had
hopes of finding by this time from Mr. Williams. I took an Evening Turn, as I
called it, in Mrs. Jewkes's Company; and walking by the Place, I said, Do you
think, Mrs. Jewkes, any of my Beans can have struck since Yesterday? She
laughed, and said. You are a poor Gardener; but I love to see you divert
yourself. She passing on, I found my good Friend had provided for me, and
slipping it in my Bosom, for her Back was toward me. Here, said I, having a
Bean in my Hand, is one of them; but it was not stirred No, to be sure, said
she, and turned upon me a most wicked Jest, unbecoming the Mouth of a Woman,
about Planting, etc. When I came in, I hy'd to my Closet, and read as follows:
'I AM sorry to tell you, that I have had a Repulse from Lady Jones. She is
concerned at your Case, she says; but don't care to make herself Enemies. I
applied to Lady Darnford, and told her, in the most pathetick manner I could,
your sad Story, and showed her your more pathetick Letter. I found her well
disposed; but she would advise with Sir Simon, who, by-the-by, is not a Man of
extraordinary Character for Virtue; but he said to his Lady, in my Presence,
Why, what is all this, my Dear, but that our Neighbor has a mind to his
Mother's Waiting-maid! And if he takes care she wants for nothing, I don't see
any great Injury will be done her. He hurts no Family by this' (So, my dear
Father and Mother, it seems that poor Peoples Honesty is to go for nothing).
'And I think, Mr. Williams, you, of all Men, should not engage in this Affair,
against your Friend and Patron. He spoke this in so determined a manner, that
the Lady had done: and I had only to beg no Notice should be taken of the
Matter as from me.

'I have hinted your Case to Mr. Peter's, the Minister of this Parish; but I am
concerned to say, that he imputed selfish Views to me, as if I would make an
Interest in your Affections, by my Zeal. And when I represented the Duties of
our Function, and the like, and protested my Disinterestedness, he coldly said,
I was very good; but was a young Man, and knew little of the World. And though
'twas a Thing to be lamented, yet when he and I set about to reform Mankind in
this respect, we should have enough upon our Hands; for, he said, it was too
common and fashionable a Case to be withstood by a private Clergyman or two:
And then he uttered some Reflections upon the Conduct of the present Fathers of
the Church, in regard to the first Personages of the Realm, as a Justification
of his Coldness on this score.

'I represented the different Circumstances of your Affair; that other Women
lived evilly by their own Consent; but to serve you, was to save an Innocence
that had but few Examples; and then I showed him your Letter.

'He said, It was prettily written; and he was sorry for you; and that your
good Intentions ought to be encouraged; but what, said he, would you have me
do, Mr. Williams? Why, suppose Sir, said I, you give her Shelter in your House,
with your Spouse and Niece, till she can get to her Friends! -- What, and
imbroil myself with a Man of Mr. B's Power and Fortune! No, not I, I Will assure
you! -- And I would have you consider what you are about. Besides, she owns,
continued he, that he promises to do honorably by her; and her Shyness will
procure her good Terms enough; for he is no covetous nor wicked Gentleman,
except in this Case; and it is what all young Gentlemen will do.

'I am greatly concerned for him, I assure you; but am not discouraged by this
ill Success, let what will come of it, if I can serve you.

'I don't hear, as yet, that Mr. B. is coming; I am glad of your Hint as to
that unhappy Fellow John Arnold; something, perhaps, will strike out from that,
which may be useful. As to your Pacquets, if you seal them up, and lay them in
the usual Place, if you find it not suspected, I will watch an Opportunity to
convey them; but if they are large, you had best be very cautious. This evil
Woman, I find, mistrusts me much.

'I just hear that the Gentleman is dying, whose Living Mr. B. has promised me.
I have almost a Scruple of taking it, as I am acting so contrary to his
Desires; but I hope he will one Day thank me for it. As to Money, don't think of
it at present. Be assured you may command all in my Power to do for you,
without Reserve.

'I believe, when we hear he is coming, it will be best to make use of the Key,
which I shall soon procure you; and I can borrow a Horse for you, I believe, to
wait within half a Mile of the Backdoor, over the Pasture; and will contrive by
myself, or somebody, to have you conducted some Miles distant, to one of the
Villages thereabouts; so don't be discomforted, I beseech you. I am, excellent
Mrs. Pamela,

' Your faithful Friend, etc.




I made a thousand sad Reflections upon the former Part of this honest
Gentleman's kind Letter; and but for the Hope he gave me at last, should have
given up my Case as quite desperate. I then wrote to thank him most gratefully
for his kind Endeavors; to lament the little Concern the Gentry had for my
deplorable Case; the Wickedness of the World, first to give way to such
iniquitous Fashions, and then plead the Frequency of them, against the Attempt
to amend them; and how unaffected People were to the Distresses of others. I
recalled my former Hint as to writing to Lady Davers, which I feared, I said,
would only serve to apprize her Brother, that she knew his wicked Scheme, and
more harden him in it, and make him come down the sooner, and to be the more
determined on my Ruin; besides, that it might make Mr. Williams guessed at, as
a means of conveying my Letter: And being very fearful, that if that good Lady
would interest herself in my Behalf, (which was a Doubt, because she both loved
and feared her Brother) it would have no Effect upon him; and that, therefore,
I would wait the happy Event I might hope for from his kind Assistance in the
Key and the Horse. I intimated my Master's Letter, begging to be permitted to
come down: Was fearful it might be sudden; and that I was of Opinion no Time
was to be lost; for we might lose all our Opportunities; telling him the
Money-trick of this vile Woman, etc.

I had not Time to take a Copy of this Letter, I was so watched. But when I had
it ready in my Bosom, I was easy. And so I went to seek out Mrs. Jewkes, and
told her I would have her Advice upon the Letter I had received from my Master,
which Point of Confidence in her, pleased her not a little. Ay, said she, now
this is something like: And, we'll take a Turn in the Garden, or where you
please. I pretended it was indifferent to me; and so we walked into the Garden.
I began to talk to her of the Letter; but was far from acquainting her with all
the Contents; only that he wanted my Consent to come down, and hoped she used
me kindly, and the like. And I said, Now, Mrs. Jewkes, let me have your Advice
as to this. Why then, said she, I will give it you freely. Even send to him to
come down. It will highly oblige him, and I dare say you will fare the better for
it. How the better? said I -- I dare say, you think yourself, that he intends
my Ruin. I hate, said she, that foolish Word; your Ruin! -- Why never a Lady in
the Lady may live happier than you, if you will, or be more honorably used.

Well, Mrs. Jewkes, said I, I shall not at this time dispute with you about the
Words Ruin or honorable; for I find, we have quite different Notions of both:
But now I will speak plainer than ever I did. Do you think he intends to make
Proposals to me, as to a kept Mistress, or kept Slave rather, or do you not? --
Why, Lambkin, said she, what do thou think thyself? -- I fear, said I, he
does. Well, said she, but if he does, (for I know nothing of the Matter, I
assure you) you may have your own Terms -- I see that; for you may do any thing
with him.

I could not bear this to be spoken, though it was all I feared of a longtime;
and began to exclaim most sadly. Nay, said she, he may marry you, as far as I
know. -- No, no, said I, that cannot be -- I neither desire nor expect it. His
Condition don't permit me to have such a Thought, and that, and the whole
Series of his Conduct, convinces me of the contrary; and you would have me
invite him to come down, would you? Is not this to invite my Ruin?

It Is what I would do, said she, in your Place; and if it was to be as you
think, I should rather be out of my Pain, than live in continual Frights and
Apprehension as you do. No, replied I, an Hour of Innocence is worth an Age of
Guilt; and were my Life to be made ever so miserable by it, I should never
forgive myself, if I were not to lengthen out to the longest Minute my happy
Time of Honesty. Who knows what Providence may do for me!

Why, may-be, said she, as he loves you so well, you may prevail upon him by
your Prayers and Tears; and for that Reason, I should think, you would better let
him come down. Well, said I, I will write him a Letter, because he expects an
Answer, or may-be he will make that a Pretense to come down. How can it go?

I Will take care of that, said she; it is in my Instructions -- Ay, thought I,
so I doubt, by the Hint Mr. Williams gave me, about the Post House.

The Gardener coming by, I said, Mr. Jacob, I have planted a few Beans, and I
call the Place my Garden. It is just by the Door out-yonder, I Will show it you;
pray don't dig them up. So I went on with him; and when we had turned the
Alley, out of her Sight, and were near the Place, said I, Pray step to Mrs.
Jewkes, and ask her if she has any more Beans for me to plant? He smiled, I
suppose at my Foolishness, and I popt the Letter under the Mould, and stepped
back, as if waiting for his Return; which being near, was immediate, and she
followed him. What should I do with Beans? said she -- and sadly scared me; for
she whispered me, I am afraid of some Fetch! you don't use to send of such
simple Errands. -- What Fetch? said I; it is hard I can neither stir, nor
speak, but I must be suspected. -- Why, said she, my Master writes, that I must
have all my Eyes about me; for, though you are as innocent as a Dove, yet you're
as cunning as a Serpent. But I Will forgive you, if you cheat me.

Then I thought of my Money, and could have called her Names, had I dared* And
I said, Pray,

Mrs. Jewkes, now you talk of forgiving me, if I cheat you, be so kind as to
pay me my Money; for though I have no Occasion for it, yet I know you was but in
Jest, and intended to give it me again. You shall have it in a proper time,
said she; but, indeed, I was in earnest to get it out of your Hands, for fear
you should make an ill Use of it. And so we cavilled upon this Subject as we
walked in, and I went up to write my Letter to my Master; and, as I intended to
show it her, I resolved to write accordingly as to her Part of it; for I made
little Account of his offer of Mrs. Jervis to me, instead of this wicked Woman,
(though the most agreeable thing that could have befallen me, except my Escape
from hence) nor indeed of any thing he said; For to be honorable, in the just
Sense of the Word, he need not have caused me to be run away with, and confined
as I am. I wrote as follows: 'Honoured Sir,
'WHEN I consider how easy it is for you to make me happy, since all I desire
is to be permitted to go to my poor Father and Mother: When I reflect upon your
former Proposal to me, in relation to a certain Person, not one Word of which
is now mentioned; and upon my being in that strange manner run away with, and
still kept here a miserable Prisoner; do you think, Sir, (pardon your poor
Servant's Freedom; my Fears make me bold; do you think, I say) that your
general Assurances of Honor to me, can have the Effect upon me, that, were it
not for these Things, all your Words ought to have? -- O good Sir! I too much
apprehend, that your Notions of Honor and mine are very different from one
another. And I have no other Hope but in your continued Absence. If you have
any Proposals to make me, that are consistent with your honorable Professions,
in my humble Sense of the Word, a few Lines will communicate them to me, and I
will return such an Answer as befits me, But Oh! What Proposals can one in your
high Station have to make to one in my low one! I know what belongs to your
Degree too well, to imagine, that any thing can be expected but sad
Temptations, and utter Distress, if you come down; and you know not, Sir, when
I am made desperate, what the wretched Pamela dares to do!

'Whatever Rashness you may impute to me, I cannot help it, but I wish I may
not be forced upon any, that otherwise would never enter into my Thoughts.
Forgive me, Sir, my Plainness; I should be loath to behave to my Master
unbecomingly; but I must needs say, Sir, my Innocence is so dear to me, that
all other Considerations are, and, I hope, shall ever be, treated by me as
Niceties, that ought, for that, to be dispensed with. If you mean honorably,
why, Sir, should you not let me know it plainly? Why is it necessary to
imprison me, to convince me of it? And why must I be close watched, and
attended, hindered from stirring out, from speaking to any body, from going so
much as to Church to pray for you, who have been till of late so generous a
Benefactor to me? Why, Sir, I humbly ask, why all this, if you mean honorably?
-- It is not for me to expostulate so freely, but in a Case so near to me, with
you. Sir, so greatly my Superior. Pardon me, I hope, you will; but as to any
the least Desire of seeing you, I cannot bear the dreadful Apprehension.
Whatever you have to propose, whatever you intend by me, let my Assent be that
of a free Person, mean as I am, and not of a sordid Slave, who is to be
threatened and frightened into a Compliance, that your Conduct to her seems to
imply would be otherwise abhorred by her. -- My Restraint is indeed hard upon
me. I am very uneasy under it. Shorten it, I beseech you, or -- But I will not
dare to say more, than that I am

'Your greatly oppressed unhappy Servant.'




After I had taken a Copy of this, I folded it up; and Mrs. Jewkes coming up,
just as I had done, sat down by me, and said, when she saw me direct it, I wish
you would tell me if you have taken my Advice, and consented to my Master's
coming down. If it will oblige you, said I, I will read it to you. That Is good,
said she; then I Will love you dearly. -- Said I, then you must not offer to
alter one Word. I will not, replied she. So I read it to her, and she praised me
much for my Wording it; but said, she thought I pushed the Matter very close;
and it would better hear talking of, than writing about. She wanted an
Explanation or two, as about the Proposal to a certain Person; but I said, she
must take it as she heard it. Well, well, said she, I make no doubt you
understand one another, and will do so more and more. I sealed up the Letter,
and she undertook to convey it.

SUNDAY.
FOR my part, I knew it in vain to expect to have Leave to go to Church now,
and so I did not ask; and I was the more indifferent, because, if I might have
had Permission, the Sight of the neighboring Gentry, who had despised my
Sufferings, would have given me great Regret and Sorrow; and it was impossible
I should have edified under any Doctrine preached by Mr. Peter's: So I applied
myself to my private Devotions.

Mr. Williams came Yesterday, and this Day, as usual, and took my Letter; but
having no good Opportunity, we avoided one another Conversation, and kept at a
Distance: But I was concerned I had not the Key; for I would not have lost a
Moment in that Case, had I been he, and he me. When I was at my Devotions, Mrs.
Jewkes came up, and wanted me sadly to sing her a Psalm, as she had often on
common Days importuned me for a Song upon the Spinnet: but I declined it,
because my Spirits were so low I could hardly speak, nor cared to be spoken to;
but when she was gone, I, remembering the 137th Psalm to be a little touching,
turned to it, and took the Liberty to alter it to my Case more. I hope I did
not sin in it; but thus I turned it: I.
WHEN sad I sat in B -- n-hall,
All watched round about,
And thought of every absent Friend,
The Tears for Grief burst out.
II.
My Joys and Hopes all overthrown,
My Heart Strings almost broke,
Unfit my Mind for Melody,
Much more to bear a Joke;
III.
Then she to whom I Prisoner was,
Said to me tauntingly,
Now cheer your Heart, and sing a Song,
And tune your Mind to Joy.
IV.
Alas! said I, how can I frame
My heavy Heart to sing;
Or tune my Mind, while thus enthralled
By such a wicked Thing!
V.
But yet, if from my Innocence
I, even in Thought, should slide,
Then let my Fingers quite forget
The sweet Spinnet to guide.
VI.
And let my Tongue within my Mouth
Be locked for ever fast,
If I rejoice, before I see
My full Deliverance past.
VII.
And thou, Almighty, recompense
The Evils I endure,
From those who seek my sad Disgrace,
So causeless, to procure.
VIII.
Remember, Lord, this Mrs. Jewkes,
When with a mighty Sound,
She cries, Down with her Chastity,
Down to the very Ground!
IX.
Even so shall thou, O wicked One,
At length to Shame be brought;
And happy shall all those be called
That my Deliverance wrought.
X.
Yea, blessed shall the Man be called
That shames thee of thy Evil,
And saves me from thy vile Attempts,
And thee, too, from the D -- -- -- l.


MONDAY, TUESDAY, WEDNESDAY.
I Write now with a little more Liking, though less Opportunity, because Mr.
Williams has got a large Parcel of my Papers safe, in his Hands, to send them
to you, as he has Opportunity; so I am not quite uselesly employed; and I am
delivered, besides, from the Fear of their being found, if I should be
searched, or discovered. I have been permitted to take an Airing five or six
Miles, with Mrs. Jewkes: But, though I know not the Reason, she watches me more
closely than ever; so that we have discontinued, by Consent, for these three
Days, the Sun-flower Correspondence.

The poor Cook-maid has had a bad Mischance; for she has been hurt much by a
Bull in the Pasture, by the Side of the Garden, not far from the Backdoor. Now
this Pasture I am to cross, which is about half a Mile, and then is a Common,
and near that a private Horse-road, where I hope to find an Opportunity for
escaping, as soon as Mr. Williams can get me a Horse, and has made all ready
for me: For he has got me the Key, which he put under the Mould, just by the
Door, as he found an Opportunity to hint to me.

He just now has signified, that the Gentleman is dead, whose Living he has had
Hope of, and he came pretendedly to tell Mrs. Jewkes of it; and so could speak
this to her, before me. She wished him Joy. See what the World is! one Man's
Death is another Man's Joy: Thus we thrust out one another! -- My hard Case
makes me serious. He found means to slide a Letter into my Hands, and is gone
away: He looked at me with such Respect and Solemnness at Parting, that Mrs.
Jewkes said, Why, Madam, I believe our young Parson is half in Love with you.
-- Ah! Mrs. Jewkes, said I, he knows better. Said she, (I believe to sound me)
Why I cannot see you can either of you do better; and I have lately been so
touched for you, seeing how heavily you apprehend Dishonor from my Master,
that I think it is Pity you should not have Mr. Williams.

I knew this must be a Fetch of hers, because instead of being troubled for me,
as she pretended, she watched me closer, and him too: and so I said, There is
not the Man living that I desire to marry. If I can but keep myself honest, it
is all my Desire: And to be a Comfort and Assistance to my poor Parents, if it
should be my happy Lot to be so, is the very Top of my Ambition. Well, but,
said she, I have been thinking very seriously, that Mr. Williams would make you
a good Hushand; and as he will owe all his Fortune to my Master, he will be
very glad, to be sure, to be obliged to him for a Wife of his choosing:
Especially, said she, such a pretty one, and one so ingenious and genteelly
educated.

This gave me a Doubt, whether she knew of my Master's Intimation of that sort
formerly; and I asked her, if she had Reason to furmise, that that was in View?
No, she said; it was only her own Thought; but it was very likely that my
Master had either that in View, or something better for me. But, if I approved
of it, she would propose such a thing to her Master directly; and gave a
detestable Hint, that I might take Resolutions upon it, of bringing such an
Affair to Effect. I told her, I abhorred her vile Insinuation; and as to Mr.
Williams, I thought him a civil good sort of Man; but as on one side, he was
above me; so on the other, of all Things, I did not love a Parson. So finding
she could make nothing of me, she quitted the Subject.

I will open his Letter by-and-by, and give you the Contents of it; for she is
up and down so much, that I am afraid of her surprising me.

Well, I see Providence has not abandoned me: I shall be under no Necessity to
make Advances to Mr. Williams, if I was (as I am sure I am not) disposed to it.
This is his Letter: 'I Know not how to express myself, lest I should appear to
you to have a selfish View in the Service I would do you. But I really know but
one effectual and honorable Way to disengage yourself from the dangerous
Situation you are in. It is that of Marriage with some Person that you could
make happy in your Approbation. As for my own part, it would be, as Things
stand, my apparent Ruin; and, worse still, I should involve you in Misery too.
But yet, so great is my Veneration for you, and so entire my Reliance in
Providence, on so just an Occasion, that I should think myself but too happy,
if I might be accepted, I would, in this Case, forego all my Expectations, and
be your Conductor to some safe Distance. But why do I say, in this Case? That I
will do, whether you think fit to reward me so eminently or not. And I will,
the Moment I hear of Mr. B's setting out, (and I think now I have settled a
very good Method of Intelligence of all his Motions) get a Horse ready, and
myself to conduct you. I refer myself wholly to your Goodness and Direction,
and am, with the highest Respect,

'Your most faithful humble Servant.
'Don't think this a sudden Resolution. I always admired your hearsay
Character; and the Moment I saw you, wished to serve so much Excellence.






What shall I say, my dear Father and Mother, to this unexpected Declaration? I
want now, more than ever, your Blessing and Direction. But after all, I have no
Mind to marry: I had rather live with you. But yet, I would marry a Man who
begs from Door to Door, and has no Home nor Being, rather than endanger my
Honesty. Yet, I cannot, methinks, hear of being a Wife. -- After a thousand
different Thoughts, I wrote as follows: Reverend Sir,
'I AM much confused at the Contents of your last. You are much too generous,
and I cannot bear you should risque all your future Prospects for so unworthy a
Creature. I cannot think of your Offer without equal Concern and Gratitude; for
nothing but to avoid my utter Ruin can make me think of a Change of Condition;
and so, Sir, you ought not to accept of such an involuntary Compliance, as mine
would be, were I, upon the last Necessity, to yield to your very generous
Proposal. I will rely wholly upon your Goodness to me, in assisting my Escape;
but shall not, on your Account principally, think of the Honor you propose for
me, at present; and never, but at the Pleasure of my Parents, who, poor as they
are, in such a weighty Point, are as much entitled to my Obedience and Duty, as
if they were ever so rich. I beg you therefore, Sir, not to think of any thing
from me, but everlasting Gratitude, which will always bind me to be

'Your most obliged Servant.'




THURSDAY, FRIDAY, SATURDAY, the 14th, 15th and 16th of my Bondage.
MRS. Jewkes has received a Letter, and is much civiler to me, and Mr. Williams
too, than she used to be. I wonder I have not one in Answer to mine to my
Master. I suppose I put the Matter too home to him; and he is angry. I am not
the more pleased for her Civility; for she is horrid cunning, and is not a whit
less watchful. I laid a Trap to get at her Instructions, which she carries in
the Bosom of her Stays, but it has not succeeded.

My last Letter is come safe to Mr. Williams, by the old Conveyance, so that he
is not suspected. He has intimated, that though I have not come so readily as he
hoped into his Scheme, yet his Diligence shall not be slackened, and he will
leave it to Providence and myself, to dispose of him as he shall be found to
deserve. He has signified to me, that he shall soon send a special Messenger
with the Packet to you, and I have added to it what has occurred since.

SUNDAY.
I Am just now quite astonished! -- I hope all is right! -- But I have a
strange Turn to acquaint you with. Mr. Williams and Mrs. Jewkes came to me both
together; he in Ecstacies, she with a strange fluttering sort of Air. Well,
said she, Mrs. Pamela, I give you Joy! I give you Joy! -- Let nobody speak but
me! Then she sat down, as out of Breath, puffing and blowing. Why, every thing
turns as I said it would! said she: Why, there is to be a Match between you and
Mr. Williams! Well, I always thought it. Never was so good a Master! -- Go to,
go to, naughty mistrustful Mrs. Pamela, nay, Mrs. Williams, said the forward
Creature, I may as good as call you, you ought on your Knees to beg his Pardon
a thousand times for mistrusting him.

She was going on; but I said, Don't torture me thus, I beseech you, Mrs.
Jewkes. Let me know all! -- Ah! Mr. Williams, said I, take care, take care! --
Mistrustful again! said she; why, Mr. Williams, show her your Letter; and I
will show her mine: They were brought by the same Hand.

I trembled at the Thoughts of what this might mean; and said. You have so
surprised me, that I cannot stand, nor hear, nor read! Why did you come up in
such a manner to attack such weak Spirits? Said he, to Mrs. Jewkes, Shall we
leave our Letters with Mrs. Pamela, and let her recover from her Surprise? Ay,
said she, with all my Heart; here is nothing but flaming Honor and Good Will!
And so saying, they left me their Letters, and withdrew.

My Heart was quite sick with the Surprise; so that I could not presently read
them, notwithstanding my Impatience; but after awhile, recovering, I found the
Contents thus strange and unexpected: Mr. WILLIAMS,
'THE Death of Mr. Fownes has now given me the Opportunty I have long wanted,
to make you happy, and that in a double respect: For I shall soon put you in
Possession of his Living, and, if you have the Art of making yourself well
received, of one of the loveliest Wives in England. She has not been used (as
she has reason to think) according to her Merit; but when she finds herself
under the Protection of a Man of Virtue and Probity, and a happy Competency to
support Life in the manner to which she has been of late Years accustomed, I am
persuaded she will forgive those seeming Hardships which have paved the Way to
so happy a Lot, as I hope it will be to you both. I have only to account for
and excuse the odd Conduct I have been guilty of, which I shall do, when I see
you: But as I shall soon set out for London, I believe it will not be yet this
Month. Mean time, if you can prevail with Pamela, you need not suspend for that
your mutual Happiness; only, let me have Notice of it first, and that she
approves of it; which ought to be, in so material a Point, entirely at her
Option; as I assure you, on the other hand, I would have it at yours, that
nothing may be wanting to complete your Happiness. I am

'Your humble Servant.'




Was ever the like heard! -- Lie still, my throbbing Heart, divided, as thou
art, between thy Hopes and thy Fears! -- But this is the Letter Mrs. Jewkes
left with me: ' Mrs. JEWKES,
'YOU have been very careful and diligent in the Task, which, for Reasons I
shall hereafter explain, I had imposed upon you. Your Trouble is now almost at
an End; for I have written my Intentions to Mr. Williams so particularly, that
I need say the less here, because he will not scruple, I believe, to let you
know the Contents of my Letter. I have only one thing to mention, that if you
find what I have hinted to him in the least measure disagreeeble to Either, you
assure them Both, that they are at entire Liberty to pursue their own
Inclinations. I hope you continue your Civilities to the mistrustful, uneasy
Pamela, who now will begin to think better of hers and

' Your Friend, etc.'




I had hardly time to transcribe these Letters, though, writing so much, I write
pretty fast, before they both came up again, in high Spirits; and Mr. Williams
said, I am glad at my Heart, Madam, that I was beforehand in my Declarations
to you: This generous Letter has made me the happiest Man on Earth; and, Mrs.
Jewkes, you may be sure, that if I can procure this Fair-one's Consent, I shall
think myself -- I interrupted the good Man, and said, Ah! Mr. Williams, take
care, take care; don't let -- There I stopped, and Mrs. Jewkes said, Still
mistrustful! -- I never saw the like in my Life! -- But I see, said she, I was
not wrong, while my old Orders lasted, to be wary of you both -- I should have
had a hard Task to prevent you, I find; for, as the Saying is, Naught can
restrain Consent of Twain.

I doubted not her taking hold of his joyful Indiscretion. -- I took her
Letter, and said, Here Mrs. Jewkes, is yours; I thank you for it; but I have
been so long in a Maze, that I can say nothing of this for the present. Time
will bring all to Light. -- Sir, said I, here is yours: May every thing turn to
your Happiness! I give you Joy of my Master's Goodness in the Living -- It will
be dying, said he, not a Living, without you. -- Forbear, Sir, said I: While
I Have a Father and Mother, I am not my own Mistress, poor as they are: And I Will
see my self quite at Liberty before I shall think my self fit to make a Choice.

Mrs. Jewkes held up her Eyes and Hands, and said, Such Art, such Caution, such
Cunning, for thy Years! -- Well! -- Why, said I, (that he might be more on his
Guard, though I hope there cannot be Deceit in this; 'twould be strange Villainy,
and that is a hard Word, if there should!) I have been so used to be made a
Fool of by Fortune, that I hardly can tell how to govern my self; and am almost
an Infidel as to Mankind. -- But, I hope I may be wrong; henceforth, Mrs.
Jewkes, you shall regulate my Opinions as you please, and I will consult you in
every thing -- (that I think proper, said I to myself) -- for to be sure, though
I may forgive her, I can never love her.

She left Mr. Williams and me, a few Minutes, together; and I said, Consider
Sir, consider what you have done. It Is impossible, said he, there can be
Deceit. I hope so, said I; but what Necessity was there for you to talk of your
former Declaration? Let this be as it will, that could do no Good, especially
before this Woman. Forgive me, Sir; they talk of Women's Promptness of Speech;
but indeed I see an honest Heart is not always to be trusted with itself in bad
Company.

He was going to reply; but, though her Task is said to be ALMOST (I took Notice
of that Word) at an End she came up to us again; and said, Well, I had a good
mind to show you the way to Church tomorrow. I was glad of this, because though
in my present doubtful Situation, I should not have chosen it, yet I would have
encouraged her Proposal, to be able to judge by her being in Earnest or
otherwise, whether one might depend upon the rest. But Mr. Williams again
indiscreetly helped her to an Excuse; by saying, that it was now best to defer
it one Sunday, and till Matters were riper for my Appearance; and she readily
took hold of it, and confirmed his Opinion.

After all, I hope the best; but if this should turn out to be a Plot, I fear
nothing but a Miracle can save me. But sure, the Heart of Man is not capable of
such black Deceit. Besides, Mr. Williams has it under his own Hand, and he dare
not but be in Earnest; and then again, though to be sure he has been very wrong
to me, yet his Education, and Parents Example, have neither of them taught him
such very black Contrivances. So I will hope for the best!

Mr. Williams, Mrs. Jewkes and I, have been all three walking together in the
Garden; and she pulled out her Key, and we walked a little in the Pasture to
look at the Bull, an ugly, grim, surly Creature, that hurt the poor Cook-maid;
who is got pretty well again. Mr. Williams pointed at the Sun-flower, but I was
forced to be very reserved to him; for the poor Gentleman has no Guard, no
Caution at all.

We have just supped together, all three; and I cannot yet think but all must
be right. -- Only I am resolved not to marry, if I can help it; and I will give
no Encouragement, I am resolved, at least, till I am with you.

Mr. Williams said, before Mrs. Jewkes, he would send a Messenger with a Letter
to my Father and Mother! -- I think the Man has no Discretion in the World: But
I desire you will give no Answer till I have the Pleasure and Happiness, which
now I hope for soon, of seeing you. He will, in sending my Packet, send a most
tedious Parcel of Stuff, of my Oppressions, my Distresses, my Fears; and so I
will send this with it (for Mrs. Jewkes gives me Leave to send a Letter to my
Father, which looks well); and I am glad I can conclude, after all my
Sufferings, with my Hopes, to be soon with you, which I know will give you
Comfort; and so I rest, begging the Continuance of your Prayers, and Blessings,

Your ever dutiful Daughter.


My dear Father and Mother,
I Have so much Time upon my Hands, that I must write on to employ myself. The
Sunday Evening, where I left off, Mrs. Jewkes asked me, If I chose to lie by
myself? I said, Yes, with all my Heart, if she pleased. Well, said she, after
tonight you shall. I asked her for more Paper, and she gave me a little Bottle
of Ink, eight Sheets of Paper, which she said was all her Store, (for now she
would get me to write for her to our Master, if she had Occasion) and six Pens,
with a piece of Sealing-wax. This looks mighty well!

She pressed me, when she came to Bed, very much, to give Encouragement to Mr.
Williams, and said many things in his Behalf; and blamed my Shyness to him. I
told her, I was resolved to give no Encouragement till I had talked to my
Father and Mother. She said, she fancied I thought of somebody else, or I could
never be so insensible. I assured her, as I could do very safely, that there
was not a Man on Earth I wished to have; and, as to Mr. Williams, he might do
better by far, and I had proposed so much Happiness in living with my poor
Father and Mother, that I could not think of any Scheme of Life, with Pleasure,
till I had tried that. I asked her for my Money; and she said it was above in
her strong Box, but that I shall have it tomorrow. All these Things look well,
as I said.

Mr. Williams would go home this Night, though late, because he would dispatch a
Messenger to you with a Letter he had proposed from himself, and my Packet.
But pray don't encourage him, as I said; for he is much too heady and
precipitate as to this Matter, in my way of thinking; though, to be sure, he is a
very good Man, and I am much obliged to him.


MONDAY Morning.
ALas-a-day! we have bad News from poor Mr. Williams. He has had a sad
Mischance; fallen among Rogues in his Way home last Night; but by good Chance
has saved my Papers. This is the Account he gives of it to Mrs. Jewkes.

' Good Mrs. JEWKES,
'I Have had a sore Misfortune in going from you. When I had got as near the
Town as the Dam, and was going to cross the Wooden-bridge, two Fellows got hold
of me, and swore bitterly they would kill me, if I did not give them what I
had. They romag'd my Pockets, and took from me my Snuff Box, my Seal-ring, and
Half a Guinea, and some Silver, and Halfpence; also my Handkerchief, and two
or three Letters I had in my Pocket. By good Fortune the Letter Mrs. Pamela
gave me was in my Bosom, and so that escaped; but they bruised my Head, and
Face, and, cursing me for having no more Money, tipped me into the Dam, Crying,
Lie there, Parson, till tomorrow! My Shins and Knees were bruised much in the
Fall against one of the Stumps; and I had like to have been suffocated in Water
and Mudd. To be sure, I shall not be able to stir out this Day or two. For I am a
fearful Spectacle! My Hat and Wig I was forced to leave behind me, and go home
a Mile and a half without; but they were found next Morning, and brought me,
with my Snuff Box, which the Rogues must have dropped. My Cassock is sadly torn,
as is my Band. To be sure, I was much frighted; for a Robbery in these Parts
has not been known many Years. Diligent Search is making after the Rogues. My
humblest Respects to good Mrs. Pamela. If she pities my Misfortunes, I shall be
the sooner well, and fit to wait on her and you. This did not hinder me in
writing a Letter, though with great Pain, as I do this. [ To be sure this good
Man can keep no Secret!] and sending it away by a Man and Horse, this Morning.
I am, good Mrs. Jewkes,

'Your most obliged humble Servant.
'God be praised it is no worse! and I find I have got no Cold, though miserably
wet from Top to Toe. My Fright, I believe, prevented me from catching Cold; for
I was not rightly myself for some Hours, and know not how I got home. I will
write a Letter of Thanks this Night, if I am able, to my kind Patron for his
inestimable Goodness to me, I wish I was enabled to say all I hope, with regard
to the better Part of his Bounty to me, incomparable Mrs. Pamela.'




The wicked Brute fell a laughing when she had read this Letter, till her fat
Sides shook; said she, I can but think how the poor Parson looked, after
parting with his pretty Mistress in such high Spirits, when he found himself at
the bottom of the Dam! And what a Figure he must cut in his tattered Band and
Cassock, and without Hat and Wig, when he got Home. I warrant, said she, he was
in a sweet Pickle! -- I said, I thought it was very barbarous to laugh at such
a Misfortune: But she said, As he was safe, she laughed; otherwise she should
have been sorry: And she was glad to see me so concerned for him -- It looked
promising, she said.

I heeded not her Reflection; but as I have been used to Causes for Mistrusts,
I cannot help saying, that I don't like this thing: And their taking his
Letters most alarms me. -- How happy it was, they missed my Packet! I know not
what to think of it! -- But why should I let every Accident break my Peace? But
yet it will do so while I stay here.

Mrs. Jewkes is mightily at me, to go with her in the Chariot, to visit Mr.
Williams. She is so officious to bring on the Affair between us, that being a
cunning, artful Woman, I know not what to make of it: I have refused her
absolutely; urging, that except I intended to encourage his Suit, I ought not
to do it. And she is gone without me.

I have strange Temptations to get away in her Absence, for all these fine
Appearances. It Is sad to have no body to advise with! -- I know not what to do.
But, alas for me! I have no Money, if I should, to buy any body's Civilities,
or to pay for Necessaries or Lodging. But I Will go into the Garden, and resolve
afterward. --

I have been in the Garden, and to the Backdoor; and there I stood, my Heart
up at my Mouth. I could not see I was watched; so this looks well. But if any
thing should go bad afterward, I should never forgive myself, for not taking
this Opportunity. Well, I will go down again, and see if all is clear, and how
it looks out at the Backdoor in the Pasture.

To be sure, there is Witchcraft in this House; and I believe Lucifer is
bribed, as well as all about me, and is got into the Shape of that nasty grim
Bull, to watch me! -- For I have been down again; and ventured to open the
Door, and went out about a Bow-shoot into the Pasture; but there stood that
horrid Bull, staring me full in the Face, with fiery saucer Eyes, as I thought.
So, I got in again; for fear he should come at me. Nobody saw me, however. --
Do you think there are such things as Witches and Spirits? if there be, I
believe in my Heart, Mrs. Jewkes has got this Bull of her Side. But yet, what
could I do without Money or a Friend? -- O this wicked Woman! to trick me so!
Every thing, Man, Woman, and Beast, is in a Plot against your poor Pamela, I
think! -- Then I know not one step of the way, nor how far to any House or
Cottage; and whether I could gain Protection, if I got to a House: And now the
Robbers are abroad too, I may run into as great Danger, as I want to escape
from; nay, greater much, if these promising Appearances hold: And sure my
Master cannot be so black as that they should not! -- What can I do? -- I have
a good mind to try for it once more; but then I may be pursued and taken; and
it will be worse for me; and this wicked Woman will beat me, and take my Shoes
away, and lock me up.

But after all, if my Master should mean well, he cannot be angry at my Fears,
if I should escape; and no body can blame me; and I can more easily be induced
with you, when all my Apprehensions are over, to consider his Proposal of Mr.
Williams, than I could here; and he pretends as you have read in his Letter, he
will leave me at my Choice: Why then should I be afraid? I will go down again,
I think! But yet my Heart misgives me, because of the Difficulties before me,
in escaping; and being so poor and so friendless! -- O good God! the Preserver
of the Innocent! direct me what to do! --

Well, I have just now a sort of strange Persuasion upon me, that I ought to
try to get away, and leave the Issue to Providence. So, once more? -- I Will see,
at least, if this Bull be still there!

Alack-a-day! what a Fate is this! I have not the Courage to go, neither can I
think to stay. But I must resolve. The Gardner was in Sight last time! so made
me come up again. But I Will contrive to send him out of the way, if I can! --
For if I never should have such another Opportunity, I could not forgive
myself. Once more I Will venture, God direct my Footsteps, and make smooth my
Path and my Way to Safety!

Well, here I am, come back again! frighted like a Fool, out of all my
Purposes! O how terrible every thing appears to me! I had got twice as far
again, as I was before, out of the Back door; and I looked, and saw the Bull,
as I thought, between me and the Door; and another Bull coming toward me the
other way: Well, thought I, here is double Witchcraft, to be sure! Here is the
Spirit of my Master in one Bull; and Mrs. Jewkes's in the other: and now I am
gone, to be sure! O help! cried I, like a Fool, and run back to the Door, as
swift as if I flew. When I had got the Door in my Hand, I ventured to look
back, to see if these supposed Bulls were coming; and I saw they were only two
poor Cows, a grazing in distant Places, that my Fears had made all this Rout
about. But as every thing is so frightful to me, I find I am not fit to think
of my Escape: For I shall be as much frighted at the first strange Man that I
meet with. And I am persuaded, that Fear brings one into more Dangers, than the
Caution, that goes along with it, delivers one from.

I then locked the Door, and put the Key in my Pocket, and was in a sad
Quandary; but I was soon determined; for the Maid Nan came in Sight, and asked,
if any thing was the matter, that I was so often up and down Stairs? God
forgive me; but I had a sad Lie at my Tongue's End: said I, Though Mrs. Jewkes is
sometimes a little hard upon me, yet I know not where I am without her: I go
up, and I come down to walk about in the Garden: and not having her, know
scarcely what to do with myself. Ay, said the Idiot, she is main good Company,
Madam; no wonder you miss her.

So here I am again; and here likely to be; for I have no Courage to help
myself any-where else. O why are poor foolish Maidens tried with such Dangers,
when they have such weak Minds to grapple with them! -- I will, since it is so,
hope the best: But yet I cannot but observe how grievously every thing makes
against me: For here are the Robbers; though I fell not into their Hands myself,
yet they gave me as much Terror: and had as great an Effect upon my Fears, as
if I had: And here is the Bull; it has as effectually frightened me, as if I
had been hurt by it instead of the Cook-maid; and so they joined together, as I
may say, to make a very Dastard of me. But my Folly was the worst of all; for
that deprived me of my Money, for had I had that, I believe I should have
ventured the other Two.

MONDAY Afternoon.
SO, Mrs. Jewkes is returned from her Visit: Well, said she, I would have you
set your Heart at rest; for Mr. Williams will do very well again. He is not
half so badly off as he fancied. O these Scholars, said she, they have not the
Hearts of Mice! He has only a few Scratches on his Face; which, said she, I
suppose he got by grabbling among the Gravel, at the bottom of the Dam, to try
to find a Hole in the Ground, to hide himself from the Robbers. His Shin and
his Knee are hardly to be seen to all any thing. He says in his Letter, he was
a frightful Spectacle: He might be so indeed, when he first came in a-doors;
but he looks well enough now; and, only for a few Groans now-and-then, when he
thinks of his Danger, I see nothing is the matter with him. So, Mrs. Pamela,
said she, I would have you be very easy about it. I am glad of it, said I, for
all your Jokes, Mrs. Jewkes.

Well, said she, he talks of nothing but you; and when I told him, I would fain
have persuaded you to come with me, the Man was out of his Wits with his
Gratitude to me: and so has laid open all his Heart to me, and told me all that
has passed, and was contriving between you two. This alarmed me prodigiously;
and the rather, as I saw, by two or three Instances, that his honest Heart
could keep nothing, believing every one as undesigning as himself. I said, but
yet with a heavy Heart, ah, Mrs. Jewkes, Mrs. Jewkes, this might have done with
me, had he had any thing that he could have told you of. But you know well
enough, that had we been disposed, we had no Opportunity for it, from your
watchful Care and Circumspection. No, said she, that is very true, Mrs. Pamela;
not so much as for that Declaration that he owned before me, he had found
Opportunity, for all my Watchfulness, to make you. Come, come, said she, no
more of these Shams with me! You have an excellent Headpiece for your Years;
but may-be I am as cunning as you. -- However said she, all is well now;
because my Watchments are now over, by my Master's Direction. How have you
employed yourself in my Absence?

I was so troubled at what might have passed between Mr. Williams and her, that
I could not hide it. And she said, Well, Mrs. Pamela, since all Matters are
likely to be so soon and so happily ended, let me advise you to be a little
less concerned at his Discoveries: and make me your Confident, as he has done,
and I shall think you have some Favor for me, and Reliance upon me; and
perhaps you might not repent it.

She was so earnest, that I mistrusted she did this to pump me; and I knew how,
now, to account for her Kindness to Mr. Williams in her Visit to him; which was
only to get out of him what she could. Why, Mrs. Jewkes, said I, is all this
fishing about for something, where there is nothing, if there be an end of your
Watchments, as you call them? Nothing, said she, but Womanish Curiosity, I Will
assure you; for one is naturally led to find out Matters, where there is such
Privacy intended. Well, said I, pray let me know what he has said; and then
I Will give you an Answer to your Curiosity. I don't care, said she, whether you
do or not; for I have as much as I wanted from him; and I despair of getting
out of you any thing you have not a mind I should know, my little cunning Dear. --
Well, said I, let him have said what he would, I care not: for I am sure he can
say no Harm of me; and so let us change the Talk.

I was the easier indeed; because, for all her Pumps, she gave no Hints of the
Key and the Door, etc. which had he communicated to her, she would not have
forborne giving me a Touch of. -- And so we gave up one another, as despairing
to gain our Ends of each other. But I am sure he must have said more than he
should. -- And I am the more apprehensive all is not right, because she has now
been actually, these two Hours, shut up a writing; though she pretended she had
given me up all her Stores of Paper, etc. and that I should write for her. I
begin to wish I had ventured every thing, and gone off, when I might. O when
will this State of Doubt and Uneasiness end!

She has just been with me, and says she shall send a Messenger to
Bedfordshire; and he shall carry a Letter of Thanks for me, if I will write it,
for my Master's Favor to me. Indeed, said I, I have no Thanks to give, till I
am with my Father and Mother: And besides, I sent a Letter, as you know, but
have had no Answer to it. She said, she thought that his Letter to Mr. Williams
was sufficient; and the least I could do, was to thank him, if but in two
Lines. No need of it, said I; for I don't intend to have Mr. Williams: What
then is that Letter to me? Well, said she, I see thou art quite unfathomable!

I don't like all this. O my foolish Fears of Bulls and Robbers! -- For now all
my Uneasiness begins to double upon me. O what has this uncautious Man said!
That, no doubt, is the Subject of her long Letter.

I will close this Day's writing, with just saying, that she is mighty silent
and reserved, to what she was, and says nothing but No, or Yes, to what I ask.
Something must be hatching, I doubt! -- I the rather think so, because I find
she does not keep her word with me, about lying by myself, and my Money; to
both which Points, she returned suspicious Answers, saying, as to the one, Why
you are mighty earnest for your Money: I shall not run away with it: And to the
other, Good lack! you need not be so willing, as I know of, to part with me for
a Bedfellow, till you are sure of one you like better. This cut me to the
Heart! -- And at the same time stopped my Mouth.

TUESDAY, WEDNESDAY.
MR. Williams has been here; but we have had no Opportunity to talk together:
He seemed confounded at Mrs. Jewkes's Change of Temper, and Reservedness, after
her kind Visit, and their Freedom with one another, and much more at what I am
going to tell you. He asked, if I would take a Turn in the Garden with Mrs.
Jewkes and him. No, said she, I cannot go. Said he, may not Mrs. Pamela take a
Walk? -- No, said she; I desire she will not. Why, Mrs. Jewkes, said he? I am
afraid I have some-how disobliged you. Not at all, replied she; but I suppose
you will soon be at Liberty to walk together as much as you please: And I have
sent a Messenger for my last Instructions, about this and more weighty Matters;
and when they come, I shall leave you to do as you both will; but till then, it
is no matter how little you are together. This alarmed us both; and he seemed
quite struck of a Heap, and put on, as I thought, a self-accusing Countenance.
So I went behind her Back, and held my two Hands together, flat, with a Bit of
Paper, I had, between them, and looked at him; and he seemed to take me, as I
intended, intimating the renewing of the Correspondence by the Tiles.

So I left them both together, and retired to my Closet, to write a Letter for
the Tiles; but having no Time for a Copy, I will give you the Substance only.

I expostulated with him on his too great Openness and Easiness to fall into
Mrs. Jewkes's Snares; told him my Apprehensions of foul Play; and gave briefly
the Reasons which moved me: Begged to know what he had said; and intimated,
that I thought there was the highest Reason to resume our Project of the Escape
by the Backdoor. I put this in the usual Place, in the Evening, and now wait
with Impatience for an Answer.

THURSDAY.
I Have the following Answer: 'Dearest Madam,
'I Am utterly confounded, and must plead guilty to all your just Reproaches. I
wish I were Master of but half your Caution and Discretion! I hope, after all,
this is only a Touch of this ill Woman's Temper, to show her Power and
Importance: For I think Mr. B. neither can nor dare deceive me in so black a
manner. I would expose him all the World over, if he did. But it is not, cannot
be in him. I have received a Letter from John Arnold; in which he tells me,
that his Master is preparing for his London Journey; and believes, afterward,
he will come into these Parts. But he says, Lady Davers is at their House, and
is to accompany her Brother to London, or meet him there, he knows not which.
He professes great Zeal and Affection to your Service. But I find he refers to
a Letter he sent me before, but which is not come to my Hand. I think there can
be no Treachery; for it is a particular Friend at Gainsborough, that I have
ordered him to direct to; and this is come safe to my Hands by this means; for
well I know, I durst trust nothing to Brett, at the Post House here. This gives
me a little Pain; but I hope all will end well, and we shall soon hear, if it
be necessary to pursue our former Intentions. If it be, I will lose no time to
provide a Horse for you, and another for myself; for I can never do either God
or myself better Service, though I were to forego all my Expectations for it
here. I am

'Your most faithful humble Servant.
'I was too free indeed with Mrs. Jewkes, led to it by her Dissimulation, and
by her pretended Concern to make me happy with you. I hinted, that I would not
have scrupled to have procured your Deliverance by any means: and that I had
proposed to you, as the only honorable one, Marriage with me. But I assured
her, though she would hardly believe me, that you discouraged my Application.
Which is too true! But not a Word of the Backdoor, Key, etc.






Mrs. Jewkes continues still sullen and ill-natured; and I am almost, afraid,
to speak to her. She watches me as close as ever, and pretends to wonder why I
shun her Company as I do.

I have just put under the Tiles these Lines; inspired by my Fears, which are
indeed very strong; and, I doubt, not without Reason.

'Sir,
'EVERY thing gives me additional Disturbance. The missed Letter of John
Arnold's makes me suspect a Plot. Yet am I loath to think myself of so much
Importance, as to suppose every one in a Plot against me. Are you sure however,
the London Journey is not to be a Lincolnshire one; may not John, who has been
once a Traitor, be so again? -- Why need I be thus in doubt? -- If I could have
this Horse, I would turn the Reins on his Neck, and trust to Providence to
guide him for my Safeguard! For I would not endanger you, now just upon the
Edge of your Preferment. Yet, Sir, I fear your fatal Openness will make you
suspected as accessory, let us be ever so cautious.

'Were my Life in question, instead of my Honesty, I would not wish to involve
you, or any body, in the least Difficulty for so worthless a poor Creature.
But, O Sir! my Soul is of equal Importance with the Soul of a Princess; though
my Quality is inferior to that of the meanest Slave.

'Save then, my Innocence, good Heaven, and preserve my Mind spotless; and
happy shall I be to lay down my worthless Life, and see an End to all my
Troubles and Anxieties!

'Forgive my Impatience: But my presaging Mind bodes horrid Mischiefs! -- Every
thing looks dark around me; and this Woman's impenetrable Sullenness and
Silence, without any apparent Reason, from a Conduct so very contrary, bids me
fear the worst. -- Blame me, Sir, if you think me wrong; and let me have your
Advice what to do: which will oblige

'Your most afflicted Servant.


FRIDAY.
I Have this half-angry Answer; but, what is more to me than all the Letters in
the World could be, yours, my dear Father, enclosed.

'Madam,
'I Think you are too apprehensive by much. I am sorry for your Uneasiness. You
may depend upon me, and all I can do. But I make no doubt of the London
Journey, nor of John's Contrition and Fidelity. I have just received, from my
Gainsborough Friend, this Letter, as I suppose, from your good Father, in a
Cover, directed for me, as I had desired. I hope it contains nothing to add to
your Uneasiness. Pray, dearest Madam, lay aside your Fears, and wait a few Days
for the Issue of Mrs. Jewkes's Letter, and mine of Thanks to Mr. B. Things, I
hope, must be better than you expect. Providence will not desert such Piety and
Innocence; and be this your Comfort and Reliance. Which is the best Advice that
can at present be given, by

'Your most faithful humble Servant.'


N. B. The Father's Letter was as follows: My dearest Daughter,
'OUR Prayers are at length heard, and we are overwhelmed with Joy. O what
Sufferings, what Trials have thou gone through! Blessed be the Divine Goodness,
which has enabled thee to withstand so many Temptations! We have not yet had
Leisure to read through your long Accounts of all your Hardships. I say long,
because I wonder how you could find Time and Opportunity for them; but
otherwise, they are the Delight of our spare Hours; and we shall read them over
and over, as long as we live, with Thankfulness to God, who has given us so
virtuous and so discreet a Daughter. How happy is our Lot, in the midst of our
Poverty! O let none ever think Children a Burden to them; when the poorest
Circumstances can produce so much Riches in a Pamela! Persist, my dear
Daughter, in the same excellent Course; and we shall not envy the highest
Estate, but defy them to produce such a Daughter as ours.

'I said, we had not read through all yours in Course. We were too impatient, and
so turned to the End; where we find your Virtue within View of its Reward, and
your Master's Heart turned to see the Folly of his Ways, and the Injury he had
intended to our dear Child. For, to be sure, my Dear, he would have ruined you,
if he could. But seeing your Virtue, his Heart is touched; and he has, no
doubt, been awakened by your good Example.

'We don't see that you can do any way so well, as to come into the present
Proposal, and make Mr. Williams, the worthy Mr. Williams! God bless him! --
happy. And though we are poor, and can add no Merit, no Reputation, no Fortune to
our dear Child, but rather must be a Disgrace to her, as the World will think;
yet I hope I do not sin in my Pride, to say, that there is no good Man, of a
common Degree (especially as your late Lady's Kindness gave you such good
Opportunities, which you have had the Grace to improve) but may think himself
happy in you, But, as you say, you had rather not marry at present, far be it
from us to offer Violence to your Inclinations. So much Prudence as you have
shown in all your Conduct, would make it very wrong in us to mistrust it in
this, or to offer to direct you in your Choice. But, alas! my Child, what can
we do for you? -- To partake our hard Lot, and involve yourself into as hard a
Life, would not help us; but add to our Afflictions. But it is time enough to
talk of these things, when we have the Pleasure you now put us in Hope of, of
seeing you with us; which God grant. Amen, Amen, say

' Your most indulgent Parents, Amen!
'Our humblest Service and Thanks to the worthy Mr. Williams. Again, we say,
God bless him for ever!

'O what a deal we have to say to you! God give us a happy Meeting! We
understand the 'Squire is setting out for London. He is a fine Gentleman, and
has Wit at Will. I wish he was as good. But I hope he will now reform.'






O what inexpressible Comfort, my dear Father, has your Letter given me. You
ask, What can you do for me! -- What is it you cannot do for your Child! -- You
can give her the Advice she has so much wanted, and still wants, and will
always want: You can confirm her in the Paths of Virtue, into which you first
initiated her; and you can pray for her, with Hearts so sincere and pure, that
are not to be met with in Palaces! -- Oh! how I long to throw myself at your
Feet, and receive from your own Lips, the Blessings of such good Parents! But,
alas! how are my Prospects again over-clouded to what they were when I closed
my last Parcel! -- More Trials, more Dangers, I fear, must your poor Pamela be
engaged in: But, through the Divine Goodness, and your Prayers, I hope, at last,
to get well out of all my Difficulties; and the rather, as they are not the
Effect of my own Vanity or Presumption!

But I will proceed with my hopeless Story. I saw Mr. Williams was a little
nettled at my Impatience; and so I wrote to assure him I would be as easy as I
could, and wholly directed by him; especially as my Father, whose Respects I
mentioned, had assured me, my Master was setting out for London, which he must
have some-how from his own Family, or he would not have written me word of it.

SATURDAY, SUNDAY.
MR. Williams has been here both these Days, as usual; but is very
indifferently received still by Mrs. Jewkes; and to avoid Suspicion, I left
them together, and went up to my Closet, most of the Time he was here. He and
she, I found by her, had a Quarrel; and she seems quite out of Humor with him;
but I thought it best not to say any thing. And he said, he would very little
trouble the House, till he had an Answer to his Letter from Mr. B. And she
returned, The less, the better. Poor Man! he has got but little by his
Openness, and making Mrs. Jewkes his Confident, as she bragged, and would have
had me to do likewise.

I am more and more satisfied there is Mischief brewing, and shall begin to
hide my Papers, and be circumspect. She seems mighty impatient for an Answer to
her Letter to my Master.

MONDAY, TUESDAY, the 25th and 26th Days of my heavy Restraint.
STILL more and more strange things to write. A Messenger is returned, and now
all is out! O wretched, wretched Pamela! What, at last, will become of me! --
Such strange Turns and Trials sure never poor Creature of my Years,
experienced. He brought two Letters, one to Mrs. Jewkes; and one to me: But, as
the greatest Wits may be sometimes mistaken, they being folded and sealed
alike, that for me, was directed to Mrs. Jewkes; and that for her, was directed
to me. But both are stark naught, abominably bad! She brought me up that
directed for me, and said, Here Is a Letter for you: Long look'd-for is come at
last. I will ask the Messenger a few Questions, and then I will read mine. So
she went down, and I broke it open in my Closet, and found it directed, To Mrs.
PAMELA ANDREWS. But when I opened it, it began, Mrs. Jewkes. I was quite
confounded; but, thinks I, this may be a lucky Mistake; I may discover
something. And so I read on these horrid Contents: ' Mrs. JEWKES,
'WHAT you write me, has given me no small Disturbance. This wretched Fool's
Play-thing, no doubt, is ready to leap at any thing that offers, rather than
express the least Sense of Gratitude for all the Benefits she has received from
my Family, and which I was determined more and more to heap upon her. I reserve
her for my future Resentment; and I charge you double your Diligence in
watching her, to prevent her Escape. I send this by an honest Swiss, who
attended me in my Travels; a Man I can trust; and so let him be your Assistant:
For the artful Creature is enough to corrupt a Nation by her seeming Innocence
and Simplicity; and she may have got a Party, perhaps, among my Servants with
you, as she has here. Even John Arnold, whom I confided in, and favored more
than any, has proved an execrable Villain; and shall meet his Reward for it.

'As to that College Novice Williams, I need not bid you take care he sees not
this painted Bauble; for I have ordered Mr. Shorter, my Attorney, to throw him
instantly into Goal, on an Action of Debt, for Money he has had of me, which I
had intended never to carry to account against him; for I know all his rascally
Practices; besides what you write me of his perfidious Intrigue with that Girl,
and his acknowledged Contrivances for her Escape; when he knew not, for
certain, that I designed her any Mischief; and when, if he had been guided by a
Sense of Piety, or Compassion for injured Innocence, as he pretends, he would
have expostulated with me, as his Function, and my Friendship for him, might
have allowed him. But to enter into a vile Intrigue, charmed, like a godly
Sensualist, with the amiable Gewgaw, to favor her Escape in so base a manner,
(to say nothing of his disgraceful Practices against me, in Sir Simon
Darnford's Family; of which Sir Simon himself has informed me) is a Conduct
that, instead of preferring the ungrateful Wretch, as I had intended, shall
pull down upon him utter Ruin.

'Monsieur Colbrand, my trusty Swiss, will obey 'you without Reserve, if my
other Servants refuse.

'As for her denying that she encouraged his Declaration, I believe it not.
It Is certain the speaking Picture, with all that pretended Innocence, and
Bashfulness, would have run away with him. Yes, she would have run away with a
Fellow that she had been acquainted with (and that not intimately, if you was
as careful as you ought to be) but few Days; at a time, when she had the
strongest Assurances of my Honor to her.

'Well, I think I now hate her perfectly; and though I will do nothing to her
myself, yet I can bear, for the sake of my Revenge, and my injured Honor, and
slighted Love, to see any thing, even what she most fears, be done to her; and
then she may be turned loose to her evil Destiny, and echo to the Woods and
Groves her piteous Lamentations for the Loss of her fantastical Innocence,
which the romantic Idiot makes such a work about. I shall go to London, with my
Sister Davers; and the Moment I can disengage myself, which perhaps may be in
three Weeks from this time, I will be with you, and decide her Fate, and put an
End to your Trouble. Mean time, be doubly careful; for this Innocent, as I have
warned you, is full of Contrivances, I am

'Your Friend.'




I had but just read this dreadful Letter through, when Mrs. Jewkes came up, in a
great Fright, guessing at the Mistake, and that I had her Letter; and she found
me with it open in my Hand, just sinking away. What Business, said she, had you
to read my Letter? and snatched it from me. You see, said she, looking upon it,
it says, Mrs. Jewkes, at top: You ought in Manners, to have read no further. O
add not, said I, to my Afflictions! I shall be soon out of all your ways! This
is too much! too much! I never can support this! -- and threw myself upon the
Couch, in my Closet, and wept most bitterly. She read it in the next Room, and
came in again afterward; Why this, said she, is a sad Letter indeed! I am
sorry for it: But I feared you would carry your Niceties too far! -- Leave me,
leave me, Mrs. Jewkes, said I, for awhile: I cannot speak nor talk! -- Poor
Heart! said she; well, I Will come up again presently, and hope to find you
better. But here, take your own Letter; I wish you well, but this is a sad
Mistake! And so she put down by me, that which was intended for me. But I have
no Spirit to read it at present. O Man! Man! hard-hearted, cruel Man! what
Mischiefs art thou not capable of, unrelenting Persecutor as thou art!

I sat ruminating, when I had a little come to myself, upon the Terms of this
wicked Letter; and had no Inclination to look into my own. The bad Names,
Fool's Plaything, artful Creature, painted Bauble, Gewgaw, speaking Picture,
are hard Words for your poor Pamela; and I began to think, whether I was not
indeed a very naughty Body, and had not done vile Things: But when I thought of
his having discovered poor John, and of Sir Simon's base Officiousness, in
telling him of Mr. Williams, with what he had resolved against him, in Revenge
for his Goodness to me, I was quite dispirited; and yet still more, about that
fearful Colebrand, and what he could see done to me; for then I was ready to
gasp for Breath, and my Heart quite failed me. Then how dreadful are the Words,
that he will decide my Fate in three Weeks! Gracious Heaven, said I, strike me
dead before that time, with a Thunderbolt, or provide some way for my escaping
these threatened Mischiefs! God forgive me if I sinned.

At last, I took up the Letter directed for Mrs. Jewkes, but designed for me;
and I find that little better than the other. These are the hard Terms it
contains: 'WELL have you done, perverse, forward, artful, yet foolish Pamela,
to convince me, before it was too late, how ill I had done to place my
Affections on so unworthy an Object. I had vowed Honor and Love to your
Unworthiness, believing you a Mirror of bashful Modesty, and unspotted
Innocence; and that no perfidious Designs lurked in so fair a Bosom. But now I
have found you out, you specious Hypocrite! and I see, that though you could not
repose the least Confidence in one you had known for Years, and who, under my
good Mother's misplaced Favor for you, had grown up, in a manner, with you;
when my Passion, in spite of my Pride, and the Difference of our Condition,
made me stoop to a Meanness that now I despise myself for; yet you could enter
into an Intrigue with a Man you never knew, till within these few Days past,
and resolve to run away with a Stranger, whom your fair Face, and insinuating
Arts, had bewitched to break through all the Ties of Honor and Gratitude to me,
even at a Time when the Happiness of his future Life depended upon my Favor.

'Henceforth, for Pamela's sake, whenever I see a lovely Face, will I mistrust
a deceitful Heart: And whenever I hear of the greatest Pretenses to Innocence,
will I suspect some deep laid Mischief. You were determined to place no
Confidence in me, though I have solemnly, over and over, engaged my Honor to
you. What, though I had alarmed your Fears, in sending you one way, when you
hoped to go another; yet, had I not, to convince you of my Resolution to do
justly by you, (although with great Reluctance, such then was my Love for you)
engaged not to come near you without your own Consent? Was not this a voluntary
Demonstration of the Generosity of my Intentions to you? Yet how have you
requited me? The very first Fellow that your charming Face, and insinuating
Address, could Influence, you have practiced upon, corrupted too, I may say,
(and even ruined, as the ungrateful Wretch shall find) and thrown your forward
Self upon him. As therefore you would place no Confidence in me, my Honor owes
you nothing; and in a little time you shall find how much you have erred in
treating, as you have done, a Man, who was once

'Your affectionate and kind Friend.
'Mrs. Jewkes has Directions concerning you; And if your Lot is now harder than
you might wish, you will bear it the easier, because your own rash Folly has
brought it upon you.






Alas! for me, what a Fate is mine, to be thus thought artful and forward, and
ungrateful! when all I intended, was to preserve my Innocence; and when all the
poor little Shifts, which his superior wicked Wit and Cunning have rendered
ineffectual, were forced upon me in my own necessary Defense!

When Mrs. Jewkes came up to me again, she found me bathed in Tears. She
seemed, as I thought, to be moved to some Compassion; and finding myself now
entirely in her Power, and that it is not for me to provoke her, I said. It is
now, I see, in vain for me to contend against my evil Destiny, and the superior
Arts of my barbarous Master. I will resign myself to the Divine Will, and
prepare to expect the worst. But you see how this poor Mr. Williams is drawn in
and undone; I am sorry I am made the Cause of his Ruin: -- Poor, poor Man! --
to be taken in thus, and for my Sake too! -- But, if you will believe me, said I,
I gave no Encouragement to what he proposed, as to Marriage; nor would he have
proposed it, I believe, but as the only honorable way he thought was left to
save me: And his principal Motive to it all, was Virtue and Compassion to one
in Distress. What other View could he have? You know I am poor and friendless.
All I beg of you, is to let the poor Gentleman have Notice of my Master's
Resentment; and let him flee the Country, and not be thrown into Goal: This
will answer my Master's End as well; for it will as effectually hinder him from
assisting me, as if he was in a Prison.

Ask me, said she, to do any thing that is in my Power, consistent with my Duty
and Trust, and I will do it; for I am sorry for you both. But, to be sure, I
shall keep no Correspondence with him, nor let you. I offered to talk of a Duty
superior to that she mentioned, of, which would oblige her to help distressed
Innocence, and not permit her to go the Lengths enjoined by lawless Tyranny;
but she plainly bid me be silent on that Head; for it was in vain to attempt to
persuade her to betray her Trust. -- All I have to advise you, said she, is to
be easy; lay aside all your Contrivances and Arts to get away, and make me your
Friend, by giving me no Reason to suspect you; for, said she, I glory in my
Fidelity to my Master: And you have both practiced some strange sly Arts, to
make such a Progress as he has owned there was between you, so seldom as, I
thought, you saw one another; and I must be more circumspect than I have been.

This doubled my Concern; for I now apprehended I should be much closer watched
than before.

Well, said I, since I have, by this strange Accident, discovered my hard
Destiny, let me read over again that fearful Letter of yours, that I may get it
by heart, and feed my Distress upon it; for now I have nothing else to think
of, and must familiarize myself to Calamity. Then, said she, let me read yours
again. I gave her mine, and she lent me hers; and so I took a Copy of it, with
her Leave; because, as I said, I would, by it, prepare myself for the worst.
And when I had done, I pinned it on the Head of the Couch: This, said I, is the
Use I shall make of this wretched Copy of your Letter; and here you shall
always find it wet with my Tears.

She said, She would go down to order Supper, and insisted upon my Company to
it: I would have excused myself; but she begun to put on a commanding Air, that
I durst not oppose. And when I went down, she took me by the Hand, and
presented me to the most hideous Monster I ever saw in my Life. Here, Monsieur
Colbrand, said she, here is your pretty Ward and mine; let us try to make her
Time with us easy. He bowed, and put on his foreign Grimaces, and seemed to
bless himself! and, in broken English, told me, I was happy in de Affections of
de vinest Gentleman in de Varld! -- I was quite frightened, and ready to drop
down; and I will describe him to you, my dear Father and Mother, if now you
will ever see this; and you shall judge if I had not Reason, especially not
knowing he was to be there, and being appriz'd, as I was, of his hated
Employment, to watch me closer.

He is a Giant of a Man, for Stature; taller by a good deal, than Harry
Mawlidge, in your Neighborhood, and large-bon'd, and scraggy; and has a Hand!
-- I never saw such an one in my Life. He has great staring Eyes, like the
Bull's that frightened me so. Vast Jaw-bones sticking out; Eyebrows hanging
over his Eyes; two great Scars upon his Forehead, and one on his left Cheek;
and two huge Whiskers, and a monstrous wide Mouth; blubber Lips; long yellow
Teeth, and a hideous Grin. He wears his own frightful long Hair, tied up in a
great black Bag; a black Crape Neckloth, about a long ugly Neck; and his Throat
sticking out like a Wen. As to the rest, he was dressed well enough, and had a
Sword on, with a nasty red Knot to it; Leather Garters, buckled below his
Knees; and a Foot -- near as long as my Arm, I verily think.

He said, he fright de Lady, and offered to withdraw; but she bid him not; and
I told Mrs. Jewkes, That as she knew I had been crying, she should not have
called me to the Gentleman without letting me know he was there. I soon went up
to my Closet; for my Heart aked all the time I was at Table; not being able to
look upon him without Horror; and this Brute of a Woman, though she saw my
Distress, before this Addition to it, no doubt did it on purpose to strike me
more in Terror. And indeed it had its Effect; for when I went to-bed, I could
think of nothing but his hideous Person, and my Master's more hideous Actions;
and thought them too well paired; and when I dropped asleep, I dreamed they were
both coming to my Bedside, with the worst Designs; and I jumped out of Bed in
my Sleep, and frighted Mrs. Jewkes; till, waking with the Terror, I told her my
Dream: And the wicked Creature only laughed, and said, All I feared was but a
Dream, as well as that; and when it was over, and I was well awake, I should
laugh at it as such!

And now I am come to the Close of WEDNESDAY, the 27th Day of my Distress.
POOR Mr. Williams is actually arrested, and carried away to Stamford. So there
is an End of all my Hopes in him. Poor Gentleman! his Over-security and
Openness, have ruined us both! I was but too well convinced, that we ought not
to have lost a Moment's time; but he was half angry, and thought me too
impatient; and then his fatal Confessions, and the detestable Artifice of my
Master! -- But one might well think, that he who had so cunningly, and so
wickedly, contrived all his Stratagems hitherto, that it was impossible to
avoid them, would stick at nothing to complete them. I fear I shall soon find
it so!

But one Stratagem I have just invented, though a very discouraging one to think
of; because I have neither Friends nor Money, nor know one Step of the Way, if
I was out of the House. But let Bulls, and Bears, and Lions, and Tigers, and,
what is worse, false, treacherous, deceitful Men, stand in my Way, I cannot be
in more Danger than I am; and I depend nothing upon his three Weeks: For how do
I know, now be is in such a Passion, and has already begun his Vengeance on
poor Mr. Williams, that he will not change his Mind, and come down to
Lincolnshire before he goes to London?

My Stratagem is this; I will endeavor to get Mrs. Jewkes to go to-bed without
me, as she often does, while I sit locked up in my Closet; and as she sleeps
very sound in her first Sleep, of which she never fails to give Notice by
snoring, if I can but then get out between the two Ears of the Window, (for you
know, I am very slender, and I find I can get my Head through; then I can drop
upon the Leads underneath, which are little more than my Height, and which
Leads are over a little Summer-parlour, that juts out toward the Garden, and
as I am light, I can easily drop from them; for they are not high from the
Ground: Then I shall get into the Garden; and then, as I have the Key of the
Backdoor, I will get out. But I have another Piece of Cunning still; good
Heaven, succeed to me my dangerous, but innocent Devices! -- I have read of a
great Captain, who being in Danger, leaped overboard, into the Sea; and his
Enemies shooting at him with Bows and Arrows; he got off his upper Garment, and
swam away, while they stuck that full of their Darts and Arrows; and he
escaped, and triumphed over them all. So what will I do, but strip off my upper
Petticoat, and throw it into the Pond, with my Neck-handkerchief; for, to be
sure, when they miss me, they will go to the Pond first, thinking I have
drowned myself; and so, when they see some of my Clothes floating there, they
will be all employed in dragging the Pond, which is a very large one: and as I
shall not, perhaps, be missed till the Morning, this will give me Opportunity
to get a great way off; and I am sure I will run for it when I am out. And so I
trust, that Providence will direct my Steps to some good Place of Safety, and
make some worthy Body my Friend; for sure, if I suffer ever so, I cannot be in
more Danger, nor in worse Hands, than where I am; and with such avowed bad
Designs.

O my dear Parents! don't be frighted when you come to read this! -- But all
will be over before you can see it; and so God direct me for the best. My
Writings, for fear I should not escape, I will bury in the Garden; for, to be
sure, I shall be searched, and used dreadfully, if I cannot get off. And so I
will close here, for the present, to prepare for my Plot. Prosper thou, O
gracious Protector of oppressed Innocence! this last Effort of thy poor
Handmaid! that I may escape the crafty Devices and Snares that have begun to
entangle my Virtue! and from which, but by this one Trial, I see no way of
escaping! And Oh! whatever becomes of me, bless my dear Parents, and protect
poor Mr. Williams from Ruin! for he was happy before he knew me!

Just now, just now! I heard Mrs. Jewkes, who is in her Cups, own, to the
horrid Colbrand, that the robbing of poor Mr. Williams, was a Contrivance of
hers, and executed by the Groom and a Helper, in order to seize my Letters upon
him, which they missed. They are now both laughing at the dismal Story, which
they little think I heard -- O how my Heart aches! for what are not such
Wretches capable of! Can you blame me for endeavoring, through any Danger, to
get out of such Clutches?

Past Eleven o'Clock.
MRS. Jewkes is come up, and gone to-bed; and bids me not stay long in my
Closet, but come to-bed. O for a dead Sleep for the treacherous Brute! I never
saw her so tipsy, and that gives me Hopes. I have tried again, and find I can
get my Head through the Iron Bars. I am now all prepared, as soon as I hear her
fast; and now I Will seal up these and my other Papers, my last Work: And to thy
Providence, O my gracious God, commit the rest! -- Once more, God bless you
both! and send us a happy Meeting; if not here, in his heavenly Kingdom. Amen.

THURSDAY, FRIDAY, SATURDAY, SUNDAY, the 28th, 29th, 30th, and 31st Days of my
Distress.
AND Distress indeed! For here I am still! And every thing has been worse and
worse! Oh! the poor unhappy Pamela! -- Without any Hope left, and ruined in all
my Contrivances. But, Oh! my dear Parents, rejoice with me, even in this low
Plunge of my Distress; for your poor Pamela has escaped from an Enemy worse
than any she ever met with; an Enemy she never thought of before; and was
hardly able to stand against. I mean, the Weakness and Presumption, both in
one, of her own Mind! which had well nigh, had not divine Grace interposed,
sunk her into the lowest last Abyss of Misery and Perdition!

I will proceed, as I have Opportunity, with my sad Relation: For my Pen and
Ink (in my now doubly-secur'd Closet) is all that I have, besides my own
Weakness of Body, to employ myself with: And, till yesterday Evening, I have
not been able to hold a Pen.

I took with me but one Shift, besides what I had on, and two Handkerchiefs,
and two Caps, which my Pocket held, (for it was not for me to incumber myself)
and all my Stock of Money, which was but five or six Shillings, to set out for
I knew not where; and got out of the Window, not without some Difficulty,
sticking a little at my Shoulders and Hips; but I was resolved to get out, if
possible. And it was further from the Leads than I thought, and I was afraid I
had sprain'd my Ancle; and when I had dropped from the Leads to the Ground, it
was still further off; but I did pretty well there; at least, I got no Hurt to
hinder me from pursuing my Intentions: So, being now on the Ground, I hid my
Papers under a Rose-bush, and covered them over with Mould, and there they
still lie, as I hope. Then I hy'd away to the Pond: The Clock struck Twelve,
just as I got out; and it was a dark misty Night, and coldish; but I felt none
then.

When I came to the Pond-side, I flung in my Upper-coat, as I had designed, and
my Neckhandkerchief, and a round eared Cap, with a Knot; and then with great
Speed ran to the Door, and took the Key out of my Pocket, my poor Heart beating
all the Time against my Bosom, as if it would have forced its way through it: And
beat it well might! For I then, too late, found, that I was most miserably
disappointed; for the wicked Woman had taken off that Lock, and put another on;
so that my Key would not open it. I tried and tried, and feeling about, I found
a Padlock besides, on another Part of the Door. O then how my Heart sunk! -- I
dropped down with Grief and Confusion, unable to stir or support myself for a
while. But my Fears awakening my Resolution, and knowing that my Attempt would
be as terrible for me, as any other Danger I could then encounter, I clamber'd
up upon the Ledges of the Door, and upon the Lock, which was a great wooden
one; and reached the Top of the Door with my Hands; then, little thinking I
could climb so well, I made shift to lay hold on the Top of the Wall with my
Hands; but, alas for me! nothing but ill Luck! -- no Escape for poor Pamela!
The Wall being old, the Bricks I held by, gave way, just as I was taking a
Spring to get up, and down came I, and received such a Blow upon my Head, with
one of the Bricks, that it quite stunned me; and I broke my Shins and m^ Ancle
besides, and beat off the Heel of one of my Shoes.

In this dreadful way, flat upon the Ground, lay poor I, for I believe five or
six Minutes; and when I would have got up, I could hardly stand; for I found I
had bruised my left Hip and Shoulder, and was full of Pain with it; and besides
my Head bled, and ak'd with the Blow I had with the Brick. -- Yet this I valued
not! but crawled a good way, upon my Feet and Hands, in Search of a Ladder, I
just recollected to have seen against the Wall two Days before, on which the
Gardner was nailing a Nectarine Branch, that was blown off from the Wall: But
no Ladder could I find, and the Wall was very high. What now, thinks I, must
become of the miserable Pamela! -- Then I began to wish myself most heartily
again in my Closet, and to repent of my Attempt, which I now censured as rash,
because it did not succeed.

God forgive me! but a sad Thought came just then into my Head! -- I tremble to
think of it! Indeed my Apprehensions of the Usage I should meet with, had like
to have made me miserable for ever! O my dear, dear Parents, forgive your poor
Child; but being then quite desperate, I crept along till I could get up on my
Feet, though I could hardly stand; and away limp'd I! -- What to do, but to throw
myself into the Pond, and so put a Period to all my Griefs in this World! --
But, Oh! to find them infinitely aggravated (had I not, by the Divine Grace,
been withheld) in a miserable Eternity! As I have escaped this Temptation,
(blessed be God for it!) I will tell you my Conflicts on this dreadful
Occasion, that the Divine Mercies may be magnified in my Deliverance, that I am
yet on this Side the dreadful Gulf, from which there can be no Redemption.

It was well for me, as I have since thought, that I was so maimed, as made me
the longer before I got to the Water; for this gave me some Reflection, and
abated that Impetuousness of my Passions, which possibly might otherwise have
hurried me in my first Transport of Grief, (on my seeing no way to escape, and
the hard Usage I had Reason to expect from my dreadful Keepers) to throw myself
in without Consideration; but my Weakness of Body made me move so slowly, that
it gave Time for a little Reflection, a Ray of Grace, to dart in upon my
benighted Mind; and so, when I came to the Pond-side, I sat myself down on the
sloping Bank, and began to ponder my wretched Condition: And thus I reasoned
with myself.

Pause here a little, Pamela, on what thou art about, before thou take the
dreadful Leap; and consider whether there be no Way yet left, no Hope, if not
to escape from this wicked House, yet from the Mischiefs threatened thee in it.

I then considered, and after I had cast about in my Mind, every thing that
could make me hope, and saw no Probability; a wicked Woman devoid of all
Compassion! a horrid Helper just arrived in this dreadful Colbrand! an angry
and resenting Master, who now hated me, and threatened the most afflicting
Evils! and, that I should, in all Probability, be deprived even of the
Opportunity I now had before me, to free myself from all their Persecutions. --
What have thou to do, distressed Creature, said I to myself, but throw thyself
upon a merciful God, (who knows how innocently I suffer) to avoid the merciless
Wickedness of those who are determined on my Ruin?

And then thought I, (and Oh! that Thought was surely of the Devil's
Instigation; for it was very soothing, and powerful with me) these wicked
Wretches, who now have no Remorse, no Pity on me, will then be moved to lament
their Misdoings; and when they see the dead Corpse of the unhappy Pamela
dragged out to these slopy Banks, and lying breathless at their Feet, they will
find that Remorse to wring their obdurate Hearts, which, now, has no Place
there! -- And my Master, my angry Master, will then forget his Resentments, and
say, O this is the unhappy Pamela! that I have so causelessly persecuted and
destroyed! Now do I see she preferred her Honesty to her Life, will he say, and
is no Hypocrite, nor Deceiver; but really was the innocent Creature she
pretended to be! Then, thinks I, will he, perhaps, shed a few Tears over the
poor Corse of his persecuted Servant; and, though he may give out, it was Love
and Disappointment, and that too, (in order to hide his own Guilt) for the
unfortunate Mr. Williams, perhaps; yet will he be inwardly grieved, and order
me a decent Funeral, and save me, or rather this Part of me, from the dreadful
Stake, and the Highway Interrment; and the young Men and Maidens all around my
dear Father's, will pity poor Pamela! But O! I hope I shall not be the Subject
of their Ballads and Elegies; but that my Memory, for the sake of my dear
Father and Mother, may quickly slide into Oblivion!

I was once rising, so indulgent was I to this sad way of thinking, to throw
myself in: But again, my Bruises made me slow; and I thought, What art thou
about to do, wretched Pamela? how know thou, though the Prospect be all dark
to thy short-sighted Eye, what God may do for thee, even when all human Means
fail? God Almighty would not lay me under these sore Afflictions, if he had not
given me Strength to grapple with them, if I will exert it as I ought: And who
knows, but that the very Presence I so much dread, of my angry and designing
Master, (for he has had me in his Power before, and yet I have escaped) may be
better for me, than these persecuting Emissaries of his, who, for his Money,
are true to their wicked Trust, and are hardened by that, and a long Habit of
Wickedness, against Compunction of Heart; God can touch his Heart in an
Instant; and if this should not be done, I can then but put an End to my Life,
by some other Means, if I am so resolved.

But how do I know, thought I, that even these Bruises and Maims that I have
gotten, while I pursued only the laudable Escape I had meditated, may not
kindly furnish me with the Opportunity I now am tempted to precipitate myself
upon, and of surrendering up my Life, spotless and unguilty, to that merciful
Being who gave it!

Then, thought I, who gave thee, presumptuous as thou art, a Power over thy
Life? Who authorized thee to put an End to it, when the Weakness of thy Mind
suggests not to thee a Way to preserve it with Honor? How know thou what
Purposes God may have to serve, by the Trials with which thou art now tempted?
Art thou to put a Bound to the Divine Will, and to say, Thus much will I bear,
and no more? And, will thou dare to say, that if the Trial be augmented, and
continued, thou will sooner die than bear it?

This Act of Despondency, thought I, is a Sin, that, if I pursue it, admits of
no Repentance, and can therefore claim no Forgiveness. -- And will thou, for
shortening thy transitory Griefs, heavy as they are, and weak as thou fanciest
thyself, plunge both Body and Soul into everlasting Misery! Hitherto, Pamela,
thought I, thou art the innocent, the suffering Pamela; and will thou be the
guilty Aggressor? and, because wicked Men persecute thee, will thou fly in the
Face of the Almighty, and bid Defiance to his Grace and Goodness, who can still
turn all these Sufferings to Benefits? And how do I know, but that God who sees
all the lurking Vileness of my Heart, may have permitted these Sufferings on
that very Score, and to make me rely solely on his Grace and Assistance, who
perhaps have too much prided myself in a vain Dependence on my own foolish
Contrivances?

Then again, thought I, will thou suffer in one Moment all the good Lessons of
thy poor honest Parents, and the Benefit of their Example, (who have persisted
in doing their Duty with Resignation to the Divine Will, amidst the extremest
Degrees of Disappointment, Poverty, and Distress, and the Persecutions of an
ungrateful World, and merciless Creditors) to be thrown away upon thee; and
bring down, as in all Probability this thy Rashness will, their gray Hairs with
Sorrow to the Grave, when they shall understand that their beloved Daughter,
slighting the Tenders of Divine Grace, desponding in the Mercies of a gracious
God, has blemished, in this last Act, a whole Life, which they had hitherto
approved and delighted in?

What then, presumptuous Pamela, do thou here, thought I? Quit with Speed
these guilty Banks, and flee from these dashing Waters, that even in their
sounding Murmurs, this still Night, reproach thy Rashness! Tempt not God's
Goodness on the mossy Banks, that have been Witnesses of thy guilty Intentions;
and while thou have Power left thee, avoid the tempting Evil, lest thy grand
Enemy, now repulsed by Divine Grace, and due Reflection, return to the Charge
with a Force that thy Weakness may not be able to resist! And lest one rash
Moment destroy all the Convictions, which now have awed thy rebellious Mind
into Duty and Resignation to the Divine Will!

And so saying, I arose; but was so stiff with my Hurts, so cold with the moist
Dew of the Night, and the wet Banks on which I had sat, as also the Damps
arising from so large a Piece of Water, that with great Pain I got from the
Banks of this Pond, which now I think of with Terror; and bending my limping
Steps toward the House, refug'd myself in the Corner of an Out-house, where
Wood and Coals are laid up for Family Use, till I should be found by my cruel
Keepers, and consigned to a wretched Confinement, and worse Usage than I had
hitherto experienced; and there behind a Pile of Firewood I crept, and lay
down, as you may imagine, with a Mind just broken, and a Heart sensible to
nothing but the extremest Woe and Dejection.

This, my dear Father and Mother, is the Issue of your poor Pamela's fruitless
Enterprise; and who knows, if I had got out at the Backdoor, whether I had
been at all in better Case, moneyless, friendless, as I am, and in a strange
Place! -- But blame not your poor Daughter too much: Nay, if ever you see this
miserable Scribble, all bathed and blotted with my Tears, let your Pity get the
better of your Blame! But I know it will. -- And I must leave off for the
present. -- For, Oh! my Strength and my Will are at this time very far unequal
to one another. -- But yet, I will add, that though I should have praised God for
my Deliverance, had I been freed from my wicked Keepers, and my designing
Master; yet I have more abundant Reason for Praise, that I have been delivered
from a worse Enemy, myself!

I will continue my sad Relation.

It seems Mrs. Jewkes awaked not till Daybreak, and not finding me in Bed, she
called me; and no Answer being returned, she relates, that she got out of Bed,
and run to my Closet; and not finding me, searched under the Bed, and in
another Closet, finding the Chamber Door as she had left it, quite fast, and
the Key, as usual, about her Wrist. For if I could have got out at the
Chamber Door, there were two or three Passages, and Doors to them all, double
locked and barred, to go through, into the great Garden; so that, to escape,
there was no Way, but that of the Window; and that very Window, because of the
Summer-parlour under it; for the other Windows are a great way from the Ground.

She says she was excessively frighted, and instantly raised the Swiss, and the
two Maids, who lay not far off; and finding every Door fast, she said, I must
be carried away as St. Peter was out of Prison, by some Angel. It is a Wonder
she had not a worse Thought!

She says, she wept and wrung her Hands, and took on sadly, running about like
a mad Woman, little thinking I could have got out of the Closet Window, between
the Iron Bars; and indeed I don't know if I could do so again. But at last
finding that Casement open, they concluded it must be so; and so they ran out
into the Garden, and found my Footsteps in the Mould of the Bed which I dropped
down upon from the Leads: And so speeded away, all of them, that is to say,
Mrs. Jewkes, Colbrand and Nan, toward the Backdoor, to see if that was fast,
while the Cook was sent to the Out-offices to raise the Men, and make them get
Horses ready, to take each a several Way to pursue me.

But it seems, finding that Door double-lock'd and padlock'd, and the Heel of
my Shoe, and the broken Bricks, they verily concluded I was got away by some
Means, over the Wall; and then, they say, Mrs. Jewkes seemed like a distracted
Woman: Till at last, Nan had the Thought to go toward the Pond, and there
seeing my Coat, and Cap and Handkerchief in the Water, cast almost to the Banks
by the dashing of the Waves, she thought it was me, and screaming out, run to
Mrs. Jewkes, and said, O Madam, Madam! here is a piteous Thing! -- Mrs. Pamela
lies drowned in the Pond! -- Thither they all ran! and finding my Clothes,
doubted not I was at the Bottom; and they all, Swiss among the rest, beat their
Breasts, and made most dismal Lamentations; and Mrs. Jewkes sent Nan to the
Men, to bid them get the Drag-net ready, and leave the Horses, and come to try
to find the poor Innocent as she, it seems, then called me, beating her Breast,
and lamenting my hard Hap; but most what would become of them, and what Account
they should give to my Master.

While every one was thus differently employed, some weeping and wailing, some
running here and there, Nan came into the Wood-house; and there lay poor I; so
weak, so low, and dejected, and withal so stiff with my Bruises, that I could
not stir nor help myself to get upon my Feet. And I said, with a low Voice,
(for I could hardly speak) Mrs. Ann, Mrs. Ann! -- The Creature was sadly
frighted, but was taking up a Billet to knock me on the Head, believing I was
some Thief, as she said; but I cried out, O Mrs. Ann, Mrs. Ann, help me, for
Pity's sake, to Mrs. Jewkes! for I cannot get up! -- Bless me, said she, what!
you, Madam! -- Why our Hearts are almost broke, and we were going to drag the
Pond for you, believing you had drowned yourself. Now, said she, you will make us
all alive again!

And without helping me, she run away to the Pond, and brought all the Crew to
the Wood-house. -- The wicked Woman, as she entered, said, Where is she? --
Plague of her Spells, and her Witchcrafts! She shall dearly repent of this
Trick, if my Name be Jewkes; and coming to me, took hold of my Arm, so roughly,
and gave me such a Pull, as made me squeal out, (my Shoulder being bruised on
that Side) and drew me on my Face. O cruel Creature! said I, if you knew what I
have suffered, it would move you to pity me!

Even Colbrand seemed to be concerned, and said, Fie, Madam, fie! you see she
is almost dead! You must not be so rough with her. The Coachman Robin seemed to
be sorry for me too, and said, with Sobs, What a Scene is here! Don't you see
she is all bloody in her Head, and cannot stir? -- Curse of her Contrivances!
said the horrid Creature; she has frighted me out of my Wits, I Am sure. How the
D -- I came you here? -- O! said I, ask me now no Questions, but let the Maids
carry me up to my Prison; and there let me die decently, and in Peace! For
indeed I thought I could not live two Hours.

The still more inhuman Tygress said, I suppose you want Mr. Williams to pray
by you, don't you? Well, I Will send for my Master this Minute; let him come and
watch you himself, for me; for there is no such thing as holding you, I Am sure.

So the Maids took me up between them, and carried me to my Chamber; and when
the Wretch saw how bad I was, she began a little to relent -- while every one
wondered (at what I had neither Strength nor Inclination to tell them) how all
this came to pass which they imputed to Sorcery and Witchcraft.

I was so weak, when I had got up Stairs, that I fainted away, with Dejection,
Pain and Fatigue; and they undressed me, and got me to Bed, and Mrs. Jewkes
ordered Nan to bathe my Shoulder, and Arm, and Ancle, with some old Rum warmed;
and they cut the Hair a little from the back Part of my Head, and washed that;
for it was clotted with Blood, from a pretty long, but not deep Gash; and put a
Family Plaster upon it; for if this Woman has any good Quality, it is, it
seems, in a Readiness and Skill to manage in Cases, where sudden Misfortunes
happen in a Family.

After this, I fell into a pretty sound and refreshing Sleep, and lay till
Twelve o'Clock, tolerably easy, considering I was very feverish and aguishly
inclined; and she took a deal of Care to fit me to undergo more Trials, which I
had hoped would have been more happily ended: But Providence did not see fit.

She would make me rise about Twelve; but I was so weak, I could only fit up
till the Bed was made, and went into it again; and was, as they said, delirious
some Part of the Afternoon. But having a tolerable Night on Thursday I was a
good deal better on Friday, and on Saturday got up, and eat a little
Spoon-meat, and my Feverishness seemed to be gone, and I was so mended by
Evening, that I begged her Indulgence in my Closet, to be left to myself; which
she consented to, it being double-barr'd the Day before, and I assuring her
that all my Contrivances, as she called them, were at an End. But first she
made me tell her the whole Story of my Enterprise; which I did very faithfully,
knowing now that nothing could stand me in any stead, or contribute to my
Safety and Escape: And she seemed full of Wonder at my Resolution and
Venturesomeness, but told me frankly, that I should have found a hard Matter to
get quite off; for, that she was provided with a Warrant from my Master, (who
is a Justice of Peace in this County, as well as the other) to get me
apprehended, if I had got away, on Suspicion of wronging him, let me have been
where I would.

O how deep-laid are the Mischiefs designed to fall on my devoted Head! --
Surely, surely, I cannot be worthy of all this Contrivance! -- This too well
shows me the Truth of what was hinted to me formerly at the other House, that
my Master swore he would have me! O preserve me, Heaven! from being his, in his
own wicked Sense of the Adjuration!

I must add, that now this Woman sees me pick up so fast, she uses me worse,
and has abridg'd me of Paper all but one Sheet, which I am to show her written
or unwritten on Demand, and has reduced me to one Pen; yet my hidden Stores
stand me in stead. But she is more and more snappish and cross; and tauntingly
calls me Mrs. Williams, and any thing that she thinks will vex me.

SUNDAY Afternoon.
MRS. Jewkes has thought fit to give me an Airing, for three or four Hours this
Afternoon, and I am a good deal better; and should be much more so, if I knew
for what I am reserved. But Health is a Blessing hardly to be coveted in my
Circumstances, since that fits me for the Calamity I am in continual
Apprehensions of; whereas a weak and sickly State might possibly move
Compassion for me. O how I dread the coming of this angry and incensed Master;
though I am sure I have done him no Harm!

Just now we heard, that he had like to have been drowned in crossing a Stream,
a few Days ago, in pursuing his Game. What is the Matter, with all his ill
Usage of me, that I cannot hate him? To be sure, I am not like other People! He
has certainly done enough to make me hate him; but yet when I heard his Danger,
which was very great, I could not in my Heart forbear rejoicing for his Safety;
though his Death would have ended my Afflictions. Ungenerous Master! if you knew
this, you surely would not be so much my Persecutor! But for my late good
Lady's sake, I must wish him well; and O what an Angel would he be in my Eyes
yet, if he would cease his Attempts, and reform.

Well, I hear by Mrs. Jewkes, that John Arnold is turned away, being detected
in writing to Mr. Williams; and that Mr. Longman, and Mr. Jonathan the Butler,
have incurred his Displeasure, for offering to speak in my Behalf. Mrs. Jervis
too is in Danger; for all these three, belike, went together to beg in my
Favor; for now it is known where I am.

Mrs. Jewkes has, with the News about my Master, received a Letter; but she
says the Contents are too bad for me to know. They must be bad indeed, if they
be worse than what I have already known.

Just now the horrid Creature tells me, as a Secret, that she has reason to
think he has found out a Way to satisfy my Scruples: It is, by marrying me to
this dreadful Colbrand, and buying me of him on the Wedding Day, for a Sum of
Money! -- Was ever the like heard? -- She says it will be my Duty to obey my
Husband; and that Mr. Williams will be forced, as a Punishment, to marry us;
and that when my Master has paid for me, and I am surrendered up, the Swiss is
to go home again, with the Money, to his former Wife and Children; for she
says, it is the Custom of those People to have a Wife in every Nation.

But this, to be sure, is horrid romancing! But abominable as it is, it may
possibly serve to introduce some Plot now hatching! -- With what strange
Perplexities is my poor Mind agitated! Perchance, some Sham-marriage may be
designed, on purpose to ruin me: But can a Husband sell his Wife, against her
own Consent? -- And will such a Bargain stand good in Law?

MONDAY, TUESDAY, WEDNESDAY, the 32d, 33d, and 34th Days of my Imprisonment.
NOTHING offers these Days but Squabblings between Mrs. Jewkes and me. She
grows worse and worse to me. I vexed her Yesterday, because she talked nastily,
and told her she talked more like a vile London Prostitute, than a Gentleman's
Housekeeper; and she cannot use me bad enough for it. Bless me! she curses and
storms at me like a Trooper, and can hardly keep her Hands off me. You may
believe she must talk sadly to make me say such harsh Words: Indeed it cannot
be repeated; and she is a Disgrace to her Sex. And then she ridicules me, and
laughs at my Notions of Honesty; and tells me, impudent Creature that she is!
what a fine Bedfellow I shall make for my Master, (and suchlike) with such
whimsical Notions about me! -- Do you think this is to be borne? And yet she
talks worse than this, if possible! -- Quite filthily! O what vile Hands am I
put into!

THURSDAY.
I Have now all the Reason that can be, to apprehend my Master will be here
soon; for the Servants are busy in setting the House to rights; and a Stable
and Coach-house are cleaning out, that have not been used some time. I ask Mrs.
Jewkes, but she tells me nothing, nor will hardly answer me when I ask her a
Question. Sometimes I think she puts on these strange wicked Airs to me,
purposely to make me wish for, what I dread most of all Things, my Master's
coming down. He talk of Love! -- If he had any the least Notion of Regard for
me, to be sure he would not give this naughty Body such Power over me: -- And
if he does come where is his Promise of not seeing me without I consent to it?
But it seems His Honor owes me nothing! So he tells me in his Letter. And-why?
Because I am willing to keep mine. But, indeed, he says, he hates me perfectly;
and it is plain he does, or I should not be left to the Mercy of this Woman;
and, what is worse, to my woeful Apprehensions.

FRIDAY, the 36th Day of my Imprisonment.
I Took the Liberty yesterday Afternoon, finding the Gates open, to walk out
before the House; and ere I was aware, had got to the Bottom of the long Row of
Elms; and there I sat myself down upon the Steps of a sort of broad Style,
which leads into the Road, that goes toward the Town. And as I sat musing
about what always busies my Mind, I saw a whole Body of Folks, running toward
me from the House, Men and Women, as in a Fright. At first I wondered what was
the Matter, till they came nearer; and I found they were all alarmed, thinking
I had attempted to get off. There was first the horrible Colbrand, running with
his long Legs, well nigh two Yards at a Stride; then there was one of the
Grooms, poor Mr. Williams's Robber; then I spied Nan, half out of Breath; and
the Cook-maid after her; and lastly, came waddling, as fast as she could, Mrs.
Jewkes, exclaiming most bitterly, as I found, against me. Colbrand said, O how
have you frighted us all! -- And went behind me, lest I should run away, as I
suppose.

I sat still, to let them see I had no View to get away; for, besides the
Improbability of succeeding, my last sad Attempt had cured me of enterprizing
again. And when Mrs. Jewkes came within hearing, I found her terribly incensed,
and raving about my Contrivances. Why said I, should you be so concerned? Here
I have sat a few Minutes, and had not the least Thought of getting away, or
going further; but to return as soon as it was duskish. She would not believe
me; and the barbarous Creature struck at me with her horrid Fist, and, I
believe, would have felled me, had not Colbrand interposed, and said, He saw me
sitting still, looking about me, and not seeming to have the least Inclination
to stir. But this would not serve: She ordered the two Maids to take me each by
an Arm, and lead me back into the House, and up Stairs; and there have I been
locked up ever since, without Shoes. In vain have I pleaded that I had no
Design, as indeed I had not the least; and, last Night I was forced to lie
between her and Nan; and I find she is resolved to make a Handle of this
against me, and in her own Behalf -- Indeed, what with her Usage, and my own
Apprehensions of still worse, I am quite weary of my Life.

Just now she has been with me, and given me my Shoes, and has laid her
imperious Commands upon me, to dress myself in a Suit of Clothes out of the
Portmanteau, which I have not seen lately, against three or four o'Clock; for,
she says, she is to have a Visit from Lady Darnford's two Daughters, who came
purposely to see me; and so she gave me the Key of the Portmanteau. But I will
not obey her; and I told her I would not be made a Show of, nor see the Ladies.
She left me, saying, It should be worse for me, if I did not. But how can that
be?

Five of Clock is come.
AND no young Ladies! -- So that I fansy -- But, hold, I hear their Coach, I
believe. I Will step to the Window. -- I will not go down to them, I am resolved. --

Good Sirs! good Sirs! What will become of me! Here is my Master come in his
fine Chariot! -- Indeed he is! What shall I do? Where shall I hide myself! --
Oh! what shall I do! -- Pray for me! But Oh! you will not see this! -- Now, good
God of Heaven, preserve me! if it be thy blessed Will!

Seven o'Clock.
THOUGH I dread to see him, yet do I wonder I have not. To be sure something is
resolving against me, and he stays to hear all her Stories. I can hardly write;
yet, as I can do nothing else, I know not how to forbear! -- Yet I cannot hold
my Pen! -- How crooked and trembling the Lines! -- I must leave off, till I can
get quieter Fingers! -- Why should the Guiltless tremble so, when the Guilty
can possess their Minds in Peace!

SATURDAY Morning.
NOW let me give you an Account of what passed last Night; for I had no Power
to write, nor yet Opportunity, till now.

This vile Woman held my Master till half an Hour after Seven; and he came
hither about Five in the Afternoon. And then I heard his Voice on the Stairs,
as he was coming up to me. It was about his Supper; for he said, I shall choose
a boiled Chicken, with Butter and Parsley. -- And up he came!

He put on a stern and majestic Air; and he can look very majestic when he
pleases. Well, perverse Pamela, ungrateful Runaway, said he, for my first
Salutation! -- You do well, don't you, to give me all this Trouble and
Vexation? I could not speak; but throwing my self on the Floor, hid my Face,
and was ready to die with Grief and Apprehension. -- He said, Well may you hide
your Face! well may you be ashamed to see me, vile forward one, as you are! --
I sobb'd, and wept, but could not speak. And he let me lie, and went to the
Door, and called Mrs. Jewkes. -- There, said he, take up that fallen Angel! --
Once I thought her as innocent as an Angel of Light. But I have now no Patience
with her. The little Hypocrite prostrates her self thus, in hopes to move my
Weakness in her Favor, and that I Will raise her from the Floor myself. But I
shall not touch her: No, said he, cruel Gentleman as he was! let such Fellows
as Williams be taken in by her artful Wiles, I know her now, and see she is for
any Fool's Turn, that will be caught by her.

I sighed, as if my Heart would break! -- And Mrs. Jewkes lifted me up upon my
Knees: for I trembled so, I could not stand. Come, said she, Mrs. Pamela, learn
to know your best Friend; confess, your unworthy Behavior, and beg his
Honor's Forgiveness of all Your Faults. I was ready to saint; and he said, She
is Mistress of Arts, I Will assure you; and will mimick a Fit, ten to one, in a
Minute.

I was struck to the Heart at this; but could not speak presently; only lifted
up my Eyes to Heaven! -- And at last made shift to say -- God forgive you, Sir!
-- He seemed in a great Passion, and walked up and down the Room, casting
sometimes an Eye upon me, and seem^ng as if he would have spoken, but checked
himself And at last he said, When she has acted this her first Part over,
perhaps I will see her again, and she shall soon know what she has to trust to.

And so he went out of the Room: And I was quite sick at Heart! -- Surely, said
I, I am the wickedest Creature that ever breathed! Well, said the Impertinent,
not so wicked as that neither; but I am glad you begin to see your Faults.
Nothing like being humble! -- Come I Will stand your Friend, and plead for you,
if you will promise to be more dutiful for the future: Come, come, added the
Wretch, this may be all made up by tomorrow Morning, if you are not a Fool. --
Begone, hideous Woman! said I; and let not my Afflictions be added to by thy
inexorable Cruelty, and unwomanly Wickedness.

She gave me a Push, and went away in a violent Passion. And it seems, she made
a Story of this; and said, I had such a Spirit, there was no hearing it.

I laid me down on the Floor, and had no Power to stir, till the Clock struck
Nine; and then the wicked Woman came up again. You must come down Stairs, said
she, to my Master; that is, if you please, Spirit! -- Said I, I believe I
cannot stand. Then, said, she, I Will send Monsieur Colbrand to carry you down.

I got up, as well as I could, and trembled all the way down Stairs. And she
went before me into the Parlour; and a new Servant, that he had waiting on him
instead of John, withdrew as soon as I came in. And, by the way, he had a new
Coachman too, which looked as if Bedfordshire Robin was turned away.

I thought, said he, when I came down, you should have sat at Table with we,
when I had not Company; but when I find you cannot forget you Original, but
must prefer my Menials to me, I call you down to wait on me, while I sup, that
I may have some Talk with you, and throw away as little Time as possible upon
you.

Sir, said I, you do me Honor to wait upon you. -- And I never shall, I hope,
forget my Original. But I was forced to stand behind his Chair, that I might
hold by it. Fill me, said he, a Glass of that Burgundy. I went to do it; but my
Hand shook so, that I could not hold the Plate with the Glass in it, and spilt
some of the Wine. So Mrs. Jewkes poured it for me, and I carried it as well as
I could; and made a low Court'sy. He took it, and said, Stand behind me, out of
my Sight!

Why, Mrs. Jewkes, said he, you tell me, she remains very sullen still, and
eats nothing. No, said she, not so much as will keep Life and Soul together. --
And is always crying, you say, too? Yes, Sir, answered she, I think she is, for
one thing or another. Ay, said he, your young Wenches will feed upon their
Tears; and their Obstinacy will serve them for Meat and Drink. I think I never
saw her look better, tho, in my Life! -- But I suppose she lives upon Love.
This sweet Mr. Williams, and her little villainous Plots together, have kept her
alive and well, to be sure. For Mischief, Love, and Contradiction, are the
natural Ailments of a Woman.

Poor I was forced to hear all this, and be silent; and indeed my Heart was too
full to speak.

And so you say, said he, that she had another Project, but Yesterday, to get
away? She denies it herself, said she; but it had all the Appearance of one.
I Am sure she made me in a fearful Pucker about it. And I am glad your Honor is
come, with all my Heart; and I hope, whatever be your Honor's Intention
concerning her, you will not be long about it; for you will find her as slippery
as an Eel, I Will assure you!

Sir, said I, and clapsed his Knees with my Arms, not knowing what I did, and
falling on my Knees, Have Mercy on me, and hear me, concerning that wicked
Woman's Usage of me. --

He cruelly interrupted me, and said, I am satisfied she has done her Duty: It
signifies nothing what you say against Mrs. Jewkes. That you are here, little
Hypocrite as you are, pleading your Cause before me, is owing to her Care of
you; else you had been with the Parson -- Wicked Girl! said he, to tempt a Man
to undo himself, as you have done him, at a Time when I was on the Point of
making him happy for his Life!

I arose, but said, with a deep Sigh, I have done, Sir, -- I have done! -- I
have a strange Tribunal to plead before. The poor Sheep, in the Fable, had such
an one; when it was tried before the Vultur, on the Accusation of the Wolf!

So, Mrs. Jewkes, said he, you are the Wolf, I the Vultur, and this the poor
innocent Lamb, on her Trial before us -- Oh! you don't know how well this
Innocent is read in Reflection. She has Wit at Will, when she has a mind to
display her own romantic Innocence, at the Price of other People's Characters.

Well, said the aggravating Creature this is nothing to what she has called me;
I have been a Jezebel, a London Prostitute, and what not? -- But I am contented
with her ill Names, now I see it is her Fashion, and she can call your Honor a
Vultur.

Said I, I had no Thought of comparing my Master -- And was going to say on:
But he said, Don't prate, Girl! -- No, said she, it don't become you, I am sure.

Well, said I, since I must not speak, I will hold my Peace: But there is a
righteous Judge, who knows the Secrets of all Hearts! and to Him I appeal.

See there! said he: Now this meek, good Creature is praying for Fire from
Heaven upon us! O she can curse most heartily, in the Spirit of Christian
Meekness, I Will assure you! -- Come, Sawcy-face, give me another Glass of Wine!

So I did, as well as I could; but wept so, that he said, I suppose I shall
have some of your Tears in my Wine!

When he had supped, he stood up, and said, O how happy for you it is, that you
can at Will, thus make your speaking Eyes overflow in this manner, without
losing any of their Brilliancy! You have been told, I suppose, that you are
most beautiful in your Tears! -- Did you ever, said he to her, (who all thi^
while was standing in one Corner of the Parl^ur) see a more charming Creature
than this? Is it to be wondered at, that I demean myself thus to take Notice of
her! -- See, said he, and took the Glass with one Hand, and turned me round
with the other, What a Shape! what a Neck! what a Hand! and what a Bloom in
that lovely Face! -- But who can describe the Tricks and Artifices, that lie
lurking in her little, plotting, guileful Heart! It Is no Wonder the poor Parson
was infatuated with her -- I blame him less than I do her; for who could expect
such Artifice in so young a Sorceress!

I went to the further part of the Room, and held my Face against the Wainscot;
and, in spite of all I could do to refrain crying, sobb'd, as if my Heart would
break. He said, I am surpised, Mrs. Jewkes, at the Mistake of the Letters you
tell me of! But, you see, I am not afraid any body should read what I write. I
don't carry on private Correspondencies, and reveal every Secret that comes to
my Knowledge, and then corrupt People to carry my Letters, against their Duty,
and all good Conscience.

Come hither, Hussy, said he; you and I have a dreadful Reckoning to make. --
Why don't you come, when I bid you? -- Fie upon it! Mrs. Pamela, said she,
what! not stir, when his Honor command* you to come to him! -- Who knows but
his Goodness will forgive you?

He came to me, (for I had no power to stir) and put his Arms about my Neck,
and would kiss me; and said, Well, Mrs. Jewkes, if it were not for the Thought
of this cursed Parson, I believe in my Heart, so great is my Weakness, that I
could yet forgive this intriguing little Slut, and take her to my Bosom.

O, said the Sycophant, yen are very good, Sir, very forgiving, indeed! -- But
come, added the profligate Wretch, I hope you will be so good, as to take her
to your Bosom; and that, by tomorrow Morning, you will bring her to a better
Sense of her Duty!

Could any thing, in Womanhood, be so vile! I had no Patience: But yet Grief
and Indignation choked up the Passage of my Words; and I could only stammer
out a passionate Exclamation to Heaven, to protect my Innocence. But the Word
was the Subject of their Ridicule. Was ever poor Creature worse beset!

He said, as if he had been considering whether he could forgive me or not, No,
I cannot yet forgive her neither -- She has given me great Disturbance; has
brought great discredit upon me, both abroad and at home; has corrupted all my
Servants at the other House; has despised my honorable Views and Intentions to
her, and sought to run away with this ungrateful Parson -- And surely I ought
not to forgive all this! -- Yet, with all this wretched Grimace, he kissed me
again, and would have put his Hand in my Bosom; but I struggled, and said, I
would die before I would be used thus. -- Consider, Pamela, said he, in a
Threatening Tone, consider where you are! and don't play the Fool: If you do, a
more dreadful Fate awaits you than you expect. But, take her up Stairs, Mrs.
Jewkes, and I Will send a few Lines to her to consider off; and let me have your
Answer, Pamela, in the Morning. Till then you have to resolve upon: And after
that, your Doom is fixed -- So I went up Stairs, and gave myself up to Grief,
and Expectation of what he would send: But yet I was glad of this Night's
Reprieve!

He sent me, however, nothing at all. And about Twelve o'Clock, Mrs. Jewkes and
Nan came up, as the Night before, to be my Bedfellows; and I would go to-bed
with some of my Clothes on; which they muttered at sadly; and Mrs. Jewkes
railed at me particularly: Indeed I would have sat up all Night, for Fear, if
she would have let me. For I had but very little Rest that Night, apprehending
this Woman would let my Master in. She did nothing but praise him, and blame
me; but I answered her as little as I could.

He has Sir Simon Tell-Tale, alias Darnford, to dine with him today, whose
Family sent to welcome him into the Country; and it seems, the old Knight wants
to see me; so I suppose I shall be sent for, as Samson was, to make Sport for
him -- Here I am, and must bear it all!

Twelve o'Clock Saturday Noon.
JUST now he has sent me up, by Mrs. Jewkes, the following Proposals. So here
are the honorable Intentions all at once laid open. They are, my dear Parents,
to make me a vile kept Mistress: Which, I hope, I shall always detest the
Thoughts of. But you will see how they are accommodated to what I should have
most desired could I have honestly promoted it, your Welfare and Happiness. I
have answered them, as I Am sure, you will approve; and I am prepared for the
worst: For though I fear there will be nothing omitted to ruin me, and though my
poor Strength will not be able to defend me, yet I will be innocent of Crime in
my Intention, and in the Sight of God; and to Him leave the avenging of all my
Wrongs, in his own good Time and Manner. I shall write to you my Answer against
his Articles; and hope the best, though I fear the worst. But if I should come
home to you ruined and undone, and may not be able to look you in the Face; yet
pity and in spirit the poor Pamela, to make her little Remnant of Life easy;
for long I shall not survive my Disgrace. And you may be assured it shall not
be my Fault, if it be my Misfortune.

'To Mrs. PAMELA ANDREWS.
'The following ARTICLES are proposed to your serious Consideration; and let me
have an Answer, in Writing, to them; that I may take my Resolutions
accordingly. Only remember, that I will not be trifled with; and what you give
for Answer, will absolutely decide your Fate, without Expostulation or further
Trouble.

This is my ANSWER.
Forgive, good Sir, the Spirit your poor Servant is about to show in her Answer
to your ARTICLES. Not to be warm, and in earnest, on such an Occasion as the
present, would show a Degree of Guilt, that, I hope, my Soul abhors. I will not
trifle with you, nor act like a Person doubtful of her own Mind; for it wants
not one Moment's Consideration with me; and I therefore return the ANSWER
following, let what will be the Consequence.

'I. IF you can convince me, that the hated Parson has had no Encouragement
from you in his Addresses; and that you have no Inclination for him, in
Preference to me; then I will offer the following Proposals to you, which I
will punctually make good.

I. AS to the first Article, Sir, it may behove me, (that I may not deserve in
your Opinion, the opprobrious Terms of forward and artful, and suchlike) to
declare solemnly, that Mr. Williams never had the least Encouragement from me,
as to what you hint; and I believe his principal Motive was the apprehended
Duty of his Function, quite contrary to his apparent Interest, to assist a
Person he thought in Distress. You may, Sir, the rather believe me, when I
declare, that I know not the Man breathing I would wish to marry; and that the
only one I could honor more than another, is the Gentleman, who, of all
others, seeks my everlasting Dishonor.

'II. I will directly make you a Present of 500 Guineas, for your own Use,
which you may dispose of to any Purpose you please: And will give it absolutely
into the Hands of any Person you shall appoint to receive it; and expect no
Favor in Return, till you are satisfied in the Possession of it.

II. As to your second Proposal, let the Consequence be what it will, I reject
it with all my Soul. Money, Sir, is not my chief Good: May God Almighty desert
me, whenever it is; and whenever, for the sake of that, I can give up my Title
to that blessed Hope which will stand me in stead, at a Time when Millions of
Gold will not purchase one happy Moment of Reflection on a past mis-pent Life!

'III. I will likewise directly make over to you a Purchase I lately made in
Kent, which brings in 250 l. per Annum, clear of all Deductions. This shall be
made over to you in full Property for your Life, and for the Lives of any
Children, to Perpetuity, that you may happen to have: And your Father shall be
immediately put into Possession of it in Trust for these Purposes. And the
Management of it will yield a comfortable Subsistence to him and your Mother,
for Life; and I will make up any Deficiencies, if such should happen, to that
clear Sum, and allow him 50 l. per Annum besides, for his Life, and that of
your Mother, for his Care and Management of this your Estate.

III. Your third Proposal, Sir, I reject, for the same Reason; and am sorry you
could think my poor honest Parents would enter into their Part of it, and be
concerned for the Management of an Estate, which would be owing to the
Prostitution of their poor Daughter. Forgive, Sir, my Warmth on this Occasion;
but you know not the poor Man, and the poor Woman, my ever dear Father and
Mother, if you think that they would not much rather choose to starve in a
Ditch, or rot in a noisome Dungeon, than accept of the Fortune of a Monarch,
upon such wicked Terms. I dare not say all that my full Mind suggests to me on
this grievous Occasion. -- But indeed, Sir, you know them not; nor shall the
Terrors of Death, in its most frightful Forms, I hope, through God's assisting
Grace, ever make me act unworthy of such poor honest Parents!

'IV. I will, moreover, extend my Favor to any other of your Relations, that
you may think worthy of it, or that are valued by you.

IV. Your fourth Proposal, I take upon me, Sir, to answer as the third. If I
have any Friends that want the Favor of the Great, may they ever want it, if
they are capable of desiring it on unworthy Terms!

'V. I will, besides, order Patterns to be sent you for choosing four complete
Suits of rich Clothes, that you may appear with Reputation, as if you was my
Wife. And I will give you the two Diamond Rings, and two Pair of Earrings, and
Diamond Necklace, that were bought by my Mother, to present to Miss Tomlins, if
the Match that was proposed between her and me had been brought to Effect: And
I will confer upon you still other Gratuities, as I shall find myself obliged,
by your good Behavior and Affection.

V. Fine Clothes, Sir, become not me; nor have I any Ambition to wear them. I
have greater Pride in my Poverty and Meanness, than I should have in Dress and
Finery. Believe me, Sir, I think such things less become the humble-born
Pamela, than the Rags your good Mother raised me from. Your Rings, Sir, your
Necklace, and your Earrings, will better befit Ladies of Degree, than me: And
to lose the best Jewel, my Virtue, would be poorly recompensed by those you
propose to give me. What should I think, when I looked upon my Finger, or saw,
in the Glass, those Diamonds on my Neck, and in my Ears, but that they were the
Price of my Honesty; and that I wore those Jewels outwardly, because I had none
inwardly?

'VI. Now, Pamela, will you see by this, what a Value I set upon the Free Will
of a Person already in my Power; and who, if these Proposals are not accepted,
shall find, that I have not taken all these Pains, and risqued my Reputation,
as I have done, without resolving to gratify my Passion for you, at all
Adventures, and if you refuse, without making any Terms at all.

VI. I know, Sir, by woeful Experience, that I am in your Power: I know all the
Resistance I can make will be poor and weak, and perhaps stand me in little
stead: I dread your Will to ruin me is as great as your Power: Yet, Sir, will I
dare to tell you, that I will make no Free Will Offering of my Virtue. All that
I can do, poor as it is, I will do, to convince you, that your Offers shall
have no Part in my Choice; and if I cannot escape the Violence of Man, I hope,
by God's Grace, I shall have nothing to reproach myself, for not doing all in
my Power to avoid my Disgrace; and then I can safely appeal to the great God,
my only Refuge and Protector, with this Consolation, That my Will bore no Part
in my Violation.

'VII. You shall be Mistress of my Person and Fortune, as much as if the
foolish Ceremony had passed. All my Servants shall be yours; and you shall
choose any two Persons to attend yourself, either Male or Female, without any
Control of mine; and if your Conduct be such, that I have Reason to be
satisfied with it, I know not (but will not engage for this) that I may, after
a Twelvemonth's Cohabitation, marry you; for if my Love increases for you, as
it has done for many Months past, it will be impossible for me to deny you any
thing.

'And now, Pamela, consider well, it is in your Power to oblige me on such
Terms, as will make yourself, and all your Friends, happy: But this will be
over this very Day, irrevocably over; and you shall find all you would be
thought to fear, without the least Benefit arising from it to yourself.

'And I beg you will well weigh the Matter, and comply with my Proposals; and I
will instantly set about securing to you the full Effect of them: And let me,
if you value yourself, experience a grateful Return on this Occasion; and I Will
forgive all that is past.'

VII. I have not once dared to look so high, as to such a Proposal as your
seventh Article contains. Hence have proceeded all my little, abortive
Artifices to escape from the Consinement you have put me in; although you
promised to be honorable to me. Your Honor, well I knew, would nor let you
stoop to so mean and so unworthy a Slave, as the poor Pamela: All I desire is,
to be permitted to return to my native Meanness unviolated. What have I done,
Sir, to deserve it should be otherwise? For the obtaining of this, though I would
not have married your Chaplain, yet would I have run away with your meanest
Servant, if I had thought I could have got safe to my beloved Poverty. I heard
you once say, Sir, That a certain great Commander, who could live upon Lentils,
might well refuse the Bribes of the greatest Monarch: and, I hope, as I can
contentedly live at the meanest Rate, and think not myself above the lowest
Condition, that I am also above making an Exchange of my Honesty for all the
Riches of the Indies. When I come to be proud and vain of gaudy Apparel, and
outside Finery; then, (which, I hope, will never be) may I rest my principal
Good in such vain Trinkets, and despise for them the more solid Ornaments of a
good Fame, and a Chastity inviolate!

Give me leave to say Sir, in Answer to what you hint, That you may, in a
Twelvemonth's Time, marry me, on the Continuance of my good Behavior; that
this weighs less with me, if possible, than any thing else you have said. For,
in the first Place, there is an End of all Merit, and all good Behavior, on my
Side, if I have now any, the Moment I consent to your Proposals. And I should
be so far from expecting such an Honor, that I will pronounce, that I should
be most unworthy of it. What, Sir, would the World say, were you to marry your
Harlot? -- That a Gentleman of your Rank in Life, should stoop, not only to the
base-born Pamela, but to a base-born Prostitute? -- Little, Sir, as I know of
the World, I am not to be caught by a Bait so poorly covered as this!

Yet, after all, dreadful is the Thought, that I, a poor, weak, friendless,
unhappy Creature, am too fully in your Power! But permit me, Sir, to pray, as I
now write, on my bended Knees, That before you resolve upon my Ruin, you will
weigh well the Matter. Hitherto, Sir, though you have taken large Strides to this
crying Sin, yet are you on this Side the Commission of it -- When once it is
done, nothing can recall it! And where will be your Triumph? -- What Glory will
the Spoils of such a weak Enemy yield you? Let me but enjoy my Poverty with
Honesty, is all my Prayer; and I will bless you, and pray for you every Moment
of my Life! Think; O think! before it is yet too late! what Stings, what
Remorse will attend your dying Hour, when you come to reflect, that you have
ruined, perhaps Soul and Body, a wretched Creature, whose only Pride was her
Virtue! And how pleased you will be, on the contrary, if in that tremendous
Moment you shall be able to acquit yourself of this soul Crime, and to plead in
your own Behalf, that you suffered the earnest Supplications of an unhappy
Wretch to prevail with you to be innocent your self, and let her remain so! --
May God Almighty, whose Mercy so lately saved you from the Peril of perishing
in deep Waters, (on which, I hope, you will give me Cause to congratulate you!)
touch your Heart in my Favor, and save you from this Sin, and me from this
Ruin! -- And to Him do I commit my Cause; and to Him will I give the Glory, and
Night and Day pray for you, if I may be permitted to escape this great Evil! --
From

Your poor, oppressed, broken-spirited Servant.


I took a Copy of this for your Perusal, my dear Parents, if I shall ever be so
happy to see you again, (for I hope my Conduct will be approved of by you); and
at Night, when Sir Simon was gone, he sent for me down. Well, said he, have you
considered my Proposals? Yes, Sir, said I, I have. And there is my Answer. But
pray let me not see you read it. Is it your Bashfulness, said he, or your
Obstinacy, that makes you not choose I should read it before you?

I offered to go away; and he said, Don't run from me: I will not read it till you
are gone. But, said he, tell me Pamela, whether you comply with my Proposals,
or not? Sir, said I, you will see presently; pray don't hold me; for he took my
Hand. Said he, Did you well consider before you answered? -- I did Sir, said I.
If it be not what you think will please me, said he, dear Girl, take it back
again, and reconsider it; for if I have this as your absolute Answer, And I
don't like it, you are undone; for I will not sue meanly, where I can command.
I fear, said he, it is not what I like, by your Manner. And, let me tell you,
That I cannot bear Denial. If the Terms I have offered are not sufficient, I
will augment them to two Thirds of my Estate; for, said he, and swore a
dreadful Oath, I cannot live without you: And since the thing is gone so far, I
will not! -- And so he clasped me in his Arms, in such a manner as quite
frighted me; and kissed me two or three times.

I got from him, and run up Stairs, and went to the Closet, and was quite
uneasy and fearful.

In an Hour's time, he called Mr. Jewkes down to him; and I heard him very high
in Passion: And all about poor me! And I heard her say, it was his own Fault;
there would be an End of all my Complaining and Perverseness, if he was once
resolved; and other most impudent Aggravations. I am resolved not to go to bed
this Night, if I can help it -- Lie still, lie still, my poor fluttering Heart!
-- what will become of me!

Almost Twelve o'Clock SATURDAY Night.
HE sent Mrs. Jewkes, about Ten o'Clock, to tell me to come to him. Where? said
I. I Will show you said she. I went down three or four Steps, and saw her making
to his Chamber, the Door of which was open: So I said, I cannot go there! --
Don't be foolish, said she; but come; no Harm will be done to you! -- Well,
said I, if I die, I cannot go there. I heard him say, Let her come, or it shall
be worse for her. I cannot bear, said he, to speak to her myself! -- Well, said
I, I cannot come, indeed I cannot, and so I went up again into my Closet,
expecting to be fetched by Force.

But she came up soon after, and bid me make haste to-bed: Said I, I will not
go to-bed this Night, that is certain! -- Then, said she, you shall be made to
come to-bed; and Nan and I will undress you. I knew neither Prayers nor Tears
would move this wicked Woman: So, I said, I am sure you will let my Master in,
and I shall be undone! Mighty Piece of Undone, she said! But he was too
exasperated against me, to be so familiar with me, she would assure me -- Ay,
said she, you will be disposed of another way soon, I can tell you for your
Comfort; And I hope your Husband will have your Obedience, though nobody else can
have it. No Husband in the World, said I, shall make me do an unjust or base
thing. -- She said, That would be soon tried; and Nan coming in, What, said I,
am I to have two Bedfellows again, these warm Nights? Yes, said she,
Slippery-ones, you are, till you can have one good one instead of us. Said I,
Mrs. Jewkes, don't talk nastily to me. I see you are beginning again; and I
shall affront you, may-be; for next to bad Action, are bad Words; for they
could not be spoken, if they were not in the Heart -- Come to bed. Purity! said
she. You are a Nonsuch, I suppose. Indeed, said I, I cannot come to bed; and it
will do you no harm to let me sit all Night in the great Chair. Nan, said she,
undress my young Lady. If she will not let you, I Will help you: And if neither of
us can do it quietly, we'll call my Master to do it for us; tho, said she, I
think it an Office worthier of Monsieur Colebrand! -- You are very wicked, said
I. I know it, said she: I am a Jezebel, and a London Prostitute, you know. You
did great Feats, said I, to tell my Master all this poor Stuff! But you did not
tell him how you beat me: No, Lambkin, said she, (a Word I had not heard a good
while) that I left for you to tell; and you was going to do it, if the Vultur
had not taken the Wolf's Part, and bid the poor innocent Lamb be silent! -- Ay,
said I, no matter for your Fleers, Mrs. Jewkes; though I can have neither Justice
nor Mercy here, and cannot be heard in my Defense, yet a Time will come,
may-be, when I shall be heard, and when your own Guilt will strike you dumb --
Ay! Spirit! said she! and the Vultur too! Must we both be dumb? Why that,
Lambkin, will be pretty! -- Then, said the wicked one, you will have all the Talk
to your self! -- Then how will the Tongue of the pretty Lambkin bleat out
Innocence, and Virtue, and Honesty, till the whole Trial be at an End! --
You're a wicked Woman, that is certain, said I; and if you thought any thing of
another World, could not talk thus. But no Wonder! -- It shows what Hands I am
got into! -- Ay, so it does, said she; but I beg you will undress, and come
to-bed, or I believe your Innocence will not keep you from still worse Hands. I
will come to-bed, said I, if you will let me have the Keys in my own Hand; not
else, if I can help it. Yes, said she, and then, hey! for another Contrivance,
another Escape! -- No, no, said I, all my Contrivances are over, I Will assure
you! Pray let me have the Keys, and I will come to bed. She came to me, and
took me in her huge Arms, as if I was a Feather; said she, I do this to show
you, what a poor Resistance you can make against me, if I pleased to exert my
self; and so, Lambkin, don't say to your Wolf, I will not come to bed! -- And set
me down, and tapped me on the Neck: Ah! said she thou art a pretty Creature,
it is true; but so obstinate! so full of Spirit! If thy Strength was but
answerable to that, thou would run away with us all, and this great House too
on thy Back!-But undress, undress, I tell you.

Well, said I, I see my Misfortunes make you very merry, and very witty too:
But I will love you, if you will humor me with the Keys of the Chamber-doors.
-- Are you sure you will love me, said she? -- Now speak your Conscience! --
Why, said I, you must not put it so close; neither would you, if you thought
you had not given Reason to doubt it! -- But I will love you as well as I can!
-- I would not tell a wilful Lie: And if I did, you would not believe me, after
your hard Usage of me. Well, said she, that is all fair, I own! -- But Nan, pray
pull off my young Lady's Shoes and Stockens. -- No, pray don't, said I; I will
come to-bed presently, since I must.

And so I went to the Closet, and scribbled a little about this idle Chit-chat.
And she being importunate, I was forced to go to-bed; but with some of my
Clothes on, as the former Night; and she let me hold the two Keys; for there
are two Locks, there being a double Door; and so I got a little Sleep that
Night, having had none for two or three Nights before.

I cannot imagine what she means; but Nan offered to talk a little once or
twice; and she snubb'd her, and said, I charge you, Wench, don't open your Lips
before me! And if you are asked any Questions by Mrs. Pamela, don't answer her
one Word, while I am here! -- But she is a lordly Woman to to the
Maidservants, and that has always been her Character. O how unlike good Mrs.
Jervis in every thing!

SUNDAY Morning.
A Thought came into my Head; I meant no Harm; but it was a little bold. For
seeing my Master dressing to go to Church, and his Chariot getting ready, I
went to my Closet, and I writ, The Prayers of this Congregation are earnestly
desired for a Gentlemen of great Worth and Honor, who labors under a
Temptation to exert his great Power to ruin a poor, distressed, worthless
Maiden. And also, The Prayers of this Congregation are earnestly desired, by a
poor distressed Creature, for the Preservation of her Virtue and Innocence.

Mrs. Jewkes came up; Always writing, said she! and would see it. And strait,
all that ever I could say, carried it down to my Master. -- He looked upon it,
and said, Tell her, she shall soon see how her Prayers are answered. She is
very bold. But as she has rejected all my Favors, her Reckoning for all, is
not far off. I looked after him, out of the Window, and he was charmingly
dressed: To be sure, he is a handsome fine Gentleman! -- What pity his Heart is
not as good as his Appearance! Why cannot I hate him? -- But don't be uneasy, if
you should see this; for it is impossible I should love him; for his Vices all
ugly him over, as I may say.

My Master sends Word, that he shall not come home to Dinner: I suppose he
dines with this Sir Simon Darnford. I am much concerned for poor Mr. Williams.
Mrs. Jewkes says, he is confined still, and takes on much. All his Trouble is
brought upon him for my sake: This grieves me much. My Master it seems, will
have his Money from him. This is very hard; for it is three fifty Pounds, he
gave him, as he thought, as a Salary for three Years that he has been with him.
But there was no Agreement between them; and he absolutely depended on my
Master's Favor. To be sure, it was the more generous of him to run these
Risques for the sake of oppressed Innocence; and I hope he will meet with his
Reward in due Time. Alas for me! I dare not plead for him; that would raise my
Oppressor's Jealousy more. And I have not Interest to save myself!

SUNDAY Evening.
MRS. Jewkes has received a Line from my Master. I wonder what it is; but his
Chariot is come home without him. But she will tell me nothing; so it is in
vain to ask her. I am so fearful of Plots and Tricks, I know not what to do! --
Every thing I suspect; for now my Disgrace is avowed, what can I think! -- To
be sure the worst will be attempted! I can only pour out my Soul in Prayer to
God, for his blessed Protection. But if I must suffer, let me not be long a
mournful Survivor! -- Only let me not shorten my own Time sinfully! --

This Woman left upon the Table, in the Chamber, this Letter of my Master's to
her; and I bolted myself in, till I had transcribed it. You Will see how
tremblingly by the Lines. I wish poor Mr. Williams's Release at any Rate; but
this Letter makes my Heart ache. Yet I have another Day's Reprieve, thank God!

' Mrs. JEWKES,
'I Have been so pressed on Williams's Affair, that I shall set out this
Afternoon, in Sir Simon. Chariot, and with Parson Peter's, who is his
Intercessor, for Stamford; and shall not be back till tomorrow Evening, if
then. As to your Ward, I am thoroughly incensed against her. She has with stood
her Time; and now, would she sign and seal to my Articles, it is too late. I
shall discover something, perhaps, by him, and will, on my Return, let her
know, that all her insnaring Loveliness shall not save her from the Fate that
awaits her. But let her know nothing of this, lest it put her fruitful Mind
upon Plots and Artifices. Besure trust her not without another with you at
Night, lest she venture the Window in her foolish Rashness: For I shall require
her at your Hands.

' Yours, etc.'


I had but just finished taking a Copy of this, and laid the Letter where I had
it, and unbolted the Door, when she came up in a great Fright, for fear I
should have seen it; but I being in my Closet, and that lying as she left it,
she did not mistrust. O, said she, I was afraid you had seen my Master's Letter
here, which I carelessly lest on the Table. I wish, said I, I had known that.
Why sure, said she, if you had, you would not have offered to read my Letters!
Indeed, said I, I should, at this time, if it had been in my way: -- Do, let me
see it. -- Well, said she, I wish poor Mr. Williams well off: I understand my
Master is gone to make up Matters with him; which is very good. To be sure,
added she, he is a very good Gentleman, and very forgiving! -- Why, said I, as
If I had known nothing of the Matter, how can he make up Matters with him? Is
not Mr. Williams at Stamford? Yes, said she, I believe so; but Parson Peter's
pleads for him, and he is gone with him to Stamford, and will not be back
tonight: So, we have nothing to do, but to eat our Suppers betimes, and go
to-bed. Ay, that is pure, said I; and I shall have good Rest, this Night, I
hope. So, said she, you might every Night, but for your own idle Fears. You are
afraid of your Friends, when none are near you. Ay, that is true, said I; for I
have not one near me.

So have I one more good honest Night before me: What the next may be, I know
not; and so I Will try to take in a good deal of Sleep, while I can be a little
easy. Therefore here I say, Goodnight, my dear Parents; for I have no more to
write about this Night And though his Letter shocks me, yet I will be as bri^^ as
I can, that she may not suspect I have seen it.

TUESDAY Night.
FOR the future, I will always mistrust most, when Appearances look fairest. O
your poor Daughter! what has she not suffered since what I wrote of Sunday
Night! -- My worst Trial, and my fearfullest Danger! O how I shudder to write
you an Account of this wicked Interval of Time! For, my dear Parents, will you
not be too much frightened and affected with my Distress, when I tell you, that
his Journey to Stamford was all abominable Pretense? for he came home
privately, and had well nigh effected all his vile Purposes* and the Ruin of
your poor Daughter; and that by such a Plot as I was not in the least
apprehensive of: And Oh! you will hear what a vile and unwomanly Part that wicked
Wretch, Mrs. Jewkes, acted in it!

I left off with letting you know how much I was pleased, that I had one
Night's Reprieve added to my Honesty. But I had less Occasion to rejoice than
ever, as you will judge by what I have said already. Take then the dreadful
Story as well as I can relate it.

The Maid Nan is a little apt to drink, if she can get at Liquor; and Mrs.
Jewkes happened, or designed, as is too probable, to leave a Bottle of
Cherry-brandy in her way, and the Wench drank some of it more than she should;
and when she came in to lay the Cloth, Mrs. Jewkes perceived it, and fell a
rating at her most sadly; for she has too many Faults of her own, to suffer any
of the like sort in any body else, if she can help it; and she bid her get out
of her Sight, when we had supped, and go to-bed, to sleep off her Liquor,
before we came to-bed. And so the poor Maid went muttering up Stairs.

About two Hours after, which was near Eleven o'Clock, Mrs. Jewkes and I went
up to go to-bed; I pleasing myself with what a charming Night I should have. We
locked both Doors, and saw poor Nan, as I thought, (for Oh! 'twas my abominable
Master, as you shall hear by-and-by) sitting fast asleep, in an Elbow-chair, in
a dark Corner of the Room, with her Apron thrown over her Head and Neck. And
Mrs. Jewkes said, There is that Beast of a Wench fast asleep, instead of being
a bed! I knew, said she, she had taken a fine Dose. I Will wake her, said I, No,
don't, said she, let her sleep on; we shall lie better without her. Ay, said I,
so we shall; but will not she get Cold?

Said she, I hope you have no Writing tonight. No, replied I, I will go to-bed
with you, Mrs Jewkes. Said she, I wonder what you can find to write about so
much; and am sure you have better Conveniences of that kind, and more Paper,
than I am aware of; and I had intended to romage you, if my Master had not come
down; for I 'spy'd a broken Tea-cup with Ink, which gave me a Suspicion; but as
he is come, let him look after you, if he will; and if you deceive him, it will
be his own Fault.

All this time we were undressing ourselves. And I fetched a deep Sigh! What do
you sigh for? said she, I am thinking, Mrs. Jewkes, answered I, what a sad Life
I live, and how hard is my Lot. I am sure the Thief that has robbed, is much
better off than I, 'bating the Guilt; and I should, I think, take it for a
Mercy, to be hanged out of the way, rather than live in these cruel
Apprehensions. So, being not sleepy, and in a prattling Vein, I began to give a
little History of myself, as I did once before to Mrs. Jervis; in this manner;

Here, said I, were my poor honest Parents; they took care to instill good
Principles into my Mind, till I was almost twelve Years of Age; and taught me
to prefer Goodness and Poverty to the highest Condition of Life; and they
confirmed their Lessons by their own Practice; for they were of late Years
remarkably poor, and always as remarkably honest, even to a Proverb; for, As
honest as Goodman ANDREWS, was a Bye-word.

Well then, said I, comes my late dear good Lady, and takes a Fancy to me, and
said, she would be the making of me, if I was a good Girl; and she put me to
sing, to dance, to play on the Spinnet, in order to divert her melancholy
Hours; and also learnt me all manner of fine Needle Work; but still this was
her Lesson, My good Pamela, be virtuous, and keep the Men at a Distance: Well,
so I was, I hope, and so I did; and yet, though I say it, they all loved me and
respected me; and would do any thing for me, as if I was a Gentlewoman.

But then, what comes next? -- Why, it pleased God to take my good Lady; and
then comes my Master: And what says he? -- Why, in Effect, it is, Be Not
Virtuous, Pamela.

So here have I lived above sixteen Years in Virtue and Reputation, and, all at
once, when I come to know what is Good, and what is Evil, I must renounce all
the Good, all the whole Sixteen Years Innocence, which, next to God's Grace, I
owed chiefly to my Parents and my Lady's good Lessons and Examples; and choose
the Evil; and so, in a Moment's Time, become the vilest of Creatures! And all
this, for what, I pray? Why truly, for a Pair of Diamond Earrings, a Necklace,
and a Diamond Ring for my Finger; which would not become me: for a few paltry
fine Clothes; which when I wore, it would make but my former Poverty more
ridiculous to every body that saw me; especially when they knew the base Terms
I wore them upon. But indeed, I was to have a great Parcel of Guineas beside; I
forget how many; for had there been ten times more, they would have been not so
much to me, as the honest Six Guineas you tricked me out of, Mrs. Jewkes.

Well, forsooth! but then I was to have I know not how many Pounds a Year for
my Life; and my poor Father (there was the Jest of it!) was to be the Manager
for the abandoned Prostitute his Daughter: And then (there was the Jest again!)
my kind, forgiving, virtuous Master, would pardon me all my Misdeeds!

Yes, thank him for nothing, truly. And what, pray, are all these violent
Misdeeds? -- Why, they are for daring to adhere to the good Lessons that were
taught me; and not learning a new one, that would have reversed all my former:
For not being contented when I was run away with, in order to ruin me; but
contriving, if my poor Wits had been able, to get out of Danger, and preserve
myself honest.

Then was he once jealous of poor John, though he knew John was his own Creature,
and helped to deceive me.

Then was he outrageous against poor Parson Williams; and him has this good,
merciful Master thrown into Goal; and for what? Why truly, for that being a
Divine, and a good Man, he had the Fear of God before his Eyes, and was willing
to forego all his Expectations of Interest, and assist an oppressed poor
Creature.

But to be sure, I must be forward, bold, saucy, and what not? to dare to run
away from certain Ruin, and to strive to escape from an unjust Confinement; and
I must be married to the Parson, nothing so sure!

He would have had but a poor Catch of me, had I consented; but he, and you
too, know, I did not want to marry any body. I only wanted to go to my poor
Parents, and to have my own Liberty, and not to be confined to such an unlawful
Restraint; and which would not be inflicted upon me, but only that I am a poor,
destitute, young Body, and have no Friend that is able to right me.

So, Mrs. Jewkes, said I, here is my History in brief. And I am a very unhappy
young Creature, to be sure! -- And why am I so? -- Why, because my Master sees
something in my Person that takes his present Fancy; and because I would not be
undone. -- Why therefore, to choose, I must, and I shall be undone! -- And this
is all the Reason that can be given!

She heard me run on all this time, while I was undressing, without any
Interruption; and I said, Well, I must go to the two Closets, ever since an
Affair of the Closet at the other House, though he is so far off. And I have a
good mind to wake this poor Maid. No, don't, said she, I charge you. I am very
angry with her, and she will get no Harm there; but if she wakes, she may come
to-bed well enough, as long as there is a Candle in the Chimney.

So I looked into the Closets,and kneeled down in my own, as I used to do, to
say my Prayers, and this with my under Clothes in my Hand, all undrest; and
passed by the poor sleeping Wench, as I thought, in my Return. But, Oh! little
did I think, it was my wicked, wicked Master in a Gown and Petticoat of hers,
and her Apron over his Face and Shoulders. What Meannesses will not Lucifer
make his Votaries stoop to, to gain their abominable Ends!

Mrs. Jewkes, by this time, was got to-bed, on the further Side, as she used to
be; and, to make room for the Maid, when she should awake, I got into Bed, and
lay close to her. And I said, Where are the Keys? though, said I, I am not so
much afraid tonight. Here, said the wicked Woman, put your Arm under mine, and
you shall find them about my Wrist, as they used to be. So I did, and the
abominable Designer held my Hand with her Right Hand, as my Right-arm was under
her Left.

In less than a quarter of an Hour, I said, There Is poor Nan awake; I hear her
stir. Let us go to sleep, said she, and not mind her: She Will come to-bed, when
she is quite awake. Poor Soul! said I, I Will warrant she will have the Headache
finely tomorrow for it! Be silent, said she, and go to sleep; you keep me
awake; and I never found you in so talkative a Humor in my Life. Don't chide
me, said I; I will say but one thing more: Do you think Nan could hear me talk
of my Master's Offers? No, no, said she; she was dead asleep. I Am glad of that,
said I; because I would not expose my Master to his common Servants; and I knew
you were no Stranger to his fine Articles. Said she, I think they were fine
Articles, and you were bewitched you did not close in with them: But let us go
to sleep. So I was silent; and the pretended Nan (O wicked base, villainous
Designer! what a Plot, what an unexpected Plot, was this!) seemed to be
awaking; and Mrs. Jewkes, abhorred Creature! said, Come, Nan! -- what, are you
awake at last? Pr'ythee come to-bed; for Mrs. Pamela is in a talking Fit, and
will not go to sleep one while.

At that the pretended She came to the Bed side; and sitting down in a Chair,
where the Curtain hid her, began to undress. Said I, Poor Mrs. Ann, I warrant
your Head aches most sadly! How do you do? -- She answered not one Word. Said
the superlatively wicked Woman, You know I have ordered her not to answer you,
And this Plot, to be sure, was laid when she gave her these Orders, the Night
before.

I heard her, as I thought, breathe all quick and short: Indeed, said I, Mrs.
Jewkes, the poor Maid is not well. What ails you, Mrs. Ann? And still no Answer
was made.

But, I tremble to relate it! the pretended She came into Bed; but quiver'd
like an Aspen-leaf; and I, poor Fool that I was! pitied her much. -- But well
might the barbarous Deceiver tremble at his vile Dissimulation, and base
Designs.

What Words shall I find, my dear Mother, (for my Father should not see this
shocking Part) to describe the rest, and my Confusion, when the guilty Wretch
took my left Arm, and laid it under his Neck, as the vile Procuress held my
Right; and then he clasped me round my Waist!

Said I, Is the Wench mad! Why, how now, Confidence? thinking still it had been
Nan. But he kissed me with frightful Vehemence; and then his Voice broke upon
me like a Clap of Thunder. Now, Pamela, said he, is the dreadful Time of
Reckoning come, that I have threatened. -- I scream'd out in such a manner, as
never any body heard the like. But there was nobody to help me: And both my
Hands were secured, as I said. Sure never poor Soul was in such Agonies as I.
Wicked Man! said I; wicked, abominable Woman! O God! my God! this Time, this
one Time! deliver me from this Distress! or strike me dead this Moment. And
then I scream'd again and again.

Says he, One Word with you, Pamela; one Word hear me but; and hitherto you see
I offer nothing to you. Is this nothing, said I, to be in Bed here? To hold my
Hands between you? I will hear, if you will instantly leave the Bed, and take
this villainous Woman from me!

Said she, (O Disgrace of Womankind!) What you do, Sir, do; don't stand
dilly-dallying. She cannot exclaim worse than she has done. And she will be
quieter when she knows the worst.

Silence! said he to her; I must say one Word to you, Pamela; it is this: You
see, now you are in my Power! -- You cannot get from me, nor help yourself: Yet
have I not offered any thing amiss to you. But if you resolve not to comply
with my Proposals, I will not lose this Opportunity: If you do, I will yet
leave you.

O Sir, said I, leave me, leave me but, and I will do any thing I ought to do.
-- Swear then to me, said he, that you will accept my Proposals! -- and then
(for this was all detestable Grimace) he put his Hand in my Bosom. With
Struggling, Fright, Terror, I fainted away quite, and did not come to myself
soon; so that they both, from the cold Sweats that I was in, thought me dying
-- And I remember no more, than that, when, with great Difficulty, they brought
me to myself, she was sitting on one side of the Bed, with her Clothes on; and
he on the other with his, and in his Gown and Slippers.

Your poor Pamela cannot answer for the Liberties taken with her in her
deplorable State of Death. And when I saw them there, I sat up in my Bed,
without any Regard to what Appearance I made, and nothing about my Neck; and he
soothing me, with an Aspect of Pity and Concern, I put my Hand to his Mouth,
and said, O tell me, yet tell me not, what I have suffered in this Distress!
And I talked quite wild, and knew not what; for, to be sure, I was on the Point
of Distraction.

He most solemnly, and with a bitter Imprecation, vowed, that he had not
offered the least Indecency; that he was frightened at the terrible manner I
was taken with the Fit: That he would desist from his Attempt; and begged but
to see me easy and quiet, and he would leave me directly, and go to his own
Bed. O then, said I, take from me this most wicked Woman, this vile Mrs.
Jewkes, as an Earnest that I may believe you!

And will you, Sir, said the wicked Wretch, for a Fit or two, give up such an
Opportunity as this? -- I thought you had known the Sex better. -- She is now,
you see, quite well again!

This I heard; more she might say; but I fainted away once more, at these
Words, and at his clasping his Arms about me again. And when I came a little to
myself, I saw him sit there, and the Maid Nan, holding a Smelling-bottle to my
Nose, and no Mrs. Jewkes.

He said, taking my Hand, Now will I vow to you, my dear Pamela, that I will
leave you the Moment I see you better, and pacified. Here Is Nan knows, and will
tell you, my Concern for you. I vow to God, I have not offered any Indecency to
you. And since I found Mrs. Jewkes so offensive to you, I have sent her to the
Maid's Bed, and the Maid shall lie with you tonight. And but promise me that
you will compose yourself, and I will leave you. But, said I, will not Nan also
hold my Hand? And will not she let you come in again to me? -- He said, by
Heaven! I will not come in again tonight. Nan, undress yourself, go to-bed,
and do all you can to comfort the dear Creature: And now, Pamela, said he, give
me but your Hand, and say you forgive me, and I will leave you to your Repose.
I held out my trembling Hand, which he vouchsafed to kiss, and I said, God
forgive you, Sir, as you have been just in my Distress; and as you will be just
to what you promise! And he withdrew, with a Countenance of Remorse, as I
hoped; and she shut the Doors, and, at my Request, brought the Keys to-bed.

This, O my dear Parents! was a most dreadful Trial. I tremble still to think
of it; and dare not recall all the horrid Circumstances of it. I hope, as he
assures me, he was not guilty of Indecency; but have Reason to bless God, who,
by disabling me in my Faculties, enabled me to preserve my Innocence; and when
all my Strength would have signified nothing, magnified himself in my Weakness.

I was so weak all Day on Monday, that I lay a-bed. My Master showed great
Tenderness for me; and I hope he is really sorry, and that this will be his
last Attempt; but he does not say so neither.

He came in the Morning, as soon as he heard the Door open: And I began to be
fearful. He stopped short of the Bed, and said, Rather than give you
Apprehensions, I will come no further. I said, Your Honor, Sir, and your
Mercy, is all I have to beg. He sat himself on the Side of the Bed, and asked
kindly how I did? -- begged me to be composed; said I still looked a little
wildly. And I said, Pray, good Sir, let me not see this infamous Mrs. Jewkes; I
doubt I cannot bear her Sight. She shall not come near you all this Day, if you will
promise to compose yourself. Then, Sir, I will try. He pressed my Hand very
tenderly, and went out. What a Change does this show! -- O may it be lasting!
But alas! he seems only to have altered his Method of Proceeding; but retains,
I doubt, his wicked Purpose!

On Tuesday about Ten o'Clock, when my Master heard I was up, he sent for me
down into the Parlour. When I came, he said, Come nearer to me, Pamela. I did
so, and he took my Hand, and said, You begin to look well again. I am glad of
it. You little Slut, how did you frighten me on Sunday Night! -- Sir, said I,
pray name not that Night; and my Eyes overflowed at the Remembrance, and I
turned my Head aside.

Said he, Place some little Confidence in me: I know what those charming Eyes
mean, and you shall not need to explain yourself: For I do assure you, that as
soon as I saw you change, and a cold Sweat bedew your pretty Face, and you
fainted away, I quitted the Bed, and Mrs. Jewkes did so too. And I put on my
Gown, and she fetched her Smelling-bottle, and we did all we could to restore
you; and my Passion for you was all swallowed up in the Concern I had for your
Recovery; for I thought I never saw a Fit so strong and violent in my Life; and
feared we should not bring you to Life again; for what I saw you in once
before, was nothing to it. This, said he, might be my Folly, and my
Unacquaintedness with what your Sex can show when they are in Earnest. But this
I repeat to you, that your Mind may be entirely comforted -- All I offered to
you, (and that, I am sure, was innocent) was before you fainted away.

Sir, said I, that was very bad: And it was too plain you had the worst
Designs. When, said he, I tell you the Truth in one Instance, you may believe
me in the other. I know not, I declare beyond this lovely Bosom, your Sex; but
that I did intend what you call the worst, is most certain: And though I would
not too much alarm you now, I could curse my Weakness, and my Folly, which
makes me own, that I love you beyond all your Sex, and cannot live without you.
But, if I am Master of myself, and my own Resolution, I will not attempt to
force you to any thing again. Sir, said I, you may easily keep your Resolution,
if you will send me out of your way, to my poor Parents; that is all I beg.

It Is a Folly to talk of it, said he. You must not, shall not go! And if I
could be assured you would not attempt it, you should have better Usage, and
your Confinement should be made easier to you. But to what End, Sir, am I to
stay? said I: You yourself seem not sure you can keep your own present good
Resolutions; and do you think, if I was to stay, when I could get away, and be
safe, it would not look, as if either I confided too much in my own Strength,
or would tempt my Ruin? And as if I was not in Earnest to wish myself safe and
out of Danger? -- And then, how long am I to stay? And to what Purpose? And in
what Light must I appear to the World? Would not that censure me, although I
might be innocent? And you will allow, Sir, that if there be any thing valuable
or exemplary in a good Name, or fair Reputation, one must not despise the
World's Censure, if one can avoid it.

Well, said he, I sent not for you on this Account, just now; but for two
Reasons: The first is, that you promise me, that for a Fortnight to come you
will not offer to go away without my express Consent; and this I expect for
your own sake, that I may give you a little more Liberty. And the second is,
That you will see and forgive Mrs. Jewkes: She takes on much, and thinks, that,
as all her Fault was her Obedience to me, it would be very hard to sacrifice
her, as she calls it, to your Resentment.

As to the first, Sir, said I, it is a hard Injunction, for the Reasons I have
mentioned. And as to the second, considering her vile unwomanly Wickedness, and
her Endeavors to instigate you more to ruin me, when your returning Goodness
seemed to have some Compassion upon me, it is still harder. But to show my
Obedience to your Commands, (for you know, my dear Parents, I might as well
make a Merit of my Compliance, when my Refusal would stand me in no stead) I
will consent to both; and to every thing else, that you shall be pleased to
injoin, which I can do with Innocence.

That Is my good Girl! said he, and kissed me. This is quite prudent, and shows
me, that you don't take insolent Advantage of my Favor for you; and will,
perhaps, stand you in more stead than you are aware of.

So he rung the Bell, and said, call down Mrs. Jewkes. She came down, and he
took my Hand, and put it into hers; and said, Mrs. Jewkes, I am obliged to you
for all your Diligence and Fidelity to me; but Pamela, I must own, is not;
because the Service I employed you in was not so very obliging to her, as I
could have wished she would have thought it; and you were not to favor her,
but obey me. But yet I Will assure you, at the very first Word, she has once
obliged me, by consenting to be Friends with you; and, if she gives me no great
Cause, I shall not, perhaps, put you on such disagreeable Service again. --
Now, therefore, be you once more Bed-fellows and Board-fellows, as I may say,
for some Days longer; and see that Pamela sends no Letters nor Messages out of
the House, nor keeps a Correspondence unknown to me, especially with that
Williams; and, as for the rest, show the dear Girl all the Respect that is due
to one I must love, if she will deserve it, as I hope she will yet; and let her
be under no unnecessary or harsh Restraints. But your watchful Care is not,
however, to cease: And remember, that you are not to disoblige me, to oblige
her; and that I will not, cannot, yet part with her.

Mrs. Jewkes looked very sullen, and as if she would be glad still to do me a
good Turn, if it lay in her Power.

I took Courage then to drop a Word or two for poor Mr. Williams; but he was
angry with me for it, and said, he could not endure to hear his Name in my
Mouth; so I was forced to have done for that time.

All this time my Papers that I had buried under the Rose-bush, lay there
still; and I begged for Leave to send a Letter to you. So I should, he said, if
he might read it first. But this did not answer my Design; and yet I would have
sent you such a Letter as he might see, if I had been sure my Danger was over.
But that I cannot; for he now seems to take another Method, and what I am more
afraid of, because, may-be, he may watch an Opportunity, and join Force with
it, on Occasion, when I am least prepared: For now he seems to abound with
Kindness, and talks of Love without Reserve, and makes nothing of allowing
himself in the Liberty of kissing me, which he calls innocent; but which I do
not like, and especially in the manner he does it: but for a Master to do it at
all to a Servant, has Meaning too much in it, not to alarm an honest Body.

WEDNESDAY Morning.
I Find I am watched and suspected still very close: and I wish I was with you;
but that must not be, it seems, this Fortnight. I don't like this Fortnight,
and it will be a tedious and a dangerous one to me, I doubt.

My Master just now sent for me down to take a Walk with him in the Garden. But
I like him not at all, nor his Ways. For he would have all the way his Arm
about my Waist, and said abundance of fond Things to me, enough to make me
proud, if his Design had not been apparent. After walking about, he led me into
a little Alcove, on the further Part of the Garden; and really made me afraid
of myself. For he began to be very tiezing, and made me sit on his Knee, and
was so often kissing me, that I said, Sir, I don't like to be here at all, I
assure you. Indeed you make me afraid! -- And what made me the more so, was
what he once said to Mrs. Jewkes, and did not think I heard him, and which,
though always uppermost with me, I did not mention before, because I did not know
how to bring it in, in my Writing.

She, I suppose, had been encouraging him in his Wickedness; for it was before
the last dreadful Trial; and I only heard what he answered.

Said he, I will try once more; but I have begun wrong. For I see Terror does
but add to her Frost; but she is a charming Girl, and may be thawed by
Kindness; and I should have melted her by Love, instead of freezing her by Fear.

Is he not a wicked sad Man for this? -- To be sure, I blush while I write it.
But I trust, that that God who has delivered me from the Paw of the Lion and
the Bear; that is, his and Mrs. Jewkes's Violences; will also deliver me from
this Philistine, myself, and my own Infirmities, that I may not defy the
Commands of the Living God!

But, as I was saying, this Expression coming into my Thoughts, I was of
Opinion, I could not be too much on my Guard, at all times; more especially
when he took such Liberties: For he professed Honor all the Time with his
Mouth, while his Actions did not correspond. I begged and prayed he would let
me go; And had I not appeared quite regardless of all he said, and resolved not
to stay, if I could help it, I know not how far he would have proceeded: For I
was forced to fall down upon my Knees.

At last he walked out with me, still bragging of his Honor, and his Love.
Yes, yes, Sir, said I, your Honor is to destroy mine; and your Love is to ruin
me, I see it too plainly. But, indeed, I will not walk with you, Sir, said I,
any more. Do you know, said he, whom you talk to, and where you are?

You may believe I had Reason to think him not so decent as he should be; for I
said, As to where I am, Sir, I know it too well, and that I have no Creature to
befriend me: And, as to who you are, Sir, let me ask you, what you would have
me answer?

Why tell me, said he, What Answer you would make? It will only make you angry,
said I; and so I shall fare worse, if possible. I will not be angry, said he. Why
then, Sir, said I, you cannot be my late good Lady's Son; for she loved me, and
taught me Virtue. You cannot then be my Master; for no Master demeans himself
so to his poor Servant.

He put his Arm round me, and his other Hand on my Neck; which made me more
angry and bold; and he said, What then am I? Why, said I, (struggling from him,
and in a great Passion) to be sure you are Lucifer himself in the Shape of my
Master, or you could not use me thus. These are too great Liberties, said he,
in Anger, and I desire that you will not repeat them, for your own sake: For if
you have no Decency toward me, I Will have none to you.

I was running from him; and he said, Come back, when I bid you. -- So, knowing
every Place was alike dangerous to me, and I had nobody to run to, I came back,
at his Call, and seeing him look displeased, I held my Hands together, and
wept, and said, Pray, Sir, forgive me. No, said he, rather say, Pray, Lucifer,
forgive me; and now, since you take me for the Devil, how can you expect any
Good from me? -- How, rather, can you expect any thing but the worst Treatment
from me? -- You have given me a Character, Pamela, and blame me not that I act
up to it.

Sir, said I, let me beg you to forgive me. I am really sorry for my Boldness;
but indeed you don't use me like a Gentleman; and how can I express my
Resentment, if I mince the Matter, while you are so indecent?

Precise Fool! said he, what Indecencies have I offered you? -- I was bewitched
I had not gone through my Purpose last Sunday Night; and then your licentious
Tongue had not given the worst Name to little puny Freedoms, that show my Love
and my Folly at the same time. But begone, said he, taking my Hand, and tossing
it from him, and learn another Conduct, and more Wit; and I will lay aside my
foolish Regard for you, and assert myself. Begone, said he, again, with a
haughty Air.

Indeed, Sir, said I, I cannot go, till you pardon me, which I beg on my bended
Knees. I am truly sorry for my Boldness. -- But I see how you go on: You creep
by little and little upon me; and now sooth me, and now threaten me; and if I
should forbear to show my Resentment, when you offer Incivilities to me, would
not that be to be lost by degrees? Would it not show, that I could bear any
thing from you, if I did not express all the Indignation I could express, at
the first Approaches you make to what I dread? And, have you not as good as
avowed my Ruin? -- And have you once made me hope, you will quit your Purposes
against me? How then, Sir, can I act, but by showing my Abhorrence of every
Step that makes toward my Undoing? And what is left me but Words? -- And can
these Words be other than such strong ones, as shall show the Detestation,
which, from the Bottom of my Heart, I have for every Attempt upon my Virtue?
Judge for me, Sir, and pardon me.

Pardon you! said he, what! when you don't repent? -- When you have the
Boldness to justify yourself in your Fault? Why don't you say, you never will
again offend me? I will endeavor, Sir, said I, always to preserve that Decency
toward you which becomes me. But really, Sir, I must beg your Excuse for
saying, That when you forget what belongs to Decency in your Actions, and when
Words are all that are left me, to show my Resentment of such Actions, I will
not promise to forbear the strongest Expressions that my distressed Mind shall
suggest to me; nor shall your angriest Frowns deter me, when my Honesty is in
Question.

What then, said he, do you beg Pardon for? Where is the Promise of Amendment,
for which I should forgive you? Indeed, Sir, said I, I own that must absolutely
depend on your Usage of me: For I will bear any thing you can inflict upon me
with Patience, even to the laying down of my Life, to show my Obedience to you
in other Cases; but I cannot be patient, I cannot be passive, when my Virtue is
at Stake! -- It would be criminal in me, if I was.

He said he never saw such a Fool in his Life! And he walked by the Side of me
some Yards, without saying a Word, and seemed vexed; and, at last walked in,
bidding me attend him in the Garden after Dinner. So having a little Time, I
went up, and wrote thus far.

WEDNESDAY Night.
IF, my dear Parents, I am not destined more surely than ever for Ruin, I have
now more Comfort before me, than ever I yet knew: And am either nearer my
Happiness, or my Misery, than ever I was. God protect me from the latter, if it
be his blessed Will! I have now such a Scence to open to you, that I know will
alarm both your Hopes and your Fears, as it does mine. And this it is:

After my Master had dined, he took a Turn into the Stables, to look at his
Stud of Horses; and, when he came in, he opened the Parlour-door, where Mrs.
Jewkes and I sat at Dinner; and, at his Entrance, we both rose up; but he said,
Sit still, sit still; and let me see how you eat your Victuals, Pamela. O, said
Mrs. Jewkes, very poorly, Sir, I Will assure you. No, said I, pretty well, Sir,
considering. None of your Considerings! said he,Pretty face; and tapp'd me on
the Cheek. I blushed, but was glad he was so good-humored; but I could not
tell how to sit before him, nor to behave myself. So he said, I know, Pamela,
you are a nice Carver: My Mother used to say so. My Lady, Sir, said I, was very
good to me, in every thing, and would always make me do the Honors of her
Table for her, when she was with her few select Friends that she loved. Cut up,
said he, that Chicken. I did so. Now, said he, and took a Knife and Fork, and
put a Wing upon my Plate, let me see you eat that. O Sir, said I, I have eat a
whole Breast of a Chicken already, and cannot eat so much. But he said, I must
eat it for his sake, and he would learn me to eat heartily: So I did eat it;
but was much confused at his so kind and unusual Freedom and Condescension.
And, good Sirs! you cannot imagine how Mrs. Jewkes looked, and star'd, and how
respectful she seemed to me, and called me good Madam, I Will assure you! urging
me to take a little Bit of Tart.

My Master took two or three Turns about the Room, musing and thoughtful, as I
had never before seen him; and at last he went out, saying, I am going into the
Garden: You know, Pamela, what I said to you before Dinner. I rose and
curt'sy'd, saying, I would attend his Honor; and he said. Do, good Girl!

Well, said Mrs. Jewkes, I see how things will go. O Madam, as she called me
again, I am sure you are to be our Mistress! And then I know what will become
of me. Ah! Mrs. Jewkes, said I, if I can but keep myself virtuous, it is the
most of my Ambition; and, I hope, no Temptation shall make me otherwise.

Nothwithstanding I had no Reason to be pleased with his Treatment of me before
Dinner, yet I made haste to attend him; and I found him walking by the Side of
that Pond, which, for want of Grace, and through a sinful Despondence, had like
to have been so fatal to me, and the Sight of which, ever since, has been a
Trouble and Reproach to me. And it was by the Side of this Pond, and not far
from the Place where I had that dreadful Conflict, that my present Hopes, if I
am not to be deceived again, began to dawn; which I presume to flatter myself
with being an happy Omen for me, as if God Almighty would show your poor sinful
Daughter, how well I did, to put my Affiance in his Goodness, and not to throw
away myself, because my Ruin seemed inevitable to my short-sighted Apprehension.

So he was pleased to say, Well, Pamela, I am glad you are come of your own
Accord, as I may say: Give me your Hand, I did so; and he looked at me very
steadily, and pressing my Hand all the time, at last said, I will now talk to
you in a serious manner.

You have a great deal of Wit, a great deal of Penetration, much beyond your
Years; and, as I thought, your Opportunities. You are possessed of an open,
frank and generous Mind; and a Person so lovely, that you excel all your Sex,
in my Eyes. All these Accomplishments have engaged my Affections so deeply,
that as I have often said, I cannot live without you; and I would divide, with
all my Soul, my Estate with you, to make you mine upon my own Terms. These you
have absolutely rejected; and that, though in saucy Terms enough, yet, in such a
manner, as makes me admire you more. Your pretty Chit-chat to Mrs. Jewkes, the
last Sunday Night, so innocent, and so full of beautiful Simplicity, half
disarmed my Resolutions before I approached your Bed. And I see you so watchful
over your Virtue, that, though I hoped to find it otherwise, I cannot but say, my
Passion for you is increased by it. But now what shall I say further, Pamela?
-- I will make you, though a Party, my Adviser in this Matter; though not perhaps
my definitive Judge.

You know I am not a very abandoned Profligate: I have hitherto been guilty of
no very enormous or vile Actions. This of seizing you, and confining you thus,
may, perhaps, be one of the worst, at least to Persons of real Innocence. Had I
been utterly given up to my Passions, I should before now have gratified them,
and not have shown that Remorse and Compassion for you, which have reprieved
you more than once, when absolutely in my Power; and you are as inviolate a
Virgin as you were when you came into my House.

But, what can I do? Consider the Pride of my Condition, I cannot endure the
Thought of Marriage, even with a Person of equal or superior Degree to myself;
and have declined several Proposals of that kind: How then, with the Distance
between us, and in the World's Judgment, can I think of making you my Wife? --
Yet I must have you; I cannot bear the Thoughts of any other Man supplanting me
in your Affections. And the very Apprehension of that has made me hate the Name
of Williams, and use him in a manner unworthy of my Temper.

Now, Pamela, judge for me; and, since I have told you thus heartily my Mind,
and I see yours is big with some important Meaning, by your Eyes, your Blushes,
and that sweet Confusion which I behold struggling in your Bosom, tell me with
like Openness and Candor, what you think I ought to do, and what you would
have me do. --

It is impossible for me to express the Agitations of my Mind on this
unexpected Declaration, so contrary to his former Behavior. His Manner, too,
had something so noble, and so sincere, as I thought; that, alas for me! I
found I had Need of all my poor Discretion, to ward off the Blow which this
Treatment gave to my most guarded Thoughts. I threw myself at his Feet; for I
trembled, and could hardly stand: O Sir, said I, spare your poor Servant's
Confusion! O spare the poor Pamela! -- Speak out, said he, and tell me what I
bid you, What you think I ought to do? I cannot say what you ought to do,
answered I: But I only beg you will not ruin me; and, if you think me virtuous,
if you think me sincerely honest, let me go to my poor Parents. I will vow to
you, that I will never suffer myself to be engaged without your Approbation.

Still he insisted upon a more explicit Answer to his Question, of what I
thought he ought to do. And I said, As to my poor Thoughts, of what you ought
to do, I must needs say, that, indeed, I think you ought to regard the World's
Opinion, and avoid doing any thing disgraceful to your Birth and Fortune; and
therefore, if you really honor the poor Pamela with your Respect, a little
Time, Absence, and the Conversation of worthier Persons of my Sex, will
effectually enable you to overcome a Regard so unworthy of your Condition: And
this, good Sir, is the best Advice I can offer.

Charming Creature! lovely Pamela! said he, (with an Ardor, that was never
before so agreeable to me) this generous Manner is of a Piece with all the rest
of your Conduct. But tell me still more explicitly, what you would advise me to
in the Case.

O Sir, said I, take not Advantage of my Credulity, and these my weak Moments;
but, were I the first Lady in the Land, instead of the poor abject Pamela, I
would, I could tell you. But I can say no more --

O my dear Father and Mother! now I know you will indeed be concerned for me;
-- for now I am for myself: -- And now I begin to be afraid, I know too well
the Reason, why all his hard Trials of me, and my black Apprehensions, would
not let me hate him.

But be assured still, by God's Grace, that I shall do nothing unworthy of your
Pamela; and if I find that he is still capable of deceiving me, and that this
Conduct is only put on to delude me more, I shall think nothing in this World
so vile and so odious; and nothing, if he be not the worst of his Kind, (as he
says, and, I hope, he is not) so desperately guileful as the Heart of Man.

He generously said, I will spare your Confusion, Pamela. But I hope, I may
promise myself, that you can love me preferably to any other Man; and that no
one in the World has had any Share in your Affections; for I am very jealous of
what I love, and if I thought you had a secret Whispering in your Soul, that
had not yet come up to a Wish, for any other Man breathing, I should not
forgive myself to persist in my Affection for you; nor you, if you did not
frankly acquaint me with it.

As I still continued on my Knees, on the Grass Slope by the Pond-side, he sat
himself down on the Grass by me, and took me in his Arms, Why hesitates my
Pamela, said he? -- Can you not answer me with Truth, as I wish? If you cannot,
speak, and I will forgive you.

O, good Sir, said I, it is not that; indeed it is not: But a frightful Word or
two that you said to Mrs. Jewkes, when you thought I was not in hearing, comes
cross my Mind; and makes me dread, that I am in more Danger than ever I was in
my Life.

You have never found me a common Liar, said he, (too fearful and foolish
Pamela!) nor will I answer how long I may hold in my present Mind; for my Pride
struggles hard within me, I Will assure you; and if you doubt me, I have no
Obligation to your Confidence or Opinion. But at present, I am really sincere
in what I say: And I expect you will be so too; and answer directly my Question.

I find Sir, said I, I know not myself; and your Question is of such a Nature,
that I only want to tell you what I heard, and to have your kind Answer to it;
or else, what I have to say to your Question, may pave the Way to my Ruin, and
show a Weakness that I did not believe was in me.

Well, said he, you may say what you have overheard; for, in nor answering me
directly, you put my Soul upon the Rack; and half the Trouble I have had with
you, would have brought to my Arms the finest Lady in England.

O Sir, said I, my Virtue is as dear to me, as if I was of the highest Quality;
and my Doubts (for which you know I have had too much Reason) have made me
troublesome. But now, Sir, I will tell you what I heard, which has given me
great Uneasiness.

You talked to Mrs. Jewkes of having begun wrong with me, in trying to subdue
me with Terror, and of Frost, and suchlike; -- you remember it well: -- and
that you would, for the future, change your Conduct, and try to melt me, that
was your Word, by Kindness.

I fear not, Sir, the Grace of God supporting me, that any Acts of Kindness
would make me forget what I owe to my Virtue; but, Sir, I may, I find, be made
more miserable by such Acts, than by Terror; because my Nature is too frank and
open to make me wish to be ungrateful; and if I should be taught a Lesson I
never yet learnt, with what Regret should I descend to the Grave, to think,
that I could not hate my Undoer? And, that, at the last great Day, I must stand
up as an Accuser of the poor unhappy Soul, that I could wish it in my Power to
save!

Exalted Girl, said he, what a Thought is that! -- Why now, Pamela, you excel
your self! You have given me a Hint that will hold me long. But, sweet
Creature, said he, tell me what is this Lesson, which you never yet learnt, and
which you are so afraid of learning?

If, Sir, said I, you will again generously spare my Confusion, I need not say
it: But this I will say, in Answer to the Question you seem most solicitous
about, That I know not the Man breathing that I would wish to be married to, or
that ever I thought of with such a Hope. I had brought my Mind so to love
Poverty, that I hoped for nothing but to return to the best, though the poorest,
of Parents; and to employ myself in serving God, and comforting them; and you
know not, Sir, how you disappointed my Hopes, and my proposed honest Pleasures,
when you sent me hither.

Well then, said he, I may promise myself, that neither the Parson, nor any
other Man, is any the least secret Motive to your steadfast Refusal of my
Offers? Indeed, Sir, said I, you may; and, as you was pleased to ask, I answer,
that I have not the least Shadow of a Wish, or Thought, for any Man living.

But, said he; for I am foolishly jealous, and yet it shows my Fondness for
you; have you not encouraged Williams to think you will have him? Indeed, Sir,
said I, I have not; but the very contrary. And would you not have had him, said
he, if you had got away by his Means? I had resolved, Sir, said I, in my Mind
otherwise; and he knew it, and the poor Man -- I charge you, said he, say not a
Word in his Favor! You will excite a Whirlwind in my Soul, if you name him
with Kindness, and then you will be borne away with the Tempest.

Sir, said I, I have done! -- Nay, said he, but do not have done; let me know
the whole. If you have any Regard for him, speak out; for, it would end
fearfully for you, for me, and for him, if I found, that you disguised any
Secret of your Soul from me, in this nice Particular.

Sir, said I, if I have ever given you Cause to think me sincere -- Say then,
said he, interrupting me, with great Vehemence; and taking both my Hands
between his, Say, That you now, in the Presence of God, declare, that you have
not any the most hidden Regard for Williams, or any other Man.

Sir, said I, I do. As God shall bless me, and preserve my Innocence, I have
not. Well, said he, I will believe you, Pamela; and in time, perhaps, I may
better bear that Man's Name. And, if I am convinced that you are not
prepossessed, my Vanity makes me assured, that I need not to fear a Place in
your Esteem, equal, if not preferable to any Man in England. But yet it stings
my Pride to the quick, that you was so easily brought, and at such a short
Acquaintance, to run away with that College Novice!

O good Sir, said I, may I be heard one Thing, and though I bring upon me your
highest Indignation, I will tell you, perhaps the unnecessary and imprudent,
but yet, the whole Truth.

My Honesty (I am poor and lowly, and am not entitled to call it Honor) was in
Danger. I saw no Means of securing myself from your avowed Attempts. You had
showed you would not stick at little Matters; and what, Sir, could any body
have thought of my Sincerity, in preferring that to all other Considerations,
if I had not escaped from these Dangers, if I could have found any way for it?
-- I am not going to say any thing for him; but indeed, indeed, Sir, I was the
Cause of putting him upon assisting me in my Escape. I got him to acquaint me,
what Gentry there were in the Neighborhood, that I might fly to; and prevailed
upon him; -- Don't frown at me, good Sir, for I must tell you the whole Truth!
-- to apply to one Lady Jones; to Lady Darnford; and he was so good to apply to
Mr. Peter's the Minister: but they all refused me; and then it was he let me
know, that there was no honorable Way but Marriage. That I declined; and he
agreed to assist me for God's sake.

Now, said he, you are going -- I boldly put my Hand before his Mouth, hardly
knowing the Liberty I took; Pray, Sir, said I, don't be angry; I have just done
-- I would only say, That rather than have staid to be ruined, I would have
thrown myself upon the poorest Beggar that ever the World saw, if I thought him
honest. -- And I hope, when you duly weigh all Matters, you will forgive me,
and not think me so bold and so forward as you have been pleased to call me.

Well, said he, even in this your last Speech, which, let me tell you, shows
more your Honesty of Heart, than your Prudence, you have not overmuch pleased
me. But I must love you; and that vexes me not a little. But tell me, Pamela;
for now the former Question recurs; Since you so much prize your Honor and
your Virtue; since all Attempts against that are so odious to you; and, since I
have avowedly made several of these Attempts, do you think it is possible for
you to love me preferably to any other of my Sex?

Ah! Sir, said I, and here my Doubt recurs, that you may thus graciously use
me, to take Advantage of my Credulity.

Still perverse and doubting, said he! Cannot you take me as I am at present;
and that, I have told you, is sincere and undesigning, whatever I may be
hereafter? --

Ah! Sir, replied I, what can I say? -- I have already said too much, if this
dreadful Hereafter should take place. Don't bid me say how well I can -- And
then, my Face, glowing as the Fire, I, all abashed, leaned upon his Shoulder,
to hide my Confusion.

He clasped me to him with great Ardour, and said, Hide your dear Face in my
Bosom, my beloved Pamela; your innocent Freedoms charm me! -- But then say, How
well -- what?

If you will be good, said I, to your poor Servant, and spare her, I cannot say
too much! But if not, I am doubly undone! -- Undone indeed!

Said he, I hope my present Temper will hold; for I tell you frankly, that I
have known in this agreeable Hour more sincere Pleasure, than I have
experienced in all the guilty Tumults that my desiring Soul put me into, in the
Hopes of possessing you on my own Terms. And, Pamela, you must pray for the
Continuance of this Temper; and I hope your Prayers will get the better of my
Temptations.

This sweet Goodness overpowered all my Reserves. I threw myself at his Feet,
and embraced his Knees: What Pleasure, Sir, you give me, at these gracious
Words, is not lent your poor Servant to express! -- I shall be too much
rewarded for all my Sufferings, if this Goodness hold! God grant it may, for
your own Soul's sake, as well as mine. And Oh! how happy should I be, if --

He stopped me, and said, But, my dear Girl, what must we do about the World, and
the World's Censure? -- Indeed, I cannot marry!

Now was I again struck all of a Heap. However, soon recollecting myself, Sir,
said I, I have not the Presumption to hope such an Honor. If I may be
permitted to return in Peace and Safety to my poor Parents, to pray for you
there; it is all I at present request! This, Sir, after all my Apprehensions
and Dangers, will be a great Pleasure to me. And, if I know my own poor Heart,
I shall wish you happy in a Lady of suitable Degree: And rejoice most sincerely
in every Circumstance that shall make for the Happiness of my late good Lady's
most beloved Son!

Well, said he, this Conversation, Pamela, is gone farther than I intended it.
You need not be afraid, at this rate, of trusting yourself with me: But it is
I, that ought to be doubtful of myself, when I am with you. -- But, before I
say any thing further on this Subject, I will take my proud Heart to Task; and,
till then, let every thing be, as if this Conversation had never passed. Only,
let me tell you, that the more Confidence you place in me, the more you will
oblige me: But your Doubts will only beget Cause of Doubts. And with this
ambiguous Saying, he saluted me in a more formal manner, if I may so say, than
before, and lent me his Hand, and so we walked toward the House, Side-by-side,
he seeming very thoughtful and pensive, as if he had already repented him of
his Goodness.

What shall I do, what Steps take, if all this be designing! -- O the
Perplexities of these cruel Doubtings! -- To be sure, if he be false, as I may
call it, I have gone too far, much too far! -- I am ready, on the Apprehension
of this, to bite my forward Tongue, (or rather to beat my more forward Heart,
that dictated to that poor Machine) for what I have said. But sure, at least,
he must be, sincere for the Time! -- He could not be such a practiced
Dissembler! -- If he could, O how desperately wicked is the Heart of Man! --
And where could he learn all these barbarous Arts? -- If so, it must be native
surely to the Sex! -- But, silent be my rash Censurings; be hushed, ye stormy
Tumults of my disturbed Mind; for have I not a Father who is a Man! -- A Man
who knows no Guile! who would do no Wrong! -- who would not deceive or oppress
to gain a Kingdom! -- How then can I think it is native to the Sex? And I must
also hope my good Lady's Son cannot be the worst of Men! -- If he is, hard the
Lot of the excellent Woman that bore him! -- But much harder the Hap of your
poor Pamela, who has fallen into such Hands! -- But yet I will trust in God,
and hope the best; and so lay down my tired Pen for this Time.

The END of VOL. I.

