A DISSERTATION ON THE KING's EVIL: WITH SOME ACCOUNT OF A MEDICINE WHICH (Though
an Alterative, and gives no Uneasiness to the Patient) Has cured MANY of that
DISORDER, Even when MOST INVETERATE, And has been found effectual In other
Complaints, occasioned by Obstructions, or a vitiated State of the Blood.

To which are added, the CASES of many Persons who have been cured, AND A
PROPOSAL Highly meriting the Consideration of the Public.

LONDON: Printed for J. NEWBERY, at the Bible and Sun in St. Paul's Churchyard.

MDCCLXIII.

[Price Sixpence.]

A DISSERTATION, etc.
ALL those who are concerned in Medical Enquiries, at least those who have had
long Practice and Experience, will readily allow, that the Want of an effectual
Remedy for the King's Evil, and all scrophulous Complaints, is one of the
Desiderata of the healing Art: For notwithstanding the boasted Effects of the
Salt Water, aided with the Use of Burnt Sponge, Millipedes, Aethiops Mineral,
Aethiops Antimonialis, and all other Medicines in Vogue, it has not come to our
Knowledge, that two Patients have ever been cured of a confirmed Scrophula,
where the Glands were indurated, the Joints so affected as to have running
Ulcers, the Bones foul, and the Body wasting with a hectic Heat. If, therefore,
we are so happy as to point out a Medicine, which, without either Confinement,
or giving the Patient any Uneasiness, will in a little Time cure this Disorder,
which has been hitherto deemed incurable, we shall think ourselves entitled to
the Good Will of the Public.

We are not insensible, that some of the Faculty, who are tender of prescribing
Medicines to their Patients, which have not had the Sanction of the College,
will object to this as being a Nostrum, with the specific Qualities of which
they are unacquainted; but these Gentlemen would do well to consider, that they
know as little of many of the Drugs and Medicines they now prescribe, as they
do of this Nostrum. It is a Dispute, not yet determined, whether most of the
Manna exhibited to Sale, is natural or factitious, and those who prescribe and
apply Chemical Medicines, prepared by the common Chemists, are in as great a
State of Uncertainty as Ignorance and Artifice can place them.

But the Objection, which will probably be made to this Medicine, on Account of
its Composition being a Secret, may perhaps in Time be removed; for when its
Efficacy is firmly established and acknowledged beyond Controversy, the
Proprietors have Thoughts of presenting it to the Public, if their good
Intentions are not prevented by any cruel and unreasonable Opposition.

All the Favor the Proprietors ask of the Public, especially of the Gentlemen
of the Faculty, is to give this Medicine a fair and candid Trial in those Cases
only, where all other Medicines in Practice have proved ineffectual. This can
neither lessen their Profits, nor diminish their Reputation, but will, we
presume, have a contrary Effect. It may wrest Patients from the Jaws of Death
who may employ them upon some future Occasion, which will add both to their
Emolument and Credit; and besides this, they will feel the Self-satisfaction of
having acted with Integrity, Justice, and Mercy, which to a wise and good Man
is a Matter of the greatest Moment.

Those who consider how little Physic has been improved by hypothetical
Reasoning, and how much by honest Practice and Experience, will be inclined to
grant this Medicine a fair and candid Trial; and when it is found to cure,
will, we doubt not, receive, and apply it in Practice as they do other
Medicines; since this may be done without the least Reason for Reproach. The
having cured one Person with it will be a sufficient Reason for attempting the
Cure of another; Experience will aid the Practitioner, and his Practice will be
justified upon Principles as rational as any of those on which the Faculty now
proceed. All Modes of Practice which are not deduced from Experience are of
little or no Effect. Experience first laid the Foundation of Physic, and it is
that alone which can support its Reputation.

It will be no Degradation of this Medicine to say, it was at first discovered
by Accident, and then perfected by Experience; for if we look back to the
Origin of Physic, we shall find, that it took its Rise from natural Sagacity
improving upon accidental and unforeseen Events. In the first Ages of the World
we do not learn from History, that there were any public Professors in
Medicine, though it was so effential to the Preservation of Mankind. Homer
indeed mentions Machaon and Podalirius with Esteem, but from what appears in
that Poem, they seem to be celebrated only for their Art in healing Wounds.

The Diseased, in these early Times, were generally placed in the Streets, the
Cross-ways and other public Places, for the Inspection and Examination of those
who passed by, and all who had Skill in the Disorder, or knew of an efficacious
Remedy, thought it a Duty to give their Advice; and when any remarkable Cure
was performed, the Memory of it was preserved for the Benefit of Posterity, by
engraving the Disorder, and the Symptoms by which it might be known, together
with the remedy and its Success on the Pillars or Walls of their Temples and
other public Buildings. By this Means a Variety of Rules and Remedies were
Registered for universal Benefit; and as those who traveled for Instruction,
treasured up this Sort of Knowledge, as well as that of the Customs and Manners
of the Countries they visited, the Medical Transactions of one Nation were
easily conveyed to that of another.

Thus repeated Trials and Experience laid the Foundation of the Art of
Medicine, and taught the Virtues, at least many of the Virtues, of vegetable,
mineral, and animal Substances, and in what Diseases they might be applied with
Safety and Success. Those, who from long Experience and accurate Observation
only, had obtained any Degree of Skill and Reputation in the Art were called
Empirics; a Term, which however misapplied now, conveyed with it then a very
different Idea, and was used as a Mark of Eminence and Esteem; for these
Empirics did not, like many of our modern Physicians, employ their Time in
writing fanciful Theories and jumbling false Philosophy with intrinsic Truth,
but in carefully collecting what others had gained from Experience, in making
cautious Experiments themselves, and in writing accurate Histories of the
Diseases which came under their Cognizance.

This was the Road to Medical Certainty, and had this Method been carefully
pursued, Physic would have made a different Appearance from what it does at
present, and few Diseases would have baffled the Art of the sagacious
Physician: But many of the most celebrated Practitioners, either too ignorant
to make farther Discoveries, or too self-sufficient to avail themselves of the
Experience of others, fancied that they had arrived at the Ne plus ultra of the
Art, and instead of searching farther, employed themselves in accounting for
the Operation of Medicines by the mechanic Laws, and in classing the Remedies
already known, and tying down others to those Forms which they thought proper
to approve. Hence all new Discoveries were deemed Innovations, the Inventors of
them branded with the opprobrious Name of Quacks, and both they and their
Compositions held in the utmost Contempt. This Aversion to new Medicines long
confined the Use of Mercury to Barbers and others ignorant of the animal
Economy, who cured their Patients, and acquired Fortunes, while the regular
Practitioner obstinately suffered his to languish and die according to the
Rules of Art. This likewise was the Case of the Bark, which, though now deemed
one of the best Medicines in the World, was opposed with all the Acrimony and
Virulence that Prejudice and Malice could suggest.

The Consideration of these Things, one would think, should stimulate the
Faculty to the Pursuit of more efficacious Medicines than what are now
contained in their Dispensatories, and induce them to behave with more Candor
to those, who are so fortunate as to make new and valuable Discoveries. Nor
should the Aid of the Legislature be here neglected, since small Premiums would
generally induce those who have discovered any valuable Medicine to disclose
the Secret.

With Regard to the Medicine, which is the Subject of this Pamphlet, we can say
with great Truth, that it was first discovered by Accident, and applied to the
Cure of many, and very different Disorders by a Person who had no Knowledge of
Medicine; but falling accidentally into the Hands of one who had more Skill,
and also an Opportunity of making proper Observations, it was improved from
Time to Time, till brought to the State in which it now appears, and found to
be an effectual Cure for this dreadful Distemper. But more of this when we come
to describe some of the Cases of those who have been cured. Previous to which,
it may seem necessary for us to give some Account of the Disorder itself, and
of the Methods hitherto pursued to effect the Cure.

Of the KING's EVIL.
THE King's Evil appears to have been a Disease of great Antiquity, being the
(...) of Hippocrates, and the Greek Physicians, and the Strumae of Celsus and
the Latins, who sometimes call it Scrophula.

The most common Seat of this Disorder is in the Neck, the Armpits and Groin,
especially in young Children, whom it also very frequently seizes in the upper
Lip, which becomes remarkably thick and sometimes chapped; it likewise very
often affects the Glandula Lachrymalis, and brings on a Scrophulous Opthalmia,
known by its Obstinacy in resisting all common Remedies.

Scrophulous Tumors rarely happen to Adults and old Persons, but when they do,
are most obstinate and troublesome, hardly differing in their Nature from a
Cancer; in which Case, as a Fever is excited, the Tumor is unequal, and
attended with pulsatory Pains, and the Veins over it become tumid and prominent.

In the milder Sort the Tumor is equal, round, circumscribed, not very hard,
free from Inflammation and Pain, and in most Respects resembling a Schirrus.

The Glands of the external Parts are not only affected with this Disease; for
those also of the Mesentery are almost always found enlarged, upon opening
Persons who have died of it: Moreover the Humor sometimes falls upon the
Lungs, and brings on a pulmonary Consumption; and indeed that Consumption is
generally owing to a scrophulous Cause, in this and all other Northern
Countries.

Scrophulous Tumors are for the most part occasioned by Obstructions of the
Glands, Want of Exercise, Rickets in Children, Want of Digestion, etc. And it
is generally allowed, that a continued Abuse of the Non-naturals may give Rise
to this Disorder.

It is also admitted, by some Physicians, that it may be communicated by
Contagion, and by the vitiated Milk of a pregnant Woman.

But the most unhappy and truly deplorable Circumstance of the King's Evil is,
that it is but too often transmitted from Parents to their Children, by way of
Inheritance, which it does not easily give up, but entails upon late Posterity.
Thus the Relics of the Venereal Lues, a rank, inveterate Scurvy, or White
Swellings in any Part of the Body, either of Father or Mother, may put on the
true Type and Character of the Evil in the Offspring, as well as the
scrophulous Virus itself.

When the Disorder is mild, the Tumors moveable, superficial, soft, and seated
in the conglobate Glands of young Children, a Cure is not to be despaired of,
even in the common Method of Treatment. Nay, it is sometimes known to wear
itself off, as the Growth advances and the Habit alters; for which we have also
the Authority of Hippocrates. But when the Tumors attack the Tendons or
Ligaments, especially if near large Vessels, or press upon the Windpipe or
Oesophagus, they are very difficult of Cure; for whatever Way the Swellings are
treated, in order to open and cicatrise them, they generally break out again
near the old Scars. When the Disorder is violent and inveterate it degenerates
into a malignant and corroding Ulcer, by which, not only the Part primarily
affected, but also those contiguous to it are corroded and destroyed, and even
the Bones made carious. The Tumor becomes worse by being handled, and, because
it cannot be brought to Maturation, lasts during the Whole of the Patient's
Life. In a word, there is scarce any Disease more obstinately lasting than
this, which has been often thought absolutely incurable.

The Ancients had but few Remedies for this perplexing Complaint. They
succeeded best by the Use of the actual Cautery, and Incision. The only
internal Medicine, according to Celsus, was, white Hellebore, frequently
repeated; excepting a very absurd one, known only to a few Peasants, which was
that of swallowing a Snake.

The Moderns have gone to work chiefly with Vomits, Purgatives, Deobstruents,
Sudorifics, Absorbents, Antimonials, and Mercurials, and sometimes with Mineral
Waters. At the same Time recommending a moderate and slender Diet, lubricating
Broths and Jellies, with Exercise, and forbidding all viscid Aliments, as
Cheese, Fish, and the like.

As to the external Treatment of scrophulous Tumors, it has been attempted to
discuss them by mercurial Unguents, Liniments, and Plasters, premising
Phlebotomy, and Purging. If by the Use of these Means the Tumor did not
discuss, but increase in Size and Hardness, Suppuration was then attempted; and
it should seem the safer and more natural Way of the two; since to endeavor to
discuss often increases the Hardness, and turns the Tumor cancerous. In the
suppurative Way, all Evacuations were omitted, and a Plaster of Diach. cum
Gumm. Burgundy Pitch, or the like laid on, and assisted occasionally with a
proper Cataplasm.

When the Swelling was ripened, so far as to discover fluctuating Matter, the
Part was opened, either by Incision, or Caustic, to give Vent to it; and after
the Separation of the Eschar, the Ulcer was dressed with a Digestive, and then
healed. Yet this Method has generally miscarried.

The Proprietors of this Medicine, however, neither attempt to discuss Tumors,
nor to bring on a Suppuration; they apply no Caustics, nor terrify their
Patients with the Knife: Their usual Way has been, to leave the Afflicted to
the Medicine, and to Nature, which kindly cooperating have always produced an
happy Event.

In the King's Evil, as in most other chronical Diseases, specific Remedies
have been recommended, applauded, and relapsed into Disuse, in all Ages. The
Veratrum album, or White Hellebore, has been mentioned already. The Tactus
Regalis of the English and French Sovereigns, so long held in reverential
Esteem, is, at this Day, if not universally, at least, by the most Judicious,
given up, and no longer in Use. Dr. Gideon Harvey's Antimonium resuscitatum had
its Run; and so, in our Days, has Dr. Huxham's Essence of Antimony. Above
twenty Years ago, a Lady of the first Nobility was cured of a very large Tumor
in her Neck, by Means of a Specific, then kept a great Secret, although it has
been affirmed, that the Cure afterward cost her her Life. This proved to be
burnt Sponge, a Medicine adopted indeed by the late Dr. Mead, who usually
administered it, mixed with purified Nitre, Coralline and Sugar: But it has
been known to fail in a hundred Instances. The late Dr. Russel, who practiced
in Sussex, laid great Stress upon Seawater as a Specific in glandular
Disorders; and it has been used in our Hospitals, but is like the rest, almost
grown out of Fashion. Lastly, the Peruvian Bark is said, to have done great
Service in these Complaints. Dr. Fordice relates six or seven remarkable Cases,
in which he gave it with much Success. Dr. Fothergill has likewise administered
the Bark in scrophulous Disorders, and avers, that it may not only be given
with Safety, but to manifest Advantage, in certain Cases; however that it will
not succeed in all. He has never known it avail much where the Bones were
affected, nor where the scrophulous Tumor has been so situated, as to be
attended with much Pain, as in the Joints, or under the membranous Covers of
the Muscles; for when these Parts are concerned, the Periosteum seldom escapes
without some Injury; in which Case the Bone will be likewise affected, and
then, he is of Opinion, that the Bark will hasten the Progress of the Disease.
The Cicuta Vulgaris has been also given in this, as well as in cancerous Cases,
and, according to Dr. Storck, with very good Effect in some Parts of Germany;
however, in this Climate it seems to fail, which confirms me in an Opinion, I
have long entertained, i. e. that various Plants have different Effects in
different Countries, as well as on different Constitutions.

After all, could a Specific be found out, of such a Nature, as equally to suit
the Constitution of Infants and Adults, Respect being had to the Dose, which
would act placidly, without sensible Evacuations, or ruffling the Habit; and as
Dr. Friend expresses it, per aliquas non patentes Vias Edit. Libb. I. and III.
Epidem. Hippocrat.
, so as effectually to eradicate this most perverse Disease, the Opprobrium of
all ancient and modern Medicine, of what unspeakable Emolument would such a
Discovery be to the Afflicted, and what would not the Inventor merit from
Mankind? Such a Specific we now offer the Public, which has succeeded in many,
and all Cases where it has been hitherto administered; and which is at this
Time entrusted to the farther Trial of a Gentleman of unquestionable Skill and
Eminence in Hospital Practice, whose Report of it cannot fail of being
absolutely decisive and satisfactory.

It may not be amiss, however, to lay before the Public, an Account of the
Success it has had in those Cases wherein it has been administered by the
Proprietors, though Persons but little skilled in the Art of Medicine.

The CASES of several Persons who have been cured by this MEDICINE.
THE first scrophulous Patient, to whom it was administered, was Mr. William
King, of St. Mary Magdalen Bermondsey, Southwark; who, at that Time, had been
long afflicted with the King's Evil, and had near forty running Ulcers, many of
them on the Joints, by which he was greatly emaciated, and thought consumptive.
The Bones were carious, many rotten Pieces came away from his Legs, and he was,
by the Surgeons who attended him, deemed incurable. Yet this Man was perfectly
restored by the abovementioned Medicine; and to satisfy some Gentlemen at
Paris, who wanted to be properly informed of the Fact, he made an Affidavit of
his being cured by this Medicine, before Sir Joseph Hankey, in Presence of Mr.
Weldon, the Notary Public, whose Testimonial bears Date the 15th of February
1752.

The next Person, to whom it was administered, was Mr. John Deane, of Saffron
Hill, in the Parish of St. Andrew Holborn. This Patient, when he took the
Medicine, had been afflicted with the Evil seven or eight Years; which began
with a Swelling in his left Eye, and the Glands of his Neck. He had, at the
Time of his first taking it, many running Ulcers, which had been often opened
with Caustics, and he was informed by the Surgeons of one of our Hospitals, to
whom he had applied for Relief, that his Disorder was incurable. Mr. Deane,
however, was soon cured by this Medicine, and in the Course of near eleven
Years has had no Return of the Disorder. Soon after the Cure was perfected he
married, and has had several healthy Children. His Case was also sent to Paris,
after being attested on Oath before Mr. Alderman Ironside, in the Presence of
Mr. Weldon, the Notary Public, whose Certificate is dated the 13th of March
1752.

In Consequence of this some of the Medicine was sent to Paris, where, we are
informed, it effected many extraordinary Cures; but the Particulars are not
come to our Knowledge: However, that it was tried in one of the Hospitals with
Success, will appear by the following Extract of a Letter from Mr. James Burton
to one of the Proprietors.

"During my Stay at Paris, which has been more than six Months, I have daily
frequented the Hospitals, and had an Opportunity of seeing the good Effects of
your Pills for the Cure of the Evil, which Mr. Cartier has administered under
the Inspection of the Physicians. I think he has eight Patients, all miserable
Objects, but I cannot help mentioning particularly the astonishing Effect it
has had on a German, born at Deux Ponts, whom I have often interrogated
respecting his Complaint. The Distemper began in his great Toe; but by some
Applications, used by the Surgeons, the Humor was repelled and fixed in his
right Leg, where it broke out in eight Ulcers, which being obstinate it was
agreed, in a Consultation of Physicians and Surgeons, to take off the Leg; but
his Parents not consenting, other Methods were used to prevent the Disorder
from spreading, though without Effect; for he continually grew worse, and, after
he had been in this deplorable Way for eight Years, his Parents sent him to
Paris. Here he arrived in June 1748, and entered the Hotel-Dieu, in St.
Andrew's Ward; where he continued two Years, and during that Time grew worse,
on which he was discharged the Ward as incurable, and sent into the Salle
d'Osier, where he took your Medicine. He had, at this Time, twenty-one running
Ulcers, eight of them were on his right Foot, and eight on his right Hand, the
Use of which he had entirely lost. He had likewise a large Swelling under each
Arm, the Glands on each Side his Throat were swelled as big as an Hen-Egg, and
he had five running Ulcers in his Neck. After he had taken your Medicine about
eight Months his Ulcers all healed, the Use of his Hand was restored, the
Swellings broke and healed, and the Man is now in perfect Health. I have no
other View, in sending you this Account, but to induce you to make it public in
England; for it is hard that your fellow Citizens should be deprived of such a
Benefit."

We have not the Honor to know Mr. James Burten; but Mr. Cartier is now in
London, and ready to give Testimony to the Truth of what is here related.

Mr. Isaac Harman, Clerk to Thomas Watson, Esquire; Callico-Printer, at Morris's
Causeway, Lambeth, was for near fifteen Years afflicted with this Disorder,
which mostly affected his Joints; for he had Tumors under each Ham, Ulcers on
the left Leg, almost from one Ankle to the other, and three on his right Foot;
the Bones about the Ankle were foul, many Pieces came away, and he was so
reduced by the continual Discharge that he could hardly stand. He took this
Medicine, and was perfectly cured; for, though nine Years are elapsed, he has
had no Return of his Complaint, but has enjoyed an exceeding good Share of
Health, and is remarkably active and strong.

We must observe, that Mr. Harman married soon after he was cured, and has four
Children living, which are all very healthy.

Mr. John Morgan, Cutler, now living at Mr. Savigny's in Pall Mall, was
afflicted with this Disorder, and admitted into one of our Hospitals for Cure,
where his Tumors were several times laid open, and, besides taking other
Medicines, he drank a very large Quantity of Seawater, but without the least
Benefit. After he came from the Hospital he applied for this Medicine, which he
began to take about Midsummer 1755. The October following, he found himself
abundantly better, and in the next Spring all his Ulcers were entirely healed,
without any Loss of Time, or Interruption in Business. He has been now cured
near seven Years, and has had no Symptoms of a Return.

John Shadwell, now Apprentice to Mr. Waldron Shoemaker in Basinghall-street,
was, when about seven Years old, seized with a Swelling in the Elbow. After
some Time he was carried to a Surgeon in the Neighborhood, who told his
Friends that the Bone was foul, and advised them to take him to an Hospital,
which they did, and he continued there seventeen Weeks, and was then discharged
as incurable. He was after this admitted into another Hospital, where he
continued fourteen Weeks, and was also thence discharged as incurable. At this
Time he had five running Sores in one Arm, and three in the other; one of which
was directly in the Joint of the Elbow. He had also Ulcers in his Neck and
Face; many of which had been opened with Caustics, and could not afterward be
healed. In this Situation his Friends applied for the Medicine, which is the
Subject of this Pamphlet. After he had taken it some little Time, there was a
large Discharge from all the Ulcers, and in about two or three Months he was
abundantly better in Health. He continued taking the Medicine as directed, and
by Degrees all the Wounds healed up, and he has been now four Years perfectly
well.

Mrs. Vias, who kept a Boarding-School for young Ladies in Harley-street,
Cavendish-square, but is now removed to the Boarding-School near
Ranelagh-House, Chelsea, has seen the good Effects of this Medicine on a Person
who was under her own Care. We shall give the Reader this Lady's Sentiments in
her own Words.

"A Lady of my Acquaintance, who was afflicted with a scrophulous Distemper,
and had Swellings in her Neck and Wounds in her Breast, which would not submit
to the Medicines prescribed and applied by the Physicians and Surgeons, who,
for a long Time attended her, was in about seven Months perfectly cured by
taking your Medicine for the Evil."

The Lady Mrs. Vias speaks of has been now cured near six Years, and remains
perfectly well.

Thomas Moss, of the Parish of St. Olave's, Southwark, had the Evil to a great
Degree, but was soon cured by taking this Medicine.

Mr. Robert Rees, Apprentice to Mr. Marsh, Woollen-draper in White-hart-yard,
Drury Lane, labored under a scrophulous Complaint many Years, for which he
took diverse Medicines without Effect, and was three Years under the Care of Dr.
Ward. During which Time, the Disorder, so far from abating, increased to that
Degree that he had several Ulcers in his Arms and Feet, a very large Ulcer on
the Inside of his right Thigh, many running Sores and Tumors about his Neck,
one of which was as large as a Cricket-Ball, and he was so weak that he could
hardly walk. He took this Medicine, which soon gave him Strength, and by
Degrees all the Tumors dispersed, the Ulcers healed, and he is now perfectly
well.

Mr. Joseph Poole, one of the Clerks of the Bank, had a Son, who was long
afflicted with a scrophulous Disorder, which made its first Appearance when he
was about four Years old. It began with a Swelling in one of his Fingers, and
in one of his Feet. He took many Medicines from different People, but to no
Purpose, and was six Months under the Care of Dr. Ward, whose Medicines
disagreed with him, and he grew worse. Upon which Application was made for the
Medicine, which is the Subject of this Pamphlet. He had taken it but a little
Time before he found himself abundantly better, and soon after all his Wounds
healed, and he continues perfectly well.

Mrs. Elizabeth Hiller, of Piccadilly, has a Daughter who was long afflicted
with this Disorder, and which seized her when she was about two Years old. She
applied to one of the Hospitals for Relief, and was continued two Years as an
Out-Patient, but received no Benefit, either by the Medicines she had there, or
by what was applied by others. When she first entered upon a Course of this
Medicine her right Foot was very much swelled and ulcerated, and the Bone foul.
She had a large Ulcer in her Hand, and another in the Middle of her right
Cheek. After she had taken this Medicine some Time, the Ulcers began to heal,
and she is now perfectly well.

Thomas Amer, of the Parish of St. Giles's, Cripplegate, in the City of London,
was seized with this Disorder, and in the Space of two Years had a Tumor
ulcerated in his Thigh, another in his Arm near the Elbow, the third Finger on
his left Hand was much swelled, and had an Ulcer by the middle Joint that ran
quite through the Finger, the Bone of which was foul, and during the Cure
several rotten Pieces exfoliated, and came away. A Surgeon, who lived in the
Neighborhood, told his Friends, that it was a very bad Case, and advised them
to take him to an Hospital. Accordingly, he was an Out-Patient at one of our
Hospitals for some Months, when the Surgeons said they could do him no Service,
unless his Finger was taken off. Upon this he went to Dr. Ward, and was under
his Care for twelve Months, during which Time he grew much worse, and his
Health was so much impaired, when Application was made for this Medicine, that
his Friends did not expect him to live a Month. This Medicine, however, soon
restored him to better Health, and by Degrees all his Ulcers healed, and he has
now the perfect Use of his Limbs, and has continued well ever since the Ulcers
were first healed, which is now somewhat more than two Years.

Mr. Bannister, who keeps a Stable-yard in Old Bond-street, has a Daughter who
was much afflicted with a scrophulous Disorder. It appeared soon after she had
the Smallpox, and when she was about four Years old, by a Tumor in her Cheek,
and others on her Feet, which ulcerated, and fouled the Bones. She had also a
Tumor on one Arm, and the Disorder had much affected her Eyes: After taking
various Medicines, without receiving any Benefit, she was perfectly cured by
this.

Mr. John Chandler, at Mr. Smith's, Watchmaker in Chiswell-street, London, was
afflicted with this Disorder. It first made its Appearance by a Swelling of the
Glands in his Neck, which being greatly increased in the Space of a Month, he
went to a Surgeon, who applied a Poultice to the Part, and after some Time
opened it with a Caustic, but the Wound thus made was so obstinate that it
could not be healed. And another Tumor soon came in his Neck, which increased
to a great Degree, and in Time affected his Shoulder, and rendered him unable
to pursue his Business. In this State he was admitted into one of our
Hospitals, where he continued nine Weeks, and was several times lanced, but
without obtaining any Relief. He then put himself under the Care of a foreign
Physician, who undertook to cure him; but the Disorder still increasing, and
his Health, as well as his Ulcers, growing worse, he, in February last, applied
for this Medicine. At this Time he had several very bad Ulcers about his Neck,
and his left Breast, all of which healed after he had taken the Pills a few
Months, and he is now ( Dec. 13, 1762) perfectly well, and has been so for some
Time past.

A Gentleman, in the Neighborhood of St. Paul's Churchyard, had a Child about
three Years old, who had many strumous Swellings in the Neck, that were very
large, hard, and so obstinate, as not to submit to any of the common Methods of
Treatment; which the Father informing Dr. BEVIS of, that Gentleman, agreeable
to his usual Candor and Humanity, advised him to apply for this Remedy, having
himself experienced the good Effects of it on two Patients before. The Child
took the Medicine about two Months, which gave it no Sort of Uneasiness, and
the Swellings entirely disappeared.

Since this Pamphlet was put to the Press, (that is to say, this 17th of Dec.
1762) we received a Letter from the Rev. Mr. BROWN, Vicar of Olney, near
Newport Pagnel, in Buckinghamshire, (the well known Author of the Sunday
Thoughts, and other valuable Pieces) of which Letter the following is an
Extract.

"Every one must be sensible, that in a Distemper of so loathsome a Kind, as
this of the King's Evil, most Persons show a Delicacy in having their Names
made public. I have, therefore, concealed the Name of a female Patient; the
others I here communicate to you to print or conceal as you think proper, it
being to them indifferent: But the Facts are certain and notorious; and it will
be of Weight with all considerate Persons to have it publicly advertised, that
any who propose themselves for Cure, and want farther Satisfaction, may receive
all they can desire, in this Particular, from the Parties who were cured, or
from me at Olney in Buckinghamshire, where the Cures here mentioned were
performed.

"JOHN BUTCHER, Baker, an Inhabitant of the Parish of Olney in Bucks, about
thirty Years of Age (from a violent Blow, as was thought, of a large Piece of
Wood falling on him) had a Contusion and Swelling on the Nose, which increased
and grew very much inflamed with livid and other alarming Appearances. He had
the Advice of several Surgeons, Apothecaries, etc. both here and at
Northampton; was purged, dieted, bled, lanced, and had several Fomentations
applied to the Part, together with Salves and other topical Applications, for
the Space of a Year and a Quarter. The Disorder, however, grew worse, and by
general Consent his Case was adjudged an inveterate and incurable Strumae. He
was, from a florid Countenance and robust Make, now become wan as a Corpse,
emaciated to a mere Skeleton, and lay unable to feed, turn, or do any the least
Offices for himself, being as feeble as an Infant. The whole Bone of the Nose
grew carious, exfoliated, and came all away; the Flesh of the upper Lip was
eaten entirely off, and left the Jaw and Teeth bare, and his Speech became so
hollow and inarticulate, that those who were mostly with him could hardly
understand a Word he said, and all about him daily expected his Death. He could
take nothing but a little Pap, or soft liquid Food, administered to him in a
Boat, as they do to Infants in the Month; and his medical Assistants had all
left him. In this deplorable Case I found him, exceedingly desirous of Life;
his Appetite strong and craving, and he had some Degree of inward Strength,
which gave me Hopes. I immediately advised your Medicine; it was tried, and he
found almost present, and (in using it about three Months) astonishing Benefit;
the fetid Discharge and Ulcers were removed and healed, the other Parts grew
well; he got up, eat, became hearty as ever, went abroad, and I myself saw and
spoke with him at a Place he had walked to above two Miles from Home on
Business, which he was now very well able to perform. This was in the Summer
about five or six Months after his first taking the Medicine. He worked from
that Time at Carting, Hedging, and other robust Labors; helped at getting in
Harvest that Year, and seemed as able as any of them; and I believe, and so do
his Friends, that he is now as free from the Evil as any Person whatever; and
has continued well ever since the Cure was performed, which is somewhat more
than two Years.

"You are to observe by the way, that his was suspected to be a Family
Disorder. One Brother, if not more having died of it, and he has a Sister,
older than himself, who is now in the last Stage of a Consumption, which is
supposed to proceed from the same Cause.

"An Inhabitant of the Town aforesaid who was upwards of thirteen Years old,
has been for several Years afflicted with the King's Evil; had sore Eyes, and
hard strumous Tumors in the Glands of the Throat, as is common in those Cases.
Mr. THOMAS ASPRAY, Surgeon and Apothecary in this Town, undertook her Cure with
your Medicine, and also applied Blisters on the Sides near her Ears to promote
the Discharge of Matter. She took the Pills regularly about three Months, and
has continued now for about the same Time perfectly well.

"This Patient's Disorder is likewise supposed to be entailed on the Family,
several of the Relations being in some Degree afflicted with it."

Mr. Brown relates another Case more extraordinary than the former, of a Boy
who had lost the Use of one Foot with the Evil, whom he took in Hand, after the
Surgeons had prepared to cut the Limb off. He has by this Medicine recovered
the Use of his Foot, but as the Boy is not yet perfectly well, we shall at
present take no farther Notice of his Case.

One other Circumstance we shall mention, which will undoubtedly have great
Weight with the Public. It is the Success this Medicine has had on five
Children in the Charity-house called Burlington-school, in Old Burlington
Street, in the Parish of St. James's Westminster, to whom it has been given
under the Inspection of a Gentleman, whose Skill and Abilities have long
distinguished him as one of the most eminent of his Profession. Though we have
not Permission to insert his Name, we cannot omit this Opportunity of returning
him our Thanks for his polite Behavior and great Candor on that Occasion;
and, we doubt not, but that Humanity which prompted him to see this Remedy
administered to the Children abovementioned, will induce him to speak of the
Medicine as he thinks it deserves.

These Children, previous to their taking the Medicine, were examined by the
abovementioned Gentleman, after they had been delared to be in a very bad
State by a Surgeon of Character who had attended them. The Medicine was first
given them in April last. Two of them are cured, another nearly so, and the
other two are in a fair way of having their Health soon established.

More Evidence might be produced in Favor of this Medicine, and some Cases
inserted which are extremely singular; but many Persons, who have been cured,
have desired to be concealed; among which are several Ladies who are since
married, and have very healthy Children. Their Names, it is true, would do
Honor to this Pamphlet, and greatly promote the Use of the Medicine; but the
Public will be pleased to consider, that the Proprietors ought not, nay they
cannot, break the Ties of Honor, and betray the Confidence reposed in them,
though in Support of Truth. The reasonable Man, we apprehend, will be satisfied
with what is above related, yet should there be any so incredulous, as to
require farther Conviction, respecting the Safety and Efficacy of this
Medicine, they may obtain it, and be introduced to the Proprietors, by applying
to the Publisher of this Pamphlet.

A PROPOSAL humbly addressed to the NOBILITY and GENTRY of Great Britain and
Ireland.
THE Proprietors of the Medicine within mentioned beg Leave to address the
Generous and the Humane, in Behalf of those poor Creatures, who are unhappily
afflicted with all Scrophulous Complaints, especially the King's Evil, which is
generally deemed incurable, and of which many unhappy Wretches are daily
discharged from our Hospitals.

A MEDICINE has been discovered (which is an Alterative, and therefore the
better adapted to all Constitutions) that effectually eradicates those
Disorders in a short Time, and, during that Interval, visibly amends and
strengthens the Constitution.

That this is a Truth, will be made manifest by a Number of Patients who have
been cured by this Medicine, even after they were discharged as incurable from
the Hospitals, and who are at all Times ready to be examined in the most strict
and scrupulous Manner. Now what the Proprietors propose, is, that a small
House, in Manner of an Hospital, be opened for the Reception of Patients, by
the charitable Contributions of the NOBILITY, GENTRY, and Others, which shall
be carried on under the Inspection of the Subscribers, or the Inspection of
those whom they shall appoint, and which shall be furnished by the Proprietors
with this Medicine the first Year gratis, and after that at such Price only as
the Ingredients shall really cost; so that the Proprietors desire no Profit for
themselves, but will contribute, as much out of their own little Fortunes as
they can afford; nor will they have any Concern in receiving the Money, but
will leave the Receipts and Disbursements, and all other Matters, respecting
the Admission of Patients, and the Management of the Hospital, entirely to
those, who shall be appointed to the Trust by a Majority of the Subscribers.

Nor is this Application made with a View of raising any Money; it is intended
only to try whether a Sum sufficient can be raised to establish a small
Hospital, in Case the Proprietors shall make every Allegation appear to the
entire Satisfaction of the Public: All that is entreated therefore for the
present, is, that every LADY and GENTLEMAN, inclined to promote this charitable
Undertaking, will be pleased to signify what Sum they would choose to contribute
yearly or otherwise; when they are satisfied of the Truth of what is here
asserted, and see the Scheme carried into Execution by Persons of their own
Appointment.

Books will be opened for the Names of those who are charitably inclined to
encourage this Undertaking; and, when a sufficient Number are collected, a
Place of Meeting will be appointed, by an Advertisement in the London Gazette,
and other Papers, to elect proper Persons for the Management of the Charity,
and to see the Testimonials, and examine the Patients who have been cured.

FINIS.
POSTSCRIPT.
DECEMBER 18, 1763.

FROM the Truths set forth in the preceding Pamphlet, and the Candid and humane
Proposal which the Proprietors made to the Public respecting an Hospital for
the Cure of the Evil, added to their extreme Readiness on all Occasions to give
their Medicines and Attendance to the Poor gratis: From these Considerations, I
say, one would have thought that all who had seen the Effects of this Medicine,
and the easy Manner in which it eradicated the Disorder, would, for the general
Good, have lent their Aid toward promoting its Use. It was what the
Proprietors flattered themselves with; but how far they have been mistaken,
will appear in the following Narrative.

In April 1762, a Surgeon of the first Eminence for his well known Humanity,
Candor, and Abilities, was accidentally informed by a Gentleman then in
Company with him, that a Medicine had been discovered, which had cured great
Numbers of the Evil, even in the worst State of the Disorder; the Surgeon
answered, that for the Benefit of Mankind, he most sincerely wished it might
prove so, and be brought into general Practice, for that this was one of the
Desiderata in the Art of Healing; adding withal, that he should be very glad to
see the Parties concerned, and be further informed of the Matter. Some Days
after this, one of the Proprietors waited on this Gentleman with some of the
Medicine, and took with him several Persons who had been cured by it, to give
their Testimony of the Truth. After he had examined amined these Patients, with
respect to the Situation they were in at the Time they first took the Medicine,
and had seen the Scars of the Ulcers that had been healed, he acknowledged that
the Cures were very extraordinary, and then said, that there were some Children
afflicted with this Disorder in Burlington School, in Old Burlington-street,
which was maintained by Subscription, and it would be a Charity to cure them.
This was readily agreed to, and five Children were examined, four of which were
undertaken, as their Disorder evidently appeared to be the Evil; but the fifth
seemed to have a Complaint of a different Nature; however, the Medicine was
given to them all. At the Time when this Medicine was first administered to the
Children, a Gentleman of the Faculty, who had examined them, smiled at the
Attempt, and said there was no Cure for them; however, his Prognostication has
proved him no Conjuror, for in the Space of nine Months, two of the four which
were undertaken, were perfectly cured; since that another is got well, and in
all Probability the fourth would have received a Cure ever this Time, but for
the following Accident.

In December last, the preceding Dissertation on the King's Evil was made
public, in which the Reader will observe, there are set forth for the
Satisfaction of the Public the Cases of many Persons who have been cured by
this Medicine; and among others, some Notice is taken of the Children above
mentioned. This naturally led those who were themselves afflicted with this
Disorder, or had Friends in that deplorable State, to enquire concerning the
Medicine, at this Place as well as others; and during the Time that Mrs. Martin
continued Governess of the House, who was a humane, discreet, and worthy Woman,
the Children were shown to them, and they obtained the necessary Information;
but Mrs. Martin declining that Office to go and live with her Daughter, who was
then married, another Person was appointed to the Trust; who, for Reasons best
known to herself, or to her Coadjutors, thought proper to behave in a rude
Manner to the Gentleman who attended, and not only so, but to falsify the
Truth, and mislead those who came to enquire of her concerning the Children;
which she did to several, and particularly to Mrs. Baker, as will evidently
appear by her Attestation.

The Manner of her Behavior Mrs. Baker generously and fairly disclosed to the
Proprietors of the Medicine, upon which Application was made to the Surgeon, at
whose Instance the Cure of the Children was undertaken. He, being greatly
irritated at such shameful and injurious Behavior, desired a Committee of the
House might be called, and said the Truth should not be suppressed. A Committee
accordingly met the 21st of July, 1763, and this Gentleman attended. The Affair
was enquired into, and it apperead, that two of the Children were perfectly
cured, and had left the House; and Mary Summers, another of them, was called
before the Board, and upon strict Examination, was found, and declared, to be
perfectly well. The Woman that had behaved so scandalously was then called, and
Mrs. Baker, who for the Sake of Truth was so kind as to attend, told the
Committee the whole of her Behavior to her, when she came to enquire
concerning the Cure of the Children. The Woman at first equivocated, but at
last she confessed the Truth, asked Pardon, and said, she was sorry for what
she had done. The Gentlemen of the Committee then asked her, who put her upon
giving such Answers? But all they could get from her was, that a tall Gentleman
had been there, and talked to her about it, but she did not know his Name. She
was then severely reproved; and the Committee desired the Proprietor of the
Medicine still to attend on the other Girl who was not yet well, and complete
the Cure. This was agreed to; but when he came to the House, some Days after,
to give her more Medicines, he found this Woman, who was so submissive and
penitent before the Committee, more insolent than ever. Upon which he applied
at two subsequent Committees to have Justice done to his Character, and to the
Medicine; but as the Gentlemen were not there who sat at the first Committee,
he could obtain no Satisfaction, and therefore left the House.

That Mary Summers was cured, appeared by her Examination before the Committee
abovementioned; but she is now in the House, and may be examined again and
again. And that Susannah or Suckey Pott (for they say she was so christened)
and Elizabeth Morris, were cured, will appear by the following Certificates.

Mrs. Baker's Attestation.
ON Saturday the 2d of July, 1763, I went to Burlington School to enquire after
some Children, who, in a Pamphlet lately published on the Evil, were said to be
cured of that Disorder. Here I saw one of the Mistresses, who said there had
been no Children cured there. Upon this I asked, if I could see any of the
Children who had taken the Medicine? After some Time and Hesitation, two of
them were called, and I asked one of them, whose Name I find is Mary Summers, if
she had taken the Alterative and purging Pills for the Evil? She said she had.
I then asked her, if she had taken any other Medicine during that Time, or
since? She said she had not, and declared before her Mistress she was perfectly
well, and that she had been the worst of them all. Upon which the Mistress
seemed greatly confounded, and to excuse herself, said the Girl had never told
her so before. I replied, that a Cure of this Sort ought not to be concealed,
and that I thought it a very charitable Action of the Gentlemen concerned in
the Medicine to Cure the Children of such a terrible Disorder. In answer to
which she said, there were proper Persons to give the Children Medicines, and
that they wanted no Charity, nor desired any Body to trouble themselves about
them. She farther said, that several Persons had been there to enquire
concerning the Cure of the Children, and that she had given them their Answer.

After this, by the desire of some Gentlemen concerned in the Charity, I
attended at one of the Committees, held at the House, which I think was on the
21st of the same Month, and this Affair was enquired into; Mary Summers, who was
then examined, was perfectly cured, and it appeared that two others had also
been cured, and had left the House; for a Surgeon, who attended, declared
before the Committee, that he had examined them before they took the Medicine
and since, and that before they took the Medicine they had the Evil, and now
they were well. The Woman, who had denied the Truth to me, and behaved so
impertinently, was also called, and charged with it. At first she equivocated,
but afterward acknowledged that she did say none of the Children were cured,
and that she was sorry for what she had said, and asked Pardon. Upon being
asked who put her upon giving such Answers? She said, that a tall Gentleman had
been there, and talked to her about it; but she did not know his Name.

Borough, Southwark, Dec. 10, 1763. MARY BAKER.


THESE are to certify those whom it may concern, that my Daughter Elizabeth
Morris, was cured of a scrophulous Disorder in her Cheek, while she was in
Burlington School, and during the Time Mrs. Martin was Governess there, by
taking the Alterative and purging Pills for the Evil.

Witness my Hand, November 28, 1763. ELIZABETH MORRIS.

I Suckey Pott was cured of a scrophulous Tumor in my Face, while I was at
Burlington School, and during the Time that Mrs. Martin was Governess there, by
taking the Alterative and purging Pills for the Evil.

Witness my Hand November 28, 1763. SUCKEY POTT.

And that the Medicine always agreed so well with these Children as not to give
them the least Uneasiness, may be learnt from Mrs. Martin, during the Time she
was Governess of the House.

I Mary Martin, late Governess of the Charity School, at the End of
Burlington-street in the Parish of St. James's, known by the Name of Burlington
School, do certify, that two of the Children in the said School, who were very
bad with the Evil, were perfectly cured, by taking the Alterative and purging
Pills, before I left the said School; and the other Children who had taken the
same Medicines, were in a fair way of Recovery. In Justice to the Public and
the Proprietors, I must also observe, that these Medicines never gave any of
those Children the least Uneasiness.

Witness my Hand, July 21, 1763. At Mr. Lyne's, Confectioner, in
Marybone-Street, near Golden-Square. MARY MARTIN.

Now, if there were no such Things in the World as Pride, Envy and Avarice, it
would be impossible to account for this Sort of Behavior; or to assign any
Reason why a Man, who had given up his Time, his Trouble, and his Medicines to
Cure a Parcel of poor Children, of a Disorder generally accounted Incurable,
should at last be insulted for his Pains; but these, and a few other Qualities
which are often harbored in the human Breast, will help to unfold the Mystery.
The Injury, however, which the Proprietors of the Medicine have received by
this Kind of Treatment, bears no Proportion to what the People have suffered,
who, by thus enquiring, have been thus misled. The first have been deprived
only of a little pecuniary Advantage, or perhaps none at all (for the Medicines
have been always given to the Poor) but the last may have been deprived of the
Means of recovering their Health, and preserving their Lives.

As Orders have been received for this Medicine from different Parts of Europe,
as well as from the Continent of America and the West Indies, the Proprietors
find it necessary to sell it out in Parcels, as other Medicines usually are.
Notice is therefore given, that a Box of these Pills, with proper Directions
for their Use, will for the future be Sold at 5s. with good Allowance to those
who buy them for charitable Uses, or to sell again; but those who reside in the
Neighborhood of London, may be attended, as usual, while the Medicine is
administered, by directing a Line to Mr. NEWBERY, in ^^ Paul's Churchyard; and
those who live at a D^^^^^e may occasionally consult the Proprietors by L^^^^r
-- The Postage of Letters and Advice to be paid for.


