Algernon Sidney

Manus haec Inimica Tyrannis Ense petit placidam sub Liberate Quietem



DISCOURSES CONCERNING GOVERNMENT, BY Algernon Sidney, Son to Robert Earl of
Leicester, and Ambassador from the Commonwealth of England to Charles Gustavus
King of Sweden. Published from an Original Manuscript. The Second Edition
carefully corrected. To which is Added, The Paper He delivered to the Sheriffs
immediately before his Death. And an ALPHABETICAL TABLE.

Dulce and decorum est pro Patria mori. Hor.
LONDON, Printed by J. Darby in Bartholomew-Close. MDCCIV.

THE PREFACE.
HOW highly the Writings of wise and good Men concerning Government have bin
esteemed in all Ages, the testimony of History, and the preservation of so many
Books composed by the Ancients on that Subject, do sufficiently manifest. And
it may be truly said, that unless men have utterly abandoned themselves to all
that is detestable, they have seldom attempted to detract from the worth of the
Assertors of Liberty, tho Ambition and other passions have influenced them to
act in opposition to it. When Augustus had surpised a young Roman who was
related to him, reading a political Discourse of Cicero, he commended his
judgment in that choice. The History of France, written by the President de
Thou, with a spirit of Freedom that might have bin worthy of those who lived
before the violation of their Liberty, has bin so generally valued by men of
all ranks in that Nation, that it is hard to find a Book on any important
Subject which has had so many Editions. And the just esteem that the Emperor
Charles the Fifth made of the Memoirs of Philip de Commines (tho that Author
has given so many instances of his detestation of Tyranny) may be enough to put
this matter out of dispute. But if all other proof were wanting, the implacable
hatred, and unwearied industry of the worst of men to suppress such Writings,
would abundantly testify their excellency.

That Nations should be well informed of their Rights, is of the most absolute
necessity: because the happiness or infelicity of any People entirely depends
upon the enjoyment or deprivation of Liberty; which is so invincibly proved in
the following Discourses, that to endeavor to make i^ more clear, would be an
unpardonable presumption.

If any man think the publication of this Work to be unseasonable a^ this time,
he is desired to consider, that as men expect good Laws only from a good
Government, so the Reign of a Prince, whose Title is founded upon the principle
of Liberty which is here defended, cannot but be the most proper, if not the
only time to inform the People of the^^ just (...), that from a due sense of
their inestimable value, they may (...) encouraged to assert them against the
attempts of ill men in time to ^ome.

It Is not necessary here to say anything concerning the Person of the Author.
He was so well known in the world, so universally esteemed by those who knew
how to set a just value upon true Merit, and will appear so admirable in the
following Discourses, as not to stand in need of a flattering Panegyric. But
it may not be amiss to say something of the Discourses now published.

The Paper delivered to the Sheriffs immediately before his death informs us,
that he had left a Large and a Lesser Treatise written against the Principles
contained in Filmer's Book; and that a small part of the lesser Treatise had
bin produced for evidence against him at his Trial. It Is there also said, that
the lesser Treatise neither was, nor probably ever should have bin finished.
This therefore is the Large Work mentioned in that Paper, and not the Lesser,
upon part of which the wicked Sentence pronounced, and executed against him,
was grounded.

It remains only to add a few words for satisfaction of the Public, that these
Discourses are genuine. And here I shall not need to say, that they were put
into the hands of a Person of eminent Quality and Integrity by the Author
himself; and that the Original is, in the judgment of those who knew him best,
all written by his own hand: His inimitable manner of treating this noble
Subject, is instead of a thousand demonstrations, that the Work can belong to
no other than the Great Man whose Name it bears.

ERRATA*
PAge 14. line 23. for it, read at P. 22. l. 26. r. Author. P. 33. l. 22. r.
title. P. 58. l. 36 r. in P. 266. l. 4. r. as. P. 288. l. 12. r. 25 E. 3. and
so in P. 325. l. r. P. 330. l. 7. put the Parenthesis after some). P. 331. l.
35. r. depended. P. 344. l. 48. f. 17, r. 16. P. 345. l. 28. r. most violent P.
356. l. 24. r. that of. P. 364. l. 26. for they, r. the P. 371. l. 44. r.
Lands. P. 375 l. 37. r. that the P. 403. l. 24. r. Justice. P. 417. l. 9 r.
great.

The CONTENTS.
CHAP. I.
SEction 1. The Introduction, Page 1. Sect. 2. The common notions of Liberty
are not from School-Divines, but from Nature, p. 3. Sect. 3. Implicit Faith
belongs to Fools, and Truth is comprehended by examining Principles, p. 6.
Sect. 4. The Rights of particular Nations cannot subsist, if general Principles
contrary to them are received as true, p. 8. Sect. 5. To depend upon the will
of a man is slavery, p. 9. Sect. 6. God leaves to man the choice of forms in
Government; and those who constitute one form may abrogate it, p. 11. Sect. 7.
Abraham and the Patriarchs were not Kings, p. 14. Sect. 8. Nimrod was the first
King during the life of Chush, Cham, Shem, and Noah, p. 15. Sect. 9. The Power
of a Father belongs only to a Father, p. 18. Sect. 10. Such as enter into
Society, must in some degree diminish their Liberty, p. 19. Sect. 11. No man
comes to command many, unless by consent, or by force. p. 20. Sect. 12. The
pretended paternal Right is divisible or indivisible: if divisible, (...)
extinguished* if indivisible, universal, p. 21. Sect. 13. There was no shadow
of a paternal Kingdom amongst the Hebrews, not Precept for it, p. 23. Sect. 14.
If the paternal Right had included Dominion, and was to be transferred to a
single H^ir, it must perish if he were not known; and could be applied to no
other person, p. 25. Sect. 16. The Ancients chose those to be Kings, who
excelled in the Virtues that are most beneficial to Civil Societys, p. 30. Sect.
1^. God having given the Government of the World to no one man, nor declared
how it should be divided, left it to the will of man, p. 35. Sect. 18. If a
right of Dominion were esteemed hereditary according to the Law of Nature, a
multitude of destructive and inextricable Controversys would thereupon (...) p.
38. Sect. 19. Kings cannot confer the Right of Father upon Princes, nor Princes
upon Kings. p. 4^. Sect. 20. All just Magistratical Power is from the People,
p. 47.
CHAP. II.
SECT. 1. That it is natural for Nations to govern, or to choose Governors* and
that Virtue only gives a natural preference of one man above another, or reason
why one should be chosen rather than another, p. 51. Sect. 2. Every man that
has Children, has the right of a Father, and is capable of preferment in a
Society composed of many, p. 58. Sect. 3. Government is not instituted for the
good of the Governor, but of the Governed; and Power is not an advantage, but a
burden, p. 60. Sect. 4. The paternal Right devolves to, and is inherited by all
the Children, p. 62. Sect. 5. Free men join together, and frame greater or
lesser Societys, and give such forms to them as best please themselves, p. 65.
Sect. 6. They who have a right of choosing a King, have the right of making a
King, p. 73. Sect. 7. The Laws of every Nation are the measure of Magistratical
Power, p. 76. Sect. 8. There is no natural propensity in man or beast to
Monarchy, p. 82. Sect. 9. The Government instituted by God over the Israelites
was Aristocratical, p. 84. Sect. 10. Aristotle was not simply for Monarchy, or
against Popular Government, but approved or disapproved of either according to
circumstances, p. 90. Sect. 11. Liberty produces Virtue, Order and Stability:
Slavery is accompanied with Vice, Weakness and Misery, p. 92. Sect. 12. The
Glory, Virtue and Power of the Romans, began and ended with their Liberty, p.
99. Sect. 13. There is no disorder or prejudice in changing the name or number
of Magistrates, whilst the root and principle of their Power continues entire,
p. 103. Sect. 14. No Sedition was hurtful to Rome, till through their prosperity
some men gained a Power above the Laws, p. 105. Sect. 15. The Empire of Rome
perpetually decayed, when it fell into the hands of one man, p. 108. Sect. 16.
The best Governments of the World have bin composed of Monarchy, Aristocracy
and Democracy, p. 115. Sect. 17. Good Governments admit of changes in the
Superstructures, whilst the Foundations remain unchangeable, p. 118. Sect. 18.
Xenophon in blaming the disorders of Democracys, favors Aristocracys, p. 122.
Sect. 19. That corruption and venality which is natural to Courts, is seldom
found in Popular Governments, p. 128. Sect. 20. Man's natural love to Liberty
is tempered by Reason, which originally is his nature, p. 133. Sect. 21. Mixed
and Popular Governments preserve Peace, and manage Wars better than Absolute
Monarchys, p. 136. Sect. 22. Commonwealths seek Peace or War, according to the
variety of their Constitutions, p. 141. Sect. 23. That is the best Government,
which provides best for War, p. 146. Sect. 24. Popular Governments are less
subject to Civil disorders than Monarchys, manage them more ably, and more
easily recover out of them, p. 152. Sect. 25. Courts are more subject to
venality and corruption than Popular Governments, p. 179. Sect. 26. Civil
Tumults and Wars are not the greatest evils that befall Nations, p. 185. Sect.
27. The mischiefs and crueltys proceeding from Tyranny, are greater than any
that can come from Popular or Mixed Governments, p. 188. Sect. 28. Men living
under Popular or Mixed Governments, are more careful of the Public Good, than
in Absolute Monarchys, p. 193. Sect. 29 There is no assurance that the
distempers of a State shall be cured by the wisdom of a Prince, p. 200. Sect.
30. A Monarchy cannot be well regulated, unless the Powers of the Monarch are
limited by Law, p. 207. Sect. 31. The Libertys of Nations are from God and
Nature, not from Kings, p. 220. Sect. 32. The Contracts made between
Magistrates and the Nations that created them, were real, solemn, and
obligatory, p. 224.
CHAP. III.
(...) ^^^gs not being Fathers of their People, nor excelling all others (...)
can have no other just power than what the Laws give, nor any (...) Privileges
of the Lord's Anointed, p. 227. (...) The Kings of Israel and Judah were under
a Law not safely to be transgrest, p. 238. Sect. 3. Samuel did not describe to
the Israelites the glory of a free Monarchy, but the evils the People should
suffer, that he might divert them from desiring a King, p. 240. Sect. 4. No
People can be obliged to suffer from their Kings what they have not a right to
do, p. 242. Sect. 5. The mischiefs suffered from wicked Kings are such as
render it both reasonable and just for all Nations that have Virtue and Power,
to exert both in repelling them, p. 245. Sect. 6. It Is not good for such
Nations as will have Kings, to suffer them to be glorious, powerful, or
abounding in Riches, p. 249. Sect. 7. When the Israelites asked for such a King
as the Nations about them had, they asked for a Tyrant tho they did not call
him so, p. 252. Sect. 8. Under the name of Tribute no more is understood, than
what the Law of each Nation gives to the supreme Magistrate for the defraying
of public Charges; to which the customs of the Romans, or sufferings of the
Jews have no relation, p. 257. Sect. 9. Our own Laws confirm to us the
enjoyment of our native Rights, p. 262. Sect. 10. The words of St. Paul
enjoining obedience to higher Powers, favor all sorts of Government no less
than Monarchy, p. 266. Sect. 11. That which is not just is not Law, and that
which is not Law ought not to be obeyed, p. 273. Sect. 12. The right and power
of a Magistrate depends upon his Institution, not upon his Name, p. 275. Sect.
13. Laws were made to direct and instruct Magistrates, and if they will not be
directed, to restrain them, p. 278. Sect. 14. Laws are not made by Kings, not
because they are busied in greater matters than doing Justice, but because
Nations will be governed by Rule, and not arbitrarily, p. 282. Sect. 15. A
general presumption that Kings will govern well, is not a sufficient security
to the People, p. 286. Sect. 16. The observation of the Laws of Nature is
absurdly expected from Tyrants, who set themselves up against all Laws: and he
that subjects Kings to no other Law than what is common to Tyrants, destroys
their being, p. 289. Sect. 17. Kings cannot be the interpreters of the Oaths
they take, p. 294. Sect. 18. The next in blood to deceased Kings, cannot
generally be said to be Kings till they are crowned, p. 301. Sect. 19. The
greatest enemy of a just Magistrate is he who endeavors to invalidate the
Contract between him and the People, or to corrupt their manners, p. 311. Sect.
20. Unjust commands are not to be obeyed; and no man is obliged to suffer for
not obeying such as are against Law, p. 314. Sect. 21. It cannot be for the
good of the People, that the Magistrate have a Power above the Law: And he is
not a Magistrate who has not his Power by Law, p. 317. Sect. 22. The rigor of
the Law is to be tempered by men of known integrity and judgment, and not by
the Prince, who may be ignorant or vicious, p. 323. Sect. 23. Aristotle proves,
that no man is to be entrusted with an Absolute Power, by showing that no one
knows how to execute it, but such a man as is not to be found, p. 326. Sect.
24. The Power of Augustus Caesar was not given, but usurped, p. 328. Sect. 25.
The Regal Power was not the first in this Nation, nor necessarily to be
continued, tho it had bin the first, p. 329. Sect. 26. That the King may be
entrusted with the power of choosing Judges; yet that by which they act is from
the Law, p. 336. Sect. 27. Magna Charta was not the Original, but a Declaration
of the English Libertys. The King's Power is not restrained, but created by
that and other Laws; and the Nation that made them, can only correct the
defects of them, p. 343. Sect. 28. The English Nation has always bin governed
by it self, or its Representatives, p. 345. Sect. 29. The King was never Master
of the Soil, p. 357. Sect. 30. Henry the First was King of England by as good a
Title as any of his Predecessors or Successors, p. 360. Sect. 31. Free Nations
have a right of meeting, when and where they please, unless they deprive
themselves of it, p. 363. Sect. 32 The Powers of Kings are so various,
according to the Constitutions of several States, that no consequence can be
drawn to the prejudice or advantage of any one, merely from the name, p. 368.
Sect. 33. The Liberty of a People is the Gift of God and Nature, p. 369. Sect.
34. No veneration paid, or honor conferred upon a just and lawful Magistrate,
can diminish the Liberty of a Nation, p. 372. Sect. 35. The Authority given by
our Law to the Acts performed by a King de facto, detract nothing from the
Peoples Right of creating whom they please, p. 374. Sect. 36. The general
revolt of a Nation cannot be called a Rebellion, p. 376. Sect. 37. The English
Government was not ill constituted; the defects more lately observed proceeding
from the change of manners and corruption of the times, p. 380. Sect. 38. The
power of calling and dissolving Parliaments is not simply in the King. The
variety of Customs in choosing Parliamentmen, and the Errors a People may
commit, neither prove that Kings are or ought to be absolute, p. 383. Sect. 39.
Those Kings only are Heads of the People, who are good, wise, and seek to
advance no Interest but that of the Public, p. 388. Sect. 40. Good Laws
prescribe easy and safe Remedys against the Evils proceeding from the Vices or
Infirmitys of the Magistrate; and when they fail, they must be supplied, p.
393. Sect. 41. The People for whom and by whom the Magistrate is created, can
only judge whether he rightly performs his Office, or not, p. 397. Sect. 42. The
Person that wears the Crown cannot determine the Affairs which the Law refers to
the King, p. 401. Sect. 43. Proclamations are not Laws, p. 405. Sect. 44. A
People that is not free, cannot substitute Delegats, p. 409. Sect. 45. The
Legislative Power is always Arbitrary, and not to be trusted in the hands of
any, who are not bound to obey the Laws they make, p. 414. Sect. 46. The
coercive Power of the Law proceeds from the Authority of Parliament, p. 416.
DISCOURSES CONCERNING GOVERNMENT.
CHAP. I.
SECTION I. INTRODUCTION.
HAVING lately seen a Book intitul'd Patriarcha, written by Sir Robert Filmer,
concerning the Universal and undistinguished Right of all Kings, I thought a
time of leisure might be well employed in examining his Doctrine, and the
Questions arising from it; which seem so far to concern all Mankind, that,
besides the Influence upon our future Life, they may be said to comprehend all
that in this World deserves to be cared for. If he say true, there is but one
Government in the World that can have any thing of Justice in it: and those who
have hitherto bin esteemed the best and wisest of Men, for having constituted
Commonwealths or Kingdoms; and taken much pains so to proportion the Powers of
several Magistracys, that they might all concur in procuring the Public Good;
or so to divide the Powers between the Magistrates and People, that a
well-regulated Harmony might be preserved in the whole, were the most unjust
and foolish of all Men. They were not builders, but overthrowers of
Governments: their business was to set up Aristocratical, Democratical or mixed
Governments, in opposition to that Monarchy which by the immutable Laws of God
and Nature is imposed upon Mankind; or presumptuously to put Shackles upon the
Monarch, who by the same Laws is to be absolute and uncontrol'd: They were
rebellious and disobedient Sons, who rose up against their Father; and not only
refused to hearken to his Voice, but made him bend to their Will. In their
Opinion, such only deserved to be called Good Men, who endeavored to be good
to Mankind; or to that Country to which they were more particularly related:
and in as much as that Good consists in a Felicity of Estate, and Perfection of
Person, they highly valued such as had endeavored to make Men better, wiser
and happier. This they understood to be the end for which Men entered into
Societys: And tho Cicero says, that Commonwealths were instituted for the
obtaining of Justice, he contradicts them not, but comprehends all in that
word; because it is just that whosoever receives a Power, should employ it
wholly for the accomplishment of the Ends for which it was given. This Work
could be performed only by such as excelled in Virtue; but lest they should
deflect from it, no Government was thought to be well constituted, Potentiora
Legum quam hominum Imperia. Tacit.
unless the Laws prevailed above the Commands of Men; and they were accounted as
the worst of Beasts, who did not prefer such a Condition before a Subjection to
the fluctuating and irregular Will of a Man.

If we believe Sir Robert, all this is mistaken. Nothing of this kind was ever
left to the Choice of Men. They are not to inquire what conduces to their own
good: God and Nature have put us into a way from which we are not to swerve: We
are not to live to him, nor to our selves, but to the Master that he has set
over us. One Government is established over all, and no Limits can be set to
the Power of the Person that manages it. This is the Prerogative, or, as
another Author of the same Stamp calls it, the Royal Charter granted to Kings
by God. They all have an equal right to it; Women and Children are Patriarchs;
and the next in Blood, without any regard to Age, Sex, or other Qualitys of the
Mind or Body, are Fathers of as many Nations as fall under their Power. We are
not to examine, whether he or she be young or old, virtuous or vicious, sober
minded or stark mad; the Right and Power is the same in all. Whether Virtue be
exalted or suppressed; whether he that bears the Sword be a Praise to those that
do well, and a Terror to those that do evil; or a Praise to those that do evil,
and a Terror to such as do well, it concerns us not; for the King must not lose
his Right, nor have his Power diminished on any account. I have bin sometimes
apt to wonder, how things of this nature could enter into the head of any Man:
Or, if no Wickedness or Folly be so great, but some may fall into it, I could
not well conceive why they should publish it to the World. But these thoughts
ceased, when I considered that a People from all Ages in love with Liberty, and
desirous to maintain their own Privileges, could never be brought to resign
'em, unless they were made to believe that in Conscience they ought to do it;
which could not be, unless they were also persuaded to believe, that there was
a Law set to all Mankind which none might transgress, and which put the
Examination of all those Matters out of their power. This is our Author's Work.
By this it will appear whose Throne he seeks to advance, and whose Servant he
is, whilst he pretends to serve the King. And that it may be evident he has
made use of Means suitable to the Ends proposed for the Service of his great
Master, I hope to show that he has not used one Argument that is not false, nor
cited one Author whom he has not perverted and abused. Whilst my work is so to
lay open these Snares that the most simple may not be taken in them, I shall
not examine how Sir Robert came to think himself a Man fit to undertake so great
a Work, as to destroy the Principles, which from the beginning seem to have bin
common to all Mankind; but only weighing the Positions and Arguments that he
alleges, will, if there be either truth or strength in them, confess the
Discovery comes from him that gave us least reason to expect it; and that in
^p^e of the Ancients, there is not in the World a Piece of Wood out of which a
Mercury may not be made.

SECT. II. The common Notions of Liberty are not from School-Divines, but from
Nature.
IN the first Lines of his Book he seems to denounce War against Mankind,
endeavoring to overthrow the Principle of Liberty in which God created us, and
which includes the chief Advantages of the Life we enjoy, as well as the
greatest helps toward the Felicity, that is the end of our hopes in the other.
To this end he absurdly imputes to the School-Divines that which was taken up
by 'em as a common Notion, written in the Hearts of all Men, denied by none but
such as are degenerated into Beasts, from whence they might prove such Points
as of themselves were less evident. Thus did Euclid lay down certain Axioms,
which none could deny that did not renounce common Sense, from whence he drew
the Proofs of such Propositions as were less obvious to the Understanding; and
they may with as much reason be accused of Paganism, who say that the Whole is
greater than a Part, that two Halfs make the Whole, or that a straight Line is
the shortest way from Point to Point, as to say, that they who in Politics lay
such Foundations as have bin taken up by Schoolmen and others as undeniable
Truths, do therefore follow them, or have any regard to their Authority. Tho
the Schoolmen were corrupt, they were neither stupid nor unlearned: They could
not but see that which all Men saw, nor lay more approved Foundations, than,
That Man is naturally free; That he cannot justly be deprived of that Liberty
without cause, and that he dos not resign it, or any part of it, unless it be
in consideration of a greater good, which he proposes to himself. But if he
unjustly imputes the Invention of this to School-Divines, he in some measure
repairs his Fault in saying, This has bin fostered by all succeeding Papists
for good Divinity: The Divines of the reformed Churches have entertained it,
and the Common People every where tenderly embrace it. That is to say, all
Christian Divines, whether reformed or unreform'd, do approve it, and the
People every where magnify it, as the height of human Felicity. But Filmer and
such as are like to him, being neither reformed nor unreform'd Christians, nor
of the People, can have no Title to Christianity; and, in as much as they set
themselves against that which is the height of human Felicity, they declare
themselves Enemies to all that are concerned in it, that is, to all Mankind.

But, says he, They do not remember that the desire of Liberty was the first
cause of the Fall of Man: and I desire it may not be forgotten, that the
Liberty asserted is not a Licentiousness of doing what is pleasing to every one
against the Command of God; but an Exemption from all human Laws, to which they
have not given their assent. If he would make us believe there was any thing of
this in Adam's Sin, he ought to have proved, that the Law which he transgrest
was imposed upon him by Man, and consequently that there was a Man to impose
it; for it will easily appear that neither the reformed or unreform'd Divines,
nor the People following them, do place the Felicity of Man in an exemption
from the Laws of God, but in a most perfect conformity to them. Our Savior
taught us not to fear such as could kill the Body, but him that could kill and
cast into Hell: And the Apostle tells us that we should obey God rather than
Man. It has bin ever hereupon observed, that they who most precisely adhere to
the Laws of God, are least sollicitous concerning the Commands of Men, unless
they are well grounded; and those who most delight in the glorious Liberty of
the Sons of God, do not only subject themselves to him, but are most regular
Observers of the just Ordinances of Man, made by the consent of such as are
concerned according to the Will of God.

The Error of not observing this may perhaps deserve to be pardoned in a Man
that had read no Books, as proceeding from Ignorance; if such as are grossly
ignorant can be excused, when they take upon them to write of such Matters as
require the highest knowledge: But in Sir Robert it is prevarication and fraud to
impute to Schoolmen and Puritans that which in his first Page he acknowledged
to be the Doctrine of all Reformed and Unreform'd Christian Churches, and that
he knows to have bin the Principle in which the Grecians, Italians, Spaniards,
Gauls, Germans, and Britans, and all other generous Nations ever lived, before
the Name of Christ was known in the World; insomuch that the base effeminate
Asiaticks and Africans, for being careless of their Liberty, or unable to
govern themselves, were by Aristotle and other wise Men called Slaves by
Nature, and looked upon as little different from Beasts.

This which has its Root in common Sense, not being to be overthrown by
Reason, he spares his pains of seeking any; but thinks it enough to render his
Doctrine plausible to his own Party, by joining the Jesuits to Geneva, and
coupling Buchanan to Doleman, as both maintaining the same Doctrine: tho he
might as well have joined the Puritans with the Turks, because they all think
that one and one makes two. But whoever marks the Proceedings of Filmer and his
Masters, as well as his Disciples, will rather believe that they have learned
from Rome and the Jesuits to hate Geneva, than that Geneva and Rome can agree
in any thing farther than as they are obliged to submit to the Evidence of
Truth; or that Geneva and Rome can concur in any Design or Interest that is not
common to Mankind.

These Men allowed to the People a liberty of deposing their Princes. This is a
desperate Opinion. Bellarmin and Calvin look asquint at it. But why is this a
desperate Opinion? If Disagreements happen between King and People, why is it a
more desperate Opinion to think the King should be subject to the Censures of
the People, than the People subject to the Will of the King? Did the People
make the King, or the King make the People? Is the King for the People, or the
People for the King? Did God create the Hebrews that Saul might reign over
them? or did they, from an opinion of procuring their own Good, ask a King,
that might judge them, and fight their Battles? If God's interposition, which
shall be hereafter explained, dos alter the Case; did the Romans make Romulus,
Numa, Tullus Hostilius, and Tarquinius Priscus Kings? or did they make or beget
the Romans? If they were made Kings by the Romans, it is certain they that made
them sought their own good in so doing; and if they were made by and for the
City and People, I desire to know if it was not better, that when their
Successors departed from the End of their Institution, by endeavoring to
destroy it, or all that was good in it, they should be censured and ejected,
than be permitted to ruin that People for whose good they were created? Was it
more just that Caligula or Nero should be suffered to destroy the poor Remains
of the Roman Nobility and People, with the Nations subject to that Empire, than
that the Race of such Monsters should be extinguished, and a great part of
Mankind, especially the best, against whom they were most fierce, preserved by
their Death?

I presume our Author thought these Questions might be easily decided; and that
no more was required to show the forementioned Assertions were not at all
desperate, than to examine the Grounds of them; but he seeks to divert us from
this enquiry, by proposing the dreadful Consequences of subjecting Kings to the
Censures of their People: whereas no Consequence can destroy any Truth; and the
worst of this is, That if it were received, some Princes might be restrained
from doing Evil, or punished if they will not be restrained. We are therefore
only to consider whether the People, Senate, or any Magistracy made by and for
the People, have, or can have such a Right; for if they have, whatsoever the
Consequences may be, it must stand: And as the one tends to the Good of Mankind
in restraining the Lusts of wicked Kings; the other exposes'em without Remedy
to the Fury of the most savage of all Beasts. I am not ashamed in this to
concur with Buchanan, Calvin, or Bellarmin; and without Envy leave to Filmer
and his Associats the Glory of maintaining the contrary.

But notwithstanding our Author's aversion to Truth, he confesses, That
Hayward, Blackwood, Barclay, and others who have bravely vindicated the Right
of Kings in this Point, do with one consent admit, as an unquestionable Truth,
and assent unto the natural Liberty and Equality of Mankind, not so much as
once questioning or opposing it. And indeed I believe, that tho since the Sin
of our first Parents the Earth has brought forth Briars and Brambles, and the
Nature of Man has bin fruitful only in Vice and Wickedness; neither the Authors
he mentions, nor any others, have had impudence enough to deny such evident
Truth as seems to be planted in the Hearts of all Men; or to publish Doctrins
so contrary to common Sense, Virtue, and Humanity, till these Times. The
production of Laud, Manwaring, Sibthorp, Hobbs, Filmer and Heylin, seems to
have bin reserved as an additional Curse to complete the Shame and Misery of
our Age and Country. Those who had Wit and Learning, with something of
Ingenuity and Modesty, tho they believed that Nations might possibly make an
ill use of their Power, and were very desirous to maintain the Cause of Kings,
as far as they could put any good color upon it; yet never denied that some
had suffered justly (which could not be, is there were no Power of judging
them) nor ever asserted any thing that might arm them with an irresistible
Power of doing mischief, animate them to persist in the most flagitious
Courses, with assurance of perpetual Impunity, or engage Nations in an
inevitable necessity of suffering all manner of Outrages. They knew that the
Actions of those Princes who were not altogether detestable, might be defended
by particular Reasons drawn from them, or the Laws of their Country; and would
neither undertake the defense of such as were abominable, nor bring Princes, to
whom they wished well, into the odious extremity of justifying themselves by
Arguments that favored Caligula and Nero, as well as themselves, and that must
be taken for a Confession, that they were as bad as could be imagined; since
nothing could be said for them that might not as well be applied to the worst
that had bin, or could be. But Filmer, Heylin, and their Associats, scorning to
be restrained by such considerations, boldly lay the Ax to the Root of the
Tree, and rightly enough affirm, That the whole Fabric of that which they call
Popular Sedition would fall to the ground, if the Principle of natural Liberty
were removed. And on the other hand it must be acknowledged that the whole
Fabric of Tyranny will be much weakened, if we prove, That Nations have a
right to make their own Laws, constitute their own Magistrates; and that such as
are so constituted, owe an account of their Actions to those by whom, and for
whom they are appointed.

SECT. III. Implicit Faith belongs to Fools, and Truth is comprehended by
examining Principles.
WHILST Filmer's business is to overthrow Liberty and Truth, he, in his
Passage, modestly professes not to meddle with Mysterys of State, or Arcana
Imperii. He renounces those Inquirys through an implicit Faith, which never
entered into the head of any but Fools, and such as, through a carelessness of the
Point in question, acted as if they were so. This is the Foundation of the
Papal Power, and it can stand no longer than those that compose the Roman
Church can be persuaded to submit their Consciences to the Word of the Priests,
and esteem themselves discharged from the necessity of searching the
Scriptures, in order to know whether the things that are told them are true of
false. This may show whether our Author or those of Geneva do best agree with
the Roman Doctrine. But his Instance is yet more sottish than his Profession: An
Implicit Faith, says he, is given to the meanest Artificer. I wonder by whom!
Who will wear a Shoo that hurts him, because the Shoo-maker tells him it is well
made? or who will live in a House that yields no defense against the extremitys
of Weather, because the Mason or Carpenter assures him it is a very good House?
Such as have Reason, Understanding, or common Sense, will, and ought to make
use of it in those things that concern themselves and their Posterity, and
suspect the Words of such as are interested in deceiving or persuading them not
to see with their own Eyes, that they may be more easily deceived. This Rule
obliges us so far to search into Matters of State, as to examine the Original
Principles of Government in general, and of our own in particular. We cannot
distinguish Truth from Falsehood, Right from Wrong, or know what Obedience we
owe to the Magistrate, or what we may justly expect from him, unless we know
what he is, why he is, and by whom he is made to be what he is. These perhaps
may be called Mysterys of State, and some would persuade us they are to be
esteemed Arcana; but whosoever confesses himself to be ignorant of 'em, must
acknowledge he is incapable of giving any judgment upon things relating to the
Superstructure, and in so doing evidently shows to others, that they ought not
at all to hearken to what he says.

His Argument to prove this is more admirable. If an Implicit Faith, says he,
is given to the meanest Artificer in his Craft, much more to a Prince in the
profound Secrets of Government. But where is the Consequence? If I trust to the
judgment of an Artificer, or one of a more ingenuous Profession, it is not
because he is of it, but because I am persuaded he dos well understand it, and
that he will be saithful to me in things relating to his Art. I do not send for
Lower or Micklethwait when I am sick, nor ask the Advice of Maynard or Jones in
a Suit of Law, because the first are Physicians, and the other Lawyers; but
because I think them wise, learned, diligent, and faithful, there being a
multitude of others who go under the same name, whose Opinion I would never
ask. Therefore if any Conclusion can be drawn from thence in favor of Princes,
it must be of such as have all the Qualitys of Ability and Integrity, that
should create this confidence in me; or it must be proved that all Princes, in
as much as they are Princes, have such Qualitys. No general Conclusion can be
drawn from the first Case, because it must depend upon the Circumstances, which
ought to be particularly proved: And if the other be asserted, I desire to know
whether Caligula, Claudius, Nero, Vitellius, Domitian, Commodus, Heliogabalus,
and others not unlike to them, had those admirable Endowments, upon which an
Implicit Faith ought to have bin grounded; how they came by them; and whether
we have any Promise from God, that all Princes should for ever excel in those
Virtues, or whether by experience we find that they do so. If they are or have
bin wanting in any, the whole falls to the ground; for no Man enjoys as a
Prince that which is not common to all Princes: And if every Prince has not
Wisdom to understand these profound Secrets, Integrity to direct him, according
to what he knows to be good, and a sufficient measure of Industry and Valor to
protect me, he is not the Artificer to whom the Implicit Faith is due. His Eyes
are as subject to dazzle as my own. But it is a shame to insist on such a Point
as this. We see Princes of all sorts; they are born as other Men: The vilest
Flatterer dares not deny that they are wise or foolish, good or bad, valiant or
cowardly, like other Men: and the Crown dos neither bestow extraordinary
Qualitys, ripen such as are found in Princes sooner than in the meanest, nor
preserve them from the decays of Age, Sickness, or other Accidents, to which
all Men are subject. And if the greatest King in the World falls into them, he
is as incapable of that mysterious Knowledge, and his Judgment is as little to
be relied on, as that of the poorest Peasant.

This Matter is not mended by sending us to seek those Virtues in the
Ministers, which are wanting in the Prince. The ill effects of Rehoboam's Folly
could not be corrected by the Wisdom of Solomon's Counselors: He rejected
them; and such as are like to him will always do the same thing. Nero advised
with none but Musicians, Players, Chariotdrivers, or the abominable Ministers
of his Pleasures and Crueltys. Arcadius his Senate was chiefly composed of
Buffoons and Cooks, influenced by an old rascally Eunuch. And it is an eternal
Truth, that a weak or wicked Prince can never choose a wise Council, nor receive
any benefit by one that is imposed upon him, unless they have a Power of acting
without him, which would render the Government in effect Aristocratical, and
would probably displease our Author as much as if it were so in name also. Good
and wise Counselors do not grow up like Mushrooms; great Judgment is required
in choosing and preparing them. If a weak or vicious Prince should be so happy
to find them chosen to his hand, they would avail him nothing. There will ever
be variety of Opinions amongst 'em; and he that is of a perverted Judgment will
always choose the worse of those that are proposed, and favor the worst Men, as
most like to himself. Therefore if this Implicit Faith be grounded upon a
supposition of profound Wisdom in the Prince, the Foundation is overthrown, and
cannot stand; for to repose confidence in the Judgment and Integrity of one
that has none, is the most brutish of all Follys. So that if a Prince may have
or want the Qualitys, upon which my Faith in him can be rationally grounded, I
cannot yield the Obedience he requires, unless I search into the Secrets
relating to his Person and Commands, which he forbids. I cannot know how to
obey, unless I know in what, and to whom: Nor in what, unless I know what ought
to be commanded: Nor what ought to be commanded, unless I understand the
Original Right of the Commander, which is the great Arcanum. Our Author finding
himself involved in many Difficultys, proposes an Expedient as ridiculous as
any thing that had gone before, being nothing more than an absurd begging the
main question, and determining it without any shadow of proof. He enjoins an
active or passive Obedience, before he shows what should oblige or persuade us
to it. This indeed were a compendious way of obviating that which he calls
Popular Sedition, and of exposing all Nations, that fall under the Power of
Tyrants, to be destroyed utterly by them. Nero or Domitian would have desired
no more, than that those who would not execute their wicked Commands, should
patiently have suffered their Throats to be cut by such as were less
scrupulous: And the World that had suffered those Monsters for some years, must
have continued under their Fury, till all that was good and virtuous had bin
abolished. But in those Ages and Parts of the World, where there has bin any
thing of Virtue and Goodness, we may observe a third sort of Men, who would
neither do Villanys, nor suffer more than the Laws did permit, or the
consideration of the public Peace did require. Whilst Tyrants with their
Slaves, and the Instruments of their Crueltys, were accounted the Dregs of
Mankind, and made the objects of detestation and scorn, these Men who delivered
their Countries from such Plagues were thought to have something of Divine in
them, and have bin famous above all the rest of Mankind to this day. Of this
sort were Pelopidas, Epaminondas, Thrasibulus, Harmodius, Aristogiton,
Philopemen, Lucius Brutus, Publius Valerius, Marcus Brutus, C. Cassius, M.
Cato, with a multitude of others amongst the ancient Heathens. Such as were
Instruments of the like Deliverances amongst the Hebrews, as Moses, Othniel,
Ehud, Barac, Gideon, Sampson, Jephtha, Samuel, David, Jehu, the Maccabees and
others, have from the Scriptures a certain Testimony of the Righteousness of
their Proceedings, when they neither would act what was evil, nor suffer more
than was reasonable. But lest we should learn by their Examples, and the
Praises given to them, our Author confines the Subject's choice to acting or
suffering, that is, doing what is commanded, or lying down to have his Throat
cut, or to see his Family and Country made desolate. This he calls giving to
Caesar that which is Cesar's; whereas he ought to have considered that the
Question is not, whether that which is Cesar's should be rendered to him, for
that is to be done to all Men; but who is Caesar, and what does of right belong
to him, which he no way indicates to us: so that the Question remains entire,
as if he had never mentioned it, unless we do in a compendious way take his
word for the whole.

SECT. IV. The Rights of particular Nations cannot subsist, if General
Principles contrary to them are received as true.
NOtwithstanding this, our Anthor, if we will believe him, dos not question or
quarrel at the Rights or Libertys of this or any other Nation. He only denies
they can have any such, in subjecting them necessarily and universally to the
will of one Man; and says not a word that is not applicable to every Nation in
the World, as well as to our own. But as the bitterness of his malice seems to
be most especially directed against England, I am inclined to believe he hurts
other Countries only by accident: as the famous The Marchioness of Brinvilliers.
French Lady intended only to poison her Father, Husband, Brother, and some
more of her nearest Relations; but rather than they should escape, destroyed
many other Persons of Quality, who at several times dined with them: and if
that ought to excuse her, I am content he also should pass uncensur'd, tho his
Crimes are incomparably greater than those for which she was condemned, or than
any can be which are not of a public extent.

SECT. V. To depend upon the Will of a Man is Slavery.
THis, as he thinks, is farther sweetened, by asserting, that he dos not
inquire what the Rights of a People are, but from whence; not considering, that
whilst he denies they can proceed from the Laws of natural Liberty, or any
other Root than the Grace and Bounty of the Prince, he declares they can have
none at all. For as Liberty solely consists in an independency upon the Will of
another, and by the name of Slave we understand a Man, who can neither dispose
of his Person nor Goods, but enjoys all at the will of his Master; there is no
such thing in nature as a Slave, if those Men or Nations are not Slaves, who
have no other title to what they enjoy, than the grace of the Prince, which he
may revoke whenever he pleases. But there is more than ordinary Extravagance
in his Assertion, That the greatest Liberty in the World is for a People to
live under a Monarch, when his whole Book is to prove, That this Monarch has
his Right from God and Nature, is endowed with an unlimited Power of doing what
he pleases, and can be restrained by no Law. If it be Liberty to live under
such a Government, I desire to know what is Slavery. It has bin hitherto
believed in the World, that the Assyrians, Medes, Arabs, Egyptians, Turks, and
others like them, lived in Slavery, because their Princes were Masters of their
Lives and Goods: Whereas the Grecians, Italians, Gauls, Germans, Spaniards, and
Carthaginians, as long as they had any Strength, Virtue or Courage amongst 'em,
were esteemed free Nations, because they abhorred such a Subjection. They were,
and would be governed only by Laws of their own making: Potentiora erant Legum
quam hominum Imperia. Even their Princes had the C. Tacit* Ibid.
Authority or Credit of Persuading, rather than the Power of Commanding. But
all this was mistaken: These Men were Slaves, and the Asiaticks were Freemen.
By the same rule the Venetians, Switzers, Grisons, and Hollanders, are not free
Nations: but Liberty in its perfection is enjoyed in France, and Turkey. The
Intention of our Ancestors was, without doubt, to establish this amongst us by
Magna Charta, and other preceding or subsequent Laws; but they ought to have
added one clause, That the Contents of 'em should be in sorce only so long as
it pleased the King. King Alfred, upon whose Laws Magna Charta was grounded,
when he said the English Nation was as free as the internal thoughts of a Man,
did only mean, that it should be so as long as it pleased their Master. This it
seems was the end of our Law, and we who are born under it, and are descended
from such as have so valiantly defended their Rights against the Encroachments
of Kings, have followed after vain shadows, and without the expense of Sweat,
Treasure, or Blood, might have secured our beloved Liberty, by casting all into
the King's hands.

We owe the discovery of these Secrets to our Author, who after having gravely
declared 'em, thinks no offense ought to be taken at the freedom he assumes of
examining things relating to the Liberty of Mankind, because he has the Right
which is common to all. But he ought to have considered, that in asserting that
Right to himself, he allows it to all Mankind. And as the temporal good of all
Men consists in the preservation of it, he declares himself to be their mortal
Enemy, who endeavors to destroy it. If he were alive, this would deserve to be
answered with Stones rather than Words. He that oppugns the public Liberty,
overthrows his own, and is guilty of the most brutish of all Follys, whilst he
arrogates to himself that which he denies to all Men.

I cannot but commend his Modesty and Care not to detract from the Worth of
Learned Men; but it seems they were all subject to error, except himself, who
is rendered infallible through Pride, Ignorance, and Impudence. But if Hooker and
Aristotle were wrong in their Fundamentals concerning natural Liberty, how
could they be in the right when they built upon it? Or if they did mistake, how
can they deserve to be cited? or rather, why is such care taken to pervert
their Sense? It seems our Author is by their Errors brought to the knowledge of
the Truth. Men have heard of a Dwarf standing on the Shoulders of a Giant, who
saw farther than the Giant; but now that the Dwarf standing on the Ground sees
that which the Giant did overlook, we must learn from him. If there be Sense in
this, the Giant must be blind, or have such eyes only as are of no use to him.
He minded only the things that were far from him: These Great and Learned Men
mistook the very Principle and Foundation of all their Doctrine. If we believe
our Author, this misfortune befell them, because they too much trusted to the
Schoolmen. He names Aristotle, and I presume intends to comprehend Plato,
Plutarch, Thucydides, Xenophon, Polybius, and all the ancient Grecians,
Italians, and others, who asserted the natural Freedom of Mankind, only in
imitation of the Schoolmen, to advance the Power of the Pope; and would have
compast their design, if Filmer and his Associats had not opposed 'em. These
Men had taught us to make the unnatural Distinction between Royalist and
Patriot; and kept us from seeing, That the relation between King and People is
so great that their well-being is reciprocal. If this be true, how came Tarquin
to think it good for him to continue King at Rome, when the People would turn
him out? or the People to think it good for them to turn him out, when he
desired to continue in? Why did the Syracusians destroy the Tyranny of
Dionysius, which he was not willing to leave, till he was pulled out by the
heels? How could Nero think of burning Rome? Or why did Caligula wish the
People had but one Neck, that he might strike it off at one blow, if their
Welsare was thus reciprocal? It Is not enough to say, These were wicked or mad
Men; for other Princes may be so also, and there may be the same reason of
differing from them. For if the Proposition be not universally true, it is not
to be received as true in relation to any, till it be particularly proved; and
then it is not to be imputed to the Quality of Prince, but to the personal
Virtue of the Man.

I do not find any great matters in the passages taken out of Bellarmin, which,
our Author says, comprehend the strength of all that ever he had heard, read,
or seen produced for the natural Liberty of the Subject: but he not mentioning
where they are to be found, I do not think my self obliged to examine all his
Works, to see whether they are rightly cited or not; however there is certainly
nothing new in them: We see the same, as to the substance, in those who wrote
many Ages before him, as well as in many that have lived since his time, who
neither minded him, nor what he had written. I dare not take upon me to give an
account of his Works, having read few of them; but as he seems to have laid the
Foundation of his Discourses in such common Notions as were assented to by all
Mankind, those who follow the same method have no more regard to Jesuitism and
Popery, tho he was a Jesuit and a Cardinal, than they who agree with Faber and
other Jesuits in the Principles of Geometry, which no sober Man did ever deny.

SECT. VI. God leaves to Man the choice of Forms in Government; and those who
constitute one Form, may abrogate it.
BUT Sir Robert desires to make Observations on Bellarmin 's words, before he
examins or refutes them; and indeed it were not possible to make such stuff of
his Doctrine as he dos, if he had examined or did understand it. First, he very
wittily concludes, That if by the Law of God, the Power be immediately in the
People, God is the Author of a Democracy: And why not as well as of a Tyranny?
Is there any thing in it repugnant to the Being of God? Is there more reason to
impute to God Caligula's Monarchy, than the Democracy of Athens? Or is it more
for the Glory of God, to assert his Presence with the Ottoman or French
Monarchs, than with the popular Governments of the Switsers and Grisons? Is
Pride, Malice, Luxury and Violence so suitable to his Being, that they who
exercise them are to be reputed his Ministers? And is Modesty, Humility,
Equality, and Justice so contrary to his Nature, that they who live in them
should be thought his Enemies? Is there any absurdity in saying, that since God
in Goodness and Mercy to Mankind, has with an equal hand given to all the
Benefit of Liberty, with some measure of understanding how to employ it, it is
lawful for any Nation, as occasion shall require, to give the Exercise of that
Power to one or more Men, under certain Limitations or Conditions; or to retain
it in themselves, if they think it good for them? If this may be done, we are
at the end of all Controversys concerning one Form of Government established by
God, to which all Mankind must submit; and we may safely conclude, that having
given to all Men in some degree a Capacity of judging what is good for
themselves, he has granted to all likewise a Liberty of inventing such Forms as
please them best, without favoring one more than another.

His second Observation is grounded upon a Falsity in matter of Fact. Bellarmin
dos not say, that Democracy is an Ordinance of God more than any other
Government; nor that the People have no Power to make use of their Right; but
that they do, that is to say ordinarily, transmit the Exercise of it to one or
more. And it is certain they do sometimes, especially in small Citys, retain it
in themselves: But whether that were observed or not by Bellarmin, makes
nothing to our Cause, which we defend, and not him.

The next Point is subtle, and he thinks thereby to have brought Belarrmin,
and such as agree with his Principle, to a Nonplus. He doubts who shall judge of
the lawful cause of changing the Government, and says, It is a pestilent
Conclusion to place that Power in the Multitude. But why should this be
esteemed pestilent? or to whom? If the allowance of such a Power to the Senate
was pestilent to Nero, it was beneficial to Mankind; and the denial of it,
which would have given to Nero an opportunity of continuing in his Villanys,
would have bin pestilent to the best of Men, whom he endeavored to destroy,
and to all others that received benefit from them. But this Question depends
upon another; for if Governments are constituted for the Pleasure, Greatness or
Profit of one Man, he must not be interrupted; for the opposing of his Will, is
to overthrow the Institution. On the other side, if the Good of the Governed be
sought, care must be taken that the End be accomplished, tho it be with the
prejudice of the Governor: If the Power be originally in the Multitude, and one
or more Men, to whom the exercise of it, or a part of it was committed, had no
more than their Brethren, till it was conferred on him or them, it cannot be
believed that rational Creatures would advance one or a few of their Equals
above themselves, unless in consideration of their own Good; and then I find no
inconvenience in leaving to them a right of judging, Cujus est instituere, ejus
est abrogate.
whether this be duly performed or not. We say in general, He that institutes,
may also abrogate, most especially when the Institution is not only by, but for
himself. If the Multitude therefore do institute, the Multitude may abrogate;
and they themselves, or those who succeed in the same Right, can only be fit
Judges of the performance of the Ends of the Institution. Our Author may
perhaps say, The public Peace may be hereby disturbed: but he ought to know,
There can be no Peace, where there is no Justice; nor any Justice, if the
Government instituted for the good of a Nation be turned to its ruin. But in
plain English, the Inconvenience with which such as he endeavor to afright us,
is no more than that He or They, to whom the Power is given, may be restrained
or chastis'd, if they betray their Trust; which I presume will displease none,
but such as would rather subject Rome with the best part of the World depending
on it, to the Will of Caligula or Nero, than Caligula or Nero to the Judgment
of the Senate and People; that is, rather to expose many great and brave Nations
to be destroyed by the rage of a savage Beast, than subject that Beast to the
Judgment of all, or the choicest Men of them, who can have no interest to
pervert them, or other reason to be severe to him, than to prevent the
Mischiefs he would commit, and to save the People from ruin.

In the next place he recites an Argument of Bellarmin, That it is evident in
Scripture God has ordained Powers; but God has given them to no particular
Person, because by Nature all Men are equal; therefore he has given Power to
the People or Multitude. I leave him to untie that Knot if he can; but, as it is
usual with Impostors, he goes about by Surmises to elude the Force of this
Argument, pretending that in some other place he had contradicted himself, and
acknowledged that every Man was Prince of his Posterity; because that if many
Men had bin created together, they ought all to have bin Princes of their
Posterity. But it is not necessary to argue upon Passages cited from Authors,
when he that cites 'em may be justly suspected of Fraud, and neither indicates
the Place nor Treatise, lest it should be detected; most especially when we are
no way concerned in the Author's Credit. I take Bellarmin's Argument to be
strong; and if he in some place did contradict it, the hurt is only to himself:
but in this particular I should not think he did it, tho I were sure our Author
had faithfully repeated his words; for in allowing every Man to be Prince of
his Posterity, he only says, every Man should be chief in his own Family, and
have a Power over his Children, which no man denies: But he dos not understand
Latin, who thinks the word Princeps does in any degree signify an absolute
Power, or a right of transmitting it to his Heirs and Successors, upon which
the Doctrine of our Author wholly depends. On the contrary, The same Law that
gave to my Father a Power over me, gives me the like over my Children; and if I
had a thousand Brothers, each of them would have the same over their Children.
Bellarmin's Argument therefore being no way enervated by the alleged Passage,
I may justly insist upon it, and add, That God has not only declared in
Scripture, but written on the Heart of every Man, that as it is better to be
clothed, than to go naked; to live in a House, than to lie in the Fields; to be
defended by the united Force of a Multitude, than to place the hopes of his
Security solely in his own strength; and to prefer the Benefits of Society,
before a savage and barbarous Solitude: he has also taught them to frame such
Societys, and to establish such Laws as were necessary to preserve them. And we
may as reasonably affirm, that Mankind is for ever obliged to use no other
Clothes than leather Breeches, like Adam; to live in hollow Trees, and eat
Acorns, or to seek after the Model of his House for a Habitation, and to use no
Arms except such as were known to the Patriarchs; as to think all Nations for
ever obliged to be governed as they governed their Familys. This I take to be
the genuin sense of the Scripture, and the most respectful way of interpreting
the Places relating to our purpose. It Is hard to imagine, that God who has left
all things to our choice, that are not evil in themselves, should tie us up in
this; and utterly incredible that he should impose upon us a necessity of
following his Will, without declaring it to us. Instead of constituting a
Government over his People, consisting of many Parts, which we take to be a
Model fit to be imitated by others, he might have declared in a word, That the
eldest Man of the eldest Line should be King; and that his Will ought to be
their Law. This had bin more suitable to the Goodness and Mercy of God, than to
leave us in a dark Labyrinth, full of Precipices; or rather, to make the
Government given to his own People, a false Light to lead us to destruction.
This could not be avoided, if there were such a thing as our Author calls a
Lord Paramount over his Childrens Children to all Generations. We see nothing
in Scripture, of Precept or Example, that is not utterly abhorrent to this
Chimera. The only sort of Kings mentioned there with approbation, is such a one
as may not raise his Heart above his Brethren. Deuteronomy. 17.
If God had constituted a Lord Paramount with an absolute Power, and multitudes
of Nations were to labor and fight for his Greatness and Pleasure, this were
to raise his Heart to a height, that would make him forget he was a Man. Such
as are versed in Scripture, not only know that it neither agrees with the
Letter or Spirit of that Book; but that it is unreasonable in it self, unless
he were of a Species different from the rest of Mankind. His exaltation would
not agree with God's Indulgence to his Creatures, tho he were the better for
it; much less when probably he would be made more unhappy, and worse, by the
Pride, Luxury and other Vices, that always attend the highest Fortunes. It Is no
less incredible that God, who disposes all things in Wisdom and Goodness, and
appoints a due Place for all, should, without distinction, ordain such a Power,
to every one succeeding in such a Line, as cannot be executed; the Wise would
refuse, and Fools cannot take upon 'em the burden of it, without ruin to
themselves, and such as are under them: or expose Mankind to a multitude of
other Absurditys and Mischiefs; subjecting the Aged to be governed by Children;
the Wise to depend on the Will of Fools; the Strong and Valiant, to expect
defense from the Weak or Cowardly; and all in general to receive Justice from
him, who neither knows nor cares for it.

SECT. VII. Abraham and the Patriarchs were not Kings.
IF any Man say, that we are not to seek into the depth of God's Counsels; I
answer, That if he had, for Reasons known only to himself, affixed such a Right
to any one Line, he would have set a Mark upon those who come of it, that
Nations might know to whom they owe Subjection; or given some testimony of his
Presence with Filmer and Heylin, if he had sent them to reveal so great a
Mystery. Till that be done, we may safely look upon them as the worst of Men,
and teachers only of Lies and Follys. This persuades me little, to examine what
would have bin, if God had it once created many Men, or the Conclusions that
can be drawn from Adam's having bin alone. For nothing can be more evident than
that if many had bin created, they had bin all equal, unless God had given a
Preference to one. All their Sons had inherited the same Right after their
death; and no Dream was ever more empty, than his Whimsy of Adam's Kingdom, or
that of the ensuing Patriarchs. To say the truth, it is hard to speak seriously
of Abraham's Kingdom, or to think any Man to be in earnest who mentions it. He
was a Stranger, and a Pilgrim in the Land where he lived, and pretended to no
Authority beyond his own Family, which consisted only of a Wife and Slaves. He
lived with Lot as with his Equal, and would have no Contest with him, because
they were Brethren. His Wife and Servants could neither make up, nor be any
part of a Kingdom, in as much as the despotical Government, both in Practice
and Principle, differs from the Regal. If his Kingdom was to be grounded on the
Paternal Right, it vanished away of it self; he had no Child: Eliezer of
Damascus, for want of a better, was to be his Heir: Lot, tho his Nephew, was
excluded: He durst not own his own Wife: He had not one foot of Land, till he
bought a Field for a burying-place: His three hundred and eighteen Men were
Servants, (bought according to the custom of those days) or their Children; and
the War he made with them, was like to Gideon's Enterprise; which shows only
that God can save by a few as well as by many, but makes nothing to our
Author's purpose. For if they had bin as many in number as the Army of
Semiramis, they could have no relation to the Regal, much less to the Paternal
Power; for a Father dos not buy, but beget Children.

Notwithstanding this, our Author bestows the proud Title of Lord Paramount
upon him, and transmits it to Isaac, who was indeed a King like his Father,
great, admirable, and glorious in Wisdom and Holiness, but utterly void of all
worldly splendour or power. This spiritual Kingdom was inherited by Jacob, whose
Title to it was not founded on Prerogative of Birth, but Election and peculiar
Grace; but he never enjoyed any other worldly Inheritance, than the Field and
Cave which Abraham had bought for a burying-place, and the Goods he had gained
in Laban's Service.

The Example of Judah his Sentence upon Thamar is yet farther from the purpose,
if it be possible; for he was then a Member of a private Family, the fourth Son
of a Father then living; neither in possession, nor under the promise of the
Privileges of Primogeniture, tho Ruben, Simeon and Levi fell from it by their
Sins. Whatsoever therefore the Right was, which belonged to the Head of the
Family, it must have bin in Jacob; but as he professed himself a keeper of Sheep,
as his Fathers had bin, the exercise of that Employment was so far from Regal,
that it deserves no explication. If that Act of Judah is to be imputed to a
Royal Power, I have as much as I ask: He, tho living with his Father, and elder
Brothers, when he came to be of Age to have Children, had the same Power over
such, as were of, or came into his Family, as his Father had over him; for none
can go beyond the Power of Life and Death: The same in the utmost extent,
cannot at the same time equally belong to many. If it be divided equally, it is
no more than that Universal Liberty which God has given to Mankind; and every
Man is a King till he devests himself of his Right, in consideration of
something that he thinks better for him.

SECT. VIII. Nimrod was the first King, during the Life of Chush, Cham, Shem,
and Noah.
THE Creation is exactly described in the Scripture; but we know so little of
what past between the finishing of it and the Flood, that our Author may say
what he pleases, and I may leave him to seek his Proofs where he can find them.
In the mean time I utterly deny, that any Power did remain in the Heads of
Familys after the Flood, that dos in the least degree resemble the Regal in
Principle or Practice. If in this I am mistaken, such Power must have bin in
Noah, and transmitted to one of his Sons. The Scripture says only, that he
built an Altar, sacrificed to the Lord, was a Husbandman, planted a Vineyard,
and performed such Offices as bear nothing of the Image of a King, for the
space of three hundred and fifty Years. We have reason to believe, that his
Sons after his Death continued in the same manner of Life, and the Equality
properly belonging to Brethren. It Is not easy to determine, whether Shem or
Japhet were the Elder; but Ham is declared to be the younger: Genesis 9.
and Noah's Blessing to Shem seems to be purely Prophetical and Spiritual, of
what should be accomplished in his Posterity; with which Japhet should be
persuaded to join. If it had bin worldly, the whole Earth must have bin brought
under him, and have for ever continued in his Race, which never was
accomplished, otherwise than in the Spiritual Kingdom of Christ, which relates
not to our Author's Lord Paramount.

As to earthly Kings, the first of 'em was Nimrod, the sixth Son of Chush the
Son of Ham, Noah's younger and accursed Son. This Kingdom was set up about a
hundred and thirty Years after the Flood, whilst Chush, Ham, Shem and Noah were
yet living: whereas if there were any thing of Truth in our Author's
Proposition, all Mankind must have continued under the Government of Noah
whilst he lived; and that Power must have bin transmitted to Shem, who lived
about three hundred and seventy Years after the erection of Nimrod's Kingdom;
and must have come to Japhet if he was the Elder, but could never come to Cham,
who is declared to have bin certainly the Younger, and condemned to be a
Servant to them both; much less to the younger Son of his Son, whilst he, and
those to whom he and his Posterity were to be Subjects, were still living.

This Rule therefore, which the Partisans of Absolute Monarchy fancy to be
universal and perpetual, falling out in its first beginning, directly contrary
to what they assert; and being never known to have bin recovered, were enough
to silence them, if they had any thing of modesty or regard to Truth. But the
matter may be carried farther: For the Scripture not only testifys, that this
Kingdom of Nimrod was an Usurpation, void of all Right, proceeding from the
most violent and mischievous Vices, but exercised with the utmost fury, that
the most wicked Man of the accursed Race, who set himself up against God, and
all that is good, could be capable of. The progress of this Kingdom was suitable
to its Institution: that which was begun in wickedness, was carried on with
madness, and produced Confusion. The mighty Hunter, whom the best Interpreters
call a cruel Tyrant, receding from the simplicity and innocence of the
Patriarchs, who were Husbandmen or Shepherds, arrogating to himself a Dominion
over Shem, to whom he and his Fathers were to be Servants, did thereby so
peculiarly become the Heir of God's Curse, that whatsoever has bin said to this
day, of the Power that did most directly set it self against God and his
People, has related literally to the Babel that he built, or figuratively to
that which resembles it in Pride, Cruelty, Injustice and Madness.

But the shameless rage of some of these Writers is such, that they rather
choose to ascribe the beginning of their Idol to this odious Violence, than to
own it from the consent of a willing People; as if they thought, that as all
Action must be suitable to its Principle, so that which is unjust in its
practice, ought to scorn to be derived from that which is not detestable in its
principle. It Is hardly worth our pains to examine whether the Nations, that went
from Babel after the confusion of Languages, were more or less than seventy
two, for they seem not to have gone according to Familys, but every one to have
associated himself to those that understood his Speech; and the chief of the
Fathers, as Noah and his Sons, were not there, or were subject to Nimrod; each
of which Points does destroy, even in the Root, all pretense to Paternal
Government. Besides, it is evident in Scripture, that Noah lived three hundred
and fifty Years after the Flood; Shem five hundred; Abraham was born about two
hundred and ninety Years after the Flood, and lived one hundred seventy five
Years: He was therefore born under the Government of Noah, and died under that
of Shem: He could not therefore exercise a regal Power whilst he lived, for
that was in Shem: So that in leaving his Country, and setting up a Family for
himself, that never acknowledged any Superior, and never pretending to reign
over any other, he fully showed he thought himself free, and to owe subjection
to none: And being as far from arrogating to himself any Power upon the Title
of Paternity, as from acknowledging it in any other, left every one to the same
liberty.

The punctual enumeration of the Years that the Fathers of the holy Seed lived,
gives us ground of making a more than probable conjecture, that they of the
collateral Lines were, in number of days, not unequal to them; and if that be
true, Ham and Chush were alive when Nimrod set himself up to be King. He must
therefore have usurped this Power over his Father, Grandfather, and great
Grandfather; or, which is more probable, he turned into Violence and Oppression
the Power given him by a Multitude; which, like a Flock without a Shepherd, not
knowing whom to obey, set him up to be their Chief. I leave to our Author the
liberty of choosing which of these two dos best suit with his Paternal Monarchy;
but as far as I can understand, the first is directly against it, as well as
against the Laws of God and Man; the other being from the consent of the
Multitude, cannot be extended farther than they would have it, nor turned to
their prejudice, without the most abominable ingratitude and treachery, from
whence no Right can be derived, nor any justifiable Example taken.

Nevertheless, if our Author resolve that Abraham was also a King, he must
presume that Shem did emancipate him, before he went to seek his Fortune. This
was not a Kingly posture; but I will not contradict him, if I may know over
whom he reigned. Paternal Monarchy is exercised by the Father of the Family
over his Descendents, or such as had bin under the Dominion of him whose Heir
he is. But Abraham had neither of these: Those of his nearest Kindred continued
in Mesopotamia, as appears by what is said of Bethuel and Laban. He had only
Lot with him, over whom he pretended no right: He had no Children till he was a
hundred Years old, (that is to say, he was a King without a Subject) and then
he had but one. I have heard that Omnisque potestas impatiens consortis erit.

Lucan.


Sovereigns do impatiently bear Competitors; but now I find Subjection also
does admit of none. Abraham's Kingdom was too great when he had two Children;
and to disburden it, Ishmael must be expelled soon aster the birth of Isaac. He
observed the same method after the death of Sarah: He had Children by Keturah;
but he gave them Gifts and sent 'em away, leaving Isaac like a Stoical King
reigning in and over himself, without any other Subject till the birth of Jacob
and Esau. But his Kingdom was not to be of a larger extent than that of his
Father: The two Twins could not agree: Jacob was sent away by his Mother; he
reigned over Esau only, and it is not easy to determine who was the Heir of his
worldly Kingdom; for tho Jacob had the birthright, we do not find he had any
other Goods than what he had gotten in Laban's service. If our Author say true,
the right of Primogeniture, with the Dominion perpetually annexed by the Laws
of God and Nature, must go to the eldest: Isaac therefore, tho he had not bin
deceived, could not have conser'd it upon the younger; for Man cannot overthrow
what God and Nature have instituted. Jacob, in the Court-Language, had bin a
double Rebel, in beguiling his Father, and supplanting his Brother: The
blessing of being Lord over his Brethren, could not have taken place. Or if
Isaac had Power, and his Act was good, the Prerogative of the Elder is not
rooted in the Law of God or Nature, but is a matter of convenience only, which
may be changed at the Will of the Father, whether he know what he dos or not.
But if this Paternal Right to Dominion were of any value, or Dominion over Men
were a thing to be desired; why did Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, content
themselves with such a narrow Territory, when after the death of their
Ancestors, they ought, according to that rule, to have bin Lords of the World?
All Authors conclude that Shem was the eldest by birth, or preferred by the
appointment of God, so as the Right must have bin in him, and from him
transmitted to Abraham and Isaac: but if they were so possessed with the
contemplation of a Heavenly Kingdom, as not to care for the greatest on Earth;
it is strange that Esau, whose modesty is not much commended, should so far
forget his Interest, as neither to lay claim to the Empire of the World, nor
dispute with his Brother the possession of the Field and Cave bought by
Abraham, but rather to fight for a dwelling on Mount Seir, that was neither
possessed by, nor promised to his Fathers. If he was fallen from his Right, Jacob
might have claimed it; but God was his Inheritance, and being assured of his
Blessing, he contented himself with what he could gain by his Industry, in a
way that was not at all suitable to the Pomp and Majesty of a King. Which way
soever therefore the business be turned, whether, according to Isaac's
Blessing, Esau should serve Jacob, or to our Author's opinion, Jacob must serve
Esau, neither of the two was effected in their Persons: And the Kingdom of two
being divided into two, each of them remained Lord of himself.

SECT. IX. The Power of a Father belongs only to a Father.
THIS leads us to an easy determination of the Question, which our Author
thinks insoluble; If Adam was Lord of his Children, he dos not see how any can
be free from the subjection of his Parents. For as no good Man will ever desire
to be free from the respect that is due to his Father, who did beget and
educate him, no wise Man will ever think the like to be due to his Brother or
Nephew that did neither. If Esau and Jacob were equally free; if Noah, as our
Author affirms, divided Europe, Asia, and Africa, amongst his three Sons, tho
he cannot prove it; and if seventy two Nations under so many Heads or Kings went
from Babylon to people the Earth, about a hundred and thirty years after the
Flood, I know not why, according to the same rule and proportion, it may not be
safely concluded, that in four thousand years Kings are so multiplied, as to be
in number equal to the Men that are in the World; that is to say, they are,
according to the Laws of God and Nature, all free, and independent upon each
other, as Shem, Ham, and Japhet were. And therefore, tho Adam and Noah had
reigned alone when there were no Men in the World except such as issued from
them, that is no reason why any other should reign over those that he has not
begotten. As the Right of Noah was divided amongst the Children he lest, and
when he was dead, no one of them depended on the other, because no one of them
was Father of the other; and the Right of a Father can only belong to him that
is so, the like must for ever attend every other Father in the World. This
paternal Power must necessarily accrue to every Father: He is a King by the
same Right as the Sons of Noah; and how numerous soever Familys may be upon the
increase of Mankind, they are all free, till they agree to recede from their
own Right, and join together in, or under one Government, according to such
Laws as best please themselves.

SECT. X. Such as enter into Society, must in some degree diminish their
Liberty.
REASON leads them to this: No one Man or Family is able to provide that which
is requisite for their convenience or security, whilst every one has an equal
Right to every thing, and none acknowledges a Superior to determine the
Controversys, that upon such occasions must continually arise, and will
probably be so many and great, that Mankind cannot bear them. Therefore tho I
do not believe that Bellarmin said, a Commonwealth could not exercise its
Power; for he could not be ignorant, that Rome and Athens did exercise theirs,
and that all the Regular Kingdoms in the World are Commonwealths: yet there is
nothing of absurdity in saying, That Man cannot continue in the perpetual and
entire fruition of the Liberty that God has given him. The Liberty of one is
thwarted by that of another; and whilst they are all equal, none will yield to
any, otherwise than by a general consent. This is the ground of all just
Governments; for Violence or Fraud can create no Right; and the same consent
gives the Form to them all, how much soever they differ from each other. Some
small numbers of Men, living within the Precincts of one City, have, as it
were, cast into a common Stock, the Right which they had of governing
themselves and Children; and by common Consent joining in one body, exercised
such Power over every single Person as seemed beneficial to the whole: and this
Men call perfect Democracy. Others chose rather to be governed by a select
number of such as most excelled in Wisdom and Virtue; and this, according to
the signification of the word, was called Aristocracy: Or when one Man excelled
all others, the Government was put into his hands under the name of Monarchy.
But the wisest, best, and far the greatest part of Mankind, rejecting these
simple Species, did form Governments mixed or composed of the three, as shall
be proved hereafter, which commonly received their respective Denomination from
the Part that prevailed, and did deserve praise or blame, as they were well or
ill proportioned.

It were a solly hereupon to say, that the Liberty for which we contend, is of
no use to us, since we cannot endure the Solitude, Barbarity, Weakness, Want,
Misery and Dangers that accompany it whilst we live alone, nor can enter into a
Society without resigning it; for the choice of that Society, and the liberty
of framing it according to our own Wills, for our own good, is all we seek.
This remains to us whilst we sorm Governments, that we our selves are Judges
how far it is good for us to recede srom our natural Liberty; which is of so
great importance, that from thence only we can know whether we are Freemen or
Slaves: and the difference between the best Government and the worst, dos
wholly depend upon a right or wrong exercise of that Power. If Men are
naturally free, such as have Wisdom and Understanding will always frame good
Governments: But if they are born under the necessity of a perpetual Slavery,
no Wisdom can be of use to them; but all must for ever depend on the Will of
their Lords, how cruel, mad, proud or wicked soever they be.

SECT. XI. No Man comes to command many, unless by Consent or by Force.
BUT because I cannot believe God has created Man in such a state of Misery and
Slavery as I just now mentioned; by discovering the vanity of our Author's
whimsical Patriarchical Kingdom, I am led to a certain conclusion, That every
Father of a Family is free and exempt from the domination of any other, as the
seventy two that went from Babel were. It Is hard to comprehend how one Man can
come to be master of many, equal to himself in Right, unless it be by Consent
or by Force. If by Consent, we are at an end of our Controversys: Governments,
and the Magistrates that execute them, are created by Man. They who give a being
to them, cannot but have a right of regulating, limiting and directing them as
best pleases themselves; and all our Author's Assertions concerning the
absolute Power of one Man, fall to the ground: If by Force, we are to examine
how it can be possible or justifiable. This subduing by Force we call Conquest;
but as he that forces must be stronger than those that are forced, to talk of
one Man who in strength exceeds many millions of Men, is to go beyond the
extravagance of Fables and Romances. This Wound is not cured by saying, that he
first conquers one, and then more, and with their help others: for as to matter
of fact, the first news we hear of Nimrod is, that he reigned over a great
multitude, and built vast Citys; and we know of no Kingdom in the World, that
did not begin with a greater number than any one Man could possibly subdue. If
they who choose one to be their Head, did under his conduct subdue others, they
were Fellow-conquerors with him; and nothing can be more brutish, than to
think, that by their Virtue and Valor they had purchased perpetual Slavery to
themselves and their Posterity. But if it were possible, it could not be
justifiable; and whilst our Dispute is concerning Right, that which ought not
to be is no more to be received, than if it could not be. No Right can come by
conquest, unless there were a Right of making that Conquest, which, by reason
of the Equality that our Author confesses to have bin amongst the Heads of
Familys, and as I have proved goes into Infinity, can never be on the
Aggressor's side. No Man can justly impose any thing upon those who owe him
nothing. Our Author therefore, who ascribes the enlargement of Nimrod 's
Kingdom to Usurpation and Tyranny, might as well have acknowledged the same in
the beginning, as he says all other Authors have done. However, he ought not to
have imputed to Sir Walter Raleigh an Approbation of his Right, as Lord or King
over his Family; sor he could never think him to be a Lord by the right of a
Father, who by that rule must have lived and died a Slave to his Fathers that
overliv'd him. Whosoever therefore like Nimrod grounds his pretensions of Right
upon Usurpation and Tyranny, declares himself to be, like Nimrod, a Usurper and
a Tyrant, that is, an Enemy to God and Man, and to have no Right at all. That
which was unjust in its beginning, can of it self never change its nature.
Tempus in ^e, says Grotius, nullam habet vim effectricem. He that persists in
doing Injustice, aggravates it, and takes upon himself all the guilt of his
Predecessors. But if there be a King in the World, that claims a Right by
Conquest, and would justify it, he might do well to tell whom he conquered,
when, with what assistance, and upon what reason he undertook the War: for he
can ground no title upon the obscurity of an unsearchable antiquity; and if he
dos it not, he ought to be looked upon as a usurping Nimrod.

SECT. XII. The pretended Paternal Right is divisible or indivisible: if
divisible, it is extinguished; if indivisible, universal.
THis paternal right to Regality, if there be any thing in it, is divisible or
indivisible; if indivisible, as Adam has but one Heir, one Man is rightly Lord
of the whole World, and neither Nimrod nor any of his Successors could ever
have bin Kings, nor the seventy two that went from Babylon: Noah survived him
near two hundred years: Shem continued one hundred and fifty years longer. The
Dominion must have bin in him, and by him transmitted to his Posterity for
ever. Those that call themselves Kings in all other Nations, set themselves up
against the Law of God and Nature: This is the Man we are to seek out, that we
may yield obedience to him. I know not where to find him; but he must be of the
race of Abraham. Shem was preferred before his Brethren: The Inheritance that
could not be divided must come to him, and from him to Isaac, who was the first
of his Descendents that outlived him. It Is pity that Jacob did not know this,
and that the Lord of all the Earth, through ignorance of his Title, should be
forced to keep one of his Subjects Sheep for wages; and strange, that he who
had wit enough to supplant his Brother, did so little understand his own
bargain, as not to know that he had bought the perpetual Empire of the World.
If in conscience he could not take such a price for a dish of Pottage, it must
remain in Esau: However our Lord Paramount must come from Isaac. If the Deed of
Sale made by Esau be good, we must seek him amongst the Jews; if he could not
so easily divest himself of his Right, it must remain amongst his Descendents,
who are Turks. We need not scruple the reception of either, since the late
Scots Act tells us, That Kings derive their Royal Power from God alone; and no
difference of Religion, etc. can divert the right of Succession. But I know not
what we shall do, if we cannot find this Man; for de non apparentibus and non
existentibus eadem est ratio. The Right must fall if there be none to inherit:
If we do not know who he is that has the Right, we do not know who is near to
him: All Mankind must inherit the Right, to which every one has an equal title;
and that which is Dominion, if in one, when it is equally divided among all Men,
is that universal Liberty which I assert. Wherefore I leave it to the choice of
such as have inherited our Author's opinions, to produce this Jew or Turk that
ought to be Lord of the whole Earth, or to prove a better title in some other
Person, and to persuade all the Princes and Nations of the World to submit: If
this be not done, it must be confessed this Paternal Right is a mere whimsical
Fiction, and that no Man by birth has a Right above another, or can have any,
unless by the concession of those who are concerned.

If this Right to an universal Empire be divisible, and Noah did actually
divide it among his three Sons: if seventy and two absolute Monarchs did at
once arise out of the Multitude that had assembled at Babel; Noah, nor his
Sons, nor any of the holy Seed, nor probably any elder than Nimrod having bin
there; many other Monarchs must necessarily have arisen from them also.
Abraham, as our Author says, was a King: Lot must have bin so also; for they
were equals: his Sons Ammon and Moab had no dependence upon the Descendents of
Abraham: Ismael and Esau set up for themselves, and great Nations came of them:
Abraham's Sons by Keturah did so also; that is to say, every one as soon as he
came to be of age to provide for himself, did so, without retaining any
dependence upon the Stock from whence he came: Those of that Stock, or the Head
of it, pretended to no Right over those who went from them. Nay, nearness in
Blood was so little regarded, that tho Lot was Abraham's Brother's Son, Eliezer
his Servant had bin his Heir, if he had died childless. The like continued
among Jacob's Sons; no Jurisdiction was given to one above the rest: an equal
division of Land was made amongst 'em: Their Judges and Magistrates were of
several Tribes and Familys, without any other preference of one before another,
than what did arise from the advantages God had given to any particular Person.
This I take to be a proof of the utmost extent and certainty, that the Equality
amongst Mankind was then perfect: He therefore that will deny it to be so now,
ought to prove that neither the Prophets, Patriarchs, or any other Men did ever
understand or regard the Law delivered by God and Nature to Mankind; or that
having bin common and free at the first, and so continued for many hundreds of
years after the Flood, it was afterward abolished, and a new one introduced.
He that asserts this must prove it; but till it dos appear to us, when, where,
how, and by whom this was done, we may safely believe there is no such thing;
and that no Man is or can be a Lord amongst us, till we make him so; and that
by nature we are all Brethren.

Our Author, by endeavoring farther to illustrate the Patriarchical Power,
destroys it, and cannot deny to any Man the Right which he acknowledges to have
bin in Ismael and Esau. But if every Man has a Right of setting up for himself
with his Family, or before he has any, he cannot but have a right of joining
with others if he pleases; as his joining or not joining with others, and the
choice of those others depends upon his own will, he cannot but have a right of
judging upon what conditions it is good for him to enter into such a Society, as
must necessarily hinder him from exercising the Right which he has originally
in himself. But as it cannot be imagined that Men should generally put such
Fetters upon themselves, unless it were in expectation of a greater good
thereby to accrue to them, no more can be required to prove that they do
voluntarily enter into these Societys, institute them for their own good, and
prescribe such Rules and Forms to them as best please themselves, without
giving account to any. But if every Man be free, till he enter into such a
Society as he chooses for his own good, and those Societys may regulate
themselves as they think sit; no more can be required to prove the natural
Equality in which all Men are born, and continue, till they resign it as into a
common stock, in such measure as they think fit for the constituting of
Societys for their own good, which I assert, and our Author denies.

SECT. XIII. There was no shadow of a Paternal Kingdom amongst the Hebrews, nor
precept for it.
OUR Author is so modest to confess, that Jacob's Kingdom, consisting of
seventy two Persons, was swallowed up by the power of the greater Monarch
Pharaoh: But if this was an Act of Tyranny, it is strange that the sacred and
eternal Right, grounded upon the immutable Laws of God and Nature, should not
be restored to God's chosen People, when he delivered them from that Tyranny.
Why was not Jacob's Monarchy conferred upon his right Heir? How came the People
to neglect a Point of such importance? Or if they did forget it, why did not
Moses put 'em in mind of it? Why did not Jacob declare to whom it did belong?
Or if he is understood to have declared it, in saying the Scepter should not
depart srom Judah, why was it not delivered into his hands, or into his Heirs?
If he was hard to be found in a People of one kindred, but four degrees removed
from Jacob their Head, who were exact in observing Genealogys; how can we hope
to find him after so many thousand years, when we do not so much as know from
whom we are derived? Or rather how comes that Right, which is eternal and
universal, to have bin nip'd in the bud, and so abolished before it could take
any effect in the World, as never to have bin heard of amongst the Gentiles,
nor the People of God, either before or after the Captivity, from the death of
Jacob to this day? This I assert, and I give up the Cause if I do not prove it.
To this end I begin with Moses and Aaron the first Rulers of the People, who
were neither of the eldest Tribe according to birth, nor the disposition of
Jacob, if he did, or could give it to any; nor were they of the eldest Line of
their own Tribe: and even between them the Superiority was given to Moses, who
was the younger; as it is said, I have made thee a God to Pharaoh, and Aaron thy
Brother shall be thy Prophet. If Moses was a King, as our Author says, but I
deny, and shall hereafter prove, the matter is worse: He must have bin an
Usurper of a most unjust Dominion over his Brethren; and this Patriarchical
power, which by the Law of God was to be perpetually fixed in his Descendents,
perished with him, and his Sons continued in an obscure rank amongst the
Levites. Joshua of the Tribe of Ephraim succeeded him; Othniel was of Judah,
Ehud of Benjamin, Barak of Napthalim, and Gideon of Manasseh. The other Judges
were of several Tribes; and they being dead, their Children lay hid among the
common People, and we hear no more of 'em. The first King was taken out of the
least Family of the least and youngest Tribe. The second, whilst the Children
of the first King were yet alive, was the youngest of eight Sons of an obscure
Man in the Tribe of Judah: Solomon one of his youngest Sons succeeded him: Ten
Tribes deserted Rehoboam, and by the command of God set up Joroboam to be their
King. The Kingdom of Israel by the destruction of one Family passed into
another: That of Judah by God's peculiar promise continued in David's race till
the Captivity; but we know not that the eldest Son was always preferred, and
have no reason to presume it. David their most reverenced King left no precept
sor it, and gave an example to the contrary: he did not set up the Eldest, but
the Wisest. After the Captivity, they who had most wisdom or valor to defend
the People, were thought most fit to command; and the Kingdom at the last came
to the Asmonean Race, whilst the Posterity of David was buried in the mass of
the common People, and utterly deprived of all worldly Rule or Glory. If the
Judges had not a Regal Power, or the Regal were only just, as instituted by
God, and eternally annexed to Paternity, all that they did was evil: There
could be nothing of Justice in the Powers exercised by Moses, Joshua, Gideon,
Samuel, and the rest of the Judges. If the Power was regal and just, it must
have continued in the Descendents of the first: Saul, David, and Solomon could
never have bin Kings: The Right failing in them, their Descendents could
inherit none from them; and the others after the Captivity were guilty of the
like injustice.

Now as the Rule is not general, to which there is any one just exception,
there is not one of these Examples that would not overthrow our Author's
Doctrine: If one deviation from it were lawful, another might be, and so to
infinity. But the utmost degree of impudent madness to which perhaps any Man in
the world has ever arrived, is to assert that to be universal and perpetual,
which cannot be verified by any one Example to have bin in any place of the
World, nor justified by any Precept.

If it be objected, That all these things were done by God's immediate
disposition: I answer, that it were an impious madness to believe that God did
perpetually send his Prophets to overthrow what he had ordained from the
beginning, and as it were in spite to bring the minds of Men into inextricable
confusion and darkness; and by particular Commands to overthrow his universal
and eternal Law. But to render this point more clear, I desire it may be
considered, That we have but three ways of distinguishing between good and evil.

1. When God by his Word reveals it to us.

2. When by his Deeds he declares it; because that which he dos is good, as
that which he says is true.

3. By the Light of Reason, which is good, in as much as it is from God.

And first; It cannot be said we have an explicit word for that continuance of
the Power in the eldest; for it appears not, and having none, we might conclude
it to be lest to our liberty: For it agrees not with the goodness of God to
leave us in a perpetual ignorance of his Will in a matter of so great
importance, nor to have suffered his own People, or any other, to persist,
without the least reproof or admonition, in a perpetual opposition to it, if it
had displeased him.

To the 2 d. The Dispensations of his Providence, which are the emanations of
his Will, have gone contrary to this pretended Law: There can therefore be no
such thing; for God is constant to himself: his Works do not contradict his
Word, and both of them do equally declare to us that which is good.

Thirdly; If there be any Precept that by the light of Nature we can in matters
of this kind look upon as certain, it is that the Government of a People should
be given to him that can best perform the Dutys of it: No Man has it sor
himself, or from himsels; but for and from those who before he had it were his
Equals, that he may do good to them. If there were a Man, who in Wisdom,
Valor, Justice and Purity, surpassed all others, he might be called a King by
Nature, because he is best able to bear the weight of so great a charge; and
like a good Shepherd to lead the People to good. Detur digniori is the voice of
Reason and that we may be sure Detur seniori is not so, Solomon tells us, That
a wise Child is better than an old and foolish King. But if this pretended
Right do not belong to him that is truly the eldest, nothing can be more absurd
than a fantastical pretense to a Right deduced from him that is not so. Now
lest I should be thought to follow my own Inventions, and call them Reason, or
the Light of God in us, I desire it may be observed that God himself has ever
taken this method. When he raised up Moses to be the leader of his People, he
endowed him with the most admirable gifts of his Spirit that ever he bestowed
upon a Man: When he chose seventy Men to assist him, he endowed them with the
same spirit. Joshua had no other title to succeed him than the like evidence of
God's Presence with him. When the People through sin fell into misery, he did not
seek out their Descendents, nor such as boasted in a prerogative of Birth; but
showed whom he designed for their Deliverer, by bestowing such gifts upon him
as were required for the performance of his work; and never failed of doing
this, till that miserable sinful People rejecting God and his Government,
desired that which was in use among their accursed Neighbors, that they might
be as like to them in the most shameful Slavery to Man, as in the Worship of
Idols set up against God.

But if this pretended Right be grounded upon no word or work of God, not the
reason of Man, it is to be accounted a mere figment, that has nothing of truth
in it.

SECT. XIV. If the paternal Right had included Dominion, and was to be
transferred to a single Heir, it must perish if he were not known; and could be
applied to no other Person.
HAving showed that the first Kings were not Fathers, nor the first Fathers
Kings; that all the Kings of the Jews and Gentiles mentioned in Scripture came
in upon Titles different from, and inconsistent with that of Paternity; and
that we are not led by the Word nor the Works of God, nor the Reason of Man, or
Light of Nature, to believe there is any such thing; we may safely conclude
there never was any such thing, or that it never had any effect, which to us is
the same. It Is as ridiculous to think of retrieving that, which from the
beginning of the World was lost, as to create that which never was. But I may
go farther, and affirm, that tho there had bin such a Right in the first
Fathers of Mankind exercised by them, and for some ages individually
transmitted to their eldest Sons, it must necessarily perish, since the
Generations of Men are so confused, that no Man knows his own original, and
consequently this Heir is no where to be found; for it is a folly for a Man to
pretend to an Inheritance, who cannot prove himself to be the right Heir. If
this be not true, I desire to know from which of Noah's Sons the Kings of
England, France, or Spain do deduce their original; or what reason they can
give why the title to Dominion, which is fancied to be in Noah, did rather
belong to the first of their respective Races, that attained to the Crowns they
now enjoy, than to the meanest Peasant of their Kingdoms; or how that can be
transmitted to them, which was not in the first. We know that no Man can give
what he has not; that if there be no giver, there is no gift; if there be no
root, there can be no branch; and that the first point failing, all that should
be derived from it must necessarily fail.

Our Author, who is good at resolving difficultys, shows us an easy way out of
this strait. It Is true, says he, all Kings are not natural Parents of their
Subjects; yet they either are, or are to be reputed the next Heirs to those
first Progenitors, who were at first the natural Parents of the whole People,
and in their right succeed to the exercise of the supreme Jurisdiction: and
such Heirs are not only Lords of their own Children, but also of their
Brethren, and all those that were subject to their Father, etc. By this means
it comes to pass, that many a Child succeeding a King, has the right of a
Father over many a grey-headed multitude, and has the title of Pater Patriae.

An Assertion comprehending so many Points, upon which the most important
Rights of all Mankind do depend, might deserve some proof: But he being of
opinion we ought to take it upon his credit, dos not vouchsafe to give us so
much as the shadow of any. Nevertheless being unwilling either crudely to
receive, or rashly to reject it, I shall take the liberty of examining the
Proposition, and hope I may be pardoned, if I dwell a little more than
ordinarily upon that which is the foundation of his Work.

We are beholden to him for confessing modestly that all Kings are not the
natural Fathers of their People, and sparing us the pains of proving, that the
Kings of Persia, who reigned from the Indies to the Hellespont, did not beget
all the Men that lived in those Countries; or that the Kings of France and
Spain, who began to reign before they were five years old, were not the natural
Fathers of the Nations under them. But if all Kings are not Fathers, none are,
as they are Kings: If any one is, or ever was, the Rights of Paternity belong
to him, and to no other who is not so also. This must be made evident; for
matters of such importance require proof, and ought not to be taken upon
supposition. If Filmer therefore will pretend that the right of Father belongs
to any one King, he must prove that he is the Father of his People; for
otherwise it dos not appertain to him: he is not the Man we seek.

It Is no less absurd to say he is to be reputed Heir to the first Progenitor:
for it must be first proved, that the Nation did descend from one single
Progenitor without mixture of other races: That this Progenitor was the Man, to
whom Noah (according to Filmer's whimsical division of Asia, Europe, and Africa
among his Sons) did give the Land now inhabited by that People: That this
Division so made was not capable of Subdivisions; and that this Man is by a
true and uninterrupted Succession descended from the first and eldest Line of
that Progenitor: and all fails, if every one of these points be not made good.
If there never was any such Man who had that Right, it cannot be inherited from
him. If by the same rule that a parcel of the World was allotted to him, that
parcel might be subdivided amongst his Children as they increased, the
subdivisions may be infinite, and the right of Dominion thereby destroyed. If
several Nations inhabit the same Land, they owe obedience to several Fathers:
that which is due to their true Father, cannot be rendered to him that is not
so; for he would by that means be deprived of the Right which is inseparably
annexed to his Person: And lastly, whatsoever the Right of an Heir may be, it
can belong only to him that is Heir.

Lest any should be seduced from these plain Truths by frivolous suggestions,
it is good to consider that the title of Pater Patriae, with which our Author
would cheat us, has no relation to the matters of Right, upon which we dispute.
It Is a figurative speech, that may have bin rightly enough applied to some
excellent Princes on account of their care and love to their People, resembling
that of a Father to his Children; and can relate to none but those who had it.
No man that had common sense, or valued truth, did ever call Phalaris,
Dionysius, Nabis, Nero, or Caligula, Fathers of their Countries; but Monsters,
that to the utmost of their power endeavored their destruction: which is
enough to prove, that sacred Name cannot be given to all, and in consequence to
none but such, as by their Virtue, Piety, and good Government do deserve it.

These matters will yet appear more evident, if it be considered, that tho Noah
had reigned as a King; that Zoroaster, as some suppose, was Ham, who reigned
over his Children, and that thereby some Right might perhaps be derived to such
as succeeded them; yet this can have no influence upon such as have not the
like Original: and no man is to be presumed to have it, till it be proved,
since we have proved that many had it not. If Nimrod set himself up against his
Grandfather; and if Ninus, who was descended from him in the fifth Generation,
slew him, they ill deserved the name and rights of Fathers; and none, but those
who have renounced all Humanity, Virtue, and common Sense, can give it to them,
or their Successors. If therefore Noah and Shem had not so much as the shadow
of Regal Power, and the actions of Nimrod, Ninus, and others who were Kings in
their times, show they did not reign in the right of Fathers, but were set up
in a direct opposition to it, the titles of the first Kings were not from
Paternity, nor consistent with it.

Our Author therefore, who should have proved every point, dos neither prove
any one, nor assert that which is agreeable to divine or human Story, as to
matter of fact; and as little conformable to common sense. It dos not only
appear contrary to his general Proposition, That all Governments have not begun
with the Paternal Power; but we do not find that any ever did. They who
according to his rules should have bin Lords of the whole Earth, lived and died
private men, whilst the most wicked and boisterous of their Children commanded
the greatest part of the then inhabited World, not excepting even those
Countries where they spent and ended their days; and instead of entering upon the
Government by the right of Fathers, or managing it as Fathers, they did by the
most outrageous injustice usurp a violent Domination over their Brethren and
Fathers.

It may easily be imagined what the Right is that could be thus acquired, and
transmitted to their Successors. Nevertheless our Author says, All Kings either
are, or ought to be reputed next Heirs, etc. But why reputed, if they are not?
How could any of the accursed race of Ham be reputed Father of Noah or Shem, to
whom he was to be a Servant? How could Nimrod and Ninus be reputed Fathers of
Ham, and of those whom they ought to have obeyed? Can Reason oblige me to
believe that which I know to be false? Can a Lie, that is hateful to God and
good Men, not only be excused, but enjoined, when (as he will perhaps say) it
is for the King's Service? Can I serve two Masters, or, without the most
unpardonable injustice, repute him to be my Father, who is not my Father; and
pay the obedience due to him who did beget and educate me, to one from whom I
never received any good? If this be so absurd, that no man dares affirm it in
the person of any, it is as preposterous in relation to his Heirs: For Nimrod
the first King could be Heir to no man as King, and could transmit to no man a
Right which he had not. If it was ridiculous and abominable to say that he was
Father of Chush, Ham, Shem and Noah; it is as ridiculous to say, he had the
Right of Father, if he was not their Father; or that his Successors inherited
it from him, if he never had it. If there be any way through this, it must have
accru'd to him by the extirpation of all his Elders, and their Races; so as he
who will assert this pretended Right to have bin in the Babylonian Kings, must
assert, that Noah, Shem, Japhet, Ham, Chush, and all Nimrod's elder Brothers,
with all their Descendents, were utterly extirpated before he began to reign,
and all Mankind to be descended from him.

This must be, if Nimrod, as the Scripture says, was the first that became
mighty in the Earth; unless men might be Kings, without having more Power than
others: for Chush, Ham and Noah were his Elders and Progenitors in the direct
Line, and all the Sons of Shem and Japhet, and their Descendents in the
Collaterals, were to be preferred before him; and he could have no Right at all
that was not directly contrary to those Principles which, our Author says, are
grounded upon the eternal and indispensable Laws of God and Nature. The like
may be said of the seventy two Heads of Colonys, which (following, as I
suppose, Sir Walter Raleigh) he says went out to people the Earth, and whom he
calls Kings: for according to the same Rule, Noah, Shem and Japhet, with their
Descendents, could not be of the number; so that neither Nimrod, nor the others
that established the Kingdoms of the World, and from whence he thinks all the
rest to be derived, could have any thing of Justice in them, unless it were
from a Root altogether inconsistent with his Principles. They are therefore
false, or the Establishments beforementioned could have no Right. If they had
none, they cannot be reputed to have any; for no man can think that to be true,
which he knows to be false: having none, they could transmit none to their
Heirs and Successors. And if we are to believe, that all the Kingdoms of the
Earth are established upon this Paternal Right; it must be proved that all
those, who in birth ought to have bin preferred before Nimrod, and the seventy
two, were extirpated; or that the first and true Heir of Noah did afterward
abolish all these unjust Usurpations; and making himself Master of the whole,
left it to his Heirs, in whom it continues to this day. When this is done, I
will acknowledge the Foundation to be well laid, and admit of all that can be
rightly built upon it; but if this fails, all fails: The poison of the Root
continues in the Branches. If the right Heir be not in possession, he is not
the right who is in possession: If the true Heir be known, he ought to be
restored to his Right: If he be not known, the Right must perish: For nothing
can be said to belong to any man, if no man knows to whom it belongs, and can
have no more effect than if it were not. This conclusion will continue
unmovable, tho the division into seventy two Kingdoms were allowed; which
cannot be without destroying the Paternal Power, or subjecting it to be
subdivided into as many parcels as there are men, which destroys Regality; for
the same thing may be required in every one of the distinct Kingdoms, and
others derived from them. Or we must know who was that true Heir of Noah, that
recovered all: How, when, and to whom he gave the several Portions; and that
every one of them do continue in the possession of those, who by this
prerogative of Birth are raised above the rest of mankind: and if they are not,
it is an impious folly to repute them so, to the prejudice of those that are;
and if they do not appear, to the prejudice of all mankind; who being equal,
are thereby made subject to them. For as Truth is the Rule of Justice; there
can be none, when he is reputed superior to all who is certainly inferior to

[In this place two Pages are wanting in the Original Manuscript.]

-- degenerated from that Reason which distinguishes men from beasts. Tho it
may be fit to use some Ceremonys before a man be admitted to practice Physic,
or set up a Trade, it is his own Skill that makes him a Doctor or an Artificer,
and others do but declare it. An Ass will not leave his stupidity, tho he be
covered with Scarlet; and he that is by nature a Slave, will be so still, tho a
Crown be put upon his Head: and it is hard to imagine a more violent inversion of
the Laws of God and Nature, than to raise him to the Throne, whom Nature
intended for the Chain; or to make them Slaves to Slaves, whom God has endowed
with the Virtues required in Kings. Nothing can be more preposterous, than to
impute to God the frantic Domination, which is often exercised by wicked,
foolish and vile Persons, over the wise, valiant, just and good; or to subject
the best to the rage of the worst. If there be any Family therefore in the
world, that can by the Law of God and Nature, distinct from the Ordinance of
Man, pretend to an hereditary Right of Dominion over any People, it must be one
that never did, and never can produce any Person that is not free from all the
Infirmitys and Vices that render him unable to exercise the Sovereign Power;
and is endowed with all the Virtues required to that end; or at least a Promise
from God, verified by Experience, that the next in Blood shall ever be able and
fit for that work. But since we do not know that any such has yet appeared in
the World, we have no reason to believe that there is, or ever was any such;
and consequently none upon whom God has conferred the Rights that cannot be
exercised without them.

If there was no shadow of a Paternal Right in the Institution of the Kingdoms
of Saul and David, there could be none in those that succeeded. Rehoboam could
have no other than from Solomon: When he reigned over two Tribes, and Jeroboam
over ten, it is not possible that both of 'em could be the next Heir of their
last common Father Jacob; and it is absurd to say, that ought to be reputed
which is impossible: for our thoughts are ever to be guided by Truth, or such
an appearance of it, as dos persuade or convince us.

The same Title of Father is yet more ridiculously or odiously applied to the
succeeding Kings. Baasha had no other Title to the Crown, than by killing Nadab
the Son of Jeroboam, and destroying his Family. Zimri purchased the same honor
by the slaughter of Elah when he was drunk, and dealing with the House of
Baasha, as he had done with that of Jeroboam. Zimri burning himself, transferred
the same to Omri, as a reward for bringing him to that extremity. As Jehu was
more fierce than these, he seems to have gained a more excellent recompense
than any since Jeroboam, even a conditional Promise of a perpetual Kingdom; but
falling from these glorious Privileges, purchased by his Zeal in killing two
wicked Kings, and above one hundred of their Brethren, Shallum must have
inherited them, by destroying Zachary and all that remained of his Race. This
in plain English is no less than to say, that whosoever kills a King, and
invades a Crown, tho the act and means of accomplishing it be never so
detestable, dos thereby become Father of his Country, and Heir of all the
Divine Privileges annexed to that glorious Inheritance. And tho I cannot tell
whether such a Doctrine be more sottish, monstrous or impious, I dare affirm,
that if it were received, no King in the World could think himself safe in his
Throne for one day: They are already encompast with many dangers; but lest
Pride, Avarice, Ambition, Lust, Rage, and all the Vices that usually reign in
the hearts of worldly men, should not be sufficient to invite 'em perpetually
to disturb Mankind, through the desire of gaining the Power, Riches and Splendour
that accompany a Crown, our Author proposes to 'em the most sacred Privileges,
as a reward of the most execrable Crimes. He that was stirred up only by the
violence of his own Nature, thought that a Kingdom could never be bought at too
dear a rate; -- Pro Regno velim
Patriam, Penates, conjugem flammis dare:
Imperia precio quolibet constant been. Senec. Theb.
But if the sacred Character of God's Anointed or Vicegerent, and Father of a
Country, were added to the other Advantages that follow the highest Fortunes;
the most modest and just men would be filled with fury, that they might attain
to them. Nay, it may be, even the best would be the most forward in conspiring
against such as reign: they who could not be tempted with external Pleasures,
would be most in love with divine Privileges; and since they should become the
sacred Ministers of God, if they succeeded, and Traitors or Rogues only if they
miscarried, their only care would be so to lay their Designs, that they might
be surely executed. This is a Doctrine worthy of Filmer's Invention, and
Heylin's Approbation; which being well weighed, will show to all good and just
Kings how far they are obliged to those, who under pretense of advancing their
Authority, fill the minds of men with such Notions as are so desperately
pernicious to them.

SECT. XVI. The Ancients chose those to be Kings, who excelled in the Virtues
that are most beneficial to Civil Societys.
IF the Israelites, whose Lawgiver was God, had no King in the first
Institution of their Government, it is no wonder that other Nations should not
think themselves obliged to set up any: if they who came all of one stock, and
knew their Genealogys, when they did institute Kings, had no regard to our
Author's Chimerical right of Inheritance, nor were taught by God or his
Prophets to have any; it is not strange that Nations, who did not know their own
Original, and who probably, if not certainly, came of several Stocks, never put
themselves to the trouble of seeking one, who by his birth deserved to be
preferred before others: and various Changes happening in all Kingdoms (whereby
in process of time the Crowns were transported into diverse Familys, to which
the Right of Inheritance could not without the utmost impiety and madness be
imputed) such a fancy certainly could only enter into the heads of Fools; and
we know of none so foolish to have harbored it.

The Grecians, amongst others who followed the Light of Reason, knew no other
original Title to the Government of a Nation, than that Wisdom, Valor and
Justice, which was beneficial to the People. These Qualitys gave beginning to
those Governments, which we call Heroum Regna; and the Veneration paid to such
as enjoyed them, proceeded from a grateful sense of the Good received from
them: They were thought to be descended from the Gods, who in Virtue and
Beneficence surpassed other men: The same attended their Descendents, till they
came to abuse their Power, and by their Vices showed themselves like to, or
worse than others. Those Nations did not seek the most ancient, but the most
worthy; and thought such only worthy to be preferred before others, who could
best perform their Duty. The Spartans knew that Hercules and Achilles were not
their Fathers, for they were a Nation before either of them were born; but
thinking their Children might be like to them in Valor, they brought them from
Thebes and Epirus to be their Kings. If our Author is of another opinion, I
desire to know, whether the Heraclidae, or the Aeacidae were, or ought to be
reputed Fathers of the Lacedaemonians; for if the one was, the other was not.

The same method was followed in Italy; and they who esteemed themselves -- Qui
rupto robore nati
Compositi^^ Luto, millos habuere parents. Juven. Sat. 6.

Aborigines, could not set up one to govern them under the Title of Parent.
They could pay no veneration to any Man under the name of a common Father, who
thought they had none; and they who esteemed themselves equal, could have no
reason to prefer any one, unless he were distinguished from others by the
Virtues that were beneficial to all. This may be illustrated by matters of
fact. Romulus and Remus, the Sons of a Nun, constuprated, as is probable, by a
lusty Soldier, who was said to be Mars, for their Vigor and Valor were made
heads of a gathered People. We know not that ever they had any Children; but we
are sure they could not be Fathers of the People that flocked to them from
several places, nor in any manner be reputed Heirs of him or them that were so:
for they never knew who was their own Father; and when their Mother came to be
discovered, they ought to have bin Subjects to Amulius or Numitor. They could
not be his Heirs whilst he lived, and were not when he died: The Government of
the Latins continued at Alba, and Romulus reigned over those who joined with
him in building Rome. The Power not coming to him by Inheritance, must have bin
gained by Force, or conferred upon him by Consent: It could not be acquired by
Force; for one Man could not force a multitude of fierce and valiant men, as
they appear to have bin. It must therefore have bin by Consent: And when he
aimed at more Authority than they were willing to allow, they slew him. He
being dead, they fetched Numa from among the Sabines: He was not their Father,
nor Heir to their Father, but a Stranger; not a Conqueror, but an unarmed
Philosopher. Tullus Hostilius had no other Title: Ancus Martius was no way
related to such as had reigned. The first Tarquin was the Son of a banished
Corinthian. Servius Tullus came to Rome in the belly of his captive Mother, and
could inherit nothing but Chains from his vanquished Father. Tarquin the Proud
murdered him, and first took upon himself the Title of King, sine jussu Populi.
If this T. Live.
Murder and Usurpation be called a Conquest, and thought to create a Right, the
effect will be but small: The Conqueror was soon conquered, banished, and his
Sons slain, after which we hear no more of him or his Descendents. Whatsoever
he gained from Servius, or the People, was soon lost, and did accrue to those
that conquered and ejected him; and they might retain what was their own, or
confer it upon one or more, in such manner and measure as best pleased
themselves. If the Regal Power, which our Author says was in the Consuls, could
be divided into two parts, limited to a Year, and suffer such restrictions as
the People pleased to lay upon it, they might have divided it into as many
parcels, and put it into such form, as best suited with their Inclinations; and
the several Magistracys which they did create for the exercise of the Kingly,
and all other Powers, shows they were to give account to none but themselves.

The Israelites, Spartans, Romans and others, who thus framed their Governments
according to their own Will, did it not by any peculiar Privilege, but by a
universal Right conferred upon them by God and Nature: They were made of no
better Clay than others: They had no Right, that dos not as well belong to
other Nations; that is to say, The Constition of every Government is referred to
those who are concerned in it, and no other has any thing to do with it.

Yet if it be asserted, that the Government of Rome was Paternal, or they had
none at all; I desire to know, how they came to have six Fathers of several
Familys, whilst they lived under Kings; and two or more new ones every Year
afterward: Or how they came to be so excellent in Virtue and Fortune, as to
conquer the best part of the World, if they had no Government. Hobbs indeed dos
scurrilously deride Cicero, Plato and Aristotle, Caeterosque Romanae and
Graecae Anarchiae fautores. But it is strange that this Anarchy, which he
resembles to a Chaos, full of darkness and confusion, that can have no Strength
or regular Action, should overthrow all the Monarchys that came within their
reach, If (as our Authors says) the best order, greatest strength, and most
stability be in them. It must therefore be confessed, that these Governments are,
in their various Forms, rightly instituted by several Nations, without any
regard to Inheritance; or that these Nations have had no Governments, and were
more strong, virtuous and happy without Government, than under it, which is
most absurd.

But if Governments arise from the Consent of Men, and are instituted by Men
according to their own Inclinations, they do therein seek their own Good; for
the Will is ever drawn by some real Good, or the appearance of it. This is that
which man seeks by all the regular or irregular motions of his mind: Reason and
Passion, Virtue and Vice do herein concur, tho they differ vastly in the
Objects, in which each of 'em thinks this Good to consist. A People therefore
that sets up Kings, Dictators, Consuls, Pretors or Emperors, dos it not, that
they may be great, glorious, rich or happy, but that it may be well with
themselves and their Posterity. This is not accomplished simply by setting one,
a few, or more men in the administration of Powers, but by placing the
Authority in those who may rightly perform their Office. This is not every
man's Work: Valor, Integrity, Wisdom, Industry, Experience and Skill, are
required for the management of those Military and Civil Affairs that
necessarily fall under the care of the chief Magistrates. He or they therefore
may reasonably be advanced above their Equals, who are most fit to perform the
Dutys belonging to their Stations, in order to the public Good, for which they
were instituted.

Marius, Sylla, Catiline, Julius or Octavius Caesar, and all those who by force
or fraud usurped a Dominion over their Brethren, could have no Title to this
Right; much less could they become Fathers of the People, by using all the most
wicked means that could well be imagined to destroy them; and not being
regularly chosen for their Virtues, or the opinion of them, nor preferred on
account of any Prerogative that had bin from the beginning annexed to their
Familys, they could have no other Right than Occupation could confer upon them.
If this can confer a Right, there is an end of all Disputes concerning the Laws
of God or Man. If Julius and Octavius Caesar did successively become Lords and
Fathers of their Country, by slaughtering almost all the Senate, and such
Persons as were eminent for Nobility or Virtue, together with the greater part
of the People, it cannot be denied, that a Thief, who breaks into his
Neighbor's House, and kills him, is justly Master of his Estate; and may exact
the same obedience from his Children, that they rendered to their Father. If
this Right could be transferred to Tiberius, either through the malice of Octavius,
or the fraud of his Wife; a wet Blanket laid over his face, and a few corrupted
Soldiers could invest Caligula with the same. A vile Rascal pulling Claudius
out by the heels from behind the Hangings where he had hid himself, could give
it to him. A dish of Mushrooms well seasoned by the infamous Strumpet his Wife,
and a Potion prepared for Britannicus by Locusta, could transfer it to her Son,
who was a stranger to his Blood. Galba became Heir to it, by driving Nero to
despair and death. Two common Soldiers by exciting his Guards to kill him,
could give a just Tittle to the Empire of the World to Otho, who was thought to
be the worst man in it. If a Company of Villains in the German Army, thinking
it as fit for them as others to create a Father of Mankind, could conser the
Dignity upon Vitellius; and if Vespasian, causing him to be killed, and thrown
into a Jakes less impure than his Life, did inherit all the glorious and sacred
Privileges belonging to that Title, it is in vain to inquire after any man's
right to any thing.

But if there be such a thing as Right or Wrong to be examined by men, and any
Rules set, whereby the one may be distinguished from the other; these
Extravagancys can have no effect of Right. Such as commit 'em, are not to be
looked upon as Fathers, but as the most mortal Enemies of their respective
Countries. No Right is to be acknowledged in any, but such as is conferred upon
them by those who have the right of conferring, and are concerned in the
exercise of the Power, upon such conditions as best please themselves. No
Obedience can be due to him or them, who have not a right of commanding; which
cannot reasonably be conferred upon any, that are not esteemed willing and able
rightly to execute it. This ability to perform the highest Works that come
within the reach of Men; and integrity of Will not to be diverted from it by
any temptation, or consideration of private Advantages, comprehending all that
is most commendable in Man; we may easily see, that whenever men act
according to the Law of their own Nature, which is Reason, they can have no
other rule to direct them in advancing one above another, than the opinion of a
man's Virtue and Ability, best to perform the Duty incumbent upon him; that is,
by all means to procure the good of the People committed to his charge. He is
only fit to conduct a Ship, who understands the Art of a Pilot: When we are
sick, we seek the assistance of such as are best skilled in Physic: The
Command of an Army is prudently conferred upon him that has most Industry,
Skill, Experience and Valor: In like manner, He only can, according to the
rules of Nature, be advanced to the Dignitys of the World, who excels in the
Virtues required for the performance of the Dutys annexed to them; for he only
can answer the end of his Institution, The Law of every i^ stituted Power, is
to accomplish the end of its Institution, as Creature are to do the Will of
their Creator, and in deflecting from it, overthro^ their own being. Magistrates
are distinguished from other men, by th Power with which the Law invests them
for the public Good: He tha cannot or will not procure that Good, destroys his
own being, and becomes like to other men. In matters of the greatest
importance, Detudigniori is the Voice of Nature; all her most sacred Laws are
perverted if this be not observed in the disposition of Governments; and all
ar^ neglected and violated, if they are not put into the hands of such as exce
in all manner of Virtues: for they only are worthy of them, and they only can
have a right who are worthy, because they only can perform the end for which
they are instituted. This may seem strange to those, wh^ have their heads
infected with Filmer's whimsys; but to others, so certainly grounded upon
Truth, that La razon es porque siempre se ha de tener respeto al fin y causa
final, por el qual, el tal supremo y universal Sennor se les pone, que es su
bien y utilitad; y a que no se le conv^erte el tal supremo Sennorio in danno,
pernicie y destruycion. Porque si assi fuesse, no ay que dudar, que non desde
entonces inclusivamente ser^a injusto, Tyrannico y iniquo tal Sennorio, come
mas se enderezasse al proprio interesse y provecho del Sennor, que al bien y
utilitad comun de los Subditos; lo qual de la razon natural y de todas las
Leyes humanas y divinas es abhorrecido y abhorrescible. Bar. de las Casas
destr. de las Indias, page 111.
Bartolomeo de las Casas Bishop o^ Chiapa, in a Treatise written by him, and
dedicated to the Empero^ Charles V. concerning the Indies, makes it the
foundation of all his Discourse, That notwithstanding his grant of all those
Countries from the Pope, and his pretensions to Conquest, he could have no right
over any of those Nations, unless he did in the first place, as the principal
end, regard their Good: The reason, says he, is, that regard is to be had to
the principal End and Cause, for which a supreme or universal Lord is set over
them, which is their good and profit, and not that it should turn to their
destruction and ruin; for if that should be, there is no doubt but from thence
forward, that Power would be tyrannical and unjust, as tending more to the
interest and profit of that Lord, than to the public good and profit of the
Subjects; which, according to natural Reason, and the Laws of God and Man, is
abhorred, and deserves to be abhorred. And in another place, speaking of the
Governors, who, abusing their Power, brought many troubles and vexations upon
the Indians; he says, El yugo y governacion de Vuestra Magestad importable,
Tirannico y degno de todo abhorrecimiento. Page 167.
They had rendered his Majesty's Government intolerable, and his Yoke
insupportable, tyrannical, and most justly abhorred. I do not alledg this through
an opinion, that a Spanish Bishop is of more Authority than another man; but to
show, that these are common Notions agreed by all Mankind; and that the
greatest Monarchs do neither refuse to hear them, or to regulate themselves
according to them, till they renounce common sense, and degenerate into Beasts.

But if that Government be unreasonable, and abhorred by the Laws of God and
Man, which is not instituted for the good of those who live under it; and an
Empire grounded upon the Donation of the Pope, which amongst those of the Roman
Religion is of great importance, and an entire conquest of the People, with
whom there had bin no former Compact, do degenerate into a most unjust and
detestable Tyranny, so soon as the Supreme Lord begins to prefer his own
interest or profit before the good of his Subjects; What shall we say of those
who pretend to a right of Dominion over free Nations, as inseparably united to
their Persons, without distinction of Age or Sex, or the least consideration of
their Infirmitys and Vices; as if they were not placed in the Throne for the
good of their People, but to enjoy the Honors and Pleasures that attend the
highest Fortune? What name can be fit for those, who have no other Title to the
Places they possess, than the most unjust and violent Usurpation; or being
descended from those, who for their Virtues were, by the Peoples consent, duly
advanced to the exercise of a legitimate Power, and having sworn to administer
it, according to the Conditions upon which it was given, for the good of those
who gave it, turn all to their own Pleasure and Profit, without any care of the
Public? These may be liable to hard Censures: but those who use them most
gently, must confess, that such an extreme deviation from the end of their
Institution, annuls it; and the Wound thereby given to the natural and original
Rights of those Nations cannot be cured, unless they resume the Libertys of
which they have bin deprived, and return to the ancient Custom of choosing those
to be Magistrates, who for their Virtues best deserve to be preferred before
their Brethren, and are endowed with those Qualitys that best enable men to
perform the great end of providing for the public Safety.

SECT. XVII. God having given the Government of the World to no one Man, nor
declared how it should be divided, left it to the Will of Man.
OUR Author's next Inquiry is, What becomes of the Right of Fatherhood, in case
the Crown should escheat for want of an Heir? Whether it does not escheat to
the People? His answer is, It Is but the negligence or ignorance of the People,
to lose the knowledge of the true Heir, etc. And a little below, The Power is
not devolved to the Multitude: No; the Kingly Power escheats on independent
Heads of Familys: All such prime Heads have Power to consent in the uniting, or
conferring their Fatherly Right of Sovereign Authority on whom they please; and
he that is so elected, claims not his Power as a Donative from the People, but
as being substituted by God, from whom he receives his Royal Charter of
Universal Father, etc.

In my opinion, before he had asked, What should be done in case the Crown
should escheat for want of an Heir? he ought to have proved, there had bin a
Man in the world, who had the Right in himself, and telling who he was, have
showed how it had bin transmitted for some Generations, that we might know
where to seek his Heir: and before he accused the Multitude of ignorance or
negligence, in not knowing this Heir, he ought to have informed us, how it may
be possible to know him, or what it would avail us if we did know him; for it is
in vain to know to whom a Right belongs, that never was, and never can be
executed. But we may go farther, and affirm, that as the Universal Right must
have bin in Noah and Shem (if in any) who never exercised it; we have reason to
believe there never was any such thing: And having proved from Scripture and
Human History, That the first Kingdoms were set up in a direct opposition to
this Right, by Nimrod and others, he that should seek and find their Heirs,
would only find those, who by a most accursed Wickedness, had usurped and
continued a Dominion over their Fathers, contrary to the Laws of God and
Nature; and we should neither be more wise, nor more happy than we are, tho our
Author should furnish us with certain and authentic Genealogys, by which we
might know the true Heirs of Nimrod, and the seventy two Kings that went from
Babylon, who, as he supposes, gave beginning to all the Kingdoms of the Earth.

Moreover, if the Right be Universal, it must be in one; for the World being
butone, the whole Right of commanding it cannot at the same time be in many,
and proceed from the Ordinance of God, or of Man. It cannot proceed from the
Ordinance of God; for he dos nothing in vain: He never gave a Right that could
not be executed. No man can govern that which he dos not so much as know: No
man did ever know all the World; no man therefore did or could govern it: and
none could be appointed by God to do that which is absolutely impossible to be
done; for it could not consist with his Wisdom. We find this in our selves. It
were a shame for one of us poor, weak, short-sighted Creatures, in the disposal
of our Affairs, to appoint such a method, as were utterly ineffectual for the
Preservation of our Familys, or destructive to them; and the blasphemy of
imputing to God such an Ordinance as would be a reproach to one of us, can suit
only with the wicked and impudent Fury of such as our Author, who delights in
Monsters. This also shows us that it cannot be from Men: One, or a few, may
commit Follys, but Mankind dos not universally commit, and perpetually persist
in any: They cannot therefore, by a general and permanent Authority, enact that
which is utterly absurd and impossible; or if they do, they destroy their own
Nature, and can no longer deserve the Name of reasonable Creatures. There can
be therefore no such man; and the Folly of seeking him, or his Heir that never
was, may be left to the Disciples of Filmer.

The Difficultys are as great, if it be said, The World might be divided into
parcels, and we are to seek the Heirs of the first Possessors; for besides that
no man can be obliged to seek that which cannot be found, (all men knowing that
Caliginosa nocte haec premit Deus) and that the Genealogys of Mankind are so
confused, that, unless possibly among the Jews, we have reason to believe there
is not a man in the world who knows his own Original, it could be of no
advantage to us tho we knew that of every one; for the Division would be of no
value, unless it were at the first rightly made by him who had all the
Authority in himself, (which dos no where appear) and rightly deduced to him,
who, according to that division, claims a right to the Parcel he enjoys. And I
fear our Author would terribly shake the Crowns, in which the Nations of Europe
are concerned, if they should be persuaded to search into the Genealogys of
their Princes, and to judge of their Rights according to the proofs they should
give of Titles rightly deduced by succession of Blood from the seventy two
first Kings, from whom our Author fancys all the Kingdoms of the World to be
derived.

Besides, tho this were done, it would be to no purpose; for the seventy two
were not sent out by Noah, nor was he or his Sons of that number; but they
went, or were sent, from Babylon where Nimrod reigned, who, as has bin already
proved, neither had, nor could have any right at all, but was a mighty Hunter,
even a proud and cruel Tyrant, usurping a Power to which he had no right, and
which was perpetually exercised by him and his Successors against God and his
People. From whence I may safely conclude, That no right can ever be derived;
and may justly presume it will be denied by none who are of better Morals, and
of more sound Principles in matters of Law and Religion than Filmer and Heylin;
since it is no less absurd to deduce a right from him that had none, than to
expect pure and wholesome Waters from a filthy, polluted, and poisonous Fountain.

If it be pretended that some other man since Noah had this universal Right, it
must either remain in one single person as his right Heir, or be divided. If in
one, I desire to know who he is, and where we may find him, that the Empire of
the World may be delivered to him. But if he cannot be found, the business is
at an end: for every man in the World may pretend himself to be the person; and
the infinite controversys arising thereupon can never be decided, unless either
the Genealogys of every one from Noah were extant and proved, or we had a Word
from Heaven, with a sufficient testimony of his mission who announces it. When
this is done, 'twill be time to consider what kind of obedience is due to this
wonderfully happy and glorious Person. But whilst the first appears to be
absolutely impossible, and we have no promise or reason to expect the other,
the Proposition is to be esteemed one of our Author's empty whimsys, which
cannot be received by mankind, unless they come all to be possessed with an
Epidemical madness, which would cast them into that which Hobbs calls Bellum
omnium contra omnes; when every man's Sword would be drawn against every man,
if God should so abandon the World to suffer them to fall into such misery.

If this pretended Right be divided, it concerns us to know by whom, when, how,
and to whom: for the division cannot be of any value, unless the Right was
originally in one; that he did exercise this Right in making the division; that
the parcels into which the World is divided are according to the allotment
made; and that the Persons claiming them by virtue of it are the true Heirs of
those to whom they were first granted. Many other difficultys may be alleged
no less inextricable than these; but this seeming sufficient for the present, I
shall not trouble my self with more, promising that when they shall be removed,
I will propose others, or confessing my errors, yield up the cause.

But if the Dominion of the whole World cannot belong to any one man, and every
one has an equal title to that which should give it; or if it did belong to
one, none did ever exercise it in governing the whole, or dividing it; or if he
did divide it, no man knows how, when, and to whom; so that they who lay claim
to any parcels can give no testimony of that division, nor show any better
title than other men derived from his first Progenitor, to whom it is said to
have bin granted; and that we have neither a Word, nor the promise of a Word
from God to decide the controversys arising thereupon, nor any Prophet giving
testimony of his mission that takes upon him to do it, the whole Fabric of our
Author's Patriarchical Dominion falls to the ground; and they who propose these
Doctrins, which (if they were received) would be a root of perpetual and
reconcilable hatred in every man against every man, can be accounted no less
than Ministers of the Devil, tho they want the abilitys he has sometimes
infused into those who have bin employed upon the like occasions. And we may
justly conclude, that God having never given the whole World to be governed by
one man, nor prescribed any rule for the division of it; nor declared where the
right of dividing or subdividing that which every man has should terminate; we
may safely affirm that the whole is for ever left to the will and discretion of
Man: We may enter into, form, and continue in greater or lesser Societys, as
best pleases our selves: The right of Paternity as to Dominion is at an end,
and no more remains, but the love, veneration, and obedience, which proceeding
from a due sense of the benefits of Birth and Education, have their root in
Gratitude, and are esteemed sacred and inviolable by all that are sober and
virtuous. And as it is impossible to transfer these Benefits by inheritance, so
it is impossible to transfer the Rights arising from them. No man can be my
Father but he that did beget me; and it is as absurd to say I owe that Duty to
one who is not my Father, which I owe to my Father, as to say, he did beget me,
who did not beget me; for the obligation that arises from benefits can only be
to him that conferred them. It Is in vain to say the same is due to his Heir; for
that can take place only when he has but one, which in this case signifies
nothing: For if I being the only Son of my Father, inherit his Right, and have
the same power over my Children as he had over me; if I had one hundred
Brothers, they must all inherit the same; and the Law of England, which
acknowledges one only Heir, is not general, but municipal, and is so far from
being general, as the precept of God and Nature, that I doubt whether it was
ever known or used in any Nation of the World beyond our Island. The words of
the Apostle, If we are Children, we are therefore Heirs and Coheirs with
Christ, are the voice of God and Nature; and as the universal Law of God and
Nature is always the same, every one of us who have Children, have the same
Right over them, as Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob had over theirs; and that Right
which was not devolved to any one of them, but inherited by them all (I mean
the right of Father as Father) not the peculiar promises, which were not
according to the Law of Nature, but the election of Grace, is also inherited by
every one of us, and ours, that is, by all Mankind. But if that which could be
inherited was inherited by all, and it be impossible that a right of Dominion
over all can be due to every one, then all that is or can be inherited by every
one is that exemption from the Dominion of another, which we call Liberty, and
is the gift of God and Nature.

SECT. XVIII. If a right of Dominion were esteemed Hereditary according to the
Law of Nature, a multitude of destructive and inextricable Controversys would
thereupon arise.
THere being no such thing therefore, according to the Law of Nature, as an
Hereditary Right to the Dominion of the World, or any part of it; nor any one
man that can derive to himself a title from the first Fathers of Mankind, by
which he can rightly pretend to be preferred before others to that command, or a
part of it; and none can be derived from Nimrod, or other Usurpers, who had
none in themselves, we may justly spare our pains of seeking farther into this
matter. But as things of the highest importance can never be too fully
explained; it may not be amiss to observe, That if Mankind could be brought to
believe that such a right of Dominion were by the Law of God and Nature
hereditary, a great number of the most destructive and inextricable
Controversys must thereupon arise, which the wisdom and goodness of God can
never enjoin, and Nature, which is Reason, can never intend; but at present I
shall only mention two, from whence others must perpetually spring. First if
there be such a Law, no Human Constitution can alter it; no length of time can
be a defense against it: All Governments that are not conformable to it are
vicious and void even in their root, and must be so for ever: That which is
originally unjust may be justly overthrown. We do not know of any (at least in
that part of the World in which we are most concerned) that is established, or
exercised with an absolute Power, as by the Authors of those opinions is
esteemed inseparable from it: Many, as the Empire, and other States, are
directly contrary; and on that account can have no Justice in them. It being
certain therefore that he or they who exercise those Governments have no right:
that there is a Man to whom it dos belong, and no man knowing who he is, there
is no one man who has not as good a title to it as any other: There is not
therefore one who has not a right, as well as any, to overthrow that which has
none at all. He that has no part in the Government may destroy it, as well as
he that has the greatest; for he neither has that which God ordained he should
have, nor can show a title to that which he enjoys from that original
Prerogative of Birth, from whence it can only be derived.

If it be said, that some Governments are arbitrary, as they ought to be; and
France, Turkey, and the like be alleged as instances, the matter is not
mended: for we do not only know when those, who deserve to be regarded by us,
were not absolute, and how they came to be so; but also, that those very
Familys which are now in possession are not of very long continuance, had no
more title to the original right we speak of than any other men, and
consequently can have none to this day. And tho we cannot perhaps say that the
Governments of the barbarous Eastern Nations were ever other than they are, yet
the known Original of them deprives them of all pretense to the Patriarchical
Inheritance; and they may be as justly as any other deprived of the Power to
which they have no title.

In the second place, tho all men's Genealogys were extant, and fully verified,
and it were allowed that the Dominion of the World, or every part of it, did
belong to the right Heir of the first Progenitor, or any other to whom the
first did rightly assign the Parcel, which is under question; yet it were
impossible for us to know who should be esteemed the true Heir, or according to
what rule he should be judged so to be: for God has not by a precise word
determined it, and Men cannot agree about it, as appears by the various Laws
and Customs of several Nations, disposing severally of Hereditary Dominions.

It Is a folly to say, they ought to go to the next in blood; for it is not known
who is that next. Some give the preference to him who amongst many Competitors
is the fewest degrees removed from their common Progenitor who first obtained
the Crown: Others look only upon the last that possessed it. Some admit of
Representation, by which means the Grandchild of a King by his eldest Son, is
preferred before his second Son, he being said to represent his dead Father, who
was the eldest: Others exclude these, and advance the younger Son, who is
nearer by one degree to the common Progenitor that last enjoyed the Crown than
the Grandchild. According to the first rule, Richard II. was advanced to the
Crown of England, as Son of the eldest Son of Edward III. before his Uncles,
who by one degree were nearer to the last Possessor: And in pursuance of the
second, Sancho sirnam'd the Brave, second Son of Alphonso the Wise, King of
Castile, was preferred before Alphonso Son of Ferdinand his eldest Brother,
according to the Law of Thanestry, which was in force in Spain ever since we
have had any knowledge of that Country, as appears by the contest between Corbis
and Orsua, decided by Combat before Scipio Africanus; continued in full force
as long as the Kingdom of the Goths lasted, and was ever highly valued, till
the House of Austria got possession of that Country, and introduced Laws and
Customs formerly unknown to the Inhabitants.

The Historys of all Nations furnish us with innumerable Examples of both
sorts; and whosoever takes upon him to determine which side is in the right,
ought to show by what authority he undertakes to be the Judge of Mankind, and
how the infinite breaches thereby made upon the rights of the governing Familys
shall be cured, without the overthrow of those that he shall condemn, and of
the Nations where such Laws have bin in force as he dislikes: and till that be
done, in my opinion, no place will afford a better lodging for him that shall
impudently assume such a Power, than the new buildings in Moor-Fields.

It Is no less hard to decide whether this next Heir is to be sought in the Male
Line only, or whether Females also may be admitted. If we follow the first as
the Law of God and Nature, the title of our English Kings is wholly abolished;
for not one of them since Henry the 1 st has had the least pretense to an
inheritance by the Masculine Line; and if it were necessary, we have enough to
say of those that were before him.

If it be said, that the same Right belongs to Females, it ought to be proved
that Women are as fit as Men to perform the Office of a King, that is, as the
Israelites said to Samuel, to go in and out before us, to judge us, and to fight
our Battles; for it were an impious folly to say that God had ordained those
for the Offices on which the good of Mankind so much depends, who by nature are
unable to perform the dutys of them. If on the other side, the sweetness,
gentleness, delicacy, and tenderness of the Sex render them so unfit for manly
exercises, that they are accounted utterly repugnant to, and inconsistent with
that modesty which dos so eminently shine in all those that are good amongst
them; that Law of Nature which should advance them to the Government of Men,
would overthrow its own Work, and make those to be the Heads of Nations, which
cannot be the Heads of private Familys; for, as the Apostle says, The Woman is
not the head of the Man, but the Man is the head of the Women. This were no
less than to oblige Mankind to lay aside the name of reasonable Creature: for
if Reason be his Nature, it cannot enjoin that which is contrary to it self; if
it be not, the definition Homo est animal rationale, is false, and ought no
longer to be assumed.

If any man think these Arguments to be mistaken or misappli'd, I desire him to
enquire of the French Nation on what account they have always excluded Females,
and such as descended from them? How comes the House of Bourbon to be advanced
to the Throne before a great Number of Familys that come from the Daughters of
the House of Valois? Or what title those could have before the Daughters of the
other Lines, descended from Hugh Capet, Pepin, Meroveus, or Pharamond? I know
not how such questions would be received; but I am inclined to think that the
wickedness and folly of those who should thereby endeavor to overthrow the
most ancient and most venerated Constitutions of the greatest Nations, and by
that means to involve them in the most inextricable difficultys, would be
requited only with Stones.

It cannot be denied, that the most valiant, wise, learned, and best polished
Nations have always followed the same Rule, tho the Reginarumque sub armis
Barbaries pars magna jacet. Lucan. P^ar^.

weak and bar^ arous acted otherwise; and no man ever heard of a Queen, or a
man deriving his title from a Female among the ancient civilized Nations. But
if this be not enough, the Law of God, that wholly omits Females, is sufficient
to show that Nature, which is his Handmaid, cannot advance them. When God
describes who should be the King of his People (if they would have one) and how
he should govern; no mention is made Deuteronomy. 17.
of Daughters. The Israelites offered the Kingdom to Gideon, and to his Sons:
God promised, and gave it to Saul, David, Jeroboam, Jehu, and their Sons. When
all of them, save David, by their Crimes fell from the Kingdom, the Males only
were extirpated; and the Females who had no part in the Promises, did not fall
under the Penaltys, or the Vengeance that was executed upon those Familys: and
we do not in the Word of God, or in the History of the Jews, hear of any
Feminin Reign, except that which was usurped by Athaliah; nor that any
consideration was had of their Descendents in relation to the Kingdom: which is
enough to show that it is not according to the Law of God, nor to the Law of
Nature, which cannot differ from it. So that Females, or such as derive their
right by inheritance from Females, must have it from some other Law, or they
can have none at all.

But tho this question were authentically decided, and concluded that Females
might or might not succeed, we should not be at the end of our contests: for if
they were excluded, it would not from thence follow, as in France, that their
Descendents should be so also; for the Privilege which is denied to them,
because they cannot, without receding from the modesty and gentleness of the
Sex, take upon them to execute all the Dutys required, may be transferred to
their Children, as Henry the second and Henry the seventh were admitted, tho
their Mothers were rejected.

If it be said that every Nation ought in this to follow their own
Constitutions, we are at an end of our Controversys; for they ought not to be
followed, unless they are rightly made: They cannot be rightly made, if they
are contrary to the universal Law of God and Nature. If there be a general
Rule, it is impossible but some of them, being directly contrary to each other,
must be contrary to it. If therefore all of them are to be followed, there can
be no general Law given to all; but every People is by God and Nature left to
the liberty of regulating these matters relating to themselves according to
their own prudence or convenience: and this seems to be so certainly true, that
whosoever dos, as our Author, propose Doctrins to the contrary, must either be
thought rashly to utter that which he dos not understand, or maliciously to
cast balls of Division among all Nations, whereby every man's Sword would be
drawn against every man, to the total subversion of all Order and Government.

SECT. XIX. Kings cannot confer the right of Father upon Princes, nor Princes
upon Kings.
LEST what has bin said before by our Author should not be sufficient to
accomplish his design of bringing confusion upon Mankind, and some may yet lie
still for want of knowing at whose command he should cut his Brother's throat,
if he has not power or courage to set up a title for himself, he has a new
project that would certainly do his work, if it were received. Not content with
the absurditys and untruths already uttered in giving the incommunicable right
of Fathers, not only to those who, as is manifestly testified by sacred and
profane Historys, did usurp a power over their Fathers, or such as owed no
manner of obedience to them: and justifying those Usurpations, which are most
odious to God and all good men, he now fancys a Kingdom so gotten may escheat
for want of an Heir; whereas there is no need of seeking any, if Usurpation can
confer a Right, and that he who gets the Power into his hands, ought to be
reputed the right Heir of the first Progenitor; for such a one will seldom be
wanting, if violence and fraud be justified by the command of God, and Nations
stand obliged to render obedience, till a stronger or more successful Villain
throws him from the Throne he had invaded. But if it should come to pass that
no man would step into the vacant place, he has a new way of depriving the
People of their Right to provide for the Government of themselves. Because,
says he, the dependency of ancient Familys is often obscure, and worn out of
knowledge; therefore the Wisdom of all or most Princes has thought fit many
times to adopt those for Heads of Familys, and Princes of Provinces, whose
merits, abilitys, or fortunes have ennobled them, and made them fit and capable
of such Royal Favors: All such prime Heads and Fathers have power to consent
to the uniting and conferring of their fatherly Right and Sovereignty on whom
they please, etc.

I may justly ask how any one or more Familys come to be esteemed more ancient
than others, if all are descended from one common Father, as the Scriptures
testify; or to what purpose it were to inquire what Familys were the most
ancient, if there were any such, when the youngest and most mean by usurpation
gets an absolute right of Dominion over the eldest, tho his own Progenitors, as
Nimrod did: but I may certainly conclude, That whatever the Right be that
belongs to those ancient Familys, it is inherent in them, and cannot be
conferred on any other by any human Power; for it proceeds from Nature only. The
Duty I owe to my Father dos not arise from an usurped or delegated Power, but
from my birth derived from him; and it is as impossible for any man to usurp or
receive, by the grant of another, the right of a Father over me, as for him to
become, or pretend to be made my Father by another who did not beget me. But if
he say true, this right of Father dos not arise from Nature; nor the obedience
that I owe to him that begot me, from the benefits which I received, but is
merely an artificial thing depending upon the Will of another: and that we may
be sure there can be no error in this, our Author attributes it to the wisdom
of Princes. But before this comes to be authentic, we must at the least be
sure that all Princes have this great and profound Wisdom, which our Author
acknowledges to be in them, and which is certainly necessary for the doing of
such great things, if they were referred to them. They seem to us to be born
like other men, and to be generally no wiser than other men. We are not obliged
to believe that Nebuchadnezzar was wise, till God had given him the heart of a
man; or that his Grandson Belshazzar, who being laid in the balance was found
too light, had any such profound Wisdom. Ahasuerus showed it not in appointing
all the People of God to be slain, upon a Lie told to him by a Rascal; and the
matter was not very much mended, when being informed of the truth, he gave 'em
leave to kill as many of their Enemies as they pleased. The hardness of
Pharaoh's heart, and the overthrow thereby brought upon himself and People, dos
not argue so profound a Judgment as our Author presumes every Prince must have:
And it is not probable that Samuel would have told Saul, He had done foolishly,
if Kings had always bin so exceeding wise: Nay, if Wisdom had bin annexed to
the Character, Solomon might have spared the pains of asking it from God, and
Rehoboam must have had it. Not to multiply examples out of Scripture, it is
believed that Xerxes had not inflicted Stripes upon the Sea for breaking his
Navy in pieces, if he had bin so very wise. Caligula for the same reason might
have saved the labor of making love to the Moon, or have chosen a fitter
Subject to advance to the Consulat than his Horse Incitatus: Nero had not
endeavored to make a Woman of Sueton.
a Man, nor married a Man as a Woman. Many other Examples might be alleged to
show that Kings are not always wise: and not only the Roman Satyrist, who says
Quicquid delirant Reges, etc. shows that he did Horat.
not believe them to be generally wiser than other men; but Solomon himself
judges them to be as liable to infirmitys, when he prefers a wise Child before
an old and foolish King. If therefore the strength of our Author's Argument
lies in the certainty of the Wisdom of Kings, it can be of no value, till he
proves it to be more universal in them than History or Experience will permit
us to believe. Nay, if there be Truth or Wisdom in the Scripture, which
frequently represents the wicked Man as a Fool, we cannot think that all Kings
are wise, unless it be proved that none of them have bin wicked; and when this
is performed by Filmer's Disciples, I shall confess my error.

Men give testimony of their Wisdom, when they undertake that which they ought
to do, and rightly perform that which they undertake; both which points do
utterly fail in the subject of our Discourse. We have often heard of such as
have adopted those to be their Sons who were not so, and some Civil Laws
approve it. This signifies no more, than that such a Man, either through affection
to one who is not his Son, or to his Parents* or for some other reason, takes
him into his Family, and shows kindness to him, as to his Son: but the adoption
of Fathers is a whimsical piece of nonsense. If this be capable of an
aggravation, I think none can be greater, than not to leave it to my own
discretion, who having no Father, may resolve to pay the Duty I owed to my
Father to one who may have showed Kindness to me; but for another to impose a
Father upon a Man, or a People composed of Fathers, or such as have Fathers,
whereby they should be deprived of that natural Honor and Right which he makes
the foundation of his Discourse, is the utmost of all absurditys. If any Prince
therefore has ever undertaken to appoint Fathers of his People, he cannot be
accounted a man of profound Wisdom, but a Fool or a Madman; and his Acts can be
of no value. But if the thing were consonant to Nature, and referred to the Will
of Princes (which I absolutely deny) the frequent Extravagancys committed by
them in the elevation of their Favorites, shows that they intend not to make
them Fathers of the People, or know not what they do when they do it.

To choose or institute a Father is nonsense in the very term; but if any were
to be chosen to perform the Office of Fathers to such as have none, and are not
of age to provide for themselves (as men do Tutors or Guardians for Orphans)
none could be capable of being elected, but such as in kindness to the person
they were to take under their care, did most resemble his true Father, and had
the virtues and abilitys required rightly to provide for his good. If this
fails, all Right ceases; and such a corruption is introduced as we saw in our
Court of Wards, which the Nation could not bear, when the Institution was
perverted, and the King, who ought to have taken a tender care of the Wards and
their Estates, delivered 'em as a prey to those whom he favored.

Our Author ridiculously attributes the Title and Authority of Father to the
word Prince; for it has none in it, and signifies no more than a Man, who in
some kind is more eminent than the Vulgar. In this sense Trecenti Romanae
juventutis Principes. T. Live.
Mutius Scaevola told Porsenna, that Three hundred Princes of the Roman Youth
had conspired against him: By which he could not mean that three hundred
Fathers of the Roman Youth, but three hundred Roman young men had conspired;
and they could not be Fathers of the City, unless they had bin Fathers of their
own Fathers. Princeps Senatus was understood in the same sense; and T.
Sempronius the Censor, choosing Q. Fabius T. Live. l. 7.
Maximus to that Honor, gave for a reason, Se lecturum Q. Fabium Maximum, quem
tum Principem Romanae Civitatis esse, vel Annibale judice, dicturus esset;
which could not be understood that Hannibal thought him to be the Father or
Lord of the City (for he knew he was not) but the Man who for Wisdom and Valor
was the most eminent in it.

The like are and ought to be the Princes of every Nation; and tho something of
Honor may justly be attributed to the Descendents of such as have done great
Services to their Country, yet they who degenerate from them cannot be esteemed
Princes; much less can such Honors or Rights be conferred upon Court-creatures
or Favorites. Tiberius, Caligula, Claudius, Nero, Galba, and others, could
advance Macro, Pallas, Narcissus, Tigellinus, Vinnius, Laco, and the like, to
the highest degrees of Riches and Power; but they still continued to be
Villains, and so they died.

No wise or good Man ever thought otherwise of those, who through the folly of
Princes have bin advanced to the highest places in several Countries. The
madness of attributing to them a paternal power, seems to have bin peculiarly
reserved to complete the insamy of our Author; for he only could acknowledge a
cooptitious Father, or give to another man the power of choosing him. I confess
that a man in his infancy may have bin exposed, like Moses, Cyrus, Oedipus,
Romulus: He may have bin taken in War; or by the charity of some good person
saved from the teeth of wild Beasts, or from the Sword by which his Parents
fell, and may have bin educated with that care which Fathers usually have of
their Children: it is reasonable that such a one in the whole course of his life
should pay that veneration and obedience to him, who gave him as it were a
second birth, which was due to his natural Father; and this, tho improperly,
may be called an Adoption. But to think that any man can assume it to himself,
or confer it upon another, and thereby arrogate to himself the service and
obedience, which, by the most tender and sacred Laws of Nature, we owe to those
from whom we receive Birth and Education, is the most preposterous folly that
hitherto has ever entered into the heart of man.

Our Author nevertheless is not ashamed of it, and gives Reasons no way
unsuitable to the Proposition. Men are, says he, adopted Fathers of Provinces
for their Abilitys, Merits, or Fortunes. But these Abilitys can simply deserve
nothing; for it they are ill employed, they are the worst of Vices, and the
most powerful Instruments of Mischief. Merits, in regard of another, are
nothing unless they be to him; and he alone can merit from me the respect due
to a Father, who has conferred Benefits upon me, in some measure proportionable
to those which we usually receive from our Fathers: and the world may judge,
whether all the Court-Ministers and Favorites that we have known, do upon this
account deserve to be esteemed Fathers of Nations. But to allow this on account
of their Fortunes, is, if possible, more extravagant than any thing that has
bin yet uttered. By this account Mazarin must have bin Father of the French
Nation: The same Right was inherited by his chaste Niece, and remained in her,
till she and her silly Husband dissipated the Treasures which her Uncle had
torn from the Bowels of that People. The Partisans may generally claim the same
Right over the Provinces they have pillaged: Old Audley, Dog Smith, Bp Duppa,
Brownloe, Child, Dashwood, Fox, etc. are to be esteemed Fathers of the People
of England. This Doctrine is perfectly Canonical, if Filmer and Heylin were good
Divines; and Legal, if they judged more rightly touching matters of Law. But if
it be absurd and detestable, they are to be reputed Men, who, by attributing
the highest Honors to the vilest Wretches of the world, for what they had
gained by the most abominable means, endeavor to increase those Vices, which
are already come to such a height, that they can by no other way be brought to
a greater. Daily experience too plainly shows, with what rage Avarice usually
fills the hearts of men. There are not many destructive Villanys committed in
the World, that do not proceed from it. In this respect it is called Idolatry,
and the root of all evil. Solomon warns us to beware of such as make have to
grow rich, and says, they shall not be innocent. But it is no matter what the
Prophets, the Apostles, or the wisest of men say of Riches, and the ways of
gaining them; for our Author tells us, that men of the greatest Fortunes,
without examining how they came to them, or what use they make of them, deserve
to be made Fathers of Provinces.

But this is not his only quarrel with all that is just and good: His whole
Book goes directly against the letter and spirit of the Scripture. The work of
all those, whom God in several Ages has raised up to announce his Word, was to
abate the Lusts and Passions that arise in the hearts of men; to show the
vanity of worldly Enjoyments, with the dangers that accompany Riches and
Honors, and to raise our hearts to the love of those Treasures that perish not.
Honest and wise men, following the Light of Nature, have in some measure
imitated this. Such as lived private lives, as Plato, Socrates, Epictetus, and
others, made it their business to abate men's Lusts, by showing the folly of
seeking vain Honors, useless Riches, or unsatissying Pleasures; and those who
were like to them, if they were raised to supreme Magistracys, have endeavored
by the severest Punishments to restrain men from commiting the Crimes by which
Riches are most commonly gained: but Filmer and Heylin lead us into a new way.
If they deserve credit, whosoever would become supreme Lord and Father of his
Country, absolute, sacred and inviolable, is only to kill him that is in the
head of the Government: Usurpation confers an equal Right with Election or
Inheritance: We are to look upon the Power, not the Ways by which it is
obtained: Possession only is to be regarded; and men must venerate the present
Power, as set up by God, tho gained by Violence, Treachery or Poison: Children
must not impose Laws upon, nor examine the Actions of their Father. Those who
are a little more modest, and would content themselves with the Honor of being
Fathers and Lords only of Provinces, if they get Riches by the savor of the
King, or the favor of the King by Riches, may receive that honor from him:
The Lord Paramount may make them peculiar Lords of each Province as sacred as
himself; and by that means every man shall have an immediate and a subaltern
Father. This would be a Spur to excite even the most sleeping Lusts; and a
Poison that would fill the gentlest Spirits with the most violent Furys. If men
should believe this, there would hardly be found one of whom it might not be
said, Hac spe, minanti fulmen occurret Jovi. Senec. Theb.
No more is required to fill the World with Fire and Blood, than the reception
of these Precepts: No man can look upon that as a Wickedness, which shall
render him Sacred; nor fear to attempt that which shall make him God's
Vicegerent. And I doubt, whether the wickedness of filling men's heads with such
Notions was ever equaled, unless by him who said, Ye shall not die, but be as
Gods.

But since our Author is pleased to teach us these strange things, I wish he
would also have told us, how many men in every Nation ought to be looked upon
as adopted Fathers: What proportion of Riches, Ability or Merit, is naturally
or divinely required to make them capable of this sublime Character: Whether
the Right of this Chimerical Father dos not destroy that of the Natural; or
whether both continue in force, and men thereby stand obliged, in despite of
what Christ said, to serve two Masters. For if the Right of my Artificial
Father arise from any Act of the King, in favor of his Riches, Abilitys or
Merit, I ought to know whether he is to excel in all, or any one of these
Points; How far, and which of 'em gives the preference; since it is impossible
for me to determine whether my Father, who may be wise, tho not rich, is thereby
divested of his Right, and it comes to be transferred to another, who may be
rich tho not wise, nor of any personal merit at all, till that Point be
decided; or, so much as to guess when I am emancipated from the Duty I owe to
him, by whom I was begotten and educated, unless I know whether he be fallen
from his Right, through want of Merit, Wisdom or Estate; and that can never be,
till it be determined, that he has forfeited his Right, by being defective in
all, or any of the three; and what proportion of Merit, Wisdom or Estate is
required in him, sor the enjoyment of his Right, or in another that would
acquire it: for no man can succeed to the Right of another, unless the first
Possessor be rightly deprived of it; and it cannot belong to them both, because
common sense universally teaches, that two distinct Persons cannot, at the same
time, and in the same degree, have an equal Right to the same individual thing.

The Right of Father cannot therefore be conferred upon Princes by Kings, but
must for ever follow the Rule of Nature. The Character of a Father is
indelible, and incommunicable: The Duty of Children arising from Benefits
received is perpetual, because they can never not have received them, and can
be due only to him from whom they are received. For these Reasons we see, that
such as our Author calls Princes, cannot confer it upon a King; for they cannot
give what they have not in themselves: They who have nothing, can give nothing:
They who are only supposititious, cannot make another to be real; and the
Whimsy of Kings making Princes to be Fathers, and Princes conferring that Right
on Kings, comes to nothing.

SECT. XX. All just Magistratical Power is from the People.
HAVING proved that the Right of a Father proceeds from the Generation and
Education of his Children: That no man can have that Right over those, whom he
has not begotten and educated: That every man has it over those who owe their
Birth and Education to him: That all the Sons of Noah, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob,
and others, did equally inherit it: That by the same Reasons, it dos for ever
belong to every man that begets Children; it plainly appears, that no Father
can have a Right over others, unless it be by them granted to him, and that he
receive his Right from those who granted it. But our Author, with an admirable
sagacity peculiar to himself, discovers, and with equal confidence tells us,
that that which is from the People, or the chief Heads of them, is not from the
People: He that is so elected, says he, claims not his Right from the People as
a Donative, but from God. That is, if I mistake not, Romulus was not made King
of the Romans by that People, but by God: Those men being newly gathered
together, had two Fathers, tho neither of them had any Children; and no man
knew who was their Father, nor which of 'em was the elder: But Romulus by the
slaughter of his Brother decided all Questions, and purchased to himself a
Royal Charter from God; and the Act of the People which conferred the Power on
him, was the Act of God. We had formerly learnt, that whatsoever was done by
Monarchs, was to be imputed to God; and that whosoever murdered the Father of a
People, acquired the same Right to himself: but now it seems, that Nations also
have the same privilege, and that God dos what they do. Now I understand why it
was said of old, Vox Populi est Vox Dei: But if it was so in regard of Romulus,
the same must be confessed of Tullus Hostilius, Ancus Martius, Tarquinius
Priscus, and Servius Tullus; who being all strangers to each other, and most of
them Aliens also, were successively advanced by the same People, without any
respect to the Children, Relations or Heirs of their Predecessors. And I cannot
comprehend, why the Act of the same People should not have the same Virtue, and
be equally attributed to God, when they gave the same or more power to Consuls,
Military Tribunes, Decemviri, or Dictators; or why the same Divine Character
should not be in the same manner conferred upon any Magistracys, that by any
People have bin, are, or shall be at any time erected for the same ends.

Upon the same grounds we may conclude, that no Privilege is peculiarly annexed
to any Form of Government; but that all Magistrates are equally the Ministers of
God, who perform the Work for which they were instituted; and that the People
which institutes them, may proportion, regulate and terminate their Power, as
to time, measure, and number of Persons, as seems most convenient to
themselves, which can be no other than their own good. For it cannot be
imagined that a multitude of People should send for Numa, or any other Person
to whom they owed nothing, to reign over 'em, that he might live in Glory and
Pleasure; or for any other reason, than that it might be good for them and
their Posterity. This shows the Work of all Magistrates to be always and every
where the same, even the doing of Justice, and procuring the Welfare of those
that create them. This we learn from common sense: Plato, Aristotle, Cicero,
and the best human Authors lay it as an unmovable Foundation, upon which they
build their Arguments relating to matters of that nature: And the Apostle from
better Authority declares, Romans 13.
That Rulers are not a terror to good Works, but to Evil: Will thou then not be
afraid of the Power? do that which is good, and thou shall have praise of the
same; for he is the Minister of God unto thee for good: But if thou do that
which is evil, be afraid; for he bears not the Sword in vain; for he is the
Minister of God, a revenger to execute Wrath upon him that does evil. ^ Tim. 2.
And the reason he gives for praying for Kings, and all that are in Authority,
is, that we may live a quiet and peaceable life, in all godliness and honesty.
But if this be the Work of the Magistrate, and the glorious Name of God's
Minister be given to him for the performance of it, we may easily see to whom
that Title belongs. His Children and Servants ye are; whose Works ye do. He
therefore, and he only, is the Servant of God, who dos the Work of God; who is
a terror to those that do evil, and a praise to those that do well; who bears
the Sword for the punishment of Wickedness and Vice, and so governs, that the
People may live quietly in all godliness and honesty. The order of his
Institution is inverted, and the Institution vacated, if the Power be turned to
the praise of those that do evil, and becomes a terror to such as do well; and
that none who live honestly and justly can be quiet under it. If God be the
Fountain of Justice, Mercy and Truth, and those his Servants who walk in them,
no exercise of Violence, Fraud, Cruelty, Pride, or Avarice, is patronized by
him: and they who are the Authors of those Villanys, cannot but be the
Ministers of him, who sets himself up against God; because it is impossible that
Truth and Falsehood, Mercy and Cruelty, Justice and the most violent Oppression
can proceed from the same Root. It was a folly and a lie in those Jews, to call
themselves the Children of Abraham, who did not the Works of Abraham; and
Christ declared them to be the Children John 8. 39.
of the Devil, whose Works they did; which words proceeding from the Eternal
Truth, do as well indicate to us whose Child and Servant every man is to be
accounted, as to those who first heard them.

If our Author's former Assertions were void of Judgment and Truth, his next
Clause shows a great defect in his Memory, and contradicts the former: The
Judgments of God, says he, who has Power to give and take away Kingdoms, are
most just; yet the ministry of Men, who execute God's Judgments without
Commission, is sinful and damnable. If it be true, as he says, that we are to
look at the Power, not the Ways by which it is gained; and that he who has it,
whether it be by Usurpation, Conquest, or any other means, is to be accounted
as Father, or right Heir to the Father of the People, to which Title the most
sublime and divine Privileges are annexed; a man who by the most wicked and
unjust Actions advances himself to the Power, becomes immediately the Father of
the People, and the Minister of God; which I take to be a piece of Divinity
worthy our Author and his Disciples.

It may be doubted what he means by a Commission from God; for we know of none
but what is outwardly by his Word, or inwardly by his Spirit; and I am apt to
think, that neither he nor his Abettors allowing of either as to the Point in
question, he dos foully prevaricate, in alleging that which he thinks cannot
be of any effect. If any man should say, that the Word of God to Moses, Joshua,
Ehud, Gideon, Samuel, Jeroboam and Jehu, or any others, are, in the like cases,
Rules to be observed by all; because that which was from God was good, that
which was good, is good; and he that dos good, is justified by it: He would
probably tell us, that what was good in them, is not good in others; and that
the Word of God dos justify those only to whom it is spoken: That is to say, No
man can execute the just Judgments of God, to the benefit of mankind, according
to the Example of those Servants of God, without damnable sin, unless he have a
precise Word particularly directed to him for it, as Moses had. But if any man
should pretend that such a Word was come to him, he would be accounted an
Enthusiast, and obtain no credit. So that, which way soever the Clause be
taken, it appears to be full of Fraud, confessing only in the Theory, that
which he thinks can never be brought into practice; that his beloved Villanys
may be thereby secured, and that the glorious Examples of the most heroic
Actions, performed by the best and wisest men that ever were in the World for
the benefit of mankind, may never be imitated.

The next Clause shows, that I did our Author no wrong in saying, that he gave
a right to Usurpation; for he plainly says, That whether the Prince be the
supreme Father of his People, or the true Heir of such a Father; or whether he
come to the Crown by Usurpation, or Election of the Nobles or People, or by any
other way whatsoever, etc. it is the only Right and Authority of the natural
Father. In the 3 d Chap. Sect. 8. It skills not which way the King comes by his
Power, whether by Election, Donation, Succession, or by any other means. And in
another place, That we are to regard the Power, not the Means by which it is
gained. To which I need say no more, than that I cannot sufficiently admire the
ingeniously invented Title of Father by Usurpation; and confess, that since
there is such a thing in the World, to which not only private men, but whole
Nations owe obedience, whatsoever has bin said anciently, (as was thought to
express the highest excess of Fury and Injustice) as, Jus datum sceleri; Jus
omne in ferro est situm; Lucan. etc.
Jus licet in jugulos nostros sibi fecerit ense; Sylla potens Mariusque ferox
and Cinna cruentus, Caesareaeque domus series; were solid Truths, good Law and
Divinity; which did not only signify the actual exercise of the Power, but
induced a conscientious Obligation of obeying it. The Powers so gained, did
carry in themselves the most sacred and inviolable Rights; and the actors of
the most detestable Villanys thereby became the Ministers of God, and the
Fathers of their subdued People. Or if this be not true, it cannot be denied,
that Filmer and his followers, in the most impudent and outrageous Blasphemy,
have surpast all that have gone before 'em.

To confirm his Assertion, he gives us a wonderful explanation of the fisth
Commandment; which, he says, enjoins Obedience to Princes, under the terms of,
Honor thy Father and thy Mother; drawing this Inference, That as all Power is
in the Father, the Prince who has it, cannot be restrained by any Law; which
being grounded upon the perfect likeness between Kings and Fathers, no man can
deny it to be true. But if Claudius was the Father of the Roman People, I
suppose the chaste Messalina was the Mother, and to be honored by virtue of the
same Commandment: But then I fear that such as met her in the most obscene
places, were not only guilty of Adultery, but of Incest. The same Honor must
needs belong to Nero and his virtuous Poppaea, unless it were transferred to his
newmade Woman Sporus; or perhaps he himself was the Mother, and the glorious
Title of Pater Patriae belonged to the Rascal, who married him as a Woman. The
like may be said of Agathocles, Dionysius, Phalaris, Busiris, Machanidas, Peter
the Cruel of Castile, Christiern of Denmark, the last Princes of the House of
Valois in France, and Philip the Second of Spain. Those Actions of theirs which
men have ever esteemed most detestable, and the whole course of their
abominable Government, did not proceed from Pride, Avarice, Cruelty, Madness
and Lust, but from the tender care of most pious Fathers. Tacitus sadly
describes the state of his Country: Vrbs incendiis vastata, consumptis
antiquissimis delubris, ipso Capitolio Civium manibus incenso; pollutae
Ceremoniae; magna Adulteria; plenum Exiliis mare; infecti caedibus scopuli;
atrocius in Vrbe saevitum; Nobilitas, opes, omissi vel gesti honores pro
crimine, and ob virtutes certissimum exitium: But he was to blame; all this
proceeded from the ardency of a paternal Affection. When Nero, by the death of
Helvidius Priscus and Thraseas, endeavored to cut up Virtue by the roots,
ipsam exscindere virtutem, he did it, because he knew it was good for the World
that there should be no virtuous man in it. When he fired the City, and when
Caligula wished the People had but one Neck that he might strike it off at one
blow, they did it through a prudent care of their Childrens good, knowing it would
be for their advantage to be destroyed; and that the empty desolated World
would be no more troubled with popular Seditions. By the same rule Pharaoh,
Eglon, Nebuchodonosor, Antiochus, Herod, and the like, were Fathers of the
Hebrews. And without looking far backward, or depending upon the Faith of
History, we may enumerate many Princes, who in a perpetual care of their
People, have not yielded to Nero or Caligula. If our Author say true, all those
Actions of theirs, which we have ever attributed to the utmost excess of Pride,
Cruelty, Avarice and Perfidiousness, proceeded from their princely Wisdom and
fatherly Kindness to the Nations under 'em: and we are beholden to him for the
discovery of so great a Mystery, which has bin hid from mankind from the
beginning of the World to this day: if not, we may still look upon them as
Children of the Devil; and continue to believe, that Princes as well as other
Magistrates were set up by the People for the public Good; that the Praises
given to such as are Wise, Just and Good, are purely personal, and can belong
only to those, who by a due exercise of their Power do deserve it, and to no
others.

CHAP. II.
SECT. I. That it is natural for Nations to govern, or to choose Governors; and
that Virtue only gives a natural preference of one man above another, or reason
why one should be chosen rather than another.
IN this Chapter our Author fights valiantly against Bellarmin and Suarez,
seeming to think himself victorious, if he can show that either of them has
contradicted the other, or himself; but being no way concerned in them, I shall
leave their followers to defend their Quarrel: My work is to seek after Truth;
and, tho they may have said some things, in matters not concerning their
beloved Cause of Popery, that are agreeable to Reason, Law, or Scripture, I
have little hope of finding it among those who apply themselves chiefly to
School Sophistry, as the best means to support Idolatry. That which I maintain,
is the Cause of Mankind; which ought not to suffer, tho Champions of corrupt
Principles have weakly defended, or maliciously betrayed it: and therefore not
at all relying on their Authority, I intend to reject whatsoever they say that
agrees not with Reason, Scripture, or the approved Examples of the best
polished Nations. He also attacks Plato and Aristotle, upon whose Opinions I
set a far greater value, in as much as they seem to have penetrated more deeply
into the secrets of human Nature; and not only to have judged more rightly of
the Interests of Mankind, but also to have comprehended in their Writings the
Wisdom of the Grecians, with all that they had learned from the Phaenicians,
Egyptians, and Hebrews; which may lead us to the discovery of the Truth we
seek. If this be our work, the question is not, whether it be a Paradox, or a
received Opinion, That People naturally govern, or choose Governors; but whether
it be true or not: for many Paradoxes are true, and the most gross Errors have
often bin most common. Tho I hope to prove, that what he calls a Paradox, is
not only true; but a Truth planted in the hearts of men, and acknowledged so to
be by all that have hearkened to the voice of Nature, and disapproved by none,
but such as through wickedness, stupidity, or baseness of Spirit, seem to have
degenerated into the worst of beasts, and to have retained nothing of men, but
the outward shape, or the ability of doing those mischiefs which they have
learned from their Master the Devil.

We have already seen, that the Patriarchical Power resembles not the Regal in
principle or practice: that the beginning and continuance of Regal Power was
contrary to, and inconsistent with the Patriarchical: that the first Fathers of
mankind left all their Children independent on each other, and in an equal
liberty of providing for themselves: that every man continued in this liberty,
till the number so increased, that they became troublesome and dangerous to each
other; and finding no other remedy to the disorders growing, or like to grow
among them, joined many Familys into one civil Body, that they might the better
provide for the convenience, safety, and defense of themselves and their
Children. This was a collation of every man's private Right into a public
Stock; and no one having any other right than what was common to all, except it
were that of Fathers over their Children, they were all equally free when their
Fathers were dead; and nothing could induce 'em to join, and lessen that
natural liberty by joining in Societys, but the hopes of a public Advantage.
Such as were wise and valiant procured it, by setting up regular Governments,
and placing the best Men in the Administration; whilst the weakest and basest
fell under the power of the most boisterous and violent of their Neighbors.
Those of the first sort had their root in Wisdom and Justice, and are called
lawful Kingdoms or Commonwealths; and the Rules by which they are governed, are
known by the name of Laws. These Governments have ever bin the Nurses of
Virtue: The Nations living under them have flourished in Peace and Happiness,
or made Wars with Glory and Advantage: whereas the other sort springing from
Violence and Wrong, have ever gone under the odious title of Tyrannys; and by
fomenting Vices, like to those from whence they grew, have brought shame and
misery upon those who were subject to them. This appears so plainly in
Scripture, that the assertors of Liberty want no other Patron than God himself;
and his Word so fully justifies what we contend for, that it were not necessary
to make use of human Authority, if our Adversarys did not oblige us to examine
such as are cited by them. This, in our present case, would be an easy work, if
our Author had rightly marked the passages he would make use of, or had bin
faithful in his Interpretation or Explication of such as he truly cites; but
failing grossly in both, it is hard to trace him.

He cites the 16 th Chapter of the third Book of Aristotle's Politics, and I
do not find there is more than twelve; or tho that Wound might be cured, by
saying the Words are in the twelfth, his Fraud in perverting the Sense were
unpardonable, tho the other mistake be past over. It Is true that Aristotle dos
there seem to doubt whether there be any such thing as one man naturally a Lord
over many Citizens, since a City consists of Equals: but in the whole scope of
that Chapter, Book, and his other Writings, he fully shows his doubt did not
arise from an imagination that one man could naturally inherit a Right of
Dominion over many not descended from him; or that they were born under a
necessity of being Slaves to him (for such fancys can proceed only from
distempered Brains) but that Civil Societys aiming at the public good, those
who by nature were endowed with such Virtues or Talents as were most beneficial
to them, ought to be preferred. And nothing can be more contrary to the frantic
whimsy of our Author, who fancys an hereditary Prerogative of Dominion inherent
to a person as Father of a People, or Heir, or to be reputed Heir of the first
Father, when it is certain he is not, but that either he or his Predecessor came
in by Election or Usurpation, than to show that it is only Wisdom, Justice,
Valor, and other commendable Virtues, which are not hereditary, that can give
the preserence; and that the only reason why it should be given, is, that Men
so qualified can better than others accomplish the end for which Societys are
constituted: Ar^st. Pol.
For tho, says he, all are equally free, all are not equally endowed with those
Virtues that render Liberty safe, prosperous, and happy. That equality which is
just among Equals, is just only among Equals; but such as are base, ignorant,
vicious, slothful, or cowardly, are not equal in natural or acquired Virtues,
to the generous, wise, valiant, and industrious; nor equally useful to the
Societys in which they live: they cannot therefore have an equal part in the
Government of 'em, they cannot equally provide for the common good; and it is
not a personal, but a public Benefit that is sought in their constitution and
continuance. There may be a hundred thousand men in an Army, who are all
equally free; but they only are naturally most fit to be Commanders or Leaders,
who most excel in the Virtues required for the right performance of those
Offices; and that, not because it is good for them to be raised above their
Brethren, but because it is good for their Brethren to be guided by them, as
it is ever good to be governed by the wisest and the best. If the nature of man
be Reason, Detur digniori, in matters of this kind, is the voice of Nature; and
it were not only a deviation from Reason, but a most desperate and mischievous
madness, for a Company going to the Indies, to give the guidance of their Ship
to the Son of the best Pilot in the world, if he want the skill required to
that employment, or to one who was maliciously set to destroy them: and he only
can have a Right grounded upon the dictates of Nature, to be advanced to the
Helm, who best knows how to govern it, and has given the best testimonys of his
Integrity and Intentions to employ his skill for the good of those that are
embarked. But as the work of a Magistrate, especially if he be the supreme, is
the highest, noblest, and most difficult that can be committed to the charge of
a man, a more excellent Virtue is required in the Person to be advanced to it,
than for any other; and he that is most excellent in that Virtue, is reasonably
and naturally to be preferred before any other. Aristotle having this in his
view, seems to think, that those who believed it not to be natural for one man
to be Lord of all the Citizens, since a City consists of Equals, had not
observed that inequality of Endowments, Virtues and Abilitys in men, which
render some more fit than others for the performance of their Dutys, and the
Work intended; but it will not be found, as I suppose, that he did ever dream
of a natural Superiority, that any man could ever have in a civil Society,
unless it be such a superiority in Virtue as most conduces to the public good.

He confirms this in proceeding to examine the different sorts of Governments,
according to the different dispositions of Nations; and is so bold to say, That
a popular Government is the best for a People, who are naturally generous and
warlike: that the Government of a few suits best with those, among whom a few
men are found to excel others in those Virtues that are profitable to Societys;
and that the Government of one is good, when that one dos so far surpass all
others in those Virtues, that he has more of them than all the rest of the
people together. And for the same reason that induced him to believe that
equality is just amongst Equals, he concludes inequality of Power to be most
unjust, unless there be inequality of Merit; and equality of Power to be so
also, when there is inequality of Virtue, that being the only rule by which
every man's part ought to be regulated.

But if it be neither reasonable nor just that those who are not equal in
Virtue should be made equal in Power, or that such as are equal in Virtue
should be unequal in Power; the most brutal and abominable of all extravagancys
is to make one or a few, who in Virtue and Abilitys to perform Civil Functions
are inferior to others, superior to all in power: and the Miserys suffered by
those Nations, who, inverting the Laws of Nature and Reason, have placed
Children or Men of no Virtue in the Government, when men that excelled in all
Virtues were not wanting, do so far manifest this Truth, that the pains of
proving it may be spared.

It Is not necessary for me to inquire, whether it be possible to find such a
Man as Aristotle calls Natura Regem; or whether he intended to recommend
Alexander to the world for the Man designed by God and Nature to be King over
all, because no man was equal to him in the Virtues that were beneficial to
all. For pursuing my Position, that Virtue only can give a just and natural
preference, I ingenuously confess, that when such a Man, or race of Men as he
describes, shall appear in the world, they carry the true marks of Sovereignty
upon them: We ought to believe, that God has raised 'em above all, whom he has
made to excel all: It were an impious folly to think of reducing him to the
ordinary level of Mankind, whom God has placed above it. 'Twere better for us
to be guided by him, than to follow our own judgment; nay, I could almost say,
'twere better to serve such a Master, than to be free. But this will be nothing
to the purpose, till such a Man, or succession of men do appear; and if our
Author would persuade us, that all Mankind, or every particular, is obliged to
a perpetual subjection to one Man or Family, upon any other condition, he must
do it by the credit of those who favor his Design more than Aristotle.

I know not who that will be, but am confident he will find no help from Plato:
for if his Principles be examined, by which a grave Author's sense is best
comprehended, it will appear, that all his Books of Laws, Plato de Leg. c^ de
Republ.
and of a Commonwealth, are chiefly grounded upon this, "That Magistrates are
chosen by Societys, seeking their own good; and that the best men ought to be
chosen for the attaining of it:" whereas his whole design of seeking which is
the best form of Government, or what Laws do most conduce to its perfection and
permanency, (if one Rule were by nature appointed for all, and none could
justly transgress it; if God had designed an universal Lord over the whole
World, or a particular one over every Nation, who could be bound by no Law)
were utterly absurd; and they who write Books concerning Political matters, and
take upon 'em to instruct Nations how to govern themselves, would be found
either foolishly to mispend their time, or impiously to incite People to rebel
against the Ordinance of God. If this can justly be imputed to Plato; he is not
the wise Man he is supposed to have bin; and can less deserve the title of
Divine, which our Author gives him: but if he remain justly free from such
Censures, it must be confessed, that whilst he seeks what is good for a people,
and to convince 'em by reason that it is so, he takes it for granted, that they
have a liberty of choosing that which appears to Plato de Leg.
be the best to them. He first says, "That this Good consists in the obtaining
of Justice; but farther explaining himself, he shows that under the name of
Justice, he comprehends all that tends to their perfection and felicity: in as
much as every People, by joining in a civil Society, and creating Magistrates,
does seek its own good; and it is just, that he or they who are created, should,
to the utmost of their power, accomplish the end of their Creation, and lead
the People to Justice, without which there is neither perfection nor happiness:
That the proper act of Justice is to give to every one his due; to Man that
which belongs to Man, and to God that which is God's. But as no man can be
just, or desire to be so, unless he know that Justice is good; nor know that it
is good, unless he know that original Justice and Goodness, through which all that
is just is just, and all that is good is good, it is impossible for any man to
perform the part of a good Magistrate, unless he have the knowledge of God; or to
bring a People to Justice, unless he bring them to the knowledge of God, who is
the Root of all Justice and Goodness." If Plato therefore deserve credit, he
only can duly perform the part of a good Magistrate, whose moral Virtues are
ripened and heightened by a superinduction of Divine Knowledge. "The misery of
Man proceeds from his being separated from God: This Separation is wrought by
corruption; his restitution therefore to Felicity and Integrity, can only be
brought about by his reunion to the Good from which he is fallen." Plato looks
upon this as the only worthy Object of Man's desire: and in his Laws and
Politics he intends not to teach us how to erect Manufactures, and to increase
Trade or Riches; but how Magistrates may be helpful to Nations in the manner
before mentioned, and consequently what men are fit to be Magistrates. If our
Author therefore would make use of Plato's Doctrine to his end, he ought to have
proved that there is a Family in every Nation, to the chief of which, and
successively to the next in Blood, God dos ever reveal and infuse such a
knowledge of himself, as may render him a Light to others; and failing in this,
all that he says is to no purpose.

The weakness in which we are born, renders us unable to attain this Good of
our selves: we want help in all things, especially in the greatest. The fierce
Barbarity of a loose Multitude, bound by no Law, and regulated by no Discipline,
is wholly repugnant to it: Whilst every man fears his Neighbor, and has no
other defense than his own strength, he must live in that perpetual anxiety
which is equally contrary to that happiness, and that sedate temper of mind
which is required for the search of it. The first step toward the cure of this
pestilent Evil, is for many to join in one body, that every one may be
protected by the united force of all, and the various Talents that men possess,
may by good discipline be rendered useful to the whole; as the meanest piece of
wood or stone being placed by a wise Architect, conduces to the beauty of the
most glorious Building. But every man bearing in his own breast Affections,
Passions, and Vices repugnant to this end, and no man owing any submission to
his Neighbor; none will subject the correction or restriction of themselves to
another, unless he also submit to the same Rule. They are rough pieces of
timber or stone, which it is necessary to cleave, saw, or cut: This is the work
of a skilful Builder, and he only is capable of erecting a great Fabric, who
is so: Magistrates are Political Architects; and they only can perform the Work
incumbent on them, who excel in Political Virtues. Nature, in variously framing
the minds of men, according to the variety of Uses in which they may be
employed, in order to the institution and preservation of Civil Societys, must
be our Guide, in allotting to every one his proper work. And Plato observing
this Variety, affirms, "That the Laws of Nature cannot be more absurdly
violated, than by giving the Government of a People to such, as do not excel
others in those Arts and Virtues that tend to the ultimate Ends for which
Governments are instituted." By this means those who are Slaves by Nature, or
rendered so by their Vices, are often set above those that God and Nature had
fitted for the highest Commands; and Societys which subsist only by order, fall
into corruption, when all Order is so preposterously inverted, and the most
extreme Confusion introduced. This is an Evil that Solomon detested: Folly is
set in great dignity, and the Eccl. 10. 7*
Rich sit in low places: I have seen Servants upon Horses, and Princes walking
as Servants upon the Earth. They who understand Solomon's Language, will easily
see, that the Rich, and the Princes he means, are such only who are rich in
Virtue and Wisdom, and who ought to be preferred for those Qualitys: And when he
says, a Servant that reigns is one of the three things the Earth cannot bear,
he can only mean such as deserve to be Servants; for when they reign, they do
not serve, but are served by others: Which perfectly agrees with what we learn
from Plato, and plainly shows, that true Philosophy is perfectly conformable
with what is taught us by those who were divinely inspired. Therefore tho I
should allow to our Author, that Aristotle, in those words, It seems to some,
not to be natural for one Man to be Lord of all the Citizens, since the City
consists of Equals, did speak the opinion of others rather than his own; and
should confess that he and his Master Plato did acknowledge a natural inequality
among men, it would be nothing to his purpose: for the Inequality, and the
rational Superiority due to some, or to one, by reason of that Inequality, did
not proceed from Blood or Extraction, and had nothing Patriarchical in it; but
consisted solely in the Virtues of the Persons, by which they were rendered
more able than others to perform their Duty, for the good of the Society.
Therefore if these Authors are to be trusted, whatsoever place a Man is
advanced to in a City, it is not for his own sake, but for that of the City; and
we are not to ask who was his Father, but what are his Virtues in relation to
it. This induces a necessity of distinguishing between a simple and a relative
Inequality; for if it were possible for a man to have great Virtues, and yet no
way beneficial to the Society of which he is, or to have some one Vice that
renders 'em useless, he could have no pretense to a Magistratical Power more
than any other. They who are equally free, may equally enjoy their freedom; but
the Powers that can only be executed by such as are endowed with great Wisdom,
Justice and Valor, can belong to none, nor be rightly conferred upon any, except
such as excel in those Virtues. And if no such can be found, all are equally by
turns to participate of the Honors annexed to Magistracy; and Law, which is
said to be written Reason, cannot justly exalt those, whom Nature, which is
Reason, has deprest, nor depress those whom Nature has exalted. It cannot make
Kings Slaves, nor Slaves Kings, without introducing that Evil, which, if we
believe Solomon, and the Spirit by which he spoke, the Earth cannot bear. This
may discover what Lawgivers deserve to be reputed wise or just; and what
Decrees or Sanctions ought to be reputed Laws. Aristotle proceeding by this
Rule, rather tells us who is naturally a King, than where we should find him;
and after having given the highest Praises to this true natural King and his
Government, he sticks not to declare that of one Man, in Virtue equal or
inferior to others, to be a mere Tyranny, even the worst of all, as it is the
corruption of the best, (or, as our Author calls it, the most Divine) and such
as can be fit only for those barbarous and stupid Nations, which, tho bearing
the shape of Men, are little different from Beasts. Whoever therefore will from
Aristotle's words inser, that Nature has designed one Man, or succession of
Men, to be Lords of every Country, must show that Man to be endowed with all
the Virtues that render him fit for so great an Office, which he dos not bear
for his own Pleasure, Glory or Profit, but for the good of those that are under
him; and if that be not done, he must look after other Patrons than Aristotle
for his opinion.

Plato dos more explicitly say, that the Civil or Politic Man, the Shepherd,
Father, or King of the People, is the same, designed for the same Work, enabled
to perform it by the excellency of the same Virtues, and made perfect by the
infusion of the divine Wisdom. This is Plato's Monarch, and I confess, that
wheresoever he dos appear in the World, he ought to be accounted as sent from
God for the good of that People. His Government is the best that can be set up
among Men; and if assurance can be given, that his Children, Heirs or
Successors, shall for ever be equal to him in the abovementioned Virtues, it
were a folly and a sin to bring him under the government of any other, or to an
equality with them, since God had made him to excel them all; and it is better
for them to be ruled by him, than to follow their own judgment. This is that
which gives him the preference: He is wise through the knowledge of the Truth,
Plato in Al^ib. l. 1, ^.
and thereby becomes good, happy, pure, beautiful and perfect. The divine Light
shining forth in him, is a guide to others; and he is a fit Leader of a People
to the good that he enjoys. If this can be expressed by words in fashion, this is
his Prerogative; this is the Royal Charter given to him by God, and to him
only, who is so adapted for the performance of his Office. He that should
pretend to the same Privileges, without the same Abilitys to perform the Works
for which they are granted, would exceed the folly of a Child, that takes upon
him a burden which can only be born by a Giant; or the madness of one who
presumes to give Physic, and understands not the Art of a Physician, thereby
drawing guilt upon himself, and death upon his Patient. It were as vain to
expect that a Child should carry the Giant's burden, and that an ignorant man
should give wholesome Physic, as that one who lives void of all knowledge of
Good, should conduct men to it. Whenever therefore such a Man, as is
above-describ'd, dos not appear, Nature and Reason instruct us to seek him or
them who are most like to him; and to lay such burdens upon 'em as are
proportionable to their strength; which is as much as to say, to prefer every
man according to his merit, and assign to every one such Works as he seems able
to accomplish.

But that Plato and Aristotle may neither be thought unreasonably addicted to
Monarchy; nor, wholly rejecting it, to have talked in vain of a Monarch, that
is not to be found; it is good to consider that this is not a siction. Moses,
Joshua, Samuel, and others, were such as they define; and were made to be such,
by that communion with God which Plato requires: And he in all his Writings,
intending the institution of such a Discipline as should render men happy, wise
and good, could take no better way to bring his Countrymen to it, than by
showing 'em that Wisdom, Virtue, and Purity only could make a natural
difference among men.

It Is not my work to justify these Opinions of Plato and his Scholar Aristotle:
They were men, and, tho wise and learned, subject to error. If they erred in
these Points, it hurts not me, nor the Cause I maintain; since I make no other
use of their Books, than to show the impudence and prevarication of those, who
gather small scraps out of good Books, to justify their Assertions concerning
such Kings as are known amongst us; which being examined, are found to be
wholly against 'em; and if they were followed, would destroy their Persons and
Power.

But our Author's intention being only to cavil, or to cheat such as are not
versed in the Writings of the Ancients, or at least to cause those who do not
make Truth their Guide, to waver and fluctuate in their Discourses, he dos in
one page say, That without doubt Moses his History of the Creation guided these
Philosophers in finding out this lineal Subjection. And in the next affirms,
That the Ignorance of the Creation occasioned several among the Heathen
Philosophers to think that men met together as herds of Cattle. Whereas they
could not have bin ignorant of the Creation, if they had read the Books that
Moses writ; and having that knowledge, they could not think that men met
together as herds of Cattle. However, I deny that any of 'em did ever dream of
that lineal Subjection, derived from the first Parents of mankind, or that any
such thing was to be learned from Moses. Tho they did not perhaps justly know
the beginning of Mankind, they did know the beginnings and progress of the
Governments under which they lived: and being assured that the first Kingdoms
had bin those, which they called Heroum Regna, that is, of those who had bin
most beneficial to Mankind; that their Descendents in many places degenerating
from their Virtues, had given Nations occasion to set up Aristocracys; and they
also falling into corruption, to institute Democracys, or mixed Governments;
did rightly conclude, That every Nation might justly order their own Affairs
according to their own pleasure, and could have neither obligation nor reason
to set up one man or a few above others, unless it did appear to them that they
had more of those Virtues which conduce to the good of Civil Societys, than the
rest of their Brethren.

Our Author's cavil upon Aristotle's Opinion, That those who are wise in mind
are by nature fitted to be Lords, and those who are strong of body ordained to
obey, deserves no answer; for he plainly falsifies the Text. Aristotle speaks
only of those Qualitys which are required for every purpose; and means no more,
than that such as are eminent in the Virtues of the mind deserve to govern, tho
they do not excel in bodily strength; and that they who are strong of body, tho
of little understanding, and incapable of commanding, may be useful in
executing the commands of others: But is so far from denying that one man may
excel in all the perfections of mind and body, that he acknowledges him only to
be a King by nature who dos so, both being required for the full performance of
his Duty. And if this be not true, I suppose that one who is like Agrippa
Posthumus, Corporis viribus stolide ferox, may be fit to govern many Nations;
and Moses or Samuel, if they naturally wanted bodily strength, or that it
decayed by age, might justly be made Slaves, which it a discovery worthy our
Author's invention.

SECT. II. Every Man that has Children, has the right of a Father, and is
capable of preferment in a Society composed of many.
I Am not concerned in making good what Suarez says: A Jesuit may speak that
which is true; but it ought to be received, as from the Devil, cautiously, lest
mischief be hid under it: and Sir Robert's frequent prevarications upon the
Scripture, and many good Authors, give reason to suspect he may have falsify'd
one, that few Protestants read, if it served to his purpose; and not mentioning
the place, his fraud cannot easily be discovered, unless it be by one who has
leisure to examine all his vastly voluminous Writings. But as to the point in
question, that pains may be saved; there is nothing that can be imputed to the
invention of Suarez; for, that Adam had only an Oeconomical, not a Political
Power, is not the voice of a Jesuit, but of Nature and common Sense: for
Politic signifying no more in Greek, than Civil in Latin; it is evident there
could be no Civil Power, where there was no Civil Society; and there could be
none between him and his Children, because a Civil Society is composed of
Equals, and fortified by mutual compacts, which could not be between him and
his Children, at least if there be any thing of truth in our Author's Doctrine,
That all Children do perpetually and absolutely depend upon the Will of their
Father. Suarez seems to have bin of another opinion; and observing the benefits
we receive from Parents, and the Veneration we owe to 'em to be reciprocal, he
could not think any Duty could extend farther than the knowledge of the Relation
upon which it was grounded; and makes a difference between the Power of a
Father, before and after his Children are made free; that is in truth, before
and after they are able to provide for themselves, and to deliver their Parents
from the burden of taking care of them. Which will appear rational to any who
are able to distinguish between what a Man of 50 years old, subsisting by
himself, and having a Family of his own, or a Child of eight, dos owe to his
Father: The same reason that obliges a Child to submit entirely to the Will of
his Parents, when he is utterly ignorant of all things, dos permit, and often
enjoin men of ripe age to examine the Commands they receive before they obey
them; and it is not more plain that I owe all manner of duty, affection, and
respect to him that did beget and educate me, than that I can owe nothing on
any such account to one that did neither.

This may have bin the opinion of Suarez: but I can hardly believe such a
notion, as, that Adam in process of time might have Servants, could proceed
from any other brain than our Author's: for if he had lived to this day, he
could have had none under him but his own Children; and if a Family be not
complete without Servants, his must always have bin defective; and his Kingdom
must have bin so too, if that has such a resemblance to a Family as our Author
fancies. This is evident, that a hard Father may use his Children as Servants,
or a rebellious, stubborn Son may deserve to be so used; and a gentle and good
Master may show that kindness to faithful and well-deserving Servants, which
resembles the sweetness of a fatherly rule: but neither of 'em can change their
nature; a Son can never grow to be a Servant, nor a Servant to be a Son. If a
Family therefore be not complete, unless it consist of Children and Servants,
it cannot be like to a Kingdom or City, which is composed of Freemen and
Equals: Servants may be in it, but are not Members of it. As Truth can never be
repugnant to Justice, it is impossible this should be a prejudice to the
paternal Rule, which is most just; especially when a grateful remembrance of
the benefits received, dos still remain, with a necessary and perpetual
obligation of repaying them in all affection and duty: whereas the care of ever
providing for their Familys, as they did probably increase in the time of our
first long-living Fathers, would have bin an insupportable burden to Parents,
if it had bin incumbent on 'em. We do not find that Adam exercised any such
power over Cain, when he had slain Abel, as our Author fancies to be Regal: The
Murderer went out, and built a City for himself, and called it by the name of
his firstborn. And we have not the least reason to believe, that after Adam's
death Cain had any Dominion over his Brethren, or their Posterity; or any one
of them over him and his. He feared that whosoever saw him would kill him,
which language dos not agree with the Rights belonging to the haughty Title of
Heir apparent to the Dominion of the whole Earth. The like was practiced by
Noah and his Sons, who set up Colonys for themselves; but lived as private men
in obscure places, whilst their Children of the fourth or fifth Generation,
especially of the youngest and accursed Son, were great and powerful Kings, as
is fully proved in the first Chapter.

Tho this had bin otherwise, it would have no effect upon us; for no argument
drawn from the examples of Shem, Ham, and Japhet, if they and their Children
had continued under the Dominion of Noah as long as he lived, can oblige me to
resign my self and all my concernments absolutely into the hands of one who is
not my Father. But when the contrary is evidently true in them, and their next
ensuing Generations, it is an admirable boldness in our Author to think of
imposing upon us for an eternal and universal Law (when the knowledge of our
first Progenitors is utterly extinguished) that which was not at all regarded
by those, who could not be ignorant of their own Original, or the Duty thereby
incumbent upon them, or their immediate Fathers then living, to whom the Rights
must have belonged, if there had bin any such thing in nature, or that they had
bin of any advantage to them: whereas in truth, if there had bin such a Law in
the beginning, it must have vanished of it self, for want of being exercised in
the beginning, and could not possibly be revived after four thousand years,
when no man in the world can possibly know to whom the universal right of
Dominion over the whole World or particular Nations dos belong; for it is in
vain to speak of a Right, when no one man can have a better Title to it than
any other. But there being no precept in the Scripture for it, and the examples
directed or approved by God himself and his most faithful Servants, being
inconsistent with, and contrary to it, we may be sure there never was any such
thing; and that men being left to the free use of their own understanding, may
order and dispose of their own Affairs as they think fit: No man can have a
better title than another, unless for his personal Virtues; every man that in
the judgment of those concerned excels in them, may be advanced: and those
Nations that through mistake set up such as are unworthy, or do not take right
measures in providing for a succession of men worthy, and other things
necessary to their welfare, may be guilty of great folly, to their own shame
and misery; but can do no injustice to any in relation to an hereditary Right,
which can be naturally in none.

SECT. III. Government is not instituted for the good of the Governor, but of
the Governed; and Power is not an Advantage, but a Burden.
THE Follys with which our Author endeavors to corrupt and trouble the World,
seem to proceed from his fundamental mistakes of the Ends for which Governments
are constituted; and from an Opinion, that an excessive Power is good for the
Governor, or the diminution of it a prejudice: whereas common sense teaches,
and all good men acknowledge, that Governments are not set up for the Advantage,
Profit, Pleasure or Glory of one or a few men, but for tho good of the Society.
For this reason Plato and Aristotle find no more certain way of distinguishing
"between a lawful King and a Tyrant, than that the first seeks to procure the
common Good, and the other his own Pleasure or Profit; and doubt not to
declare, That he who according to his Institution was the first, destroys his
own being, and degenerates into the latter, if he deflect from that rule: He
that was the best of Men, becomes the worst; and the Father or Shepherd of the
People makes himself their Enemy." And we may from hence collect, that in all
Controversys concerning the Power of Magistrates, we are not to examine what
conduces to their Profit or Glory, but what is good for the Public.

His second Error is no less gross and mischievous than the first; and that
absolute Power to which he would exalt the chief Magistrate, would be
burdensome, and desperately dangerous if he had it. The highest Places are
always slippery: Men's eyes dazzle when they are carried up to them; and all
falls from them are mortal. Few Kings or Tyrants, says -- Sine caede and
sanguine pauci
Descendunt reges, and sicca morte Tyranni. Juven. Sat.

Juvenal, go down to the Grave in peace; and he did not imprudently couple them
together, because in his time few or no Kings were known who were not Tyrants.
Dionysius thought no man left a Tyranny, till he was drawn out by the heels.
But Tacitus says, Nescit quam grave and intolerandum sit cuncta regendi onus.
Moses could not bear it: Gideon would not accept of any Resemblance of it. The
moral sense of Jotham's wise Parable is eternal: The Bramble coveted the Power,
which the Vine, Olive and Figtree refused. The worst and basest of men are
ambitious of the highest places, which the best and wisest reject; or if some,
who may be otherwise well qualified --

[In this place two pages are wanting in the Original Manuscript.]

-- as the fittest to be followed by Mankind. If these Philosophers and Divines
deserve credit, Nimrod, Ninus, Pharaoh, and the rest of that accursed Crew, did
not commit such excesses as were condemned by God, and abhorred by good Men; but
gaining to themselves the glorious Character of his Vicegerents, left their
practices as a perpetual Law to all succeeding Generations; whereby the world,
and every part of it, would be for ever exposed to the violence, cruelty and
madness of the most wicked men that it should produce. But if these Opinions
comprehend an extravagancy of wickedness and madness, that was not known among
men, till some of these Wretches presumed to attempt the increase of that
corruption under which Mankind groans, by adding fuel to the worst of all
Vices; we may safely return to our Propositions, That God having established no
such Authority as our Author fancies, Nations are left to the use of their own
Judgment, in making provision for their own Welfare: That there is no lawful
Magistrate over any of them, but such as they have set up; that in creating
them, they do not seek the advantage of their Magistrate, but their own: And
having found that an absolute Power over a People, is a burden which no man can
bear; and that no wise or good Man ever desired it; from thence conclude, that
it is not good for any to have it, nor just for any to affect it, tho it were
personally good for himself; because he is not exalted to seek his own good,
but that of the Public.

SECT. IV. The Paternal Right devolves to, and is inherited by all the Children.
THO the perversity of our Author's Judgment and Nature may have driven him
into the most gross Errors, it is not amiss to observe, that many of those
delivered by him, proceed from his ignorance of the most important Differences
between Father and Lord, King and Tyrant; which are so evident and
irreconcilable, that one would have thought no man could be so stupid, as not
to see it impossible for one and the same man, at the same time, to be Father
and Master, King and Tyrant, over the same Persons. But lest he should think me
too scrupulous, or too strict in inquiring after Truth, I intend for the
present to wave that inquiry, and to seek what was good for Adam or Noah: What
we have reason to believe they desired to transmit to their Posterity, and to
take it for a perpetual Law in its utmost extent; which I think will be of no
advantage to our Author: for this Authority, which was universal during their
lives, must necessarily after their decease be divided, as an Inheritance, into
as many parcels as they had Children. The Apostle Romans 8. 19.
says, If Children, then Heirs, Heirs of God, and joint Heirs with Christ; which
alluding to the Laws and Customs of Nations, could have bin of no force, unless
it had bin true and known to be so. But if Children are Heirs, or joint Heirs,
whatsoever Authority Adam or Noah had, is inherited by every man in the world;
and that title of Heir which our Author so much magnifys, as if annexed to one
single person, vanishes into nothing; or else the words of the Apostle could
have neither strength nor truth in them, but would be built upon a false
Foundation, which may perhaps agree with our Author's Divinity.

Yet if the Apostle had not declared himself so fully in this Point, we might
easily have seen that Adam and Noah did leave their Children in that equality;
for Fathers are ever understood to embrace all their Children with equal
Affection, till the discovery of personal Virtues or Vices makes a difference.
But the personal Virtues, that give a reasonable preference of one before
another, or make him more fit to govern than the others, cannot appear before
he is, nor can be annexed to any one Line: Therefore the Father cannot be
thought to have given to one Man, or his Descendents, the Government of his
Brethren and their Descendents.

Besides, tho the Law of England may make one man to be sole Heir of his
Father, yet the Laws of God and Nature do not so. All the Children of Noah were
his Heirs: The Land promised to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, was equally divided
among their Children. If the Children of Joseph made two Tribes, it was not as
the firstborn, but by the Will of Jacob, who adopted Ephraim and Manasseh; and
they thereby became his Sons, and obtained an Inheritance equal to that of the
other Tribes. The Law allowed a double Portion to the first begotten; but this
made a difference between Brothers only in proportion, whereas that between
Lord and Servant is in specie, not in degree. And if our Author's Opinion might
take place, instead of such a division of the common Inheritance between
Brothers, as was made between the Children of Jacob, all must continue for ever
Slaves to one Lord; which would establish a difference in specie between
Brethren, which Nature abhors.

If Nature dos not make one man Lord over his Brethren, he can never come to be
their Lord, unless they make him so, or he subdue them. If he subdue them, it
is an act of Violence, contrary to Right, which may consequently be recovered:
If they make him Lord, it is for their own sakes, not for his; and he must seek
their good, not his own, lest, as Aristotle says, he degenerat from a King into
a Tyrant. He therefore who would persuade us, that the Dominion over every
Nation dos naturally belong to one Man, Woman or Child, at a venture; or to the
Heir, whatsoever he or she be, as to Age, Sex, or other Qualifications, must
prove it good for all Nations to be under them. But as Reason is our Nature,
that can never be natural to us that is not rational. Reason gives Paria
paribus, equal Power to those who have equal Abilitys and Merit: It allots to
every one the part he is most fit to perform; and this fitness must be equally
lasting with the Law that allots it. But as it can never be good for great
Nations, having men amongst 'em of Virtue, Experience, Wisdom and Goodness, to
be governed by Children, Fools, or vicious and wicked Persons; and we neither
find that the Virtues required in such as deserve to govern them, did ever
continue in any race of men, nor have reason to believe they ever will, it can
never be reasonable to annex the Dominion of a Nation to any one Line. We may
take this upon Solomon's word, Woe to thee, O Land, when thy King Eccl. 10. 16.
is a Child, and thy Princes eat in the morning! And I wish the experience of
all Ages did not make this Truth too evident to us. This therefore can never be
the Work, much less the Law of Nature; and if there be any such thing in the
world, as the Dominion over a Nation inseparably united to a Man and his
Family, it can have no other Root than a civil or municipal Law, which is not
the subject of our Discourse.

Moreover, every Father's Right must cease, when he ceases to be; or be
transmitted to those, who, being also Fathers, have the same Title to it. And
tho the contrary method of annexing the whole Inheritance to one Person, or
exposing all his Brethren to be destroyed by his rage if they will not submit,
may conduce to the enlargement of a proud and violent Empire, as in Turkey;
where he that gains the Power, usually begins his Reign with the slaughter of
his Brothers and Nephews: yet it can never agree with the piety, gentleness and
wisdom of the Patriarchs, or the Laws of God and Nature.

These thing being agreed, we need not trouble our selves with the Limits or
Definition of a Family, and as little with the Titles given to the Head of it:
It Is all one to us, whether it be confined to one Roof and Fire, or extended
farther; and none but such as are strangers to the practice of mankind, can
think that titles of Civility have a power to create a right of Dominion. Every
man in Latin is called Dominus, unless such as are of the vilest condition, or
in a great subjection to those who speak to them; and yet the word strictly
taken, relates only to Servus, for a Man is Lord only of his Servant or Slave.
The Italians are not less liberal of the Titles of Signore and Padrone, and the
Spaniards of Sennor; but he would be ridiculous in those Countries, who
thereupon should arrogate to himself a right of Dominion over those who are so
civil. The vanity of our Age seems to carry this Point a little higher,
especially among the French, who put a great weight upon the word Prince; but
they cannot change the true signification of it; and even in their sense,
Prince du Sang signifys no more than a chief Man of the Royal Blood, to whom
they pay much respect, because he may come to the Crown; as they at Rome do to
Cardinals, who have the Power of choosing Popes, and out of whose number, for
some Ages, they have bin chosen. In this sense did Scevola, when he was
apprehended by Porsenna, T. Live. l. 2.
say, Trecenti conjuravimus Romanae juventutis Principes; which was never
otherwise understood, than of such young Citizens as were remarkable amongst
their Companions. And nothing can be more absurd than to think, if the name of
Prince had carried an absolute and despotical Power with it, that it could
belong to three hundred in a City, that possessed no more than a ten miles
territory; or that it could have bin given to them, whilst they were young, and
the most part of their Fathers, as is most probable, still living.

I should, like our Author, run round in a Circle, if I should refute what he
says of a Regal Power in our first Parents; or show, that the Regal, where it
is, is not absolute as often as he dos assert it. But having already proved,
that Adam, Noah, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, etc. enjoyed no such Power; transmitted
to every one of their Sons that which they had, and they became Fathers of many
great Nations, who always continued independent on each other; I leave to our
Author to prove, when and by what Law the Right of subdividing the Paternal
Power was stopped, and how any one or more of their Descendents came to have
that Power over their Brethren, which none of their immediate Children had over
theirs.

His question to Suarez, how and when Sons become free, favors more of
Jesuitical Sophistry, than any thing said by the Jesuit; but the Solution is
easy: for if he mean the respect, veneration and kindness proceeding from
gratitude, it ceases only with the Life of the Father to whom it is due, and
the memory of it must last as long as that of the Son; and if they had bin
possessed of such an absolute Power as he fancys, it must have ceased with the
reasons upon which it was grounded.

First, Because the Power, of which a Father would probably have made a wise
and gentle use, could not be rightly trusted in the hands of one who is not a
Father; and that which tended only to the preservation of all the Children,
could not be turned to the increase of the Pride, Luxury and Violence of one,
to the oppression of others who are equally Heirs.

In the second place, Societys cannot be instituted, unless the Heads of the
Familys that are to compose them, resign so much of their Right as seems
convenient into the public Stock, to which every one becomes subject: But that
the same Power should, at the same time, continue in the true Father, and the
figurative Father, the Magistrate; and that the Children should owe entire
Obedience to the Commands of both, which may often cross each other, is absurd.

Thirdly, It ceases when it cannot be executed; as when men live to see four or
five Generations, as many do at this day; because the Son cannot tell whether
he should obey his Father, Grandfather, or Great-Grandfather, and cannot be
equally subject to them all; most especially, when they live in diverse places,
and set up Familys of their own, as the Sons of the Patriarchs did: which being
observed, I know no place where this Paternal Power could have any effect,
unless in the fabulous Island of Pines; and even there it must have ceased,
when he died, who, by the Inventor of the story, is said to have seen above ten
thousand Persons issued of his body.

And if it be said, that Noah, Shem, Abraham, etc. consented that their
Children should go where they thought fit, and provide for themselves; I
answer, that the like has bin done in all Ages, and must be done for ever. It Is
the Voice of Nature, obeyed not only by Mankind, but by all living Creatures;
and there is none so stupid as not to understand it. A Hen leaves her Chickens,
when they can seek their own nourishment: A Cow looks after her Calf no longer,
than till it is able to feed: A Lion gives over hunting for his Whelps, when
they are able to seek their own Prey, and have strength enough to provide what
is sufficient for themselves. And the contrary would be an insupportable burden
to all living Creatures, but especially to Men; for the good order that the
rational Nature delights in, would be overthrown, and Civil Societys, by which
it is best preserved, would never be established.

We are not concerned to examine, Whether the Political and Oeconomical Powers
be entirely the same, or in what they differ: for that absolute Power which he
contends for, is purely despotical, different from both, or rather inconsistent
with either as to the same Subject; and that which the Patriarchs exercised,
having bin equally inherited by their Children, and consequently by every one
of their Posterity, it is as much as is required for my purpose of proving the
natural, universal Liberty of Mankind; and I am no way concerned in the
Question, Whether the first Parents of Mankind had a Power of Life and Death
over their Children, or not.

SECT. V. Freemen join together and frame greater or lesser Societys, and give
such Forms to them as best please themselves.
THis being established, I shall leave Filmer to fight against Suarez and
Bellarmin; or to turn one of them against the other, without any concernment in
the Combat, or the success of it. But since he thereupon raises a Question,
Whether the supreme Power be so in the People, that there is but one and the
same Power in all the People of the World; so that no Power can be granted,
unless all Men upon the Earth meet, and agree to choose a Governor: I think it
deserves to be answered, and might do it by proposing a Question to him;
Whether in his opinion, the Empire of the whole World dos, by the Laws of God
and Nature, belong to one Man, and who that Man is? Or, how it came so to be
divided, as we have ever known it to have bin, without such an injury to the
Universal Monarch, as can never be repaired? But intending to proceed more
heartily, and not to trouble my self with Bellarmin or Suarez, I say, that they
who place the Power in a Multitude, understand a Multitude composed of Freemen,
who think it for their convenience to join together, and to establish such Laws
and Rules as they oblige themselves to observe: which Multitude, whether it be
great or small, has the same Right, because ten Men are as free as ten Millions
of Men; and tho it may be more prudent in some cases to join with the greater
than the smaller number, because there is more strength, it is not so always:
But however, every Man must therein be his own judge, since if he mistake, the
hurt is only to himself; and the ten may as justly resolve to live together,
frame a Civil Society, and oblige themselves to Laws, as the greatest number of
Men that ever met together in the World.

Thus we find that a few Men assembling together upon the Banks of the Tiber,
resolved to build a City, and set up a Government among themselves: And the
Multitude that met at Babylon, when their design of building a Tower that
should reach up to Heaven failed, and their Language was confounded, divided
themselves, as our Author says, into seventy two parcels, and by the same Right
might have divided into more, as their Descendents did into almost an infinite
number before the death of their common Father Noah. But we cannot find a more
perfect Picture of Freemen, living according to their own Will, than in Abraham
and Lot; they went together into Canaan, continued together as long as was
convenient for them, and parted when their Substance did so increase, that they
became troublesome to each other. In the like manner Ismael, Isaac, and
Abraham's six Sons by Keturah, might have continued together and made one
Nation; Isaac and Esau, Moab and Ammon, might have done so too; or all of them
that came of the same Stock might have united together; but they did not: And
their Descendents by the same rule might have subdivided perpetually, if they
had thought it expedient for themselves: and if the Sons of Jacob did not do
the like, it is probable they were kept together by the hope of an Inheritance
promised to 'em by God, in which we find no shadow of a despotical Dominion,
affected by one as Father or Heir to the first Father, or reputed to be the
Heir; but all continued Genesis 13.
in that fraternal equality, which according to Abraham's words to Lot they
ought to do. There was no Lord, Slave or Vassal; no strife was to be among
them: They were Brethren; they might live together, or separate, as they found
it convenient for themselves. By the same Law that Abraham and Lot, Moab and
Ammon, Ismael, Isaac, and the Sons of Keturah, Jacob, Esau, and their
Descendents, did divide and set up several Governments, every one of their
Children might have done the like: and the same Right remained to their Issue,
till they had by agreement engaged themselves to each other. But if they had no
dependence upon each other, and might live together in that fraternal equality
which was between Abraham and Lot; or separate, and continue in that
separation, or reunite; they could not but have a right of framing such
conditions of their union as best pleased themselves. By this means every
number of Men, agreeing together and framing a Society, became a complete Body,
having all Power in themselves over themselves, subject to no other human Law
than their own. All those that compose the Society, being equally free to enter
into it or not, no Man could have any Prerogative above others, unless it were
granted by the consent of the whole: and nothing obliging them to enter into
this Society, but the consideration of their own Good; that Good, or the
opinion of it, must have bin the Rule, Motive and End of all that they did
ordain. It Is lawful therefore for any such Bodies to set up one, or a few Men to
govern them, or to retain the Power in themselves; and he or they who are set
up, having no other Power but what is so conferred upon them by that Multitude,
whether great or small, are truly by them made what they are; and by the Law of
their own Creation, are to exercise those Powers according to the proportion,
and to the ends for which they were given.

These Rights, in several Nations and Ages, have bin variously executed, in the
establishment of Monarchys, Aristocracys, Democracys, or mixed Governments,
according to the variety of Circumstances; and the Governments have bin good or
evil, according to the rectitude or pravity of their Institution, and the
virtue and wisdom, or the folly and vices of those to whom the Power was
committed: but the end which was ever proposed, being the good of the Public,
they only performed their duty, who procured it according to the Laws of the
Society, which were equally valid as to their own Magistrates, whether they were
few or many.

This might suffice to answer our Author's Question; but he endeavors further
to perplex it, by a fiction of his own brain, That God gave this Power to the
whole Multitude met, and not to every particular Assembly of Men: And expects a
proof, That the whole Multitude met, and divided this Power which God gave them
in gross, by breaking it into parcels, and by appointing a distinct Power to
each Commonwealth. He also fathers it upon the Assertors of Liberty; and dos
not see, as he says, how there can be an Election of a Magistrate by any
Commonwealth, that is not an Usurpation upon the Privilege of the whole World,
unless all Mankind had met together, and divided the Power into parcels which
God had given them in gross. But before I put my self to the trouble of
answering that which is but an Appendix to a whimsy of his own, I may justly
ask, What hurt he finds in Usurpation, who asserts, that the same Obedience is
due to all Monarchs, whether they come in by Inheritance, Election or
Usurpation? If Usurpation can give a Right to a Monarch, why dos it not confer
the same upon a People? Or rather, if God did in gross confer such a Right upon
all Mankind, and they neither did, nor can meet together by consent to dispose
of it for the good of the whole; why should not those who can, and do consent
to meet together, agree upon that which seems most expedient to them for the
Government of themselves? Did God create Man under the necessity of wanting
Government, and all the good that proceeds from it; because at the first all
did not, and afterward all could not meet to agree upon Rules? Or did he ever
declare, that unless they should use the first opportunity of dividing
themselves into such parcels as were to remain unalterable, the right of
reigning over every one shall fall to the first Villain that should dare to
attempt it? Is it not more consonant to the Wisdom and Goodness of God, to
leave to every Nation a liberty of repairing the Mischiefs fallen upon them
through the omission of their first Parents, by setting up Governments among
themselves, than to lay 'em under a necessity of submitting to any that should
insolently aspire to a Domination over them? Is it not more just and reasonable
to believe, that the universal Right not being executed, devolves upon
particular Nations, as Members of the great Body, than that it should become
the reward of Violence or Fraud? Or is it possible that any one Man can make
himself Lord of a People, or parcel of that Body, to whom God had given the
liberty of governing themselves, by any other means than Violence or Fraud,
unless they did willingly submit to him? If this Right be not devolved upon any
one Man, is not the invasion of it the most outrageous Injury that can be done
to all Mankind, and most particularly to the Nation that is enslaved by it? Or
if the Justice of every Government depends necessarily upon an original Grant,
and a Succession certainly deduced from our first Fathers, dos not he by his
own Principles condemn all the Monarchys of the World, as the most detestable
Usurpations, since not one of 'em that we know do any way pretend to it? Or,
tho I, who deny any Power to be just that is not founded upon Consent, may
boldly blame Usurpation; is it not an absurd and unpardonable impudence in
Filmer, to condemn Usurpation in a People, when he has declared that the Right
and Power of a Father may be gained by Usurpation; and that Nations in their
Obedience are to regard the Power, not the Means by which it was gained? But
not to lose more time upon a most frivolous fiction, I affirm, that the Liberty
which we contend for is granted by God to every Man in his own Person, in such
a manner as may be useful to him and his Posterity, and as it was exercised by
Noah, Shem, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, etc. and their Children, as has bin proved,
and not to the vast Body of all Mankind, which never did meet together since
the first Age after the Flood, and never could meet to receive any benefit by
it.

His next Question deserves scorn and hatred, with all the effects of either,
if it proceed from malice; tho perhaps he may deserve compassion, if his Crime
proceed from ignorance: Was a general Meeting of a whole Kingdom, says he, ever
known for the Election of a Prince? But if there never were any general
Meetings of whole Nations, or of such as they did delegate and entrust with the
Power of the whole, how did any Man that was elected come to have a Power over
the whole? Why may not a People meet to choose a Prince, as well as any other
Magistrate? Why might not the Athenians, Romans, or Carthaginians, have chosen
Princes as well as Archons, Consuls, Dictators or Suffetes, if it had pleased
them? Who chose all the Roman Kings, except Tarquin the proud, if the People
did not; since their Historys testify, that he was the first who took upon T.
Live. l. 1.
him to reign sine jussu populi? Who ever heard of a King of the Goths in Spain,
that was not chosen by the Nobility and People? Or, how could they choose him,
if they did not meet in their Persons, or by their Deputys, which is the same
thing, when a People has agreed it should be so? How did the Kings of Sweden
come by their Power, unless by the like Election, till the Crown was made
hereditary, in the time of Gustavus the First, as a Reward of his Virtue and
Service, in delivering that Country from the Tyranny of the Danes? How did
Charles Gustavus come to be King, unless it was by the Election of the
Nobility? He acknowledged by the Act of his Election, and upon all occasions,
that he had no other right to the Crown than what they had conferred on him. Did
not the like Custom prevail in Hungary and Bohemia, till those Countries fell
under the Power of the House of Austria? and in Denmark till the Year 1660? Do
not the Kings of Poland derive their Authority from this popular Election,
which he derides? Dos not the style of the Oath of Allegiance used in the
Kingdom of Arragon, as it is related by Antonio Perez Secretary of State to
Philip 2 d, show, that their Kings were of their own making? Could they say,
Nos que val^mos tanto come vos, os hazemos neustro Rey, con tal que no^
guardeys nuestros suero^ ^ libertades, ^ ^^no, no. Relacion. de Ant. Perez.
We who are as good as you, make you our King, on condition that you keep and
observe our Privileges and Libertys; and if not, not; if he did not come in by
their Election? Were not the Roman Emperors, in disorderly times, chosen by the
Soldiers; and in such as were more regular, by the Senate, with the consent of
the People?

Our Author may say, the whole Body of these Nations did not meet at their
Elections; tho that is not always true, for in the Infancy of Rome, when the
whole People dwelt within the Walls of a small City, they did meet for the
choice of their Kings, as afterward for the choice of other Magistrates. Whilst
the Goths, Franks, Vandals and Saxons, lived within the Precincts of a Camp,
they frequently met for the Election of a King, and raised upon a Target the
Person they had chosen: but finding that to be inconvenient, or rather
impossible, when they were vastly increased in number, and dispersed over all
the Countries they had conquered, no better way was found, than to institute
Gemotes, Parliaments, Diets, Cortez, Assemblys of Estates, or the like, to do
that which formerly had bin performed by themselves; and when a People is, by
mutual compact, joined together in a civil Society, there is no difference as
to Right, between that which is done by them all in their own Persons, or by
some deputed by all, and acting according to the Powers received from all.

If our Author was ignorant of these things, which are the most common in all
Historys, he might have spared the pains of writing upon more abstruse Points;
but it is a stupendous folly in him, to presume to raise Doctrins depending upon
the universal Law of God and Nature, without examining the only Law that ever
God did in a public manner give to Man. If he had looked into it, he might
have learnt, That all Israel 1 Samuel 10.
was, by the command of God, assembled at Mispeth to choose a King, and did choose
Saul: He being slain, all Judah came to Hebron, and made 2 Samuel 2.
David their King: After the death of Ishbosheth, all the Tribes went to 2 Samuel
5.
Hebron, and anointed him King over them, and he made a Covenant with them
before the Lord. When Solomon was dead, all Israel met together in Shechem, and
ten Tribes disliking the proceedings of Rehoboam, 1 King. 12.
rejected him, and made Jeroboam their King. The same People in the time of the
Judges, had general Assemblys, as often as occasion did require, to set up a
Judge, make War, or the like: And the several Tribes had their Assemblys to
treat of Businesses relating to themselves. The Historys of all Nations,
especially of those that have peopled the best parts of Europe, are so full of
Examples in this kind, that no man can question them, unless he be brutally
ignorant, or maliciously contentious. The great matters among the Germans were
transacted omnium consensu. De C. Tacit. de mor. Germ.
minoribus consultant Principes; de majoribus omnes. The Michelgemote among the
Saxons was an Assembly of the whole People: The Baronagium is truly said to be
the same, in as much as it comprehended all the Freemen, that is, all the
People; for the difference between Civis and Servus is irreconcilable; and no
man, whilst he is a Servant, can be a Member of a Commonwealth; for he that is
not in his own power, cannot have a part in the Government of others. All the
forementioned Northern Nations had the like customs among 'em: The Governments
they had were so instituted. The utmost that any now remaining pretends to, is,
to derive their right from them: If, according to Filmer, these first Assemblys
could not confer it upon the first, they had none: Such as claim under 'em, can
inherit none from those that had none; and there can be no right in all the
Governments we so much venerate; and nothing can tend more to their overthrow
than the reception of our Author's Doctrine.

Tho any one Instance would be sufficient to overthrow his general negative
Proposition (for a Rule is not generally true, if there be any just Exception
against it) I have alleged many, and find it so easy to increase the number,
that there is no Nation, whose Original we know, out of whose Historys I will
not undertake to produce the like: But I have not bin solicitous precisely to
distinguish, which Nations have acted in their own Persons, and which have made
use of Delegats; nor in what times they have changed from one way to the other:
for if any have acted by themselves, the thing is possible; and whatsoever is
done by delegated Powers, must be referred to their Principals; for none can
give to any a Power which they have not in themselves.

He is graciously pleased to confess, That when Men are assembled by a human
Power, that Power that dos assemble them, may also limit the manner of the
execution of that Power, etc. But in Assemblys that take their Authority from
the Law of Nature, it is not so; for what liberty or freedom is due to any man
by the Law of Nature, no inferior Power can alter, limit or diminish: No one
man, or multitude of men, can give away the natural Right of another, etc.
These are strong Lines, and such as, if there be any sense in them, utterly
overthrow all our Author's Doctrine; for if any Assembly of men did ever take
their Authority from the Law of Nature, it must be of such as, remaining in the
entire fruition of their natural Liberty, and restrained by no Contract, meet
together to deliberate of such matters as concern themselves; and if they can
be restrnin'd by no one man, or number of men, they may dispose of their own
Affairs as they think fit. But because no one of them is obliged to enter into
the Society that the rest may constitute, he cannot enjoy the benefit of that
Society unless he enter into it: He may be gone and set up for himself, or set
up another with such as will agree with him. But if he enter into the Society,
he is obliged by the Laws of it; and if one of those Laws be, that all things
should be determined by the plurality of Voices, his Assent is afterward
comprehended in all the Resolutions of that Plurality. Reuben or Simeon might,
according to the Laws of Nature, have divided themselves from their Brethren,
as well as Lot from Abraham, or Ismael and the Sons of Keturah from Isaac; but
when they, in hopes of having a part in the Inheritance promised to their
Fathers, had joined with their Brethren, a few of their Descendents could not
have a right, by their dissent, to hinder the Resolutions of the whole Body, or
such a part of it as by the first Agreement was to pass for an Act of the
whole. And the 1 Samuel 10.
Scripture teaches us, that when the Lot was fallen upon Saul, they who despised
him were styled Men of Belial; and the rest, after his Victory over the
Ammonites, would have slain 'em if he had permitted. In the like manner, when a
number of Men met together to build Rome, any man who had disliked the design,
might justly have refused to join in it; but when he had entered into the
Society, he could not by his Vote invalidate the Acts of the whole, nor destroy
the Rights of Romulus, Numa, and the others, who by the Senate and People were
made Kings; nor those of the other Magistrates, who after their expulsion were
legally created.

This is as much as is required to establish the natural Liberty of Mankind in
its utmost extent, and cannot be shaken by our Author's surmise, That a Gap is
thereby opened for every seditious multitude to raise a new Commonwealth: For
till the Commonwealth be established, no multitude can be seditious, because
they are not subject to any human Law; and Sedition implies an unjust and
disorderly opposition of that Power which is legally established; which cannot
be when there is none, nor by him who is not a Member of the Society that makes
it; and when it is made, such as entered into it, are obliged to the Laws of it.

This showing the root and foundation of Civil Powers, we may judge of the use
and extent of them, according to the letter of the Law, or the true intentional
meaning of it; both which declare them to be purely Human Ordinances,
proceeding from the will of those who seek their own good; and may certainly
infer, that since all Multitudes are composed of such as are under some
Contract, or free from all, no Man is obliged to enter into those contracts
against his own will, nor obliged by any to which he dos not assent: Those
multitudes that enter into such Contracts, and thereupon form Civil Societys,
act according to their own will: Those that are engaged in none, take their
Authority from the Law of Nature; their Rights cannot be limited or diminished
by any one Man, or number of Men; and consequently whoever dos it, or attempts
the doing of it, violates the most sacred Laws of God and Nature.

His cavils concerning Proxys, and the way of using them, deserve no answer, as
relating only to one sort of Men amongst us, and can have no influence upon the
Laws of Nature, or the proceedings of Assemblys, acting according to such Rules
as they set to themselves. In some places they have voted all together in their
own persons, as in Athens: In others by Tribes, as in Rome: Sometimes by
Delegats, when the number of the whole People is so great, that no one place
can contain them, as in the Parliaments, Diets, General Assemblys of Estates,
long used in the great Kingdoms of Europe. In other Parts many Citys are joined
together in Leagues, as anciently the Achaians, Etolians, Samnites, Tuscans;
and in these times the States of Holland, and Cantons of Switzerland: but our
Author not regarding such matters, in pursuance of his folly, with an ignorance
as admirable as his stupidity, repeats his Challenge; I ask, says he, but one
Example out of the History of the whole World; let the Commonwealth be named,
wherever the Multitude, or so much as the major part of it, consented either by
Voice or Procuration to the Election of a Prince: not observing, that if an
Answer could not be given, he did overthrow the Rights of all the Princes that
are, or ever have bin in the World: for if the Liberty of one Man cannot be
limited or diminished by one, or any number of Men, and none can give away the
Right of another; it is plain that the Ambition of one Man, or of many, a
faction of Citizens, or the mutiny of an Army, cannot give a Right to any over
the Libertys of a whole Nation. Those who are so set up, have their root in
Violence or Fraud, and are rather to be accounted Robbers and Pirates, than
Magistrates. Leo Africanus observing in his History, that since the extinction
Leonis Afr. Hist. Africae.
of Mahomet's Race (to whom his Countrymen thought God had given the Empire of
the World) their Princes did not come in by the consent of those Nations which
they governed, says, that they are esteemed Thieves; and that on this account,
the most honorable Men among the Arabians and Moors scorn to eat, drink, or
make Alliances with them: and if the case were as general as that Author makes
it, no better Rule could be any where followed by honorable and worthy Men.
But a good Cause must not be lost by the fault of an ill Advocate; the Rights
of Kings must not perish, because Filmer knows not how to defend, or dos
maliciously betray them. I have already proved that David, and diverse of the
Judges, were chosen by all Israel; Jeroboam by ten Tribes; all the Kings of
Rome, except Tarquin the Proud, by the whole City. I may add many Examples of
the Saxons in our own Country: Ina and Offa were made Kings, omnium consensu:
These All are expressed plainly Mat. Paris.
by the words, Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Abbatibus, Senatoribus, Ducibus and
Populo terrae. Egbert and Ethelward came to the Crown by the same Authority,
Omnium consensu Rex creatur. Ethelwolf the Monk, Necessitate Guil. Ma^^s. Polyd.
cogente sac^us est Rex, and consensus publicus in regem dari petiit.
Ethelstan, tho a Bastard, electus est magno consensu Optimatum, and a Populo
consalutatus. Polyd. Huntingd. Mat. West. Hoveden.
In the like manner Edwin's Government being disliked, they chose Edgar: Vnanimi
omnium conspiratione, Edwino dejecto, eligerunt Deo dictante Edgarum in Regem,
and annuente Populo: And in another place, Edgarus ab omni Anglorum Populo
electus est. Ironside being dead, Canutus Florent.
was received by the general consent of all: Juraverunt illi, quod eum regem
sibi eligere vellent; foedus etiam cum principibus and omni populo ipse, and
Abbas Croyl. Huntingd.
illi cum ipso percusserunt. Whereupon, Omnium consensu super totam Angliam
Canutus coronatur. Hardicanutus gaudenter ab omnibus suscipitur and electus
est. The same Author says that Edward the Confessor, electus est Ingulf.
in regem ab omni populo: And another, Omnium Electione in Edwardum
concordatur. Tho the name of Conqueror be odiously given to William the Norman,
he had the same Title to the Crown with his Predecessors; In magna exultatione
a Clero and Populo susceptus, and ab omnibus Rex acclamatus. I cannot recite
all the Examples of this kind, that the History of almost all Nations
furnishes, unless I should make a Volume in bulk not inferior to the Book of
Martyrs: But those which I have mentioned out of the Sacred, Roman, and English
History, being more than sufficient to answer our Author's Challenge, I take
liberty to add, that tho there could not be one Example produced of a Prince,
or any other Magistrate, chosen by the general consent of the People, or by the
major part of them, it could be of no advantage to the Cause he has undertaken
to maintain: For when a People has either indefinitely, or under certain
Conditions and Limitations, resigned their Power into the hands of a certain
number of Men; or agreed upon Rules, according to which Persons should, from
time to time, be deputed for the management of their Affairs, the Acts of those
Persons, if their Power be without restrictions, are of the same value as the
Acts of the whole Nation, and the assent of every individual Man is
comprehended in them. If the Power be limited, whatsoever is done according to
that limitation, has the same Authority. If it dos therefore appear (as is
testified by the Laws and Historys of all our Northern Nations) that the power
of every People is either wholly, or to such a degree as is necessary for
creating Kings, granted to their several Gemotes, Diets, Cortez, Assemblys of
Estates, Parliaments, and the like; all the Kings that they have any where, or
at any time chosen, do reign by the same authority, and have the same right, as
if every individual Man of those Nations had assented to their Election. But
that these Gemotes, Diets, and other Assemblys of State, have every where had
such Powers, and executed them by rejecting or setting up Kings; and that the
Kings now in being among us have received their beginning from such Acts, has
bin fully proved, and is so plain in it self, that none but those who are
grossly stupid or impudent can deny it: which is enough to show that all Kings
are not set up by violence, deceit, faction of a few powerful Men, or the
mutinys of Armies; but from the consent of such multitudes, as joining together,
frame Civil Societys; and either in their own Persons at general Assemblys, or
by their Delegats, confer a just and legal Power upon them; which our Author
rejecting, he dos, as far as in him lies, prove them all to be Usurpers and
Tyrants.

SECT. VI. They who have a right of choosing a King, have the right of making a
King.
THO the Right of Magistrates dos essentially depend upon the consent of those
they govern, it is hardly worth our pains to examine, Whether the silent
acceptance of a Governor by part of the People be an argument of their
concurring in the election of him; or by the same reason the tacit consent of
the whole Commonwealth may be maintained: for when the question is concerning
Right, fraudulent surmises are of no value; much less will it from thence
follow, that a Prince commanding by Succession, Conquest, or Usurpation, may be
said to be elected by the People; for evident marks of dissent are often given:
Some declare their hatred; others murmur more privately; many oppose the
Governor or Government, and succeed according to the measure of their
Strength, Virtue, or Fortune. Many would resist, but cannot; and it were
ridiculous to say, that the Inhabitants of Greece, the Kingdom of Naples, or
Duchy of Tuscany, do tacitly assent to the Government of the Great Turk, King
of Spain, or Duke of Florence; when nothing is more certain than that those
miserable Nations abhor the Tyrannys they are under; and if they were not
mastered by a Power much too great for them, they would soon free themselves.
And they who are under such Governments do no more assent to them, tho they may
be silent, than a Man approves of being robbed, when, without saying a word, he
delivers his Purse to a Thief that he knows to be too strong for him.

It Is not therefore the bare sufferance of a Government when a disgust is
declared, nor a silent submission when the power of opposing is wanting, that
can imply an Assent, or Election, and create a Right; but an explicit act of
Approbation, when Men have ability and courage to resist or deny. Which being
agreed, it is evident that our Author's distinction between eligere and
instituere signifys nothing: tho, if the power of instituting were only left to
Nations, it would be sufficient; for he is in vain elected who is not
instituted; and he that is instituted is certainly elected, for his Institution
is an Election. As the Romans who chose Romulus, Numa, and Hostilius to be
Kings; and Brutus, Valerius, or Lucretius to be Consuls; did make them so, and
their Right was solely grounded upon their Election. The Text brought by our
Author against this dos fully prove it, Him shall thou set King over thee whom
the Lord shall choose; Deuteronomy. 17.
for God did not only make the institution of a King to be purely an act of the
People, but left it to them to institute one or not, as should best please
themselves: and the words, whom the Lord shall choose, can have no other
signification, than that the People resolving to have a King, and following the
Rules prescribed by his Servant Moses, he would direct 'em in their choice;
which relates only to that particular People in covenant with God, and
immediately under his Government, which no other was. But this pains might have
bin saved, if God by a universal Law had given a rule to all. The Israelites
could not have bin three hundred years without a King, and then left to the
liberty of making one, or not, if he by a perpetual Law had ordained that every
Nation should have one; and it had bin as well impertinent as unjust to
deliberate who should be King, if the Dominion had by right of Inheritance
belonged to one: They must have submitted to him whether they would or not: No
care was to be taken in the election or institution of him, who by his birth
had a Right annexed to his Person that could not be altered: He could not have
bin forbidden to multiply Silver or Gold, who by the Law of his Creation might
do what he pleased: It had bin ridiculous to say, he should not raise his Heart
above his Brethren, who had no Brethren, that is, no Equals; but was raised
above all by God, who had imposed upon all others a necessity of obeying him.
But God, who dos nothing in vain, did neither constitute or elect any till they
desired it, nor command 'em to do it themselves, unless it so pleased
themselves; nor appoint 'em to take him out of any one Line: Every Israelite
might be chosen: None but Strangers were excluded; and the People were left to
the liberty of choosing and instituting any one of their Brethren.

Our Author endeavoring by Hooker's authority to establish his distinction
between eligere and instituere, destroys it, and the paternal Right, which he
makes the foundation of his Doctrine. Heaps of Scripture are alleged, says he,
concerning the solemn Coronation and Inauguration of Saul, David, Solomon and
others, by Nobles, Ancients, and People of the Commonwealth of Israel: which is
enough to prove that the whole work was theirs; that no other had any title
more than what they bestowed upon him; that the Kings were set up by the
Nobles, Ancients and People: Even God did no otherwise intervene than by such a
secret disposition of the Lots by his Providence, as is exercised in the
Government of all the things in the World; and we cannot have a more certain
evidence, that a paternal right to Dominion is a mere Whimsy, than that God did
not cause the Lot to fall upon the eldest, of the eldest Line, of the eldest
Tribe; but upon Saul, a young Man, of the youngest Tribe: and afterward, tho
he had designed David, Solomon, Jerobvam, and others, who had no pretense to
the paternal Right, to be Kings, he left both the election and institution of
them to the Elders and People.

But Hooker being well examined, it will appear that his opinions are as
contrary to the Doctrine of our Author, as those we have mentioned out Hooker
Eccl. Pol. l. 1. c. 10.
of Plato and Aristotle. He plainly says, It is impossible that any should have
a complete lawful power over a multitude consisting of so many Familys, as
every politic Society dos, but by consent of Men, or immediate appointment
from God: Because not having the natural Superiority of Fathers, their Power
must needs be usurped, and then unlawful; or if lawful, then either granted or
consented to by them over whom they exercise the same, or else given
extraordinarily by God. And tho he thinks Kings to have bin the first Governors
so constituted, he adds, That this is not the only Regiment that has bin
received in the World. The inconveniences of one kind have caused sundry others
to be devised. So that in a word, all public Regiment, of what kind soever,
seems evidently to have risen from deliberate advice, consultation and
composition between Men, judging it convenient and behoofeful. And a little
below, Man's Nature standing therefore as it does, some kind of regiment the
Law of Nature dos require; yet the kinds thereof being many, Nature ties not to
any one, but leaves the choice as a thing arbitrary. And again, To live by one
Man's will, became all Men's misery: This constrained them to come unto Laws,
etc. But as those Laws do not only teach that which is good, but enjoin it,
they have in them a constraining force. To constrain Men to any thing
inconvenient seems unreasonable: Most requisite therefore it is that to devise
Laws, which all Men should be forced to obey, none but wise Men should be
admitted. Moreover that which we say concerning the power of Government, must
here be applied to the power of making Laws, whereby to govern; which Power God
has over all; and by the natural Law, whereunto he has made all subject, the
lawful power of making Laws to command whole politic Societys of men, belongs
so properly to the same entire Societys, that for any Prince or Potentate, of
what kind soever upon Earth, to exercise the same of himself, and not either by
express commission immediately from God, or else by authority derived at the
first from their consent, upon whose persons they impose Laws, it is no better
than mere Tyranny. Laws therefore they are not, which public consent has not
made so. The humor of our Age considered, I should not have ventured to say so
much: But if Hooker be a Man of such great Authority, I cannot offend in
transcribing his words, and showing how vilely he is abused by Filmer;
concluding, that if he be in the right, the choice and constitution of
Government, the making of Laws, Coronation, Inauguration, and all that belongs
to the choosing and making of Kings, or other Magistrates, is merely from the
People; and that all Power exercised over them, which is not so, is Usurpation
and Tyranny, unless it be by an immediate Commission from God; which if any man
has, let him give testimony of it, and I will confess he comes not within the
reach of our reasonings, but ought to be obeyed by those to whom he is sent, or
over whom he is placed.

Nevertheless our Author is of another opinion; but scorning to give us a
reason, he adds to Hooker's words, As if these Solemnitys were a kind of deed,
whereby the right of Dominion is given; which strange, untrue, and unnatural
Conceits are set abroad by Seedsmen of Rebellion: And a little farther, Unless
we will openly proclaim defiance to all Law, Equity, and Reason, we must say
(for there is no remedy) that in Kingdoms hereditary, Birthright gives a Right
to Sovereign Dominion, etc. Those Solemnitys do either serve for an open
testification of the Inheritor's Right, or belong to the form of inducing him
into the possession. These are bold Censures, and do not only reach Mr. Hooker,
whose modesty and peaceableness of spirit is no less esteemed than his
Learning; but the Scriptures also, and the best of human Authors, upon which he
founded his Opinions. But why should it be thought a strange, untrue, or
unnatural Conceit, to believe that when the Scriptures say Nimrod was the first
that grew powerful in the Earth, long before the death of his Fathers, and
could consequently neither have a right of Dominion over the Multitude met
together at Babylon, nor subdue them by his own strength, he was set up by
their Consent; or that they who made him their Governor, might prescribe Rules
by which he should govern? Nothing seems to me less strange, than that a
multitude of reasonable Creatures, in the performance of Acts of the greatest
importance, should consider why they do them. And the infinite variety which is
observed in the constitution, mixture, and regulation of Governments, dos not
only show that the several Nations of the World have considered them; but
clearly prove that all Nations have perpetually continued in the exercise of
that Right. Nothing is more natural than to follow the voice of Mankind: The
wisest and best have ever employed their studys in forming Kingdoms and
Commonwealths, or in adding to the perfections of such as were already
constituted; which had bin contrary to the Laws of God and Nature, if a general
Rule had bin set, that had obliged all to be for ever subject to the Will of
one; and they had not bin the best, but the worst of men who had departed from
it. Nay, I may say, that the Law given by God to his peculiar People, and the
Commands delivered by his Servants in order to it, or the prosecution of it,
had bin contrary to his own eternal and universal Law; which is impossible. A
Law therefore having bin given by God, which had no relation to, or consistency
with the absolute paternal power; Judges and Kings created, who had no pretense
to any preference before their Brethren, till they were created, and commanded
not to raise their Hearts above them when they should be created; the Wisdom
and Virtue of the best men in all ages shown in the constitution or reformation
of Governments; and Nations in variously framing them, preserving the
possession of their natural Right, to be governed by none, and in no other way
than they should appoint: The opinions of Hooker, That all public Regiment, of
what kind soever, arises from the deliberate advice of men seeking their own
good, and that all other is mere Tyranny; are not untrue and unnatural conceits
set abroad by the Seedsmen of Rebellion, but real Truths grounded upon the Laws
of God and Nature, acknowledged and practiced by Mankind. And no Nation being
justly subject to any but such as they set up, nor in any other manner than
according to such Laws as they ordain, the right of choosing and making those
that are to govern them, must wholly depend upon their Will.

SECT. VII. The Laws of every Nation are the measure of Magistratical Power.
OUR Author lays much weight upon the word Hereditary: but the question is,
What is inherited in an Hereditary Kingdom, and how it comes to be hereditary?
It Is in vain to say the Kingdom; for we do not know what he means by the
Kingdom: it is one thing in one place, and very different in others; and I think
it not easy to find two in the World that in power are exactly the same. If he
understands all that is comprehended within the precincts over which it
reaches, I deny that any such is to be found in the World: If he refers to what
preceding Kings enjoyed, no determination can be made, till the first original
of that Kingdom be examined, that it may be known what that first King had, and
from whence he had it.

If this variety be denied, I desire to know whether the Kings of Sparta and
Persia had the same power over their Subjects; if the same, whether both were
absolute, or both limited; if limited, how came the Decrees of the Persian
Kings to pass for Laws? If absolute, how could the Spartan Kings be subject to
Fines, Imprisonment, or the sentence of Death; and not to have power to send
for their own Supper out of the Common Hall? Why did Xenophon call Agesilaus a
good and faithful King, obedient to the Laws of his Country, when, upon the
command of the Ephori, he left the War that he had with so much glory begun in
Asia, if he was subject to none? How came the Ephori to be established to
restrain the Power of Kings, if it could no way be restrained, if all owed
obedience to them, and they to none? Why did Theopompus his Wife reprove him
for suffering his power to be diminished by their creation, if it could not be
diminished? Or why did he say he had made the Power more permanent in making it
lefs odious, if it was perpetual and unalterable? We may go farther, and taking
Xenophon and Plutarch for our guides, assert that the Kings of Sparta never had
the powers of War or Peace, Life and Death, which our Author esteems
inseparable from Regality, and conclude either that no King has them, or that
all Kings are not alike in power. If they are not in all places the same, Kings
do not reign by an universal Law, but by the particular Laws of each Country;
which give to every one so much power, as in the opinion of the givers conduces
to the end of their Institution, which is the public good.

It may be also worth our inquiry how this inherited Power came to be
hereditary. We know that the Sons of Vespasian and Constantine inherited the
Roman Empire, tho their Fathers had no such title: But having gained the Empire
by violence, which Hooker says is mere Tyranny that can create no right, they
could devolve none to their Children. The Kings of France of the three Races
have inherited the Crown; but Meroveus, Pepin, and Hugh Capet could neither
pretend title nor conquest, or any other Right than what was conferred upon them
by the Clergy, Nobility, and People; and consequently whatsoever is inherited
from them can have no other Original; for that is the gift of the People which
is bestowed upon the first, under whom the Successors claim, as if it had bin
by a peculiar Act given to every one of them. It will be more hard to show how
the Crown of England is become hereditary, unless it be by the Will of the
People; for tho it were granted that some of the Saxon Kings came in by
inheritance (which I do not, having, as I think, proved them to have bin
absolutely elective) yet William the Norman did not, for he was a Bastard, and
could inherit nothing. William Rufus and Henry did not; for their Elder Brother
Robert by right of Inheritance ought to have bin preferred before 'em: Stephen
and Henry the second did not; for Maud the only Heiress of Henry the first was
living when both were crowned: Richard and John did not, for they were Bastards
born in adultery. They must therefore have received their Right from the
People, or they could have none at all; and their Successors fall under the
same condition.

Moreover, I find great variety in the deduction of this hereditary Right. In
Sparta there were two Kings of different Familys, endowed with an equal power.
If the Heraclidae did reign as Fathers of the People, the Aeacidae did not: if
the right was in the Aeacidae, the Heraclidae could have none; for it is equally
impossible to have two Fathers as two thousand. It Is in vain to say that two
Familys joined, and agreed to reign jointly: for it is evident the Spartans had
Kings before the time of Hercules or Achilles, who were the Fathers of the two
Races. If it be said that the Regal power with which they were invested did
entitle 'em to the right of Fathers, it must in like manner have belonged to
the Roman Consuls, Military Tribunes, Dictators and Pretors; for they had more
Power than the Spartan Kings; and that glorious Nation might change their
Fathers every year, and multiply or diminish the number of 'em as they pleased.
If this be most ridiculous and absurd, it is certain that the Name and Office of
King, Consul, Dictator, or the like, dos not confer any determined Right upon
the Person that has it: Every one has a right to that which is allotted to him
by the Laws of the Country by which be is created.

As the Persians, Spartans, Romans or Germans, might make such Magistrates, and
under such names as best pleased themselves, and accordingly enlarge or
diminish their Power; the same Right belongs to all Nations, and the Rights due
unto, as well as the Dutys incumbent upon every one, are to be known only by
the Laws of that place. This may seem strange to those who know neither Books
nor Things, Historys nor Laws; but is well explained by Grotius, who denying
the Sovereign Power to be annexed to any Name, speaks of diverse Magistrates
under several names that had, and others that under the same names had it not;
and distinguishes Grot. de Jur. bell. and pac. l. 1. c. 1.
those who have the Summum Imperium summo modo, from those who have it modo non
summo: and tho probably he looked on the first sort as a thing merely
speculative, if by that summo modo, a right of doing what one pleases be
understood; yet he gives many Examples of the other. Among those who had
liberrimum imperium, if any had it, he names the Kings of the Sabeans; who
nevertheless were under such a condition, that tho they were, as Agatharchidas
reports, obeyed in all things, whilst they continued within the Walls of their
Palace, might be stoned by any that met 'em without it. He finds also another
Obstacle to the Absolute power, Cum Rex partem habeat summi Imperii, partem
Senatus, sive Populus; which parts are proportioned according to the Laws of
each Kingdom, whether Hereditary or Elective, both being equally regulated by
them.

The Law that gives and measures the Power, prescribes Rules how it should be
transmitted. In some places the supreme Magistrates are annually elected, in
others their Power is for life; in some they are merely elective, in others
hereditary under certain Rules or Limitations. The ancient Kingdoms and
Lordships of Spain were hereditary; but the Succession went ordinarily to the
eldest of the reigning Family, not to the nearest in Blood. This was the ground
of the Quarrel between Corbis T. Live. l. 28.
the Brother, and Orsua the Son of the last Prince, decided by combat before
Scipio. I know not whether the Goths brought that custom with 'em when they
conquered Spain, or whether they learnt it from the Inhabitants; but certain it
is, that keeping themselves to the Familys of Saavedra corona Gothica.
the Balthei, and Amalthei, they had more regard to Age than Proximity; and
almost ever preferred the Brother, or eldest Kinsman of the last King Marian.
Hist. Hispan.
before his Son. The like custom was in use among the Moors in Spain and Africa,
who according to the several Changes that happened among the Familys of
Almohades, Almoranides, and Benemerini, did always take one of the reigning
Blood; but in the choice of him had most respect to Age and Capacity. This is
usually called the Law of Thanestry; and, as in many other places, prevailed
also in Ireland, till that Country fell under the English Government.

In France and Turkey the Male that is nearest in Blood, succeeds; and I do not
know of any deviation from that Rule in France, since Henry the First was
preferred before Robert his elder Brother, Grandchild to Hugh Capet: But
notwithstanding the great veneration they have for the Royal Blood, they
utterly exclude Females, lest the Crown should fall to a Stranger; or a Woman
that is seldom able to govern her self, should come to govern so great a
People. Some Nations admit Females, either simply, as well as Males; or under a
condition of not marrying out of their Country, or without the consent of the
Estates, with an absolute exclusion of them and their Children if they do;
according to which Law, now in force among the Swedes, Charles Gustavus was
chosen King upon the resignation of Queen Christina, as having no Title; and
the Crown settled upon the Heirs of his Body, to the utter exclusion of his
Brother Adolphus, their Mother having married a German. Tho diverse Nations have
differently disposed their Affairs; all those that are not naturally Slaves,
and like to Beasts, have preferred their own Good before the personal Interests
of him that expects the Crown, so as upon no pretense whatever to admit of one
who is evidently guilty of such Vices as are prejudicial to the State. For this
reason the French, tho much addicted to their Kings, rejected the vile
remainders of Meroveus his Race, and made Pepin the Son of Charles Martel King:
And when his Descendents fell into the like Vices, they were often deposed,
till at last they were wholly rejected, and the Crown given to Capet and to his
Heirs Male as formerly. Yet for all this Henry his Grandchild, being esteemed
more fit to govern than his elder Brother Robert, was, as is said before, made
King, and that Crown still remains in his Descendents; no consideration being
had of the Children of Robert, who continued Dukes of Burgundy during the
reigns of ten Kings. And in the memory of our Fathers, Henry of Navarr was
rejected by two Assemblys of the Estates, because he differed in Religion from
the Body of the Nation, and could never be received as King, till he had
renounced his own, tho he was certainly the next in Blood; and that in all
other respects he excelled in those Virtues which they most esteem.

We have already proved, that our own History is full of the like Examples, and
might enumerate a multitude of others, if it were not too tedious: and as the
various Rules, according to which all the hereditary Crowns of the World are
inherited, show, that none is set by Nature, but that every People proceeds
according to their own Will; the frequent deviations from those Rules do
evidently testify, that Salus Populi est Lex suprema; and that no Crown is
granted otherwise, than in submission to it.

But tho there were a Rule, which in no case ought to be transgrest, there must
be a Power of judging to whom it ought to be applied. It Is perhaps hard to
conceive one more precise than that of France, where the eldest Legitimate Male
in the direct Line is preferred; and yet that alone is not sufficient. There may
be Bastardy in the case: Bastards may be thought legitimate, and legitimate
Sons Bastards. The Children born of Isabel of Portugal during her Marriage with
John the Third of Castile were declared Bastards; and the Title of the House of
Austria to that Crown, depends upon that Declaration. We often see that
Marriages which have bin contracted, and for a long time taken to be good, have
bin declared null; and the legitimation of the present King of France is
founded solely upon the abolition of the Marriage of Henry the Fourth with
Marguerite of Valois, which for the space of twenty seven Years was thought to
have bin good. Whilst Spain was divided into five or six Kingdoms, and the
several Kings linked to each other by mutual Alliances, incestuous Marriages
were often contracted, and upon better consideration annul'd; many have bin
utterly void, through the preingagement of one of the Partys. These are not
feigned Cases, but such as happen frequently; and the diversity of Accidents,
as well as the humors of Men, may produce many others, which would involve
Nations in the most fatal Disorders, if every one should think himself obliged
to follow such a one who pretended a Title, that to him might seem plausible,
when another should set up one as pleasing to others, and there were no Power
to terminate those Disputes to which both must submit, but the decision must be
left to the Sword.

This is that which I call the Application of the Rule, when it is as plain and
certain as human Wisdom can make it; but if it be left more at large, as where
Females inherit, the difficultys are inextricable: and he that says, the next
Heir is really King when one is dead, before he be so declared by a Power that
may judge of his Title, dos, as far as in him lies, expose Nations to be split
into the most desperate Factions, and every man to fight for the Title which he
fancies to be good, till he destroy those of the contrary Party, or be
destroyed by them. This is the blessed way proposed by our Author to prevent
Sedition: But, God be thanked, our Ancestors found a better. They did not look
upon Robert the Norman as King of England after the death of his Father; and
when he did proudly endeavor, on pretense of Inheritance, to impose himself
upon the Nation, that thought fit to prefer his younger Brothers before him, he
paid the penalty of his folly, by the loss of his Eyes and Liberty. The French
did not think the Grandchild of Pharamond to be King after the death of his
Father, nor seek who was the next Heir of the Merovingian Line, when Chilperic
the Third was dead; nor regard the Title of Charles of Lorrain after the death
of his Brother Lothair, or of Robert of Burgundy eldest Son of King Robert; but
advanced Meroveus, Pepin, Capet and Henry the First, who had no other Right
than what the Nobility and People bestowed upon them. And if such Acts do not
destroy the Pretenses of all who lay claim to Crowns by Inheritance, and do not
create a Right, I think it will be hard to find a lawful King in the world, or
that there ever has bin any; since the first did plainly come in like Nimrod,
and those who have bin every where since Historys are known to us, owed their
exaltation to the Consent of Nations, armed or unarmed, by the deposition or
exclusion of the Heirs of such as had reigned before them.

Our Author not troubling himself with these things, or any other relating to
the matter in question, is pleased to slight Hooker's Opinions concerning
Coronation and Inauguration, with the heaps of Scripture upon which he grounds
them; whereas those Solemnitys would not only have bin foolish and impertinent,
but profane and impious, if they were not Deeds by which the Right of Dominion
is really conferred. What could be more wickedly superstitious, than to call all
Israel together before the Lord, and to cast Lots upon every Tribe, Family and
Person, for the election of a King, if it had bin known to whom the Crown did
belong by a natural and unalterable Right? Or if there had bin such a thing in
Nature, how could God have caused that Lot to fall upon one of the youngest
Tribe, for ever to discountenance his own Law, and divert Nations from taking
any notice of it? It had bin absurd for the Tribe of Judah to choose and anoint
David, and for the other Tribes to follow their example after the death of
Ishbosheth, if he had bin King by a Right not depending on their Will. David
did worse in slaying the Sons of Rimmon, saying, they had killed a righteous
Man lying upon his bed, if Ishbosheth, whose Head they presented, had most
unrighteously detained from him, as long as he lived, the Dominion of the ten
Tribes: The King, Elders and People, had most scornfully abused the most sacred
things, by using such Ceremonys in making him King, and completing their Work
in a Covenant made between him and them before the Lord, if he had bin already
King, and if those Acts had bin empty Ceremonys conferring no Right at all.

I dare not say that a League dos imply an absolute equality between both
Partys; for there is a Foedus inequale, wherein the weaker, as Grotius says,
dos usually obtain protection, and the stronger honor; but there can be none
at all, unless both Partys are equally free to make it, or not to make it.
David therefore was not King, till he was elected, and those Covenants made;
and he was made King by that Election and Covenants.

This is not shaken by our Author's Supposition, That the People would not have
taken Joas, Manasseh or Josiah, if they had had a right of choosing a King;
since Solomon says, Woe unto the Kingdom whose King is a Child! For, first, they
who at the first had a right of choosing whom they pleased to be King, by the
Covenant made with him whom they did choose, may have deprived themselves of the
farther execution of it, and rendered the Crown hereditary even to Children,
unless the Conditions come to be violated upon which it was granted. In the
second place, if the Infancy of a King brings Woe upon a People, the Government
of such a one cannot be according to the Laws of God and Nature; for
Governments are not instituted by either for the pleasure of a Man, but for the
good of Nations; and their Weal, not their Woe, is sought by both: And if
Children are any where admitted to rule, it is by the particular Law of the
place, grounded perhaps upon an opinion, that it is the best way to prevent
dangerous Contests; or that other ways may be found to prevent the
Inconveniences that may proceed from their weakness. Thirdly, It cannot be
concluded that they might not reject Children, because they did not: Such
matters require positive Proofs, Suppositions are of no value in relation to
them, and the whole matter may be altered by particular Circumstances. The Jews
might reasonably have a great veneration for the House of David: they knew what
was promised to that Family; and whatever respect was paid, or privilege
granted on that account, can be of no advantage to any other in the world. They
might be farther induced to set up Joas, in hope the defects of his Age might
be supplied by the Virtue, Experience and Wisdom of Jehoiada. We do not know
what good opinion may have bin conceived of Manasseh when he was twelve years
old; but much might be hoped from one that had bin virtuously educated, and was
probably under the care of such as had bin chosen by Hezekiah: and tho the
contrary did fall out, the mischiefs brought upon the People by his wicked
Reign, proceeded not from the weakness of his Childhood, but from the malice of
his riper Years. And both the Examples of Joas and Josiah prove, that neither
of 'em came in by their own right, but by the choice of the People. Jehoiada
gathered the Levites out of all the Citys of Judah, and the chief of the
Fathers 2 Chronicles. 23.
of Israel, and they came to Jerusalem: And all the Congregation made a
Covenant with the King in the House of God, and brought out the King's Son, and
put upon him the Crown, and gave him the Testimony, and made him King;
whereupon they slew Athaliah. And when Ammon was slain, 2 Chronicles. 33.
the people of the Land slew them that had conspired against King Ammon; and
the people of the Land made Josiah his Son King in his stead: which had bin
most impertinent, if he was of himself King before they made him so. Besides,
tho Infancy may be a just cause of excepting against, and rejecting the next
Heir to a Crown, it is not the greatest or strongest. It Is far more easy to find
a Remedy against the folly of a Child (if the State be well regulated) than the
more rooted Vices of grown men. The English, who willingly received Henry the
Sixth, Edward the Fifth and Sixth, tho Children, resolutely opposed Robert the
Norman: And the French, who willingly submitted to Charles the Ninth, Lewis the
Thirteenth and Fourteenth in their Infancy, rejected the rude remainders of
Meroveus his Race, Charles of Lorrain with his Kindred descended from Pepin,
Robert Duke of Burgundy with his Descendents, and Henry of Navarr, till he had
satisfied the Nobility and People in the point of Religion. And tho I do not
know that the Letter upon the words, Vae regno Lamb. Leg. Saxon.
cujus Rex p^er est, recited by Lambard, was written by Eleutherius Bishop of
Rome; yet the Authority given to it by the Saxons, who made it a Law, is much
more to be valued than what it could receive from the Writer: And whoever he
was, he seems rightly to have understood Solomon's meaning, who did not look
upon him as a Child that wanted years, or was superannuated, but him only who
was guilty of Insolence, Luxury, Folly and Madness; and he that said, A wise
Child was better than an old and foolish King, could have no other meaning,
unless he should say, it was worse to be governed by a wise Person than a Fool;
which may agree with the judgment of our Author, but could never enter into the
heart of Solomon.

Lastly, Tho the practice of one or more Nations may indicate what Laws,
Covenants or Customs were in force among them, yet they cannot bind others: The
diversity of them proceeds from the variety of men's Judgments, and declares,
that the direction of all such Affairs depends upon their own Will; according
to which every People for themselves do form and measure the Magistracy, and
magistratical Power; which, as it is directed solely for the good, has its
exercises and extent proportionable to the Command of those that institute it;
and such Ordinances being good for men, God makes them his own.

SECT. VIII. There is no natural propensity in Man or Beast to Monarchy.
I SEE no reason to believe that God did approve the Government of one over
many, because he created but one: but to the contrary, in as much he did endow
him, and those that came from him, as well the youngest as the eldest Line,
with understanding to provide for themselves, and by the invention of Arts and
Sciences to be beneficial to each other; he showed, that they ought to make use
of that understanding in forming Governments according to their own
convenience, and such occasions as should arise, as well as in other matters.
And it might as well be inferred, that it is unlawful for us to build, clothe,
arm, defend, or nourish our selves, otherwise than our first Parents did,
before or soon after the Flood, as to take from us the liberty of instituting
Governments that were not known to them. If they did not find out all that
conduces to the use of man, but a Faculty as well as a Liberty was left to
every one, and will be to the end of the World, to make use of his Wit,
Industry, and Experience, according to present Exigences, to invent and
practice such things as seem convenient to himself and others in matters of the
least importance; it were absurd to imagine, that the political Science, which
of all others is the most abstruse and variable according to Accidents and
Circumstances, should have bin perfectly known to them who had no use of it;
and that their Descendents are obliged to add nothing to what they practiced.
But the reason given by our Author to prove this extravagant fancy, is yet more
ridiculous than the thing it self; God, says he, showed his opinion, viz. that
all should be governed by one, when he endowed not only Men, but Beasts with a
natural propensity to Monarchy: Neither can it be doubted, but a natural
propensity is referred to God who is the Author of Nature: Which I suppose may
appear if it be considered.

Nevertheless I cannot but commend him in the first place for introducing God
speaking so modestly, not declaring his Will, but his Opinion. He puts haughty
and majestic Language into the mouth of Kings. They command and decide, as if
they were subject to no Error, and their Will ought to be taken for perpetual
Laws; but to God he ascribes an humble delivery of his Opinion only, as if he
feared to be mistaken. In the second place, I deny that there is any such
general propensity in Man or Beast, or that Monarchy would thereby be justified
tho it were found in them. It cannot be in Beasts, for they know not what
Government is; and being incapable of it, cannot distinguish the several sorts,
nor consequently incline to one more than another. Salmasius his story of Bees
is only fit for old Women to prate of in Chimny-corners; and they who represent
Lions and Eagles as Kings of Birds and Beasts, do it only to show, that their
Power is nothing but brutish Violence, exercised in the destruction of all that
are not able to oppose it, and that has nothing of goodness or justice in it:
which Similitude (tho it should prove to be in all respects adequate to the
matter in question) could only show, that those who have no sense of Right,
Reason or Religion, have a natural propensity to make use of their strength to
the destruction of such as are weake^ than they; and not that any are willing
to submit, or not to resist it if they can; which I think will be of no great
advantage to Monarchy. But whatever propensity may be in Beasts, it cannot be
attributed generally to Men; for if it were, they never could have deviated
from it, unless they were violently put out of their natural course; which in
this case cannot be, for there is no Power to force them. But that they have
most frequently deviated, appears by the various Forms of Government
established by them. There is therefore no natural propensity to any one, but
they choose that which in their judgment seems best for them. Or, if he would
have that inconsiderate impulse, by which brutish and ignorant men may be
swayed when they know no better, to pass for a Propensity; others are no more
obliged to follow it, than to live upon Acorns, or inhabit hollow Trees,
because their Fathers did it when they had no better dwellings, and found no
better nourishment in the uncultivated World. And he that exhibits such
Examples, as far as in him lies, endeavors to take from us the use of Reason,
and, extinguishing the light of it, to make us live like the worst of Beasts,
that we may be fit Subjects to absolute Monarchy. This may perhaps be our
Author's intention, having learned from Aristotle, that such a Government is
only suitable to the nature of the most bestial men, who being incapable of
governing themselves, fall under the Power of such as will take the conduct of
'em: But he ought withal to have remembered, that, according to Aristotle's
opinion, this Conductor must be in nature different from those he takes the
charge of; and if he be not, there can be no Government, nor Order, by which it
subsists: Beasts follow Beasts, and the blind lead the blind to destruction.

But tho I should grant this Propensity to be general, it could not be imputed
to God, since man by Sin is fallen from the Law of his Creation. The wickedness
of man (even in the first Ages) was great in the World: All the imaginations of
his heart are evil, and that continually. All men are liars: There is none that
does good, no not one. Out of the heart proceed evil Thoughts, Murders,
Adulterys, Fornications, Thefts, false Testimonys, etc. These are the Fruits of
our corrupted nature, which the Apostle observing, dos not only make a
difference between the natural and the spiritual Man, whose proceeding only can
be referred to God, and that only so far as he is guided by his Spirit; but
shows, that the natural man is in a perpetual enmity against God, without any
possibility of being reconciled to him, unless by the destruction of the old
Man, and the regenerating or renewing him through the Spirit of Grace. There being
no footsteps of this in our Author's Book, he and his Master Heylin may have
differed from the Apostle, referring that Propensity of Nature to God, which he
declares to be utter enmity against him; and we may conclude, that this
Propensity, however general it may be, cannot be attributed to God as the
Author of Nature, since it cannot be more general than the Corruptions into
which we are fallen.

SECT. IX. The Government instituted by God over the Israelites was
Aristocratical.
NOtwithstanding all this, our Author is resolved that Monarchy must be from
God: What form of Government, says he, God ordained by his Authority, may be
gathered by that Commonwealth which he instituted amongst the Hebrews; which
was not Aristocratical, as Calvin says, but plainly Monarchical. I may in as
few words deny the Government set up by God to have bin Monarchical, as he
asserts it; but finding such Language ordinarily to proceed from a mixture of
folly, impudence and pride, I choose rather to show upon what I ground my
Opinions, than nakedly to deliver them; most especially, when by insisting upon
the Government instituted by God over his People, he refers us to the
Scripture. And I do this the more boldly, since I follow Calvin's Exposition,
and believe that he having bin highly esteemed for his Wit, Judgment, and
Learning, by such as were endowed with the like, and reverenced as a glorious
Servant of God, might, if he were now alive, comfort himself, tho he had the
misfortune to fall under the censures of Filmer and his followers. It Is
probable he gave some Reasons for his Opinions; but our Author having
maliciously concealed 'em, and I not having leisure at present to examine all
his Writings to find 'em, must content my self with such as my small
understanding may suggest, and such as I have found in approved Authors.

In the first place I may safely say, he was not alone of that opinion:
Josephus, Philo, and Moses Maimonides, with all the best of the Jewish and
Christian Authors, had long before delivered the same. Josephus ^o^. Ant. Jud.
says, that Readiness first Sin by which he fell, was, that he took away the
Aristocracy; which he could not do if it had never bin established. Philo
imputes the institution of Kingly Government, as it was in Israel, neither to
God nor his Word, but to the fury of the sinful People. Abarbenel says, it
proceeded from their delight in the Idolatry to which their Abar. in 1 Samuel 8.
Neighbors were addicted, and which could be upheld only by a Government, in
practice and principle contrary to that which God had instituted. Maimonides
frequently says the same thing, grounded upon the Maim. More-Nevochim.
words of Hosea, I gave them Kings in my Wrath; and whosoever will call that a
divine Institution, may give the same name to Plagues or Famines, and induce a
necessity incumbent upon all men to go and search the one where they may find
it, and to leave their Lands for ever uncultivated that they may be sure of the
other: which being too bestial to be asserted by a man, I may safely say the
Hebrew Kings were not instituted by God, but given as a punishment of their
Sin, who despised the Government he had instituted: and the abovementioned
Authors agree in the same thing, calling the Peoples desire to have a King,
furious, mad, wicked, and proceeding from their love to the Idolatry of their
Neighbors, which was suited to their Government; both which were inconsistent
with what God had established over his own People.

But waving the opinions of men, it is good to see what we can learn from the
Scripture, and inquire if there be any Precept there expressly commanding them
to make a King; or any Example that they did so whilst they continued obedient
to the Word of God; or any thing from whence we may reasonably infer they ought
to have done it: all which, if I mistake not, will be found directly contrary.

The only Precept that we find in the Law concerning Kings, is that of Deuteronomy.
17. already mentioned; and that is not a Command to the People to make, but
Instructions what manner of King they should make if they desired to have one:
There was therefore none at all.

Examples do as little favor our Author's Assertions. Moses, Joshua, and the
other Judges, had not the name or power of Kings: They were not of the Tribe to
which the Scepter was promised: They did not transmit the Power they had to
their Children, which in our Adversary's opinion is a Right inseparable from
Kings; and their Power was not continued by any kind of Succession, but created
occasionally, as need required, according to the Virtues discovered in those
who were raised by God to deliver the Nation in the time of their distress;
which being done, their Children lay hid among the rest of the People. Thus
were Ehud, Gideon, Jephtha, and others set up: Whosoever will give battle (say
the Princes Judge. 1^.
and People of Gilead) to the Children of Ammon, shall be head over the
Inheritance of Gilead: and finding Jephtha to be such a man as they sought,
they made him their Chief, and all Israel followed them. When Othniel had
showed his Valor in taking Kiriath Sepher, and delivering his Brethren from
Cushan-Rishathaim, he was made Judge: When Ehud had killed Eglon; when Shamgar
and Samson had destroyed great numbers of the Philistines; and when Gideon had
defeated the Midianites, they were sit to be advanced above their Brethren.
These Dignitys were not inherent in their Persons or Familys, but conferred upon
them; nor conferred, that they might be exalted in Riches and Glory, but that
they might be Ministers of Good to the People. This may justify Plato's
opinion, that if one man be found incomparably to excel all others in the
Virtues that are beneficial to Civil Societys, he ought to be advanced above
all: but I think it will be hard from thence to deduce an Argument in favor of
such a Monarchy as is necessarily to descend to the next in Blood, whether Man,
Woman, or Child, without any consideration of Virtue, Age, Sex, or Ability; and
that failing, it can be of no use to our Author. But whatever the dignity of a
Hebrew Judge was, and howsoever he was raised to that Office, it certainly
differed from that of a King. Gideon could not have refused to be a King when
the People would have made him so, if he had bin a King already; or that God
from the beginning had appointed they should have one: The Elders and People 1 Samuel 8.
could not have asked a King of Samuel, if he had bin King; and he could not
without impiety have bin displeased with them for asking such a one as God had
appointed; neither would God have said to him, They have not rejected thee, but
they have rejected me that I should not reign over them, if he had ordained
what they desired.

They did not indeed reject God with their Mouths: They pretended to use the
liberty he had given them to make a King; but would have such a one as he had
forbidden: They drew near to him with their Lips, but their Hearts were far
from him; and he seeing their Hypocrisy, severely chastis'd 'em in granting
their ill conceived request; and foretold the Miserys that should thereupon
befall 'em, from which he would not deliver 'em, tho they should cry to him by
reason of what they suffered from their King* He was their Creature, and the
mischiefs thereby brought upon them were the fruits of their own labor.

This is that which our Author calls God's institution of Kings; but the Hos.
13.
Prophet explains the matter much better, I gave them Kings in my anger, and
took them away in my wrath: in destroying them God brought desolation upon the
people that had sinned in asking for them, and following their example in all
kind of Wickedness. This is all that our Author has to boast of: but God who
acknowledges those works only to be his own, which proceed from his goodness
and mercy to his People, disowns this; Hos. 8.
Israel has cast off the thing that is good (even the Government that he had
established) the Enemy shall pursue him: They have set up Kings, but not by me;
and Princes, but I know them not. As if he sought to justify the severity of
his Judgments brought upon them by the wickedness of their Kings, that they,
not he, had ordained.

Having seen what Government God did not ordain, it may be seasonable to examine
the Nature of the Government which he did ordain; and we shall easily find that
it consisted of three parts, besides the Magistrates of the several Tribes and
Citys. They had a chief Magistrate, who was Numb. 11.
called Judge or Captain, as Joshua, Gideon, and others; a Council of seventy
chosen men; and the General Assemblys of the People.

The first was merely occasional, like to the Dictators of Rome: and as the
Romans in times of danger frequently chose such a Man as was much esteemed for
Valor and Wisdom, God's peculiar People had a peculiar regard to that Wisdom
and Valor which was accompanied with his Presence, hoping for deliverance only
from him.

The second is known by the name of the Great Sanhedrin, which being instituted
by Moses according to the command of God, continued, till they were all save
one slain by Herod. And the third part, which is the Assembly of the People,
was so common, that none can be ignorant of it, but such as never looked into
the Scripture. When the Tribes of Reuben, Gad, and half that of Manasseh had
built an Altar on the side of Jordan, Josh. 22.
The whole Congregation of the Children of Israel gathered together at Shiloh
to go up to war against them, and sent Phineas the Son of Eleazer, and with him
ten Princes, etc. This was the highest and most important action that could
concern a People, even War or Peace, and that not with Strangers, but their own
Brethren. Joshua was then alive: The Elders never failed: yet this was not
transacted by him or them, but by the collected body of the People; for They
sent Phineas. This Democratical Embassy was Democratically received: It was not
directed to one Man, but to all the Children of Reuben, Gad, and Manasseh, and
the Answer was sent by them all; which being pleasing to Phineas, and the ten
that were with him, they made their report to the Congregation, and all was
quiet.

The last eminent Act performed by Joshua was the calling of a like Assembly to
Shechem, composed of Elders, Heads of Familys, Judges, Officers, Jos. 24.
and all the People, to whom he proposed, and they agreeing made a Covenant
before the Lord.

Joshua being dead, the Proceedings of every Tribe were grounded upon Counsels
taken at such Assemblys among themselves for their own concerns, as appears by
the Actions of Judah, Simeon, etc. against the Canaanites; and when the Levite
complained that his Wife had bin forced Judge. 1.
by those of Gibeah, the whole Congregation of Israel met together at Mispeth
from all parts, even from Dan to Beersheba, as one man, and there resolved upon
that terrible War which they made against the Tribe of Benjamin. The like
Assembly was gathered together for the election of Saul, every man was there:
and tho the Elders only are said to have asked a King of Samuel, they seem to
have bin deputed from the whole Congregation; for God said, Hearken to the
Voice of the People. In the 1 Samuel 8. 7.
same manner the Tribe of Judah, and after that the rest, chose and anointed
David to be their King. After the death of Solomon all Israel met together to
treat with Rehoboam; and not receiving satisfaction from him, ten of the Tribes
abrogated his Kingdom.

If these Actions were considered singly by themselves, Calvin might have given
the name of a Democracy to the Hebrew Government, as well as to that of Athens;
for without doubt they evidently manifest the supreme Power to have bin in the
supreme manner in these General Assemblys: but the Government (as to its
outward order) consisting of those three parts, which comprehend the three
simple species; and no times having bin appointed, nor occasions specified,
upon which Judges should be chosen, or these Assemblys called, whereas the
Sanhedrim, which was the Aristocratical part, was permanent; the whole might
rightly be called an Aristocracy, that part prevailing above the others: and
tho Josephus calls it a Theocracy, by reason of God's presence with his People;
yet in relation to man he calls it an Aristocracy, and says that Readiness first
Sin by which he fell from the Kingdom was, that Gubernationem optimatum
sustulit; which could not be, if they were governed by a Monarch before he was
chosen.

Our Author taking no notice of these matters, first endeavors to prove the
excellency of Monarchy from natural instinct; and then begging the question,
says, that God did always govern his People by Monarchy: whereas he ought in
the first place to have observed that this instinct (if there be any such
thing) is only an irrational appetite, attributed to Beasts, that know not why
they do any thing; and is to be followed only by those men who being equally
irrational, live in the same ignorance: and the second being proved to be
absolutely false by the express words of the Scripture, There was then no King
in Israel, several Judge. 18.
times repeated, and the whole series of the History, he has no other evasion
than to say, That even then the Israelites were under the Kingly Government of
the Fathers of particular Familys.

It appears by the forementioned Text cited also by our Author, that in the
Assembly of the People, gathered together to take counsel concerning the War
against Benjamin, were four hundred thousand Footmen that drew Sword: They all
arose together, saying, Not a man of us shall go to his Tent. So all the men of
Israel were gathered together against the City. This is repeated several times
in the relation. The Benjamites proceeded in the like manner in preparing for
their defense; and if all these who did so meet to consult and determine were
Monarchs, there were then in Israel and Benjamin four hundred twenty six
thousand seven hundred Monarchs or Kings, tho the Scripture says there was not
one.

If yet our Author insists upon his notion of Kingly Government, I desire to
know who were the Subjects, if all these were Kings; for the Text says, that
the whole Congregation was gathered together as one man from Dan to Beersheba.
If there can be so many Kings without one Subject, what becomes of the Right of
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, that was to have bin devolved upon one Man as Heir to
them, and thereby Lord of all? If every man had an equal part in that
inheritance, and by virtue of it became a King, why is not the same eternally
subdivided to as many men as are in the World, who are also Kings? If this be
their natural condition, how comes it to be altered, till they dethrone
themselves by consent, to set up one or more to have a power over them all? Why
should they divest themselves of their natural Right to set up one above
themselves, unless in consideration of their own good? If the 426700 Kings
might retain the power in themselves, or give it to one, why might they not
give it to any such number of men as should best please themselves, or retain
it in their own hands, as they did till the days of Saul; or frame, limit, and
direct it according to their own pleasure? If this be true, God is the Author
of Democracy; and no assertor of human Liberty did ever claim more than the
People of God did enjoy and exercise at the time when our Author says they were
under the Kingly Government; which Liberty being not granted by any peculiar
concession or institution, the same must belong to all Mankind.

It Is in vain to say the 426700 men were heads of Familys; for the Scripture
only says, They were Footmen that drew the Sword, or rather all the men of
Israel from Dan to Beersheba, who were able to make War. When six hundred
Benjamites did only remain of the 26700, it is plain that no more were left of
that Tribe, their Women and Children having bin destroyed in the Citys after
their defeat. The next Chapter makes the matter yet more plain; for when all
that were at the Congregation in Mispeth were found to have sworn, they would
not give their Daughters to any of the Tribe of Benjamin, no Israelite was free
from the Oath, but J^dg. ^1.
the men of Jabesh Gilead, who had not bin at the Assembly: All the rest of
Israel was therefore comprehended; and they continuing to govern in a popular
way with absolute power, sent twelve thousand of their most valiant men to
destroy all the Males of Jabesh Gilead, and the Women that had lain by Man,
reserving the Virgins for the Benjamites. This is enough for my purpose: for
the question is not concerning the power that every Householder in London has
over his Wife, Children and Servants; but whether they are all perpetually
subject to one man and Family; and I intend not to set up their Wives,
Prentices, and Children against them, or to diminish their Rights, but to
assert them, as the gift of God and Nature, no otherwise to be restrained than
by Laws made with their own consent.

Reason failing, our Author pleases himself with terms of his own Invention:
When the People begged a King of Samuel, they were governed by a Kingly power:
God out of a special love and care to the House of Israel, did choose to be
their King himself, and did govern them at that time by his Viceroy Samuel and
his Sons. The behavior of the Israelites toward Samuel has bin thought proud,
perverse, and obstinate; but the fine Court-word begging was never before
applied to them; and their insolent fury was not only seen against Samuel, but
againand;st God; They have not rejected thee, 1 Samuel 8.
but they have rejected me. And I think Filmer is the first who ever found that
Beggars in begging did reject him of whom they begged: Or if they were Beggars,
they were such as would not be denied; for after all that Samuel had said to
dissuade them from their wicked design, they said, Nay, but we will have a
King. Ver. 19.


But lest I should be thought too much inclined to contradict our Author, I
confess that once he has happened to be in the right. God out of a special love
to the House of Israel chose to be their King: He gave them Laws, prescribed a
Form of Government, raised up Men in a wonderful manner to execute it, filled
them with his Spirit, was ever present when they called upon him: He gave them
counsel in their doubts, and assistance in all their extremitys: He made a
Covenant with them, and would be exalted by them. But what is this to an
earthly Monarch? Who can from hence derive a Right to any one man to play the
Lord over his Brethren, or a reason why any Nation should set him up? God is
our Lord by right of creation, and our only Lord, because he only has created
us. If any other were equal to him in Wisdom, Power, Goodness, and Beneficence
to us, he might challenge the same duty from us. If growing out of our selves,
receiving being from none, depending on no providence, we were offered the
protection of a Wisdom subject to no error, a Goodness that could never fail,
and a Power that nothing could resist; it were reasonable for us to enter into
a Covenant, submit our selves to him, and with all the facultys of our minds to
addict our selves to his Service. But what Right can from hence accrue to a
mortal Creature like to one of us, from whom we have received nothing, and who
stands in need of help as much as we? Who can from hence deduce an argument to
persuade us to depend upon his Wisdom, who has as little as other men? To
submit to his Will who is subject to the same Frailtys, Passions, and Vices
with the rest of Mankind? Or to expect protection and defense from him whose
life depends upon as slender threads as our own; and who can have no power but
that which we confer upon him? If this cannot be done, but is of all things the
most contrary to common sense, no man can in himself have any right over us; we
are all as free as the four hundred twenty six thousand seven hundred Hebrew
Kings: We can naturally owe allegiance to none; and I doubt whether all the
lusts that have reigned amongst Men since the beginning of the World, have
brought more guilt and misery upon them than that preposterous and impudent
pretense of imitating what God had instituted. When Saul set himself most
violently to oppose the command of God, he pretended to fulfill it: When the
Jews grew weary of God's Government, and resolved to reject him, that he should
not reign over them, they used some of Moses his words, and asked that King of
God, whom they intended to set up against him: But this King had not bin set up
against God, the People had not rejected God, and sinned in asking for him, if
every Nation by a general Law ought to have one, or by a particular Law one had
bin appointed by him over them. There was therefore no King amongst them, nor
any Law of God or Nature, particular or general, according to which they ought
to have one.

SECT. X. Aristotle was not simply for Monarchy or against Popular Government;
but approved or disapproved of either according to circumstances.
OUR Author well observes that Aristotle is hardly brought to give a general
opinion in favor of Monarchy, as if it were the best form of Government, or to
say true, never dos it. He uses much caution, proposes conditions and
limitations, and makes no decision but according to circumstances. Men of
Wisdom and Learning are subject to such doubts; but none ought to wonder if
stupidity and ignorance defend Filmer and his Followers from them; or that
their hatred to the ancient Virtue should give 'em an aversion to the Learning
that was the Nurse of it. Those who neither understand the several Species of
Government, nor the various Tempers of Nations, may without fear or shame give
their opinions in favor of that which best pleases them; but wise men will
always proportion their praises to the merit of the Subject, and never commend
that simply which is good only according to circumstances. Aristotle highly
applauds Monarchy, when the Monarch has more of those Virtues that tend to the
good of a Commonwealth, than all they who compose it. This is the King
mentioned in his Ethics, and extolled in his Politics: He is above all by
Nature, and ought not by a municipal Law to be made equal to others in Power:
He ought to govern, because it is better for a People to be governed by him,
than to enjoy their Liberty; or rather, they do enjoy their Liberty, which is
never more safe, than when defended by one who is a living Law to himself and
others. Wheresoever such a man appears, he ought to reign: He bears in his
Person the Divine Character of a Sovereign: God has raised him above all; and
such as will not submit to him, ought to be accounted Sons of Belial, brought
forth and slain. But he dos withal confess, that if no such man be found, there
is no natural King: All the Prerogatives belonging to him vanish, for want of
one who is capable of enjoying them. He lays severe Censures upon those who not
being thus qualified take upon them to govern men, equal to or better than
themselves; and judges the assumption of such Powers by persons not naturally
adapted to the administration of them, as barbarous Usurpations, which no Law
or Reason can justify; and is not so much transported with the excellency of
this true King, as not to A^^^t. ^o^^t. (...)
confess he ought to be limited by Law: Qui legem praeesse jubet, videtur jubere
praeesse Deum and Leges: qui autem hominem praeesse jubet, adjungit and
bestiam; libido quippe talis est, atque obliquos agit, etiam viros optimos qui
sunt in pot^state, ex quo men's atque appetitus Lex est. This agrees with the
words of the best King that is known to have bin in the world, proceeding, as
is most probable, from a sense of the Passions that reigned in his own breast;
Man being in honor, has no understanding, but is like to the beast that
perishes. This shows that such as deny that Kings do reign by Law, or that Laws
may be put upon Kings, do equally set themselves against the opinions of wise
Men, and the Word of God: and our Author having found that Learning made the
Grecians seditious, may reasonably doubt that Religion may make others worse;
so as none will be fit Subjects of his applauded Government, but those who have
neither Religion nor Learning; and that it cannot be introduced till both be
extinguished.

Aristotle having declared his mind concerning Government, in the Books
expressly written on that Subject, whatsoever is said by the by in his Moral
Discourses, must be referred to and interpreted by the other: And if he said
(which I do not find) that Monarchy is the best Form of Government, and a
Popular State the worst, he cannot be thought to have meant otherwise, than
that those Nations were the most happy, who had such a Man as he thinks fit to
be made a Monarch; and those the most unhappy, who neither had such a one, nor
a few, that any way excelled the rest; but all being equally brutish, must take
upon 'em the Government they were unable to manage: for he dos no where admit
any other end of Just and Civil Government, than the good of the Governed; nor
any advantage due to one or a few persons, unless for such Virtues as conduce
to the common good of the Society. And as our Author thinks Learning makes men
seditious, Aristotle also acknowledges, that those who have Understanding and
Courage, which may be taken for Learning, or the effect of it, will never
endure the Government of one or a few that do not excel them in Virtue: but no
where dispraises a Popular Government, unless the Multitude be composed of such
as are barbarous, stupid, lewd, vicious, and incapable of the Happiness for
which Governments are instituted; who cannot live to themselves, but like a
herd of Beasts must be brought under the dominion of another; or who, having
among themselves such an excellent Person as is above described, will not
submit to him, but either kill, banish, or bring him to be equal with others,
whom God had made to excel all. I do not trouble my self, or the Reader, with
citing here and there a Line out of his Books, but refer my self to those who
have perused his Moral and Political Writings, submitting to the severest
Censures, if this be not the true Sense of 'em; and that Virtue alone, in his
opinion, ought to give the pre-eminence. And as Aristotle following the wise
Men of those times, shows us how far Reason, improved by Meditation, can
advance in the knowledge and love of that which is truly good; so we may in
Filmer guided by Heylin, see an Example of corrupted Christians, who
extinguishing the Light of Religion by their Vices, and degenerating into
Beasts (whilst they endeavor to support the personal Interest of some men, who
are raised to Dignitys by the consent of Nations, or by unwarrantable ways and
means) would cast all the Power into the hands of such as happen to be born in
certain Familys; as if Governments had not bin instituted for the common good
of Nations, but only to increase their Pride, and foment their Vices; or that
the care and direction of a great People were so easy a work, that every Man,
Woman, or Child, how young, weak, foolish or wicked soever, may be worthy of
it, and able to manage it.

SECT. XI. Liberty produces Virtue, Order and Stability: Slavery is accompanied
with Vice, Weakness and Misery.
OUR Author's judgment, as well as inclinations to Virtue, are manifested in
the preference he gives to the manners of the Assyrians and other Eastern
Nations, before the Grecians and Romans: Whereas the first were never
remarkable for any thing, but Pride, Leudness, Treachery, Cruelty, Cowardice,
Madness, and hatred to all that is good; whilst the others excelled in Wisdom,
Valor, and all the Virtues that deserve imitation. This was so well observed
by St. Augustine, that De Civ. Dei.
he brings no stronger Argument to prove, that God leaves nothing that is good
in man unrewarded, than that he gave the dominion of the best part of the World
to the Romans, who in moral Virtues excelled all other Nations. And I think no
Example can be alleged of a Free People that has ever bin conquered by an
Absolute Monarch, unless he did incomparably surpass them in Riches and
Strength; whereas many great Kings have bin overthrown by small Republics: and
the success being constantly the same, it cannot be attributed to Fortune, but
must necessarily be the production of Virtue and good Order. Machiavel
discoursing of these matters, finds Virtue to be so essentially necessary to
the establishment and preservation of Liberty, that he thinks it impossible for
a corrupted People to set up a good Government, or for a Tyranny to be
introduced if they be virtuous; and makes this Si puo far questa conclusione,
che dove la materia non e corrotta, i tumulti ed altri scandali non nuocono: la
dove la e corrotta le buone Leggi non giovano. Machiav. Disc. sopra T. Livio,
lib. 1.
Conclusion, That where the Matter (that is, the body of the People) is not
corrupted, Tumults and Disorders do no hurt; and where it is corrupted, good
Laws do no good: Which being confirmed by Reason and Experience, I think no
wise man has ever contradicted him.

But I do not more wonder that Filmer should look upon Absolute Monarchy to be
the Nurse of Virtue, tho we see they did never subsist together, than that he
should attribute Order and Stability to it; whereas Order principally consists
in appointing to every one his right Place, Office or Work; and he lays the
whole weight of the Government upon one Person, who very often dos neither
deserve, nor is able to bear the least part of it. Plato, Aristotle, Hooker,
and (I may say in short) all wise men have held, that Order required that the
wisest, best, and most valiant should be placed in the Offices where Wisdom,
Virtue and Valor are requisite. If common sense did not teach us this, we might
learn it from the Scripture. When God gave the conduct of his People to Moses,
Joshua, Samuel, and others, he endowed them with all the Virtues and Graces
required for the right performance of their Duty. When the Israelites were
oppressed by the Midianites, Philistines and Ammonites, they expected help from
the most vise and valiant. When Hannibal was at the Gates of Rome, and had
filled Italy with Fire and Blood; or when the Gauls overwhelmed that Country
with their multitudes and fury, the Senate and People of Rome put themselves
under the conduct of Camillus, Manlius, Fabius, Scipio, and the like; and when
they failed to choose such as were fit for the work to be done, they received
such defeats as convinced 'em of their Error. But if our Author say true, Order
required that the Power of defending the Country should have bin annexed as an
Inheritance to one Family, or left to him that could get it, and the exercise
of all Authority committed to the next in Blood, tho the weakest of Women, or
the basest of Men.

The like may be said of judging, or doing of Justice; and it is absurd to
pretend that either is expected from the Power, not the Person of the Monarch;
for experience dos too well show how much all things halt in relation to
Justice or Defense, when there is a defect in him that ought to judge us, and to
fight our Battles. But of all things this ought least to be alleged by the
Advocats for absolute Monarchy, who deny that the Authority can be separated
from the Person, and lay it as a fundamental Principle, that whosoever has it
may do what he pleases, and be accountable to no man.

Our Author's next work is to show, that Stability is the effect of this good
Order; but he ought to have known, that Stability is then only worthy of
praise, when it is in that which is good. No man delights in sickness or pain,
because it is long, or incurable; nor in slavery and misery, because it is
perpetual: much less will any man in his senses commend a permanency in vice
and wickedness. He must therefore prove, that the Stability he boasts of is in
things that are good, or all that he says of it signifies nothing.

I might leave him here with as little fear, that any man who shall espouse his
Quarrel, will ever be able to remove this Obstacle, as that he himself should
rise out of his Grave and do it. But I hope to prove, that of all things under
the Sun, there is none more mutable or unstable than absolute Monarchy; which
is all that I dispute against, professing much veneration for that which is
mixed, regulated by Law, and directed to the Public Good.

This might be proved by many Arguments, but I shall confine my self to two;
the one drawn from Reason, the other from matters of Fact.

Nothing can be called stable, that is not so in Principle and Practice, in
which respect human Nature is not well capable of Stability; but the utmost
deviation from it that can be imagined, is, when such an Error is laid for a
Foundation as can never be corrected. All will confess, that if there be any
stability in man, it must be in Wisdom and Virtue, and in those Actions that
are thereby directed; for in weakness, folly and madness, there can be none.
The Stability therefore that we seek, in relation to the exercise of Civil and
Military Powers, can never be found, unless care be taken that such as exercise
those Powers, be endowed with the Qualitys that should make them stable. This
is utterly repugnant to our Author's Doctrine: He lays for a Foundation, That
the Succession goes to the next in Blood, without distinction of Age, Sex, or
personal Qualitys; whereas even he himself could not have the impudence to say,
that Children, and Women (where they are admitted) or Fools, Madmen, and such
as are full of all wickedness, do not come to be the Heirs of reigning Familys,
as well as of the meanest. The Stability therefore that can be expected from
such a Government, either depends upon those who have none in themselves, or is
referred wholly to Chance, which is directly opposite to Stability.

This would be the case, tho it were (as we say) an even Wager, whether the
Person would be fit or unfit, and that there were as many men in the world
able, as unable to perform the Duty of a King; but Experience showing that
among many millions of men, there is hardly one that possesses the Qualitys
required in a King, it is so many to one, that he upon whom the Lot shall fall,
will not be the man we seek, in whose Person and Government there can be such a
stability as is asserted. And that failing, all must necessarily fail; for
there can be no stability in his Will, Laws or Actions, who has none in his
Person.

That we may see whether this be verified by Experience, we need not search
into the dark relations of the Babylonian and Assyrian Monarchys: Those rude
Ages afford us little instruction; and tho the fragments of History remaining
do sufficiently show, that all things there were in perpetual fluctuation, by
reason of the madness of their Kings, and the violence of those who transported
the Empire from one Place or Family to another, I will not much rely upon them,
but slightly touching some of their Storys, pass to those that are better known
to us.

The Kings of those Ages seem to have lived rather like Beasts in a Forest,
than Men joined in Civil Society: they followed the Example of Nimrod the
mighty Hunter; Force was the only Law that prevailed, the stronger devoured the
weaker, and continued in Power till ejected by one of more strength or better
fortune. By this means the race of Ninus was destroyed by Belochus: Arbaces
rent the Kingdom asunder, and took Media to himself: Morodach extinguished the
Race of Belochus, and was made King: Nabuchodonosor like a Flood overwhelmed
all for a time, destroyed the Kingdoms of Jerusalem and Egypt, with many
others, and found no obstacle, till his rage and pride turned to a most bestial
madness: And the Assyrian Empire was wholly abolished at the death of his
Grandchild Belshazzar; and no Stability can be found in the reigns of those
great Kings, unless that name be given to the Pride, Idolatry, Cruelty, and
Wickedness in which they remained constant. If we examine matters more
distinctly, we shall find that all things vari'd according to the humor of the
Prince. Whilst Pharaoh lived, who had received many signal Services from
Joseph, the Israelites were well used: but when another rose up who knew him
not, they were persecuted with all the extremitys of Injustice and Cruelty,
till the furious King persisting in his design of exterminating them, brought
destruction upon himself and the Nation. Where the like Power has prevailed, it
has ever produced the like effects. When some great men of Persia had persuaded
Darius, that it was a fine thing to command that no man for the space of thirty
days should make any Petition to God or Man, but to the King only, Daniel the
most wise and holy Man then in the world must be thrown to the Lions. When God
(...) ^.
had miraculously saved him, the same Sentence was passed against the Princes of
the Nation. When Haman had filled Ahasuerus his ears with Lies, all the Jews
were appointed to be slain; and when the fraud of that Villain was detected,
leave was given them, with the like precipitancy, to kill whom they pleased.
When the Israelites came to have Kings, they were subject to the same Storms,
and always with their Blood suffered the Penalty of their Princes madness. When
one kind of Fury possessed Saul, he slew the Priests, persecuted David, and would
have killed his brave Son Jonathan: When he fell under another, he took upon
him to do the Priest's Office, pretended to understand the Word of God better
than Samuel, and spared those that God had commanded him to destroy: Upon
another whimsy he killed the Gibeonites, and never rested from finding new
Inventions to vex the People, till he had brought many thousands of them to
perish with himself and his Sons on Mount Gilboa. We do not find any King, in
Wisdom, Valor and Holiness, equal to David; and yet he falling under the
temptations that attend the greatest Fortunes, brought Civil Wars and a Plague
upon the Nation. When Solomon's heart was drawn away by strange Women, he
filled the Land with Idols, and oppressed the People with intolerable Tributes.
Rehoboam's Folly made that Rent in the Kingdom which could never be made up.
Under his Successors the people served God, Baal or Ashtaroth, as best pleased
him who had the Power; and no other marks of Stability can be alleged to have
bin in that Kingdom, than the constancy of their Kings in the practice of
Idolatry, their cruelty to the Prophets, hatred to the Jews, and civil Wars
producing such Slaughters as are reported in few other Storys: The Kingdom was
in the space of about two hundred years possessed by nine several Familys, not
one of 'em getting possession otherwise than by the slaughter of his
Predecessor, and the extinction of his Race; and ended in the Bondage of the
ten Tribes, which continues to this day.

He that desires farther proofs of this Point, may seek 'em in the Historys of
Alexander of Macedon, and his Successors: He seems to have bin endowed with all
the Virtues that Nature improved by Discipline did ever attain, so that he is
believed to be the man meant by Aristotle, who on account of the excellency of
his Virtues was by Nature framed for a King; and Plutarch ascribes his
Conquests rather to those, than to his Fortune. Plut. in Vic. Alex.
But even that Virtue was overthrown by the Successes that accompanied it: He
burnt the most magnificent Palace of the world in a frolic, to please a mad
drunken Whore: Upon the most frivolous suggestions of Eunuchs and Rascals, he
killed the best and bravest of his Friends; and his Valor, which had no equal,
not subsisting without his other Virtues, perished when he became lewd, proud,
cruel and superstitious; so as it may be truly said, he died a Coward. His
Successors did not differ from him: When they had killed his Mother, Wife and
Children, they exercised their fury against one another; and tearing the
Kingdom to pieces, the Survivors left the Sword as an Inheritance to their
Familys, who perished by it, or under the weight of the Roman Chains.

When the Romans had lost that Liberty which had bin the Nurse of their Virtue,
and gained the Empire in lieu of it, they attained to our Author's applauded
Stability. Julius being slain in the Senate, the first Question was, whether it
could be restored, or not? And that being decided by the Battle of Philippi,
the Conquerors set themselves to destroy all the eminent men in the City, as
the best means to establish the Monarchy. Augustus gained it by the death of
Antonius, and the corruption of the Soldiers; and he dying naturally, or by the
fraud of his Wife, the Empire was transferred to her Son Tiberius; under whom
the miserable People suffered the worst effects of the most impure Lust and
inhuman Cruelty: He being stifled the Government went on with much uniformity
and stability; Caligula, Claudius, Nero, Galba, Otho, Vitellius regularly and
constantly did all the mischief they could, and were not more like to each
other in the Villanys they committed, than in the Deaths they suffered.
Vespasian's more gentle Reign did no way compensate the Blood he spilt to
attain the Empire: And the Benefits received from Titus his short lived Virtue,
were infinitely overbalanc'd by the detestable Vices of his Brother Domitian,
who turned all things into the old Channel of Cruelty, Lust, Rapine and
Perfidiousness. His slaughter gave a little breath to the gasping perishing
World; and men might be virtuous under the Government of Nerva, Trajan,
Antoninus, Aurelius, and a few more; tho even in their time Religion was always
dangerous. But when the Power fell into the hands of Commodus, Heliogabalus,
Caracalla, and others of that sort, nothing was safe but obscurity, or the
utmost excesses of leudness and baseness. However, whilst the Will of the
Governor passed for a Law, and the Power did usually fall into the hands of
such as were most bold and violent, the utmost security that any man could have
for his Person or Estate, depended upon his temper; and Princes themselves,
whether good or bad, had no longer Leases of their lives, than the furious and
corrupted Soldiers would give them; and the Empire of the World was changeable,
according to the Success of a Battle.

Matters were not much mended when the Emperors became Christians: Some
favored those who were called Orthodox, and gave great Revenues to corrupt the
Clergy. Others supported Arianism, and persecuted the Orthodox with as much
asperity as the Pagans had done. Some revolted, and showed themselves more
fierce against the professors of Christianity, than they that had never had any
knowledge of it. The World was torn in pieces amongst them, and often suffered
as great miserys by their sloth, ignorance and co wardice, as by their fury and
madness, till the Empire was totally dissolved and lost. That which under the
weakness and irregularity of a popular Government, had conquered all from the
Euphrates to Britain, and destroyed the Kingdoms of Asia, Egypt, Macedon,
Numidia, and a multitude of others, was made a Prey to unknown barbarous
Nations, and rent into as many pieces as it had bin composed of, when it
enjoyed the Stability that accompanys Divine and Absolute Monarchy.

The like may be said of all the Kingdoms in the World: they may have their
ebbings and flowings according to the Virtues or Vices of Princes or their
Favorites; but can never have any Stability, because there is, and can be none
in them. Or if any Exception may be brought against this Rule, it must be of
those Monarchys only which are mixed and regulated by Laws, where Diets,
Parliaments, Assemblys of Estates, or Senats, may supply the defects of a
Prince, restrain him if he prove extravagant, and reject such as are found to
be unworthy of their Office, which are as odious to our Author and his
Followers, as the most popular Governments, and can be of no advantage to his
Cause.

There is another ground of perpetual Fluctuation in Absolute Monarchys; or
such as are grown so strong, that they cannot be restrained by Law, tho
according to their Institution they ought to be, distinct from, but in some
measure relating to the Inclinations of the Monarch, that is, the impulse of
Ministers, Favorites, Wives or Whores, who frequently govern all things
according to their own Passions or Interests. And tho we cannot say who were
the Favorites of every one of the Assyrian or Egyptian Kings, yet the Examples
beforementioned of the different method followed in Egypt before and after the
death of Joseph, and in Persis whilst the idolatrous Princes, and Haman, or
Daniel, Esther and Mordecai were in credit; the violent Changes happening
thereupon, give us reason to believe the like were in the times of other Kings:
and if we examine the Historys of latter Ages, and the Lives of Princes that are
more exactly known, we shall find that Kingdoms are more frequently swayed by
those who have Power with the Prince, than by his own Judgment: So that
whosoever has to deal with Princes concerning Foreign or Domestic Affairs, is
obliged more to regard the humor of those Persons, than the most important
Interests of a Prince or People.

I might draw too much envy upon my self, if I should take upon me to cite all
the Examples of this kind that are found in modern Historys, or the Memoirs
that do more precisely show the Temper of Princes, and the secret Springs by
which they were moved. But as those who have well observed the management of
Affairs in France during the Reigns of Francis the First, Henry the Second,
Francis the Second, Charles the Ninth, Henry the Third, Henry the Fourth, and
Lewis the Thirteenth, will confess, that the Interests of the Dukes of
Montmorency and Guise, Queen Katherine de Medicis, the Duke of Epernon, La
^osseuse, Madame de Guiche, de Gabriele, d' Entragues, the Marechal d' Ancre,
the Constable de Luines, and the Cardinal de Richelieu, were more to be
considered by those who had any public or private Business to treat at Court,
than the Opinions of those Princes, or the most weighty Concernments of the
State; so it cannot be denied, that other Kingdoms where Princes legally have,
or wrongfully usurp the like Power, are governed in the like manner; or if it
be, there is hardly any Prince's Reign that will not furnish abundant proof of
what I have asserted.

I agree with our Author, that good Order and Stability produce Strength. If
Monarchy therefore excel in them, Absolute Monarchys should be of more strength
than those that are limited, according to the proportion of their Riches,
extent of Territory, and number of People that they govern; and those limited
Monarchys in the like proportion more strong than popular Governments or
Commonwealths. If this be so, I wonder how a few of those giddy Greeks who,
according to our Author, had learning enough only to make them seditious, came
to overthrow the vast Armies of the Persians as often as they met with 'em; and
seldom found any other difficulty than what arose from their own Countrymen,
who sometimes sided with the Barbarians. Seditions are often raised by a little
prating; but when one Man was to fight against fifty, or a hundred, as at the
Battles of Salamis, Platea, Marathon, and others, then Industry, Wisdom, Skill
and Valor were required; and if their Learning had not made 'em to excel in
those Virtues, they must have bin overwhelmed by the prodigious multitudes of
their Enemies. This was so well known to the Persians, that when Cyrus the
younger prepared to invade his Brother Artaxerxes, Plut. vit. Artax.
he brought together indeed a vast Army of Asiaticks; but chiefly relied upon
the Counsel and Valor of ten thousand Grecians, whom he had engaged to serve
him. These giddy heads, accompanied with good hands, in the great Battle near
Babylon, found no resistance from Artaxerxes his Army; and when Cyrus was
killed by accident in the pursuit of the Victory they had gained, and their own
Officers treacherously murdered, they made good their retreat into Greece under
the conduct of Xenophon, in despite of above four hundred thousand Horse and
Foot, who endeavored to oppose them. They were destitute of Horse, Money,
Provisions, Friends and all other help, except what their Wisdom and Valor
furnished them; and thereupon relying, they passed over the Bellys of all the
Enemies that ventured to appear against them in a march of a thousand miles.
These things were performed in the weakness of popular confusion; but Agesilaus
not being sensible of so great defects, accompanied only with six and thirty
Spartans, and such other Forces as he could raise upon his personal credit,
adventured without Authority or Money to undertake a War against that great King
Artaxerxes; and having often beaten Pharnabazus and Tissaphernes his
Lieutenants, was preparing to assault him in the heart of his Kingdom, when he
was commanded by the Ephori to return for the defense of his own Country.

It may in like manner appear strange, that Alexander with the Forces of
Greece, much diminished by the Phocean, Peloponnesian, Theban, and other
intestin Wars, could overthrow all the Powers of the East, and conquer more
Provinces than any other Army ever saw; if so much order and stability were to
be found in absolute Monarchys, and if the Liberty in which the Grecians were
educated did only fit them for Seditions: And it would seem no less
astonishing, that Rome and Greece, whilst they were free, should furnish such
numbers of men excelling in all moral Virtues, to the admiration of all
succeeding Ages; and thereby become so powerful that no Monarchs were able to
resist them; and that the same Countries since the loss of their Liberty, have
always bin weak, base, cowardly and vicious, if the same Liberty had not bin
the Mother and Nurse of their Virtue, as well as the root of their Power.

It cannot be said that Alexander was a Monarch in our Author's sense; for the
power of the Macedonian Kings was small. Philip confessed the People were
Freemen, and his Son found them to be so, when his Fortune had overthrown his
Virtue, and he fell to hate and fear that generosity of Spirit which it
creates. He made his Conquests by it, and loved it as long as he deserved to be
loved. His Successors had the same fortune: When their Hearts came to be filled
with Barbarick Pride, and to delight only in rendering men Slaves, they became
weak and base, and were easily overthrown by the Romans, whose Virtue and
Fortune did also perish with their Liberty. All the Nations they had to deal
with, had the same fate. They never conquered a Free People without extreme
difficulty: They received many great defeats, and were often necessitated to
fight for their Lives against the Latins, Sabins, Tuscans, Samnites,
Carthaginians, Spaniards; and in the height of their Power found it a hard work
to subdue a few poor Etolians: But the greatest Kings were easily overcome.
When Antiochus had insolently boasted that he would Plut. in vit. Q. Flamin.
cover Greece and Italy with the multitude of his Troops, Quintius Flaminius
ingeniously compared his Army of Persians, Chaldeans, Syrians, Mesopotamians,
Cappadocians, Arabians, and other base Astatic Slaves, to a Supper set before
him by a Grecian Friend, which seeming to be of several sorts of Venison, was
all cut out of one Hog, variously dressed; and not long after, that vast
multitude was as easily slaughtered as the Hog had bin. The greatest danger of
the War with Mithridates was to avoid his Poisons and Treacherys; and to follow
him through the Deserts where he fled. When Lucullus with less than twenty
thousand men had put Tigranes Plut. in vit. Lucul.
with two hundred thousand to flight, the Roman Soldiers who for a while had
pursued the chase, stood still on a sudden, and fell into a loud laughter at
themselves for using their Arms against such wretched cowardly Slaves. If this
be not enough to prove the Falsehood of our Author's Proposition, I desire it
may be considered whether good Order or Stability be wanting in Venice: Whether
Tuscany, be in a better condition to defend it self since it fell under the
power of the Medices, or when it was full of free Citys: Whether it were an
easy work to conquer Switzerland: Whether the Hollanders are of greater
strength since the recovery of their Liberty, or when they groaned under the
Yoke of Spain: And lastly, whether the entire conquest of Scotland and Ireland,
the Victorys obtained against the Hollanders when in the height of their Power,
and the reputation to which England did rise in less than five years after
1648. be good marks of the instability, disorder, and weakness of free Nations:
And if the contrary be true, nothing can be more absurdly false than our
Author's assertion.

SECT. XII. The Glory, Virtue, and Power of the Romans began and ended with
their Liberty.
AMong many fine things proposed by our Author, I see none more to be admired,
or that better declares the soundness of his Judgment, than that he is only
pleased with the beginning and end of the Roman Empire; and says, that their
time of Liberty (between those two extremes) had nothing of good in it, but
that it was of short continuance. Whereas I dare affirm that all that was ever
desirable, or worthy of praise and imitation in Rome, proceeded from its
Liberty, and grew up and perished with it: which I think will not be
contradicted by any, but those who prefer the most sordid Vices before the most
eminent Virtues; who believe the People to have bin more worthily employed by
the Tarquins in cleansing Jakes and common Shores, than in acquiring the
Dominion of the best part of Mankind; and account it better for a People to be
oppressed with hard labor under a proud Master, in a steril, unhealthy tenmile
Territory, than to command all the Countries that lie between the Fuphrates and
Britain. Such Opinions will hardly find any better Patrons than Filmer and his
Disciples, nor the matters of fact, as they are represented, be denied by any
that know the Historys of those times. Many Romans may have had seeds of virtue
in them, whilst in the insancy of that City they lived under Kings; but they
brought forth little fruit. Tarquin, sirnam'd the Proud, being a Grecian by
extraction, had perhaps observed that the Virtue of that Nation had rendered
them averse to the Divine Government he desired to set up; and having by his
wellnatur'd Tullia poisoned his own Brother her Husband, and his own Wife her
Sister, married her, killed her Father, and spared none that he thought able to
oppose his designs, to finish the work, he butchered the Senate, with such as
seemed most eminent among the People, and like a most pious Father endeavored
to render the City desolate: during that time they who would not be made
instruments of those Villanys, were obliged for their own safety to conceal
their Virtues; but he being removed, they shined in their Glory. Whilst he
reigned, Brutus, Valerius, Horatius, Herminius, Larcius, and Coriolanus, lay
hid and unregarded; but when they came to fight for themselves, and to employ
their Valor for the good of their Country, they gave such testimonys of
Bravery as have bin admired by all succeeding ages, and settled such a
Discipline, as produced others like to them, or more excellent than they, as
long as their Liberty lasted. In two hundred and sixty years that they remained
under the Government of Kings, tho all of 'em, the last only excepted, were
chosen by the Senate and People, and did as much to advance the public Service
as could reasonably be expected from them, their Dominion hardly extended so
far as from London to Hownslow: But in little more than three hundred years
after they recovered their Liberty, they had subdued all the warlike Nations of
Italy, destroyed vast Armies of the Gauls, Cimbri, and Germans, overthrown the
formidable power of Carthage, conquered the Cisalpine and Transalpine Gauls,
with all the Nations of Spain, notwithstanding the ferocity of the one, and the
more constant valor of the other, with the prodigious multitudes of both: They
had brought all Greece into subjection, and by the conquest of Macedon the
Spoils of the World to adorn their City; and found so little difficulty in all
the Wars that happened between them and the greatest Kings after the Death of
Alexander of Epirus and Pirrhus, that the defeats of Siphax, Perses, Antiochus,
Prusias, Tigranes, Ptolomy, and many others, did hardly deserve to be numbered
amongst their Victorys.

It were ridiculous to impute this to chance, or to think that Fortune, which
of all things is the most variable, could for so many Ages continue the same
course, unless supported by Virtue; or to suppose that all these Monarchys
which are so much extolled, could have bin destroyed by that Commonwealth, if it
had wanted Strength, Stability, Virtue, or good Order. The secret Counsels of
God are impenetrable; but the ways by which he accomplishes his designs are
often evident: When he intends to exalt a People, he fills both them and their
Leaders with the Virtues suitable to the accomplishment of his end; and takes
away all Wisdom and Virtue from those he resolves to destroy. The Pride of the
Babylonians and Assyrians fell through the baseness of Sardanapalus; and the great
City was taken while Belshazzar lay drunk amongst his Whores: The Empire was
transported to the Persians and Grecians by the valor of Cyrus, Alexander, and
the brave Armies that followed them. Historys furnish us with innumerable
examples of this kind: But I think none can be found of a cowardly, weak,
effeminate, foolish, ill-disciplin'd People, that have ever subdued such as
were eminent in Strength, Wisdom, Valor, and good Discipline; or that these
qualitys have bin found or subsisted any where, unless cultivated and nourished
by a well-ordered Government. If this therefore was found among the Romans, and
not in the Kingdoms they overthrew, they had the order and stability which the
Monarchys had not; and the Strength and Virtue by which they obtained such
success, was the product of them. But if this Virtue and the glorious effects
of it did begin with Liberty, it also expired with the same. The best men that
had not fallen in Battle were gleaned up by the Proscriptions, or circumvented
for the most part by false and frivolous Accusations. Mankind is inclined to
Vice, and the way to Virtue is so hard, that it wants encouragement; but when
all Honors, Advantages and Preferments are given to Vice, and despised Virtue
finds no other reward than Hatred, Persecution, and Death, there are few who
will follow it. Tacitus well describes the State of the Empire, when the (...)
Tacit. (...)
Power was absolutely fallen into the hands of one: Italia novis cladibus, vel
post longam seculorum seriem repetitis, afflicta; Vrbs incendiis vastata,
consumptis antiquissimis delubris, ipso Capitolio Civium manibus incenso;
pollutae ceremoniae; magna adulteria; plenum exiliis mare; infecti caedibus
scopuli; atrocius in urbe saevitum; Nobilitas, opes, omissi vel gesti honores
pro crimine, and ob virtutes certissimum exitium. His following words show,
that the rewards of these abominations were not less odious than the things
themselves: The highest Dignitys were bestowed upon the Delatores, who were a
kind of Rogues like to our Irish Witnesses, or those that by a new coined word
we call Trepanners. This is not a Picture drawn by a vulgar hand, but by one of
the best Painters in the world; and being a Model that so much pleases our
Author, it is good to see what it produced. The first fruit was such an entire
degeneracy from all good, that Rome may be justly said never to have produced a
brave Man since the first age of her Slavery. Germanicus and Corbulo were born
expirante Liberate; and the recompense they received did so little encourage
others to follow their example, that none have bin found in any degree like to
them; and those of the most noble Familys applied themselves to sleep,
laziness, and luxury, that they might not be suspected to be better than their
Masters. Thraseas, Soranus, and Helvidius were worthy men, who resolved to
persist in their Integrity, tho they should die for it; but that was the only
thing that made them eminent; for they were of unknown Familys, not Romans by
birth, nor ever employed in War: And those Emperors who did arrive to any
degree of Virtue, were Spaniards, Gauls, Africans, Thracians, and of all
Nations, except Romans. The Patrician and Plebeian Familys, which for many ages
had filled the World with great Commanders, and such as excelled in all Virtues,
being thus extinguished or corrupted, the common People fell into the lowest
degree of baseness: Plebs sordida Circo and Theatris sueta. That People which
in C. Tacit
magnanimity surpast all that have bin known in the World; who never found any
Enterprise above their Spirit to undertake, and Power to accomplish, with their
Liberty lost all their Vigor and Virtue. They who by their Votes had disposed
of Kingdoms and Provinces, fell to desire nothing but to live and see Duas
tantum res anxius opta^,
P^nem and Circenses. Juven. Sat.

Plays. Whether their Emperors were good or bad, they usually rejoiced at their
Death, in hopes of getting a little Money or Victuals from the Successor. Tho
the Empire was by this means grown weak and bloodless, yet it could not fall on
a sudden: So vast a Body could not die in a moment: All the neighboring
Nations had bin so much broken by their Power, that none was able to take
advantage of their Weakness; and life was preserved by the strength of hungry
Barbarians, allured by the greatness of the Pay they received to defend those,
who had no power left to defend themselves. This precarious and accidental help
could not be durable. They who for a while had bin contented with their Wages,
soon began to think it fit for them rather to fight for themselves, than for
their weak Masters; and thereupon fell to set up Emperors depending on
themselves, or to seize upon the naked Provinces, where they found no other
difficulty than to contend with other Strangers, who might have the like design
upon the same. Thus did the Armies of the East and West set up Emperors at their
pleasure; and tho the Goths, Vandals, Huns, Sueves, Alans, and others, had
cruel Wars among themselves, yet they feared and suffered little or nothing
from the Romans. This state of things was so soon observed, that in the
beginning of Tiberius his reign, they who endeavored to excite the Gauls to
take Arms, used no other arguments than such as were drawn from the extreme
weakness of the Quam inop^ Italia, Plebs urbana imbellis, nihil in exercitibus
validum praeter externum* C. Tacit. An. l. 3.
Romans. It was evident that after the Battles of Philippi and Actium, the
strength of the Roman Armies consisted of Strangers; and even the Victorys that
went under their name were gained by those Nations which in the time of their
Liberty they had subdued. They had nothing left but Riches gathered out of
their vast Dominions; and they learned by their ruin, that an Empire acquired
by Virtue could not long be supported by Money. They who by their Valor had
arrived at such a height of Glory, Power, Greatness, and Happiness, that was
never equaled, and who in all appearance had nothing to fear from any foreign
Power, could never have fallen, unless their Virtue and Discipline had decayed,
and the corruption of their Manners excited 'em to turn their victorious Swords
into their own bowels. Whilst they were in that flourishing condition, they
thought they had nothing more to desire than continuance; but if our Author's
judgment is to be followed, there was nothing of good in it, except the
shortness of its continuance; they were beholden to those who wrought the
Change; they were the better for the Battles of Pharsalia, Philippi, Munda, and
Actium; the destruction of two thirds of the People, with the slaughter of all
the most eminent men among them, was for their advantage: The Proscriptions
were wholesome Remedys: Tacitus did not understand the state of his own Country,
when he seems to be Ann^l. l. 4.
ashamed to write the History of it, Nobis in arcto and inglorius labor; when
instead of such glorious things as had bin achieved by the Romans, whilst
either the Senate, or the Common Poople prevailed, he had nothing left to
relate, but saeva jussa, continuas accusationes, fallaces amicitias, perniciem
innocentium: They enjoyed nothing that was good from the expulsion of the
Tarquins to the reestablishment of Divine absolute Monarchy in the Persons of
those pious Fathers of the People, Tiberius, Caligula, Claudius, Nero, Galba,
Otho, Vitellius, etc. There was no Virtue in the Junii, Horatii, Cornelii,
Quintii, Decii, Manlii; but the generous and tenderhearted Princes
beforementioned were perfect examples of it: Whilst annual Magistrates
governed, there was no stability; Sejanus, Macro and Tigellinus introduced good
order: Virtue was not esteemed by the ancient Senate and People; Messalina,
Agrippina, Poppaea, Narcissus, Pallas, Vinnius, and Laco knew how to put a just
value upon it: The irregularitys of popular Assemblys, and want of Prudence in
the Senate, was repaired by the temperate proceedings of the German, Pannonian
and Eastern Armies* or the modest discretion of the Pretorian Bands: The City
was delivered by them from the burden of governing the World, and for its own
good frequently plundered, fired; and at last, with the rest of desolated
Italy, and the noblest Provinces of Europe, Asia, and Africa, brought under the
yoke of the most barbarous and cruel Nations. By the same light we may see that
those who endeavored to perpetuate the misery of Liberty to Rome, or lost
their lives in the defense of it, were the worst or the most foolish of men,
and that they were the best who did overthrow it. This rectifys all our Errors;
and if the highest Praises are due to him that did the work, the next are well
deserved by those who perished in attempting it: and if the Sons of Brutus,
with their Companions the Vitellii and Aquillii; Claudius Appius the Decemvir;
those that would have betrayed the City to Porsenna; Spurius Melius, Spur.
Cassius, Manlius Capitolinus, Saturninus, Catiline, Cethegus, Lentulus, had bin
as fortunate as Julius Caesar, they might as well have deserved an Apotheosis.
But if all this be false, absurd, bestial, and abominable, the principles that
necessarily lead us to such conclusions are so also; which is enough to show,
that the Strength, Virtue, Glory, Wealth, Power, and Happiness of Rome
proceeding from Liberty, did rise, grow, and perish with it.

SECT. XIII. There is disorder or prejudice in changing the name or number of
Magistrates, whilst the root and principle of their Power continues entire.
IN the next place our Author would persuade us that the Romans were
inconstant, because of their changes from annual Consuls to Military Tribunes,
Decemviri, and Dictators; and gives the name of Sedition to the complaints made
against Usury, or the contests concerning Marriages or Magistracy: But I affirm,

1. That no change of Magistracy, as to the name, number, or form, dos testify
irregularity, or bring any manner of prejudice, as long as it is done by those
who have a right of doing it, and he or they who are created continue within
the power of the Law to accomplish the end of their institution; many forms
being in themselves equally good, and may be used as well one as another,
according to times and other circumstances.

2. In the second place, it is a rare thing for a City at the first to be
rightly constituted: Men can hardly at once foresee all that may happen in many
Ages, and the changes that accompany them ought to be provided for. Rome in its
foundation was subject to these defects, and the inconveniences arising from
them were by degrees discovered and remedi'd. They did not think of regulating
Usury, till they saw the mischiefs proceeding from the cruelty of Usurers; or
of setting limits to the proportion of Land that one man might enjoy, till the
avarice of a few had so far succeeded, that their Riches were grown formidable,
and many by the poverty to which they were reduced became useless to the City.
It was not time to make a Law that the Plebeians might marry with the
Patricians, till the distinction had raised the Patricians to such Pride, as to
look upon themselves to have something of divine, and the others to be
Inauspicati, or profane, and brought the City into danger by that division; nor
to make the Plebeians capable of being elected to the chief Magistracys, till
they had men able to perform the dutys of them. But these things being
observed, remedys were seasonably applied without any bloodshed or mischief,
tho not without noise and wrangling.

3. All human Constitutions are subject to corruption, and must perish, unless
timely renewed and reduced to their first principles: This was chiefly done by
means of those Tumults which our Author ignorantly blames: The whole People by
whom the Magistracy had bin at first created, executed their power in those
things which comprehend Sovereignty in the highest degree, and brought every
one to acknowledge it: There was nothing that they could not do, who first
conferred the supreme Honors upon the Patricians, and then made the Plebeians
equal to them. Yet their Modesty was not less than their Power or Courage: and
therefore when by the Law they might have made a Plebeian Consul, they did not
choose one in forty years; and when they did make use of their Right in
advancing men of their own Order, they were so prudent, that they cannot be
said to have bin mistaken in their Elections three times, whilst their Votes
were free: whereas, of all the Emperors that came in by Usurpation, pretense of
Blood from those who had usurped, or that were set up by the Soldiers, or a few
Electors, hardly three can be named who deserved that Honor, and most of them
were such as seemed to be born for Plagues to Mankind.

4. He manifests his fraud or ignorance in attributing the Legislative power
sometimes to the Senate, and sometimes to the People; for the Senate never had
it. The style of Senatus censuit, Populus jussit, was never altered; but the
right of Advising continuing in the Senate, that of Enacting ever continued in
the People.

5. An occasion of commending absolute Power, in order to the establishment of
Hereditary Monarchy, is absurdly drawn from their Custom of creating a Dictator
in time of danger; for no man was ever created, but such as seemed able to bear
so great a burden, which in hereditary Governments is wholly left to chance.
Tho his Power was great, it did arise from the Law; and being confined to six
months, 'twas almost impossible for any man to abuse it, or to corrupt so many
of those who had enjoyed the same honor, or might aspire to it, as to bring
them for his pleasure to betray their Country: and as no man was ever chosen
who had not given great testimonys of his Virtues, so no one did ever forseit
the good opinion conceived of him. Virtue was then honored, and thought so
necessarily to comprehend a sincere love and fidelity to the Commonwealth, that
without it the most eminent qualitys were reputed vile and odious; and the
memory of former Services could no way expiate the guilt of conspiring against
it. This seeming Severity was in truth the greatest Clemency: for tho our
Author has the impudence to say, that during the Roman Liberty the best men
thrived worst, and the worst best, he cannot alledg one example of any eminent
Roman put to death (except Manlius Capitolinus) from the expulsion of the
Tarquins to the time of the Gracchi, and the Civil Wars not long after ensuing;
and of very few who were banished. By these means Crimes were prevented; and
the temptations to evil being removed, Treachery was destroyed in the root; and
such as might be naturally ambitious, were made to see there was no other way
to Honor and Power, than by acting virtuously.

But lest this should not be sufficient to restrain aspiring men, what Power
soever was granted to any Magistrate, the Sovereignty still remained in the
People, and all without exception were subject to them. This may seem strange
to those who think the Dictators were absolute, because they are said to have
bin sine provocatione; but that is to be only understood in relation to other
Magistrates, and not to the People, as is clearly proved in the case of Q.
Fabius, whom Papirius the Dictator ^. ^av. ^. 8.
would have put to death: Tribunos Plebis appello, says Fabius Maximus his
Father, and provoco ad Populum, eumque tibi fugienti exercitus tui, fugienti
Senatus Judicium, judicem sero; qui certe unus plusquam tua dicta^ura potest
polletque: videro, cessurusne sis provocationi, cui Tullus Hostilius cessit.
And tho the People did rather intercede for Fabius than command his
deliverance, that modesty did evidently proceed from an opinion that Papirius
was in the right; and tho they desired to save Fabius, who seems to have bin
one of the greatest and best men that ever the City produced, they would not
enervate that military Discipline, to which they owed, not only their greatness,
but their subsistence; most especially when their Sovereign Authority was
acknowledged by all, and the Dictator himself had submitted. This right of
Appeals to the People was the foundation of the Roman Commonwealth, laid in the
days of Romulus, T. Live. l. 1.
submitted to by Hostilius in the case of Horatius, and never violated, till the
Laws and the Liberty which they supported were overthrown by the power of the
Sword. This is confirmed by the speech of Metellus the Tribune, who in the time
of the second Carthaginian War, causelessly disliking the Proceedings of Q.
Fabius Maximus then Dictator, in a public Assembly of the People said, Quod si
antiquus animus Plebi T. Live. l. 22.
Romanae esset, se audacter laturum de abrogando Q. Fabii Imperio; nunc modicam
rogationem promulgaturum, de aequando Magistri Equitum and Dictatoris jure:
which was done, and that Action, which had no precedent, shows that the People
needed none, and that their Power being eminently above that of all Magistrates,
was obliged to no other rule than that of their own Will. Tho I do therefore
grant that a Power like to the Dictatorian, limited in time, circumscribed by
Law, and kept perpetually under the supreme Authority of the People, may, by
virtuous and welldisciplin'd Nations, upon some occasions, be prudently granted
to a virtuous man, it can have no relation to our Author's Monarch, whose Power
is in himself, subject to no Law, perpetually exercised by himself, and for his
own sake, whether he has any of the abilitys required for the due performance
of so great a work, or be entirely destitute of them; nothing being more
unreasonable than to deduce consequences from cases, which in substance and
circumstances are altogether unlike: but to the contrary, these examples
showing that the Romans, even in the time of such Magistrates as seemed to be
most absolute, did retain and exercise the Sovereign Power, do most evidently
prove that the Government was ever the same remaining in the People, who
without prejudice might give the Administration to one or more men as best
pleased themselves, and the success shows that they did it prudently.

SECT. XIV. No Sedition was hurtful to Rome, till through their Prosperity some
men gained a Power above the Laws.
LIttle pains is required to confute our Author, who imputes much bloodshed to
the popular Government of Rome; for he cannot prove that one man was unjustly
put to death, or slain in any Sedition before Publius Gracchus: The Foundations
of the Commonwealth were then so shaken, that the Laws could not be executed;
and whatsoever did then fall out, ought to be attributed to the Monarchy for
which the great Men began to contend. Whilst they had no other Wars than with
neighboring Nations, they had a strict eye upon their Commanders, and could
preserve Discipline among the Soldiers: but when by the excellence of their
Valor and Conduct the greatest Powers of the World were subdued, and for the
better carrying on of foreign Wars, Armies were suffered to continue in the same
hands longer than the Law did direct, Soldiery came to be accounted a Trade,
and those who had the worst designs against the Commonwealth, began to savor
all manner of Licentiousness and Rapine, that they might gain the savor of the
Legions, who by that means became unruly and seditious; 'twas hard, if not
impossible, to preserve a Civil equality, when the Spoils of the greatest
Kingdoms were brought to adorn the Houses of private men; and they who had the
greatest Citys and Nations to be their Dependents and Clients, were apt to
scorn the power of the Law. This was a most dangerous Disease, like those to
which human Bodies are subject, when arrived to that which Physicians call the
Athletick habit, proceeding from the highest perfection of Health, Activity and
Strength, that the best Constitution by Diet and Exercise can attain. Whosoever
falls into them shows that he had attained that perfection; and he who blames
that which brings a State into the like condition, condemns that which is most
perfect among men. Whilst the Romans were in the way to this, no Sedition did
them any hurt: they were composed without Blood; and those that seemed to be
the most dangerous, produced the best Laws. But when they were arrived to that
condition, no Order could do them good; the fatal period set to human things
was come, they could go no higher, Lucan. l. 1.
-- Summisque negatum
Stare diu;
and all that our Author blames, is not to be imputed to their Constitution,
but their departing from it. All men were ever subject to error, and it may be
said that the mistaken People in the space of about three hundred years did
unjustly fine or banish five or six men; but those mistakes were so frankly
acknowledged, and carefully repaired by Honors bestowed upon the injured
Persons, as appears by the Examples of Camillus, Livius Salinator, Paulus
Emylius, and others, that they deserve more praise than if they had not failed.

If for the abovementioned time Seditions were harmless or profitable, they
were also absolutely exempted from Civil Wars. Those of Apulia and Greece were
Revolts of conquered Nations, and can no way fall under that name: But it is
most absurdly applied to the servile and gladiatorian Wars; for the Gladiators
were Slaves also, and Civil Wars can be made only by those who are Members of
the Civil Society, which Slaves are not. Those that made the bellum Sociale,
were Freemen, but not Citizens; and the War they made could not be called
Civil. The Romans had three ways of dealing with conquered Nations.

1. Some were received into the body of the City, Civitate donati, as the
Latins by Romulus; the Albans by Hostilius; the Privernates when their
Ambassador declared, that no Peace could be durable unless it were just and
easy; and the Senate said, Se viri and liberi vocem audivisse, talesque dignos
esse ut Romani siant; and the like Favor was shown to many others.

2. By making Leagues with them, as Livy says, Populum Romanum devictos bello
populos, malle societate and amicitia habere conjunctos, quam tristi subjectos
servitio: Of which sort were the Samnites, who not liking their condition,
joined with Hannibal; and afterward, under the conduct of the brave Telesinus,
with other Nations that lived under the condition of Socii, made an
unprosperous attempt to deliver themselves.

3. Those who after many Rebellions were in Provinciam redacti, as the Capuans,
when their City was taken by Appius Claudius, and Q. F^lvius Flaccus.

We osten hear of Wars made by those of the two latter sorts; but of none that
can be called Civil, till the times of Marius, Sylla, and Catiline: and as they
are to be esteemed the last Struglings of expiring Liberty, when the Laws, by
which it had subsisted, were enervated; so those that happened between Caesar
and Pompey, Octavius and Antonius, with the Proscriptions, Triumvirate, and all
the Mischiefs that accompanied them, are to be imputed wholly to the Monarchy
for which they contended, as well as those between Nero, Galba, Otho,
Vitellius, and Vespasian, that hardly ever ceased till the Empire was
abolished; for the name of a Commonwealth continued to the end; and I know not
why Tiberius or Nero might not use it as well as Sylla or Marius.

Yet if our Author be resolved to impute to Popular Government all that passed
before Caesar made himself perpetual Dictator, he will find no more than is seen
in all places. We have known few small States, and no great one free from
Revolts of Subjects or Allies; and the greatest Empire of the East was
overthrown by the rebellion of the Mammalukes their Slaves. If there is any
difference to be observed between what happened at Rome, it is chiefly, that
whilst there was any shadow of Liberty, the Slaves, Gladiators, Subjects or
Allies, were always beaten and suppressed; whereas in the time of the Emperors,
the Revolt of a Province was sufficient to give a new Master to the best part
of Mankind; and he having no more power than was required for a present
Mischief, was for the most part, in a short time, destroyed by another. But to
please our Author, I will acknowledge a second defect, even that Wantonness to
which he ascribes all their Disorders; tho I must withal desire him to consider
from whence Wantonness dos proceed. If the People of Turkey or France did rebel,
I should think they were driven to it by Misery, Beggary, or Despair; and could
lay Wantonness only to the charge of those who enjoy much Prosperity. Nations
that are oppressed and made miserable, may fall into Rage, but can never grow
wanton. In the time of the Roman Emperors, the Pretorian Cohorts, or the Armies
that had the liberty of ravaging the richest Provinces, might be proud of their
Strength, or grow wanton through the abundance of their Enjoyments: The Janizarys
in later Ages may, for the same reasons, have fallen into the like excesses;
but such as have lost their Liberty are in no danger of them. When all the
Nobility of Rome was destroyed, and those who excelled in Reputation or Virtue,
were fallen in the Wars, or by the Proscriptions; when two thirds of the People
were slain, the best Citys and Colonys burnt, the Provinces exhausted, and the
small remains left in them oppressed with a most miserable slavery, they may have
revolted, and sometimes did, as the Britans, Batavians, and others mentioned in
the Roman History: But they were driven to those Revolts by Fury and Necessity,
arising from the Miserys and Indignitys they suffered under an insupportable
Tyranny; and Wantonness had no part in them. The People of Rome, when they were
a little freed from the Terror of the Soldiers, did sometimes for the same
reasons conspire against the Emperors; and when they could do no more, expressed
their hatred by breaking their Statues: But after the Battles of Pharsalia,
Philippi, and the Proscriptions, they never committed any folly through
Wantonness. In the like manner Naples and Sicily have revolted within these few
years; and some who are well acquainted with the State of those Kingdoms, think
them ready again to do the like: but if it should so happen, no man of
understanding would impute it to Wantonness. The Pressures under which they
groan, have cured 'em of all such Diseases; and the Romans after the loss of
their Liberty could never fall into them. They may have grown wanton when their
Authority was reverenced, their Virtue admired, their Power irresistible, and
the Riches of the World were flowing in upon them, as it were, to corrupt their
Manners, by enticing them to pleasure. But when all that was lost, and they
found their Persons exposed to all manner of Violence from the basest of men;
their Riches exhausted by Tributes and Rapine, whilst the Treasures of the
Empire were not sufficient to supply the Luxury of their Masters: the misery
they suffered, and the shame of suffering it, with the contemptible weakness to
which they were reduced, did too strongly admonish them that the Vices of
Wantonness belonged only to those who enjoyed a Condition far different from
theirs; and the memory of what they had lost, sharpened the sense of what they
felt. This is the state of things which pleases our Author; and, by praising
that Government, which deprived those who were under it of all that is most
desirable in the world, and introduced all that ought to be detested, he
sufficiently shows that he delights only in that which is most abominable, and
would introduce his admired Absolute Monarchy, only as an Instrument of
bringing Vice, Misery, Devastation and Infamy upon Mankind.

SECT. XV. The Empire of Rome perpetually decayed when it fell into the hands
of one Man.
IN pursuance of his Design our Author, with as much Judgment as Truth, denies
that Rome became Mistress of the World under the Popular Government: It is not
so, says he, for Rome began her Empire under Kings, and did perfect it under
Emperors: It did only increase under that Popularity: Her greatest exaltation
was under Trajan, and longest Peace under Augustus. For the illustration of
which, I desire these few things may be considered.

1. That the first Monarchy of Rome was not absolute: The Kings were made by
the People without regard to any Man's Title, or other reason than the common
Good, choosing him that seemed most likely to procure it; setting up at the same
time a Senate consisting of a hundred of the most eminent Men among them; and,
after the reception of the Sabins into the City, adding as many more to them,
and committing the principal part of the Government to their care, retaining
the power of making those Laws to which the Kings who reigned by their Command
were subject, and reserving to themselves the Judgment of all great Matters
upon Appeal. If any of their Kings deserved to be called a Monarch, according
to Filmer's Definition, it was the last Tarquin; for he alone of all their ^.
L^v. l. 2.
Kings reigned not jussu Populi, but came in by Treachery and Murder. If he had
continued, he had cured the People of all Vices proceeding from Wantonness; but
his farthest Conquest was of the small Town of Gabii ten miles distant from
Rome, which he effected by the fraud of his detestable Son; and that being then
the utmost limit of the Roman Empire, must deserve to be called the World, or
the Empire of it was not gained by their Kings.

2. The Extent of Conquests is not the only, nor the chief thing that ought to
be considered in them; regard is to be had to the Means whereby they are made,
and the Valor or Force that was employed by the Enemy. In these respects not
only the overthrow of Carthage, and the Conquests of Spain, but the Victorys
gained against the Sabins, Latins, Tuscans, Samnites, and other valiant Nations
of Italy, who most obstinately defended their Liberty, when the Romans had no
Forces but their own, show more Virtue, and deserve incomparably more Praise,
than the Defeats of any Nations whatsoever, when they were increased in Number,
Riches, Reputation and Power, and had many other warlike People iustructed in
their Discipline, and fighting under their Ensigns. But I deny that the Romans
did ever make any considerable acquisition after the loss of their Liberty.
They had already subdued all Italy, Greece, Macedon, the Islands of the
Mediterranean Sea, Thracia, Illyrium, Asia the Less, Pontus, Armenia, Syria,
Egypt, Africa, Gaul and Spain. The Forces of Germany were broken; a Bridge laid
over the Rhine, and all the Countries on this side subdued. This was all that
was ever gained by the Valor of their own Forces, and that could bring either
Honor or Profit. But I know of no Conquest made after that time, unless the
name of Conquest be given to Caligula's Expedition, when he said he had subdued
the Sea, in making an useless Bridge from Puteoli to Baiae; or that of the other
Fool, who entered Rome in triumph, for having gathered shells on the Seashore.
Trajan's Expedition into the East, was rather a Journey than a War: He rambled
over the Provinces that Augustus had abandoned as not worth keeping, and others
that had nothing to defend them, but illarm'd and unwarlike Barbarians: Upon
the whole matter, he seems to have bin led only by Curiosity; and the vanity of
looking upon them as Conquests, appears in their being relinquished as soon as
gained. Britain was easily taken from a naked and unskilful, tho a brave
People; hardly kept, and shamefully lost. But tho the Emperors had made greater
Wars than the Commonwealth, vanquished Nations of more valor and skill than
their Italian Neighbors, the Grecians or Carthaginians; subdued and
slaughtered those that in Numbers and Ferocity had exceeded the Cimbri, Gauls
and Teutons, encountered Captains more formidable than Pirrhus and Hannibal, it
might indeed increase the Glory of him that should have done it, but could add
nothing of Honor or Advantage to the Roman Name: The Nobility was extirpated
long before, the People corrupted and enslaved, Italy lay desolate, so as a
Roman was hardly to be found in a Roman Army, which was generally composed of
such, as fighting for themselves or their Commander, never thought of any thing
less than the Interest of Rome. And as it is impossible that what is so
neglected and betrayed, should be durable, that Empire which was acquired by
the Valor and Conduct of the bravest and best disciplined People of the World,
decayed and perished in the hands of those Absolute Monarchs who ought to have
preserved it.

3. Peace is desirable by a State that is constituted for it, who contenting
themselves with their own Territorys, have no desires of enlarging them: Or
perhaps it might simply deserve praise, if Mankind were so framed, that a
People intending hurt to none, could preserve themselves; but the World being
so far of another temper, that no Nation can be safe without Valor and
Strength, those Governments only deserve to be commended, which by Discipline
and Exercise increase both, and the Roman above all, that excelled in both.
Peace therefore may be good in its season, and was so in Numa's Reign; yet two
or three such Kings would have encouraged some active Neighbors to put an end
to that aspiring City, before its Territory had extended beyond Fidenae. But
the Discipline that best agreed with the Temper and Designs of a Warlike People,
being renewed by his brave Successors, the Dangers were put on their Enemies;
and all of them, the last only excepted, persisting in the same way, did
reasonably well perform their Duty. When they were removed, and the Affairs of
the City depended no longer upon the Temper or Capacity of one Man, the ends
for which the City was constituted were vigorously pursued, and such Magistrates
annually chosen, as would not long continue in a universal Peace, till they had
gotten the Empire to which they aspired, or were by ill Fortune brought to such
weakness, as to be no longer able to make War. Both of these happened in the so
much magnified Reign of Augustus. He found the Empire so great, that all
Additions might rationally be rejected as useless or prejudicial; and Italy so
exhausted, that Wars could only be carried on by the strength of Strangers: It
was time to lie still when they had no power to act; and they might do it
safely, whilst the Reputation gained by former Victorys preserved them from
Foreign Invasions. When Crassus, Pompey, and Caesar, who had torn the
Commonwealth into three Monarchys, were killed, and the Flower of the Roman
Nobility and People destroyed with them, or by them: When Cato's Virtue had
proved too weak to support a falling State, and Brutus with Cassius had
perished in their noble Attempt to restore their Liberty: When the best part of
the Senate had bin exposed for a Prey to the Vulturs and Wolves of Thessaly, and
one hundred and thirty of those who deserved the hatred of Tyrants, and had
escaped the fury of War, had bin destroyed by the Proscriptions: When neither
Captains nor Soldiers remained in the desolate City; when the Tyrant abhorred
and feared all those who had either Reputation or Virtue, and by the most
subtle Arts endeavored so to corrupt or break the Spirits of the remaining
People, that they might not think of their former Greatness, or the ways of
recovering it, we ought not to wonder that they ceased from War. But such a
Peace is no more to be commended, than that which Men have in the Grave; as in
the Epitaph of the Marquess Trivultio seen at Milan, Qui nunquam quievit,
quiescit, tace. This Peace is in every Wilderness: The Turks have established
it in the empty Provinces of Asia and Greece. Where there are no men, or if
those men have no Courage, there can be no War. Our Ancestors the Britans
observed, that the Peace which in that Age the Romans established in the
Provinces, consisted in the most C. Tacit.
wretched slavery and solitude: Miserrimam servitutem pacem appellant. And in
another place, Solitudinem faciunt, pacem vocant. This is the Peace the
Spaniards settled in their Dominions of the West Indies, by the destruction of
above Barth. de las Casas, destruy^. de las Indias.
forty millions of Souls. The Countries were very quiet, when wild Beasts only
were left to fight in them, or a few miserable Wretches, who had neither
strength nor courage to resist their violence. This was the Peace the Romans
enjoyed under Augustus: A few of those who made themselves subservient to his
Pleasure, and Ministers of the public Calamitys, were put into a flourishing
condition; but the rest pined, withered, and never recovered. If yet our Author
will have us to think the Liberty and People of Rome obliged to Augustus, who
procured such a Peace for them, he ought to remember that besides what they
suffered in settling it, they paid dear for it even in the future; for Italy
was thereby so weakened, as never to recover any strength or virtue to desend
it self; but depending absolutely upon barbarous Nations, or Armies composed of
them, was ravaged and torn in pieces by every Invader.

4. That Peace is only to be valued which is accompanied with Justice; and
those Governments only deserve praise, who put the Power into the hands of the
best Men. This was wholly wanting during the Reigns of Augustus and his
Successors. The worst of men gained the Sovereignty by Alliance, Fraud, or
Violence, and advanced such as most resembled themselves. Augustus was worse in
the beginning than in the latter end of his Reign; but his bloody and impure
Successor grew every day more wicked as long as he lived: Whilst he sat upon
the Rocks at Capreae with his Chaldeans, he meditated nothing but Lust or
Mischief, and had Sejanus and Macro always ready to execute his detestable
Designs. Caligula could find none equal to himself in all manner of Villanys;
but savored those most who were likest to him. Claudius his stupidity,
drunkenness, and subjection to the fury of two impudent Strumpets, and
manumis'd Slaves, proved as hurtful to the Empire, as the savage fury of his
Predecessor. Tho Nero was a Monster that the World could not bear, yet the
raging Soldiers killed Galba, and gave the Empire to Otho for no other reason,
than that he had bin the Companion of his Debauches, and of all men was thought
most to resemble him. With them all Evils came in like a Flood; and their
Successors finding none so bad as themselves, but the Favorites, Whores and
Slaves that governed them, would suffer no Virtue to grow up; and filled the
City with a base, lewd, and miserable Rabble, that cared for nothing beyond
Stage Plays and Bread. Such a People could not be seditious; but Rome had bin
desolate, if they had not thus filled it. And tho this temper and condition of
a People may please our Author; yet it was an incurable Wound to the State, and
in consequence to the best part of the World.

When the City had bin burnt by the Gauls, it was soon restored: The Defeats of
Ticinum, Trebia, Thrasimene, and Cannae, were repaired with equal or greater
Victorys: The War of the Allies ended in their overthrow: The Fury of the
Gladiators was extinguished with their Blood: The Commonwealth lost Battles,
but was never conquered in any War: and in the end triumphed over all that had
contended with them. Whilst Liberty continued, it was the Nurse of Virtue; and
all the Losses suffered in Foreign or Civil Wars, were easily recovered: but
when Liberty was lost, Valor and Virtue was torn up by the roots, and the
Roman Power proceeding from it, perished.

I have not dwelt so long upon this point to expose the folly of our Author,
but to show that the abovementioned Evils did proceed from a permanent cause,
which will always produce the like effects; and Historys testify, that it has
done the same in all places. Carthage was rebuilt, after i^ had bin destroyed
by Scipio, and continued to be a rich City for almost a thousand years, but
produced no such Men as Amilcar, Asdrubal and Hannibal: Cleomenes and Euclidas
were the last that deserved to be called Spartans: Athens never had an eminent
Man, after it felt the weight of the Macedonian Yoke, and Philopemen was the
last of the Achaians. Tho the Commonwealths of Italy in later Ages, having too
much applied themselves to the acquisition of Money, wanted that greatness of
Spirit which had reigned in their Ancestors, yet they have not bin without
Valor and Virtue. That of Pisa was famous for Power at Sea, till the Genoeses
overthrew them. Florence had a brave Nobility, and a stout People. Arezzo,
Pistoia, Cortona, Sienna, and other small Towns of Tuscany, were not without
strength, tho for the most part unhappily exercised in the Factions of
Ghibelins and Guelphs, Neri and Bianchi, that divided all Italy; but since the
introduction of Filmer's divine Absolute Monarchy, all Power, Virtue,
Reputation and Strength, are utterly perished from among them, and no man dares
to oppose the public Mischiefs. They usually decide private Quarrels by
Assassination or Poison; and in other respects they enjoy the happiness of that
Peace which is always found within empty Walls and desolated Countries: And if
this be according to the Laws of God and Nature, it cannot be denied, that
Weakness, Baseness, Cowardice, Destruction and Desolation are so likewise.
These are the Blessings our well-natur'd Author would confer upon us; but if
they were to be esteemed so, I cannot tell why those that felt them, complained
so much of 'em. Tacitus reciting what past in his time, and somewhat before
(for want of a Christian Spirit) in the bitterness of ^. Tacit. l. 1.
his Soul says, Nec unquam atrocioribus Populi Romani cladibus, magisque justis
indiciis probatum est, non esse curae Deis securitatem nostram esse ultionem.
Some thought that no Punishments could be justly deserved by a People that had
so much favored Virtue; others, that even the Gods they adored, envied their
Felicity and Glory; but all confessed they were fallen from the highest pitch
of human Happiness into the lowest degree of Infamy and Misery: And our Author
being the first that ever found they had gained by the change, we are to
attribute the discovery of so great a Spirit to the excellency of his Wisdom.
If, suspending my Judgment in this point, till it be proved by better Authority
than his word, I in the mean time follow the opinion of those who think Slavery
dos naturally produce meanness of Spirit, with its worst effect, flattery,
which Tacitus calls foedum servitutis crimen; I must believe, that the
Impudence of carrying it to such a height, as to commend nothing in the most
glorious Liberty, that made the most virtuous People in the world, but the
shortness of its continuance, and to prefer the Tyranny of the basest of Men,
or worst of Monsters, is peculiar to Filmer; and that their wickedness, which
had never bin equaled, is surpast by him, who recommends as the Ordinance of
God, the Principles that certainly produce them.

But, says our Author, tho Rome was for a while miraculously upheld in Glory by
a greater Prudence than its own, yet in a short time, after manifold
Alterations, she was ruined by her own hand. But it is absurd to say, that the
overthrow of a Government, which had nothing of good in it, can be a ruin; or
that the Glory in which it continued, had nothing of good in it; and most of
all, that it could be ruined by no hands but its own, if that Glory had not bin
gained, and immediately or instrumentally supported by such virtue and strength
as is worthily to be preferred before all other temporal Happiness, and dos ever
produce it. This shows that Liars ought to have good memorys. But passing over
such foolish Contradictions, I desire to know, how that Prudence, greater than
its own (which till I am better informed, I must think to be inseparably united
to Justice and Goodness) came miraculously to support a Government, which was
not only evil in it self, as contrary to the Laws of God and Nature; but so
perpetually bent against that Monarchy, which he says is according to them, as
to hate all Monarchs, despise all that would live under them, destroy as many
of them as came within their reach; and make a Law by which any man was
authorized to kill him, who should endeavor to set up this Divine Power among
them. Moreover, no human Prudence preserved the Roman Glory but their own: the
others directly set themselves to oppose it, and the most eminent fell under
it. We know of no Prudence surpassing the human, unless it be the Divine: But
the Divine Prudence did never miraculously exert it self, except to bear
witness to the Truth, and to give authority to those that announc'd it. If
therefore the Glory of this Popular Government was miraculously supported by a
more than human Prudence, it was good in it self; the Miracles done in favor
of it did testify it, and all that our Author says against it is false and
abominable.

If I lay aside the word Miraculous, as put in by chance, 'twill be hard to
know how God (who in the usual course of his Providence guides all things by
such a gentle and undiscerned Power, that they seem to go on of themselves)
should give such virtue to this popular Government, and the Magistrates bred up
under it, that the greatest Monarchs of the Earth were as dust before them,
unless there had bin an excellency in their Discipline, far surpassing that of
their Enemies; or how that can be called ill in its Principle, and said to
comprehend no good, which God did so gloriously support, and no man was ever
able to resist. This cannot be better answered than by our Author's Citation,
Suis and ipsa Roma viribus ruit; That City which had overthrown the greatest
Powers of the World must, in all appearance, have lasted for ever, if their
Virtue and Discipline had not decayed, or their Forces bin turned against
themselves. If our Author therefore say true, the greatest good that ever befell
the Romans, was the decay of their Virtue and Discipline; and the turning of
their own Arms against themselves, was not their Ruin but their Preservation.

When they had brought the warlike Nations of Italy into subjection, or
association; often represt the fury of the Gauls, Cimbri and Teutons;
overthrown the Wealth, Power and Wit of Carthage, supported by the Skill,
Industry and Valor of Hannibal and his brave Relations; almost extirpated the
valiant Spaniards, who would no other way be subdued; defeated Philip, Perses,
Antiochus, Gentius, Syphax and Jugurtha; struck an aw into Ptolomy; avoided the
snares and poisons of Mithridates; followed him in his Flights, revenged his
Treacherys, and carried their victorious Arms beyond his conquered Kingdoms to
the Banks of Tygris: When neither the Revolt of their Italian Associats, nor
the Rebellion of their Slaves led by Spartacus (who in skill seems to have bin
equal to Hannibal, and above him in Courage) could put a stop to their
Victorys: When Greece had bin reduced to yield to a Virtue rather than a Power
greater than their own, we may well say that Government was supported by a more
than human prudence, which led them through Virtue to a height of Glory, Power and
Happiness, that till that day had bin unknown to the World, and could never
have bin ruined, if by the decay of that Virtue they had not turned their
victorious Arms against themselves. That City was a Giant that could die by no
other hand than his own; like Hercules poisoned and driven into madness, after
he had destroyed Thieves, Monsters and Tyrants, and found nothing on the Earth
able to resist him. The wisest of men in ancient times, looking upon this as a
point of more than human Perfection, thought or feigned to think, that he was
descended from the Gods, and at his death received into their number, tho
perhaps Filmer would prefer a weak, base and effeminate Slave before him. The
matter will not be much different, if we adhere to the forementioned similitude
of the Athletick Habit; for the danger proceeds only from the perfection of it,
and he who dislikes it, must commend that Weakness and Vice which may perish,
but can never be changed into any thing worse than it self, as those that lie
upon the ground can never fall. However this Fall of the Romans, which our
Author, speaking truth against his will, calls their Ruin, was into that which
he recommends as the Ordinance of God: Which is as much as to say, that they
were ruined when they fell from their own unnatural Inventions to follow the
Law of God and of Nature; that Luxury also through which they fell, was the
product of their Felicity; and that the Nations that had bin subdued by them,
had no other way of avenging their Defeats, than by alluring their Masters to
their own Vices: This was the Root of their Civil Wars. When that proud City
found no more resistance, it grew -- Saevior armis
Luxuria incubuit, victumque ulciscitur orbem. Lucan.

wanton. Honest Poverty became uneasy, when Honors were given to ill-gotten
Riches. This was so Monarchical, that a People infected with such a Custom must
needs fall by it. They who by Vice had exhausted their Fortunes, could repair
them only by bringing their Country under a Government that would give impunity
to Rapine; and such as had not Virtues to deserve Advancement from the Senate
and People, would always endeavor to set up a Man that would bestow the
Honors due to Virtue, upon those who would be most abjectly subservient to his
Will and Interests. When men's minds are filled with this Fury, they sacrifice
the common Good to the advancement of their private Concernments. This was the
temper of Catiline expressed by Sallust, Sallust. Bell. Catilin.
Luxuria principi gravis, paupertas vix a privato toleranda; and this put him
upon that desperate extremity to say, Incendium meum ruina extinguam. Others in
the same manner being filled with the same rage, he could not want Companions
in his most villainous Designs. It Is not long since a Person of the highest
Quality, and no less famous for Learning and Wit, having observed the State of
England, as it stood not many years ago, and that to which it has bin reduced
since the year sixty, as is thought very much by the Advice and Example of
France, said, That they were now taking a most cruel Vengeance upon us for all
the Overthrows received from our Ancestors, by introducing their most damnable
Maxims, and teaching us the worst of their Vices. It Is not for me to determine
whether this Judgment was rightly made or not; for I intend not to speak of our
Affairs: but all Historians agreeing, that the change of the Roman Government
was wrought by such means as I have mentioned; and our Author acknowledging
that change to have bin their ruin, as in truth it was, I may justly conclude,
that the overthrow of that Government could not have bin a ruin to them, but
good for them, unless it had bin good; and that the Power which did ruin it,
and was set up in the room of it, cannot have bin according to the Laws of God
or Nature, for they confer only that which is good, and destroy nothing that is
so; but must have bin most contrary to that good which was overthrown by it.

SECT. XVI. The best Governments of the World have bin composed of Monarchy,
Aristocracy, and Democracy.
OUR Author's cavils concerning I know not what vulgar Opinions that Democracys
were introduced to curb Tyranny, deserve no answer; for our question is,
Whether one form of Government be prescribed to us by God and Nature, or we are
left according to our own understanding, to constitute such as seem best to our
selves. As for Democracy, he may say what pleases him of it; and I believe it
can suit only with the convenience of a small Town, accompanied with such
Circumstances as are seldom sound. But this no way obliges men to run into the
other extreme, in as much as the variety of Forms between mere Democracy and
Absolute Monarchy is almost infinite: And if I should undertake to say, there
never was a good Government in the world, that did not consist of the three
simple Species of Monarchy, Aristocracy and Democracy, I think I might make it
good. This at the least is certain, that the Government of the Hebrews
instituted by God, had a Judge, the great Sanhedrin, and General Assemblys of
the People: Sparta had two Kings, a Senate of twenty eight chosen Men, and the
like Assemblys: All the Dorian Citys had a chief Magistrate, a Senate, and
occasional Assemblys: The Ionian, Athens, and others, had an Archon, the
Areopagi; and all Judgments concerning matters of the greatest importance, as
well as the Election of Magistrates, were referred to the People. Rome in the
beginning had a King and a Senate, whilst the Election of Kings, and Judgments
upon Appeals remained in the People; afterward Consuls representing Kings, and
vested with equal Power, a more numerous Senate, and more frequent meetings of
the People. Venice has at this day a Duke, the Senate of the Pregadi, and the
Great Assembly of the Nobility, which is the whole City, the rest of the
Inhabitants being only Incolae, not Cives; and those of the other Citys or
Countries are their Subjects, and do not participate of the Government. Genoa is
governed in like manner: Luca not unlike to them. Germany is at this day
governed by an Emperor, the Princes or great Lords in their several Precincts,
the Citys by their own Magistrates, and by general Diets, in which the whole
Power of the Nation resides, and where the Emperor, Princes, Nobility, and
Citys have their places in person, or by their Deputys. All the Northern
Nations, which upon the dissolution of the Roman Empire possessed the best
Provinces that had composed it, were under that form which is usually called
the Gothic Polity: They had King, Lords, Commons, Diets, Assemblys of Estates,
Cortez, and Parliaments, in which the Sovereign Powers of those Nations did
reside, and by which they were exercised. The like was practiced in Hungary,
Bohemia, Sweden, Denmark, Poland; and if things are changed in some of these
places within a few years, they must give better proofs of having gained by the
change than are yet seen in the World, before I think my self obliged to change
my opinion.

Some Nations not liking the name of King, have given such a power as Kings
enjoyed in other places to one or more Magistrates, either limited to a certain
time, or left to be perpetual, as best pleased themselves: Others approving the
Name, made the Dignity purely elective. Some have in their Elections
principally regarded one Family as long as it lasted: Others considered nothing
but the fitness of the Person, and reserved to themselves a Liberty of taking
where they pleased. Some have permitted the Crown to be hereditary as to its
ordinary course; but restrained the Power, and instituted Officers to inspect
the Proceedings of Kings, and to take care that the Laws were not violated: Of
this sort were the Ephori of Sparta, the Maires du Palais, and afterward the
Constable of France; the Justicia in Arragon; the Rijcshofmeister in Denmark;
the High Steward in England; and in all places such Assemblys as are before
mentioned under several names, who had the Power of the whole Nation. Some have
continued long, and it may be always in the same form; others have changed it:
Some being incensed against their Kings, as the Romans exasperated by the
Villanys of Tarquin, and the Tuscans by the Crueltys of Mezentius, abolished
the name of King: Others, as Athens, Sicion, Argos, Corinth, Thebes, and the
Latins, did not stay for such extremitys; but set up other Governments when
they thought it best for themselves, and by this conduct prevented the evils
that usually fall upon Nations, when their Kings degenerate into Tyrants, and a
Nation is brought to enter into a War by which all may be lost, and nothing can
be gained which was not their own before. The Romans took not this salutary
Course; the mischief was grown up before they perceived, or set themselves
against it; and when the effects of Pride, Avarice, Cruelty and Lust were grown
to such a height, that they could no longer be endured, they could not free
themselves without a War: and whereas upon other occasions their Victorys had
brought them increase of Strength, Territory, and Glory; the only reward of
their Virtue in this was, to be delivered from a Plague they had unadvisedly
suffered to grow up among them. I confess this was most of all to be esteemed;
for if they had bin overthrown, their condition under Tarquin would have bin
more intolerable than if they had fallen under the power of Pirrhus or
Hannibal; and all their following Prosperity was the fruit of their recovered
Liberty: But it had bin much better to have reformed the State after the death
of one of their good Kings, than to be brought to fight for their Lives against
that abominable Tyrant. Our Author in pursuance of his aversion to all that is
good, disapproves this; and wanting reasons to justify his dislike, according
to the custom of Impostors and Cheats, has recourse to the ugly terms of a
Backdoor, Sedition, and Faction: as if it were not as just for a People to lay
aside their Kings when they receive nothing but evil, and can rationally hope
for no benefit by them, as for others to set them up in expectation of good
from them. But if the truth be examined, nothing will be found more orderly
than the changes of Government, or of the Persons and Races of those that
governed, which have bin made by many Nations. When Pharamond's Grandson seemed
not to deserve the Crown he had worn, the French gave it to Meroveus, who more
resembled him in Virtue: In process of time when this Race also degenerated,
they were rejected, and Pepin advanced to the Throne; and the most remote in
blood of his Descendents having often bin preferred before the nearest, and
Bastards before the legitimate Issue, they were at last all laid aside; and the
Crown remains to this day in the Family of Hugh Capet, upon whom it was
bestowed on the rejection of Charles of Lorrain. In like manner the Castilians
took Don Sancho sirnam'd the Brave, second Son to Alphonso the Wise, before
Alphonso el Desheredado, Son of the elder Brother Ferdinand. The States of
Arragon preferred Martin, Brother to John the first, before Mary his Daughter
married to the Count de Foix, tho Females were not excluded from the
Succession; and the House of Austria now enjoys that Crown from Joan Daughter
to Ferdinand. In that and many other Kingdoms, Bastards have bin advanced
before their legitimate Brothers. Henry Count of Trastamara, Bastard to
Alphonso XI. King of Castile, received the Crown as a reward of the good
Service he had done to his Country against his Brother Peter the Cruel, without
any regard had to the House of La Cerda descended from Alphonso el Desheredado,
which to this day never enjoyed any greater honor than that of Duke de Medina
Celi. Not long after the Portuguese conceiving a dislike of their King
Ferdinand, and his Daughter married to John King of Castile, rejected her and
her Uncle by the Father's side, and gave the Crown to John a Knight of
Calatrava, and Bastard to an Uncle of Ferdinand their King. About the beginning
of this age the Swedes deposed their King Sigismund for being a Papist, and
made Charles his Uncle King. Diverse Examples of the like nature in England have
bin already mentioned. All these transportations of Crowns were Acts performed
by Assemblys of the three Estates in the several Kingdoms, and these Crowns are
to this day enjoyed under Titles derived from such as were thus brought in by
the deposition or rejection of those, who according to descent of blood had
better Titles than the present Possessors. The Acts therefore were lawful and
good, or they can have no Title at all; and they who made 'em, had a just power
so to do.

If our Author can draw any advantage from the resemblance of Regality that he
finds in the Roman Consuls and Athenian Archons, I shall without envy leave him
the enjoyment of it; but I am much mistaken if that dos not prove my assertion,
that those Governments were composed of the three simple species: for if the
Monarchical part was in them, it cannot be denied that the Aristocratical was
in the Senate or Areopagi, and the Democratical in the People. But he ought to
have remembered, that if there was something of Monarchical in those
Governments when they are said to have bin Popular, there was something of
Aristocratical and Democratical in those that were called Regal; which justifys
my proposition on both sides, and shows that the denomination was taken from
the part that prevailed: and if this were not so, the Governments of France,
Spain, and Germany might be called Democracys, and those of Rome and Athens
Monarchys, because the People have a part in the one, and an image of Monarchy
was preserved in the other.

If our Author will not allow the cases to be altogether equal, I think he will
find no other difference, than that the Consuls and Archons were regularly made
by the Votes of the consenting People, and orderly resigned their Power, when
the time was expired for which it was given; whereas Tarquin, Dionysius,
Agathocles, Nabis, Phalaris, Caesar, and almost all his Successors, whom he
takes for complete Monarchs, came in by violence, fraud, and corruption, by the
help of the worst men, by the slaughter of the best, and most commonly (when
the method was once established) by that of his Predecessor, who, if our Author
says true, was the Father of his Country, and his also. This was the root and
foundation of the only Government that deserves praise: this is that which
stamped the divine character upon Agathocles, Dionysius and Caesar, and that had
bestowed the same upon Manlius, Marius, or Catiline, if they had gained the
Monarchys they affected. But I suppose that such as God has blessed with better
judgment, and a due regard to Justice and Truth, will say, that all those who
have attained to such greatness as destroys all manner of good in the places
where they have set up themselves by the most detestable Villanys, came in by a
backdoor; and that such Magistrates as were orderly chosen by a willing People,
were the true Shepherds who came in by the gate of the Sheepfold, and might
justly be called the Ministers of God, so long as they performed their duty in
providing for the good of the Nations committed to their charge.

SECT. XVII. Good Governments admit of Changes in the Superstructures, whilst
the Foundations remain unchangeable.
IF I go a step farther, and confess the Romans made some changes in the
outward Form of their Government, I may safely say they did well in it, and
prosper'd by it. After the Expulsion of the Kings, the Power was chiefly in the
Nobility, who had bin Leaders of the People; but it was necessary to humble
them, when they began to presume too much upon the advantages of their Birth;
and the City could never have bin great, unless the Plebeians who were the Body
of it, and the main strength of their Armies, had bin admitted to a
participation of Honors. This could not be done at the first: They who had bin
so vilely oppressed by Tarquin, and harassed with making or cleansing Sinks, were
not then fit for Magistracys, or the Command of Armies: but they could not
justly be excluded from them, when they had men who in courage and conduct were
equal to the best of the Patricians; and it had bin absurd for any man to think
it a disparagement to him to marry the Daughter of one whom he had obeyed as
Dictator or Consul, and perhaps followed in his Triumph. Rome that was
constituted for War, and sought its Grandeur by that means, could never have
arrived to any considerable height, if the People had not bin exercised in
Arms, and their Spirits raised to delight in Conquests, and willing to expose
themselves to the greatest fatigues and dangers to accomplish them. Such men as
these were not to be used like Slaves, or oppressed by the unmerciful hand of
Usurers. They who by their sweat and blood were to defend and enlarge the
Territorys of the State, were to be convinced they fought for themselves; and
they had reason to demand a Magistracy of their own, vested with a Power that
none might offend, to maintain their Rights, and to protect their Familys
whilst they were abroad in the Armies. These were the Tribuns of the People,
made, as they called it, Sacrosancti or inviolable; and the creation of them
was the most considerable Change that happened till the time of Marius, who
brought all into disorder. The creation or abolition of Military Tribuns with
Consular Power, ought to be accounted as nothing; for it imported little
whether that Authority were exercised by two, or by five: That of the Decemviri
was as little to be regarded: they were intended only for a Year; and tho new
ones were created for another, on pretense the Laws they were to frame could
not be brought to perfection in so short a time, yet they were soon thrown down
from the Power they usurped, and endeavored to retain contrary to Law: The
creation of Dictators was no novelty, they were made occasionally from the
beginning, and never otherwise than occasionally, till Julius Caesar subverted
all order, and invading that supreme Magistracy by force Jura omnium in se
(...).
, usurped the Right which belonged to all. This indeed was a mortal Change even
in root and principle. All other Magistrates had bin created by the People for
the public good, and always were within the power of those that had created
them. But Caesar coming in by force, sought only the satisfaction of his own
raging Ambition, or that of the Soldiers, whom he had corrupted to destroy
their Country; and his Successors governing for themselves by the help of the
like Villains, perpetually exposed the Empire to be ravaged by them. But
whatever opinion any man may have of the other Changes, I dare affirm, there
are few or no Monarchys (whose Historys are so well known to us as that of
Rome) which have not suffered Changes incomparably greater and more mischievous
than those of Rome whilst it was free. The Macedonian Monarchy fell into pieces
immediately after the death of Alexander: It Is thought he perished by Poison:
His Wives, Children and Mother, were destroyed by his own Captains: The best of
those who had escaped his fury, fell by the Sword of each other. When the
famous Argyraspides might have expected some Reward of their labors, and a
little rest in old age, they were maliciously sent into the East by Antigonus,
to perish by hunger and misery, after he had corrupted them to betray Eumenes.
No better fate attended the rest; all was in confusion, every one followed whom
he pleased, and all of them seemed to be filled with such a rage, that they
never ceased from mutual slaughters till they were consumed; and their Kingdoms
continued in perpetual Wars against each other, till they all fell under the
Roman Power. The fortune of Rome was the same after it became a Monarchy:
Treachery, Murder and Fury, reigned in every part; there was no Law but Force;
he that could corrupt an Army, thought he had a sufficient Title to the Empire:
by this means there were frequently three or four, and at one time thirty
several Pretenders, who called themselves Emperors; of which number he only
reigned that had the happiness to destroy all his Competitors; and he himself
continued no longer than till another durst attempt the destruction of him and
his Posterity. In this state they remained, till the wasted and bloodless
Provinces were possessed by a multitude of barbarous Nations. The Kingdoms
established by them enjoyed as little Peace or Justice; that of France was
frequently divided into as many parts as the Kings of Meroveus or Pepin's Race
had Children, under the names of the Kingdoms of Paris, Orleans, Soissons,
Arles, Burgundy, Austrasia, and others: These were perpetually vexed by the
unnatural fury of Brothers or nearest Relations, whilst the miserable Nobility
and People were obliged to fight upon their foolish Quarrels, till all fell
under the power of the strongest. This mischief was in some measure cured by a
Law made in the time of Hugh Capet, that the Kingdom should no more be divided:
But the Appanages, as they call them, granted to the King's Brothers, with the
several Dukedoms and Earldoms erected to please them and other great Lords,
produced frequently almost as bad effects. This is testified by the desperate
and mortal Factions, that went under the names of Burgundy and Orleans,
Armagnac and Orleans, Montmorency and Guise: These were followed by those of
the League, and the Wars of the Hugonots: They were no sooner finished by the
taking of Rochel, but new ones began by the Intrigues of the Duke of Orleans,
Brother to Lewis the 13 th, and his Mother; and pursued with that animosity by
them, that they put themselves under the protection of Spain: To which may be
added, that the Houses of Conde, Soissons, Montmorency, Guise, Vendosme,
Angouleme, Bouillon, Rohan, Longueville, Rochefocault, Epernon, and I think I
may say every one that is of great eminency in that Kingdom, with the Citys of
Paris, Bourdeaux, and many others, in the space of these last fifty years, have
sided with the perpetual Enemies of their own Country.

Again, other great Alterations have happened within the same Kingdom: The
Races of Kings four times wholly changed: Five Kings deposed in less than 150
Years after the death of Charles the Great: The Offices of Maire du Palais, and
Constable, erected and laid aside: The great Dukedoms and Earldoms, little
inferior to Sovereign Principalitys, established and suppressed: The decision of
all Causes, and the execution of the Laws, placed absolutely in the hands of
the Nobility, their Deputys, Seneschals, or Vice-Seneschals, and taken from
them again: Parliaments set up to receive Appeals from the other Courts, and to
judge sovereignly in all cases, expressly to curb them: The Power of these
Parliaments, after they had crushed the Nobility, brought so low, that within
the last twenty years they are made to register, and give the Power of Laws, to
Edicts, of which the Titles only are read to them; and the General Assemblys of
Estates, that from the time of Pepin had the Power of the Nation in their
hands, are now brought to nothing, and almost forgotten.

Tho I mention these things, it is not with a design of blaming them, for some
of them deserve it not; and it ought to be considered, that the Wisdom of man
is imperfect, and unable to foresee the Effects that may proceed from an
infinite variety of Accidents, which according to Emergences, necessarily
require new Constitutions, to prevent or cure the mischiefs arising from them,
or to advance a good that at the first was not thought on: And as the noblest
work in which the Wit of man can be exercised, were (if it could be done) to
constitute a Government that should last for ever, the next to that is to suit
Laws to present Exigences, and so much as is in the power of man to foresee:
And he that should resolve to persist obstinately in the way he first entered
upon, or to blame those who go out of that in which their Fathers had walked,
when they find it necessary, dos as far as in him lies, render the worst of
Errors perpetual. Changes therefore are unavoidable, and the Wit of man can go
no farther than to institute such, as in relation to the Forces, Manners,
Nature, Religion or Interests of a People and their Neighbors, are suitable and
adequate to what is seen, or apprehended to be seen: And he who would oblige
all Nations at all times to take the same course, would prove as foolish as a
Physician who should apply the same Medicin to all Distempers, or an Architect
that would build the same kind of House for all Persons, without considering
their Estates, Dignitys, the number of their Children or Servants, the Time or
Climate in which they live, and many other Circumstances; or, which is, if
possible, more sottish, a General who should obstinately resolve always to make
War in the same way, and to draw up his Army in the same form, without
examining the nature, number and strength of his own and his Enemies Forces, or
the advantages and disadvantages of the Ground. But as there may be some
universal Rules in Physic, Architecture and Military Discipline, from which men
ought never to depart; so there are some in Politics also, which ought always
to be observed: and wise Legislators adhering to them only, will be ready to
change all others as occasion may require, in order to the public Good. This
we may learn from Moses, who laying the Foundation of the Law given to the
Israelites in that Justice, Charity and Truth, which having its root in God, is
subject to no change, left them the liberty of having Judges or no Judges,
Kings or no Kings, or to give the Sovereign Power to High Priests or Captains,
as best pleased themselves; and the Mischiefs they afterward suffered,
proceeded not simply from changing, but changing for the worse. The like
judgment may be made of the Alterations that have happened in other places.
They who aim at the public Good, and wisely institute means proportionable and
adequate to the attainment of it, deserve praise; and those only are to be
disliked, who either foolishly or maliciously set up a corrupt private Interest
in one or a few men. Whosoever therefore would judge of the Roman Changes, may
see, that expelling the Tarquins, creating Consuls, abating the violence of
Usurers, admitting Plebeians to marry with the Patricians, rendering them
capable of Magistracys, deducing Colonys, dividing Lands gained from their
Enemies, erecting Tribuns to defend the Rights of the Commons, appointing the
Decemviri to regulate the Law, and abrogating their Power when they abused it,
creating Dictators and Military Tribuns with a Consular Power, as occasions
required; they acted in the face of the Sun for the good of the Public; and
such Acts having always produced Effects suitable to the rectitude of their
Intentions, they consequently deserve praise. But when another Principle began
to govern, all things were changed in a very different manner: Evil Designs,
tending only to the advancement of private Interests, were carried on in the
dark by means as wicked as the end. If Tarquin when he had a mind to be King,
poisoned his first Wife and his Brother, contracted an incestuous Marriage with
his second by the death of her first Husband, murdered her Father and the best
men in Rome, yet Caesar did worse: He favored Catiline and his villainous
Associats, bribed and corrupted Magistrates; conspired with Crassus and Pompey;
continued in the Command of an Army beyond the time prescribed by Law, and
turned the Arms with which he had bin entrusted for the service of the
Commonwealth, to the destruction of it; which was rightly represented by his
Dream, that he had constuprated his Mother: In the like manner when Octavius,
Antonius and Lepidus, divided the Empire, and then quarreled among themselves;
and when Galba, Otho, Vitellius and Vespasian set up Partys in several
Provinces, all was managed with Treachery, Fraud and Cruelty; nothing was
intended but the advancement of one Man, and the Recompense of the Villains
that served him: And when the Empire had suffered infinite Calamitys by pulling
down or rejecting one, and setting up another, it was for the most part
difficult to determine who was the worst of the two; or whether the prevailing
side had gained or lost by their Victory. The question therefore upon which a
Judgment may be made to the praise or dispraise of the Roman Government, before
or after the loss of their Liberty, ought not to be, Whether either were
subject to changes, for neither they nor any thing under the Sun was ever
exempted from them; but whether the Changes that happened after the
establishment of Absolute Power in the Emperors, did not solely proceed from
Ambition, and tend to the public Ruin: whereas those Alterations related by
our Author concerning Consuls, Dictators, Decemviri, Tribunes and Laws, were
far more rare, less violent, tending to, and procuring the public Good, and
therefore deserving praise. The like having bin proved by the Examples of other
Kingdoms, and might be farther confirmed by many more, which on account of
brevity I omit, is in my opinion sufficient to manifest, that whilst the
Foundation and Principle of a Government remains good, the Superstructures may
be changed according to occasions, without any prejudice to it.

SECT. XVIII. Xenophon in blaming the Disorders of Democracys, favors
Aristocracys, not Monarchys.
IN the next place our Author introduces Xenophon disallowing Popular
Governments: Cites Rome and Athens as Places where the best Men thrived worst,
and the worst best; and condemns the Romans for making it capital to pass
Sentence of Death, Banishment, loss of Liberty, or Stripes upon any Citizen of
Rome. But lest his Fraud in this should be detected, he cites no precise
Passage of any Author, alleges few Examples, and those mistaken; never tells
us what that Law was, when made, or where to be found: whereas I hope to prove,
that he has upon the whole matter abominably prevaricated, and advanced things
that he knows to be either impertinent or false.

1. To this end we are in the first place to consider, whether Xenophon speaks
of Popular Governments simply, or comparatively: if simply, it is confessed that a
pure Democracy can never be good, unless for a small Town; if comparatively, we
must examine to what he compares it: We are sure it was not to Absolute
Monarchy; there was no such thing amongst the Greeks established by Law: The
little Tyrants who had enslaved their own Countries, as Jason, Phaereus,
Phalaris, and the like, had no pretense to it, and were accounted as the worst
of Beasts: None but such as in all bestiality were like to 'em, did ever speak
or think well of them. Xenophon's Opinion in this point, may be easily found
out by what passed between his Master Plato and the Sicilian Tyrant; and the
matter will not be mended by referring to his own experience: He had seen the
vast Monarchy of Persia torn in pieces by the fury of two Brothers, and more
than a million of men brought to fight upon their private quarrel: Instead of
that Order, Stability and Strength which our Author ascribes to Absolute
Monarchy as the effect of Wisdom and Justice, he knew, that by filling one man
with pride and cruelty, it brought unspeakable miserys upon all others, and
infected 'em with all the Vices that accompany Slavery: Men lived like Fishes,
the great ones devoured the small; and as appeared by Tissaphernes,
Pharnabazus, and others with whom he had to deal, the worst and basest were
made to be the greatest: The Satrapes insulted over those of meaner rank, with
an insolence and cruelty that equaled the depth of their servil submission to
their proud Master. Luxury and Avarice reigned in all: many great Nations were
made to live for the service of one man, and to foment his Vices. This produced
weakness and cowardice; no number of those Slaves were able to stand against a
few free Grecians. No man knew this better than Xenophon, who after the death
of Cyrus the younger, and the treacherous murder of Clearchus, and other
Officers that commanded the Greeks who had served him, made his retreat from
Babylon to the Hellespont with ten thousand foot, and passed over the bellys of
all that dared to oppose him. He would never have spent his life in exciting
his Countrymen to attempt the Conquest of Asia, nor persuaded Agesilaus to put
himself at the head of the Enterprise, if he had thought there was such
admirable Order, Stability and Strength in that Monarchy, and in the Greeks
nothing but giddiness of Spirit, and so much Learning as made them seditious:
Nor could he, being a wise man and an excellent Captain, have conceived such a
design, if he had not by experience found that Liberty inspired his Countrymen
with such solid Virtue, and produced such Stability, good Order and Strength,
that with small numbers of them he might hope to overthrow the vain Pomp of the
Barbarians, and to possess himself of their Riches, tho they could bring more
than a hundred men to fight against one; which Design being interrupted in his
time by domestic Wars, was soon after his death accomplished by Alexander.

But that Xenophon's meaning may be better understood, it is good to consider,
that he spoke of such Governments as were then in use among the Greeks; which
tho mixed, yet took their denomination from the prevailing part: so that the
Dorians, who placed the Power chiefly in the hands of a few chosen men, were
said to be governed Aristocratically; and the Ionians giving more Power to the
common People, Democratically: And he, tho an Ionian, either through friendship to
Agesilaus, conversation with the Spartans, or for other reasons best known to
himself, preferred the Government of Sparta, or some other which he thought he
could frame, and desired to introduce, before that of Athens; as Cimon,
Thucydides, and many other excellent men of that City are said to have done:
And if I acknowledge they were in the right, and that Athens was more subject to
disorder, and had less Stability than Sparta, I think it will be of little
advantage to Absolute Monarchy.

2. The Athenians did banish some worthy men, and put others to death; but our
Author, like the Devil, never speaking truth, unless to turn it into a lie,
prevaricates in his report of them. The temporary banishment, which they called
Ostracism, was without hurt or dishonor, never accounted as a Punishment, nor
intended for any other end, than to put a stop to the too eminent greatness of
a man, that might prove dangerous to the City; and some excellent Persons who
fell under it, were soon recalled, and brought home with glory. But I am not
solicitous whether that reason be sufficient to justify it or not: We are upon
a general Thesis relating to the Laws of God and Nature; and if the Athenians,
by a fancy of their own, did make an imprudent use of their Liberty, it cannot
prejudice the public Cause. They who make the worst of it can only say, that
by such means they, for a time, deprived themselves of the benefits they might
have received from the Virtues of some excellent men, to the hurt of none but
themselves; and the application of it as an injustice done to Themistocles, is
absolutely false: He was a man of great Wit, Industry and Valor, but of
uncertain Faith, too much addicted to his Plut. in vit. Themist.
own Interest, and held a most dangerous Correspondence with the Persians, who
then threatened the destruction of Greece. Through envy and spite to Aristides,
and to increase his own Power, he raised dangerous Factions in the City, and
being summoned to render an account of his Proceedings, he declined the
Judgment of his Country, fled to their Enemies, and justly deserved the Sentence
pronounced against him. Some among them were unjustly put to death, and above
all Socrates; but the People, who, deceived by false Witnesses, (against whom
neither the Laws of God or Man have ever prescribed a sufficient defense) had
condemned him, did so much lament their Crime, when the truth was discovered to
them, that I doubt whether a more righteous Judgment had given better testimony
of their righteous Intentions. But our Author's impudence appears in the
highest excess, in imputing the death of Phocion to the popular State of
Athens: Their Forces had bin broken in the Sicilian War; the City taken, and
the principal Men slain by Lysander; the remains of the most Worthy destroyed
by the thirty Tyrants set up by him; their ill-recover'd Liberty overthrown by
the Macedonians, and the death of Phocion compast by Polyperchon, who with
Foreign Soldiers, Slaves, Vagabonds, and Outlaws, overpowered the People.

The proceedings of Rome may be more completely justified: Coriolanus was duly
condemned, he set too great a price upon his own Valor, and arrogated to
himself a Power in Rome, which would hardly have bin endured in Corioli: His
violence and pride overbalanc'd his Services; and he that would submit to no
Law, was justly driven out from the Society which could subsist only by Law.
Quintius was not unlike him, and Manlius Capitolinus far worse than either.
Their Virtues were not to be considered when they departed from them.
Consideration ought to be had of human frailty, and some indulgence may be
extended to those who commit Errors, after having done important Services; but
a State cannot subsist, which compensating evil Actions with good, gives
impunity to the most dangerous Crimes, in remembrance of any Services whatever.
He that dos well, performs his Duty, and ought always to do so: Justice and
Prudence concur in this; and it is no less just than profitable, that every
Action be considered by it self, and such a reward or punishment allotted to
it, as in nature and proportion it best deserves.

This, as I suppose, is enough for their Cases; but relates not to those of
Mamercus, Camillus, Livius Salinator, and Emylius Paulus; their Virtue was
complete, they were wrongfully sentenced. But the best Princes, Senate or People
that ever was in the world, by the deceit of evil men, may and have bin drawn
out of the way of Justice: Yet of all the States that are known to us, none was
ever so free from Crimes of malice and wilful injustice; none was ever guilty
of so few Errors as that of Rome; and none did ever give better testimonys of
Repentance, when they were discovered, than the Romans did by the Veneration
they showed to those worthy Persons, and the Honors they conferred upon them
afterward. ^ Live.
Mamercus was made Dictator, to repair the unjust mark of Infamy laid upon him
by the Censors. Camillus being recalled from his banishment, often enjoyed the
same honor, and died the most reverenced Man that had ever bin in that City.
Livius Salinator was not only made Consul after he had bin fined, but the
People (as it were to expiate the guilt of having condemned him) suffered that
asperity of speech and manners, which might have persuaded such as had bin less
confident of his Virtue and their own, that he desired to be revenged, tho it
were with the ruin of the City. They dealt in the like manner with Paulus
Emylius, repairing the injury of a Fine unduly imposed. Their generosity in
leaving the Tribuns in the Forum, with their Accusation against Scipio
Africanus, and following him to celebrate an annual Sacrifice in the Capitol,
in commemoration of his victory against Hannibal, was no less admirable than
the greatness of his mind, who thought his Virtue should be so well known, that
no account ought to be expected from him; which was an Error proceeding from a
noble Root, but not to be born in a well-governed Commonwealth. The Laws that
aim at the public Good, make no distinction of Persons; and none can be
exempted from the Penaltys of them, otherwise than by approved Innocence, which
cannot appear without a Trial: He that will not bend his mind to them, shakes
off the equality of a Citizen, and usurps a Power above the Law, to which no
man submits upon any other condition, than that none should be exempted from
the power of it. And Scipio being the first Roman that thus disdained the Power
of the Law, I do not know whether the prejudice brought upon the City by so
dangerous an Example, did not outweigh all the Services he had done:
Nevertheless the people contented with his retirement to his own house, and
afterward convinced of his Innocence, would probably (if he had not died in a
few months) have brought him back with the Honors that Fate reserved for his
ashes.

I do not at present remember any other eminent men, who can be said in any
respect to have thrived ill, whilst the People and Senate of Rome acted freely;
and if this be not sufficient to clear the point, I desire to know the names of
those worst men that thrived best. If they may have bin judged to thrive, who
were frequently advanced to the supreme Magistracys, and enjoyed the chief
Honors; I find no men so eminent as Brutus, Publicola, Quintius Cincinnatus,
and Capitolinus, the two Fabii sirnam'd Maximi, Corvinus, Torquatus, Camillus,
and the like: and if these were the worst Men that Rome produced in those Ages,
Valor, Wisdom, Industry in the Service of their Country, and a most entire Love
to it, must have bin the worst of qualitys; and I presume our Author may have
thought them so, since they were invincible obstacles to the introduction of
that Divine Monarchy which Appius Claudius the Decemvir, Manlius Capitolinus,
Spurius Cassius, Sp. Melius, and some others may be thought to have affected.

However, these instances are not to be understood as they are simply in
themselves, but comparatively with what has happened in other places under
absolute Monarchys: for our inquiry is not after that which is perfect, well
knowing that no such thing is found among men; but we seek that human
Constitution which is attended with the least, or the most pardonable
inconveniences. And if we find that in the space of three hundred years, while
the Senate, People, and legally created Magistrates governed Rome, not one worthy
Man was put to death, not above five or six condemned to Fines by the beguiled
People, and those injurys repaired by the most honorable satisfaction that
could be given; so that Virtue continued ever flourishing; the best men that
could be found were put into the chief Commands, and the City was filled with
more excellent men than were ever known to be in any other place: And on the
other side, if the Emperors so soon as the Government was changed, made it
their business to destroy the best, and so far succeeded in their design, that
they left none; and never failed to advance the worst, unless it fell out as to
Queen Katherine de Medicis, who is said never to have done any good but by
mistake, and some few may have proved better than was intended; it will appear,
that our Author's Assertions are in the utmost degree false. Of this we need no
better witness than Tacitus. The Civil Wars, and the Proscriptions upon which
he touches, are justly to be attributed to that Monarchy which was then setting
up, the only question being who should be the Monarch, when the Liberty was
already overthrown. And if any eminent Men escaped, it was much against the
will of those who had usurped the Power: He acknowledges his Historys to be a
continued relation of the slaughter of the most illustrious Persons, and that
in the times of which he writes, Virtue was attended with certain destruction.
After the death of Germanicus and his eldest Children, Valerius Asiaticus,
Seneca, Corbulo, and an infinite number more who were thought most to resemble
them, found this to be true at the expense of their lives: Nero, in pursuance
of the same tyrannical design, murdered Helvidius and Thraseas, that he might
Ipsam exscindere virtutem. Tacit.
tear up Virtue by the roots: Domitian spared none willingly that had either
Virtue or Reputation; and tho Trajan, with perhaps some other, might grow up
under him in the remote Provinces, yet no good Man could escape who came under
his eye, and was so eminent as to be observed by him. Whilst these, who were
thought to be the best Men that appeared in the Roman Empire, did thrive in
this manner, Sejanus, Macro, Narcissus, Pallas, Tigellinus, Icetus, Vinnius,
Laco, and others like to 'em, had the power of the Empire in their hands.
Therefore, unless Mankind has bin mistaken to this day, and that these, who
have hitherto bin accounted the worst of Villains, were indeed the best Men in
the world; and that those destroyed by them, who are thought to have bin the
best, were truly the worst, it cannot be denied that the best Men, during the
Liberty of Rome, thrived best; that good Men suffered no indignity, unless by
some fraud imposed upon the well-meaning People; and that so soon as the
Liberty was subverted, the worst men thrived best. The best Men were exposed to
so many Calamitys and Snares, that it was thought a matter of great wonder to
see a virtuous man die in his bed: and if the account were well made, I think
it might appear, that every one of the Emperors before Titus shed more noble
and innocent Blood, than Rome and all the Commonwealths in the world have done,
whilst they had the free enjoyment of their own Liberty. But if any man in
favor of our Author seeks to diminish the vast disproportion between the two
differing sorts of Government, and imputes the disorders that happened in the
time of the Gracchi, and others, whilst Rome was struggling for her Liberty, to
the Government of a Commonwealth, he will find them no more to be compared with
those that fell out afterward, than the railings of a turbulent Tribune
against the Senate, to the Villanys and Crueltys that corrupted and dispeopl'd
the Provinces from Babylon to Scotland. And whereas the State never failed to
recover from any disorders, as long as the Root of Liberty remained untouched,
and became more powerful and glorious than ever, even after the Wars of Marius
and Sylla; when that was destroyed, the City fell into a languishing condition,
and grew weaker and weaker, till that and the whole Empire was ruined by the
Barbarians.

3. Our Author, to show that his memory is as good as his judgment, having
represented Rome in the times of Liberty as a public Slaughterhouse, soon
after blames the clemency of their Laws: whereas it is impossible that the same
City could at the same time be guilty of those contrary extremitys; and no less
certain, that it was perfectly free from them both. Sallust. Bell. Catilin.
His assertion seems to be grounded upon Cesar's Speech (related by Sallust) in
favor of Lentulus and Cethegus Companions of Catiline: but tho he there
endeavored to put the best color he could upon their cause, it signified only
thus much, that a Roman Citizen could not be put to death, without being heard
in public; which Law will displease none that in understanding and integrity
may not be compared to Filmer and his Followers. It Is a folly to extend it
farther; for it is easily proved that there was always a power of putting
Citizens to death, and that it was exercised when occasion required. The Laws
were the same in the time of the Kings, when that Office was executed by
Consuls, excepting such changes as are already mentioned. The Lex perduellionis
cited by Livy in the case of Horatius who had killed his Sister, continued in
force from the foundation to the end of that Government: the condemnation was
to death, the words of the Sentence these, Caput obnubito, infelici arbore
rest suspendito; verberato intra Pomaerium vel extra Pomaerium. He was tried
by this Law upon an appeal made to the People by his Father, and absolved
admiratione magis virtutis quam jure causae; which could not have bin, if by
the Law no Citizen might be put to death. The Sons of Brutus were condemned to
death in public, and executed with the Aquilii and Vitellii their Companions
in the same Conspiracy: Manlius Capitolinus was put to death by the vote of the
People: Titus Manlius by the command of his Father Torquatus, for fighting
without order: Two Legions were decimated by Appius Claudius: Spurius Melius
refusing to appear before the Dictator, was killed by Servilius Ahala General
of the Horse, and pronounced jure caesum: Quintus Fabius was by Papirius the
Dictator condemned to die, and could not have bin saved but by the intercession
and authority of the People. If this be not so, I desire to be informed what
the Senate meant by condemning Nero to be put to death more majorum, if more
majorum no Citizen might be put to death: Why the Consuls, Dictators, Military
Tribuns, Decemviri, caused Rods and Axes to be carried before them, as well
within as without the City, if no use was to be made of 'em. Were they only
vain Badges of a Power never to be executed; or upon whom was the Supreme Power
signified by them, to be exercised within and without the City, if the Citizens
were not subject to it? It Is strange that a man who had ever read a Book of
matters relating to the Affairs of Rome, should fancy these things; or hope to
impose them upon the World, if he knew them to be foolish, false, and absurd.
But of all the marks of a most supine stupidity that can be given by a man, I
know none equal to this of our Author, who in the same Clause wherein he says
no Citizen could be put to death or banished, adds, that the Magistrates were
upon pain of death forbidden to do it; for if a Magistrate might be put to
death for banishing a Citizen, or causing him to be executed, a Citizen might
be put to death; for the Magistrates were not Strangers, but Citizens. If this
was not so, he must think that no Crime was capital, but the punishment of
capital Crimes; or that no man was subject to the Supreme Power, but he that
was created for the execution of it. Yet even this will not stop the gap; for
the Law that condemned the Magistrate to die, could be of no effect, if there
were no man to execute it; and there could be none if the Law prohibited it, or
that he who did it was to die for it: And this goes on to infinity. For if a
Magistrate could not put a Citizen to death, I suppose a Citizen could not put
to death a Magistrate; for he also is a Citizen. So that upon the whole matter
we may conclude, that Malice is blind, and that Wickedness is Madness. It Is
hard to say more in praise of Popular Governments than will result from what he
says against them: his reproaches are Praises, and his Praises reproaches. As
Government is instituted for the preservation of the Governed, the Romans were
sparing of Blood, and are wisely commended by Livy for it: Nulli unquam Populo
mitiores placuere poenae; which gentleness will never be blamed, unless by
those who are pleased with nothing so much as the fury of those Monsters, who
with the ruin of the best part of Mankind, usurped the dominion of that
glorious City. But if the Romans were gentle in punishing Offenses, they were
also diligent in preventing them: the excellence of their Discipline led the
Youth to Virtue, and the Honors they received for recompense confirmed them in
it. By this means many of 'em became Laws to themselves; and they who were not
the most excellent, were yet taught so much of good, that they had a veneration
for those they could not equal, which not only ferv'd to incite them to do well
according to their Talents, but kept them in such a w as to fear incurring
their ill opinion by any bad action, as much as by the penalty of the Law. This
integrity of manners made the Laws as it were useless; and whilst they seemed
to sleep, ignorant persons thought there were none: But their Discipline being
corrupted by Prosperity, those Vices came in which made way for the Monarchy;
and Wickedness being placed in the Throne, there was no safety for any but such
as would be of the same spirit, and the Empire was ruined by it.

SECT. XIX. That Corruption and Venality which is natural to Courts, is seldom
found in Popular Governments.
OUR Author's next work is, with that modesty and truth which is natural to
him, to impute Corruption and Venality to Commonwealths. He knows that
Monarchys are exempted from those evils, and has discovered this truth from the
integrity observed in the modern Courts of England, France, and Spain, or the
more ancient of Rome and Persia: But after many falsehoods in matter of fact,
and misrepresentations of that which is true, he shows that the Corruption,
Venality, and Violence he blames, were neither the effects of Liberty, nor
consistent with it. Cneius Manlius, who with his Asiatic Army brought in the
Luxury that gave birth to those mischiefs, did probably follow the looseness of
his own disposition; yet the best and wisest men of that time knew from the
beginning that it would ruin the City, unless a stop might be put to the course
of that evil: But they who had seen Kings under their feet, and could no longer
content themselves with that equality which is necessary among Citizens,
fomented it as the chief means to advance their ambitious designs. Tho Marius
was rigid in his nature, and cared neither for Money nor sensual Pleasures, yet
he favored those Vices in others, and is said to be the first that made use of
'em to his advantage. Catiline was one of the leudest men in the world, and had
no other way of compassing his designs than by rendering others as bad as
himself: and Caesar set up his Tyranny by spreading that corruption farther than
the others had bin able to do; and tho he, Caligula, and some others were
slain, yet the best men found it as impossible to restore Liberty to the City
when it was corrupted, as the worst had done to set up a Tyranny whilst the
integrity of their manners did continue. Men have a strange propensity to run
into all manner of excesses, when plenty of means invite, and there is no power
to deter; of which the succeeding Emperors took advantage, and knowing that
even their subsistence depended upon it, they thought themselves obliged by
interest as well as inclination to make Honors and Preferments the rewards of
Vice: and tho it be not always true in the utmost extent that all men follow
the example of the King; yet it is of great efficacy: Tho some are so good that
they will not be perverted, and others so bad that they will not be corrected;
yet a great number dos always follow the course that is favored and rewarded
by those that govern. There were Idolaters doubtless among the Jews in the days
of David and Hezekiah; but they prosper'd better under Jeroboam and Ahab:
England was not without Papists in the time of Queen Elizabeth; but they
thrived much better during the Reign of her furious Sister. False Witnesses and
Accusers had a better trade under Tiberias, who called them Custodes Legum,
than under Trajan who abhorred them; and Whores, Players, and Fiddlers, with
other such Vermin, abounded certainly more when encouraged by Nero, than when
despised by Antoninus and Marcus Aurelius. But as every one of these manifested
what he was by those he favored or punished, and that a man can only be judged
by his principles or practices, he that would know whether absolute Monarchys
or mixed Governments do most foment or punish Venality and Corruption, ought to
examine the principle and practice of both, and compare them one with the other.

As to the Principle, the abovementioned Vices may be profitable to ptivate
men, but they can never be so to the Government, if it be popular or mixed: No
People was ever the better for that which renders them weak or base; and a duly
created Magistracy, governing a Nation with their consent, can have no interest
distinct from that of the Public, or desire to diminish the strength of the
People, which is their own, and by which they subsist. On the other side, the
absolute Monarch who governs for himself, and chiefly seeks his own
preservation, looks upon the strength and bravery of his Subjects as the root
of his greatest danger, and frequently desires to render them weak, base,
corrupt, and unfaithful to each other, that they may neither dare to attempt
the breaking of the Yoke he lays upon them, nor trust one another in any
generous design for the recovery of their Liberty. So that the same corruption
which preserves such a Prince, if it were introduced by a People, would weaken,
if not utterly destroy them.

Again, all things have their continuance from a principle in Nature suitable to
their Original: all Tyrannys have had their beginnings from corruption. The
Historys of Greece, Sicily, and Italy, show that all those who made themselves
Tyrants in several places, did it by the help of the worst, and the slaughter
of the best: Men could not be made subservient to their Lusts whilst they
continued in their integrity; so as their business was to destroy those who
would not be corrupted. They must therefore endeavor to maintain or increase
the corruption by which they attain their greatness: If they fail in this
point, they must fall as Tarquin, Pisistratus, and others have done; but if
they succeed so far that the vicious part do much prevail, the Government is
secure, tho the Prince may be in danger. And the same thing dos in a great
measure accidentally conduce to the safety of his Person: For they who for the
most part are the Authors of great Revolutions, not being so much led by a
particular hatred to the Man, as by a desire to do good to the Public, seldom
set themselves to conspire against the Tyrant, unless he be altogether
detestable and intolerable, if they do not hope to overthrow the Tyranny.

The contrary is seen in all popular and well-mix'd Governments: they are ever
established by wise and good men, and can never be upheld otherwise than by
Virtue: The worst men always conspiring against them, they must fall, if the
best have not power to preserve them. Wheresoever therefore a People is so
governed, the Magistrates will obviate afar off the introduction of Vices, which
tend as much to the ruin of their Persons and Government, as to the
preservation of the Prince and his. This is evidenced by experience. It Is not
easy to name a Monarch that had so many good qualitys as Julius Caesar, till
they were extinguished by his Ambition, which was inconsistent with them: He
knew that his strength lay in the corruption of the People, and that he could
not accomplish his designs without increasing it. He did not seek good men, but
such as would be for him; and thought none sufficiently addicted to his
Interests, but such as stuck at the performance of no wickedness that he
commanded: he was a Soldier according to Cesar's heart who said, Pectore si
fratris gladium juguloque parentis
Condere me jubeas, gravidaeve in viscera partu
Conjugis, invita peragam tamen omnia dextra. Lucan.
And lest such as were devoted to him should grow faint in Villainy, he
industriously inflamed their fury: -- Vult omnia Caesar
A se saeva peti, vult praemia Martis amari. Ib.
Having spread this Poison amongst the Soldiers, his next work was by
corrupting the Tribuns to turn that Power to the destruction of the People,
which had bin erected for their preservation; and pouring the Treasures he had
gained by rapine in Gaul into the Bosom of Curio, made him an instrument of
mischief, who had bin a most eminent Supporter of the Laws. Tho he was thought
to have affected the glory of sparing Cato, and with trouble to have found that
he despised life when it was to be accounted his gift; yet in suspecting Brutus
and Cassius, he showed he could not believe that virtuous men who loved their
Country could be his Friends. Such as carry on the like designs with less
Valor, Wit, and Generosity of Spirit, will always be more bitterly bent to
destroy all that are good, knowing that the deformity of their own Vices is
rendered most manifest, when they are compared with the good qualitys of those
who are most unlike them; and that they can never defend themselves against the
scorn and hatred they incur by their Vices, unless such a number can be
infected with the same, and made to delight in the recompenses of iniquity that
foment them, as may be able to keep the rest of the People in subjection.

The same thing happens even when the Usurpation is not so violent as that of
Agathocles, Dionysius, or the last King of Denmark, who in one day by the
strength of a mercenary Soldiery overthrew all the Laws of his Country: and a
lawfully created Magistrate is forced to follow the same ways as soon as he
begins to affect a Power which the Laws do not confer upon him. I wish I could
say there were few of these; but experience shows that such a proportion of
Wisdom, moderation of Spirit, and Justice is required in a supreme Magistrate,
to render him content with a limited Power, as is seldom found. Man is of an
aspiring nature, and apt to put too high a value upon himself; they who are
raised above their Brethren, tho but a little, desire to go farther; and if
they gain the name of King, they think themselves wronged and degraded, when
they are not suffered to do what they Sanctitas, pietas, sides
Privata bona sunt: Qua juvat reges eant. Senec. Thyest.

please. In these things they never want Masters; and the nearer they come to a
Power that is not easily restrained by Law, the more passionately they desire
to abolish all that opposes it: and when their Hearts are filled with this
fury, they never fail to choose such Ministers as will be subservient to their
Will: and this is so well known, that those only approach them who resolve to
be so. Their interests as well as their inclinations incite them to diffuse
their own manners as far as they can, which is no less than to bring those who
are under their power to all that wickedness of which the nature of man is
capable; and no greater testimony can be given of the efficacy of these means
toward the utter corruption of Nations, than the accursed effects we see of
'em in our own and the neighboring Countries.

It may be said that some Princes are so full of Virtue and Goodness, as not to
desire more power than the Laws allow, and are not obliged to choose ill men,
because they desire nothing but what the best are willing to do. This may be,
and sometimes is: the Nation is happy that has such a King; but he is hard to
find, and more than a human Power is required to keep him in so good a way. The
strength of his own affections will ever be against him: Wives, Children, and
Servants will always join with those Enemies that arise in his own breast to
pervert him: if he has any weak side, any Lust unsubdu'd, they will gain the
victory. He has not searched into the nature of Man, who thinks that any one
can resist when he is thus on all sides assaulted: Nothing but the wonderful
and immediate power of God's Spirit can preserve him; and to alledg it will be
nothing to the purpose, unless it can be proved that all Princes are blessed with
such an assistance, or that God has promised it to them and their Successors
for ever, by what means soever they came to the Crowns they enjoy.

Nothing is farther from my intention than to speak irreverently of Kings; and
I presume no wise man will think I do so, if I profess, that having observed as
well as I can what History and daily Experience teach us concerning the Virtues
and Religions that are or have bin from the beginning of the World encouraged
and supported by Monarchs, the methods they have followed since they have gone
under the name of Christians, their moral as well as theological Graces,
together with what the Scriptures tell us of those who in the last days will
principally support the Throne of Antichrist; I cannot be confident that they
are generally in an extraordinary manner preserved by the hand of God from the
Vices and Frailtys to which the rest of mankind is subject. If no man can show
that I am in this mistaken, I may conclude, that as they are more than any
other men in the world exposed to temptations and snares, they are more than
any in danger of being corrupted, and made Instruments of corrupting others, if
they are no otherwise defended than the rest of men.

This being the state of the matter on both sides, we may easily collect, that
all Governments are subject to corruption and decay; but with this difference,
that Absolute Monarchy is by principle led unto, or rooted in it; whereas mixed
or popular Governments are only in a possibility of falling into it: As the
first cannot subsist, unless the prevailing part of the people be corrupted;
the other must certainly perish, unless preserved in a great measure free from
Vices. And I doubt whether any better reason can be given, why there have bin
and are more Monarchys than popular Governments in the world, than that Nations
are more easily drawn into corruption than defended from it; and I think that
Monarchy can be said to be natural in no other sense, than that our depraved
Nature is most inclined to that which is worst.

To avoid unnecessary Disputes, I give the name of Popular Governments to those
of Rome, Athens, Sparta, and the like, tho improperly, unless the same may also
be given to many that are usually called Monarchys, since there is nothing of
violence in either; the Power is conferred upon the chief Magistrates of both by
the free consent of a willing People, and such a part as they think fit is
still retained and executed in their own Assemblys; and in this sense it is
that our Author seems to speak against them. As to Popular Government in the
strictest sense, (that is pure Democracy, where the People in themselves, and
by themselves, perform all that belong to Government) I know of no such thing;
and if it be in the World, have nothing to say for it. In asserting the
Liberty, generally, as I suppose, granted by God to all mankind, I neither
deny, that so many as think fit to enter into a Society, may give so much of
their Power as they please to one or more men, for a time or perpetually, to
them and their Heirs, according to such Rules as they prescribe; nor approve
the Disorders that must arise if they keep it entirely in their own hands. And
looking upon the several Governments, which under different forms and names
have bin regularly constituted by Nations, as so many undeniable Testimonys,
that they thought it good for themselves and their Posterity so to do, I infer,
that as there is no man who would not rather choose to be governed by such as
are just, industrious, valiant and wise, than by those that are wicked,
slothful, cowardly and foolish; and to live in society with such as are
qualified like those of the first sort, rather than with those who will be ever
ready to commit all manner of Villanys, or want experience, strength or
courage, to join in repelling the Injurys offered by others: So there are none
who do not according to the measure of their understanding, endeavor to set up
those who seem to be best qualified, and to prevent the introduction of those
Vices which render the Faith of the Magistrate suspected, or make him unable to
perform his duty, in providing for the execution of Justice, and the public
defense of the State against Foreign or Domestic Enemies. For as no man who is
not absolutely mad, will commit the care of a Flock to a Villain, that has
neither skill, diligence, nor courage to defend them, or perhaps is maliciously
set to destroy them, rather than to a stout, faithful, and wise Shepherd; it is
less to be imagined that any would commit the same error in relation to that
Society which comprehends himself with his Children, Friends, and all that is
dear to him.

The same Considerations are of equal force in relation to the Body of every
Nation: For since the Magistrate, tho the most perfect in his kind, cannot
perform his duty, if the people be so base, vicious, effeminate and cowardly,
as not to second his good Intentions; those who expect good from him, cannot
desire so to corrupt their Companions that are to help him, as to render it
impossible for him to accomplish it. Tho I believe there have bin in all Ages
bad men in every Nation, yet I doubt whether there was one in Rome, except a
Catiline or a Caesar who designed to make themselves Tyrants, that would not
rather have wished the whole People as brave and virtuous as in the time of the
Carthaginian Wars, than vile and base as in the days of Nero and Domitian. But
it is madness to think, that the whole Body would not rather wish to be as it
was when Virtue flourished and nothing upon Earth was able to resist their
power, than weak, miserable, base, slavish, and trampled under foot by any that
would invade them; and forced as a Chattel to become a prey to those that were
strongest. Which is sufficient to show, that a People acting according to the
liberty of their own Will, never advance unworthy men, unless it be by mistake,
nor willingly suffer the introduction of Vices: Whereas the Absolute Monarch
always prefers the worst of those who are addicted to him, and cannot subsist
unless the prevailing part of the People be base and vicious.

If it be said, that those Governments in which the Democratical part governs
most, do more frequently err in the choice of men, or the means of preserving
that purity of Manners which is required for the well-being of a People, than
those wherein Aristocracy prevails; I confess it, and that in Rome and Athens
the best and wisest men did for the most part incline to Aristocracy. Xenophon,
Plato, Aristotle, Thucydides, Livy, Tacitus, Cicero, and others, were of this
sort: But if our Author there seek Patrons for his Absolute Monarchy, he will
find none but Phalaris, Agathocles, Dionysius, Catiline, Cethegus, Lentulus,
with the corrupted Crew of mercenary Rascals, who did, or endeavored to set 'em
up. These are they quibus ex honesto nulla est spes; they abhor the Dominion of
the Law, because it curbs their Vices, and make themselves subservient to the
Lusts of a man who may nourish them. Similitude of Interests, Manners, and
Designs, is a link of Union between them: Both are Enemies to popular and mixed
Government; and those Governments are Enemies to them, and by preserving Virtue
and Integrity, oppose both; knowing, that if they do not, they and their
Governments must certainly perish.

SECT. XX. Man's natural love to Liberty is tempered by Reason, which
originally is his Nature.
THAT our Author's Book may appear to be a heap of Incongruitys and
Contradictions, it is not amiss to add to what has already bin observed, that
having asserted Absolute Monarchy to be the only natural Government, he now
says, that the nature of all People is to desire Liberty without restraint. But
if Monarchy be that Power which above all restrains Liberty, and subjects all
to the Will of one; this is as much as to say, that all People naturally desire
that which is against Nature; and by a wonderful excess of extravagance and
folly to assert contrary Propositions, that on both sides are equally absurd
and false. For as we have already proved that no Government is imposed upon men
by God or Nature, it is no less evident, that Man being a rational Creature,
nothing can be universally natural to him, that is not rational. But this
Liberty without restraint being inconsistent with any Government, and the Good
which man naturally desires for himself, Children and Friends, we find no place
in the world where the Inhabitants do not enter into some kind of Society or
Government to restrain it: and to say that all men desire Liberty without
restraint, and yet that all do restrain it, is ridiculous. The truth is, man is
hereunto led by Reason which is his Nature. Every one sees they cannot well
live asunder, nor many together, without some Rule to which all must submit.
This submission is a restraint of Liberty, but could be of no effect as to the
Good intended, unless it were general; nor general, unless it were natural.
When all are born to the same freedom, some will not resign that which is their
own, unless others do the like: This general consent of all to resign such a
part of their Liberty as seems to be for the good of all, is the voice of
Nature, and the act of Men (according to natural Reason) seeking their own
Good: And if all go not in the same way, according to the same form, it is an
evident testimony that no one is directed by Nature; but as a few or many may
join together, and frame smaller or greater Societys, so those Societys may
institute such an order or form of Government as best pleases themselves; and
if the ends of Government are obtained, they all equally follow the voice of
Nature in constituting them.

Again, if man were by nature so tenacious of his Liberty without restraint, he
must be rationally so. The creation of Absolute Monarchys, which entirely
extinguishes it, must necessarily be most contrary to it, tho the people were
willing; for they thereby abjure their own Nature. The usurpation of them can
be no less than the most abominable and outrageous violation of the Laws of
Nature that can be imagined: The Laws of God must be in the like measure
broken; and of all Governments, Democracy, in which every man's Liberty is
least restrained, because every man has an equal part, would certainly prove to
be the most just, rational and natural; whereas our Author represents it as a
perpetual spring of disorder, confusion and vice. This consequence would be
unavoidable, if he said true; but it being my fate often to differ from him, I
hope to be excused if I do so in this also, and affirm, that nothing but the
plain and certain dictates of Reason can be generally applicable to all men as
the Law of their Nature; and they who, according to the best of their
understanding provide for the good of themselves and their Posterity, do all
equally observe it. He that inquires more exactly into the matter may find,
that Reason enjoins every man not to arrogate to himself more than he allows to
others, nor to retain that Liberty which will prove hurtful to him; or to
expect that others will suffer themselves to be restrained, whilst he, to their
prejudice, remains in the exercise of that freedom which Nature allows. He who
would be exempted from this common Rule, must show for what reason he should be
raised above his Brethren; and if he dos it not, he is an enemy to them. This
is not Popularity, but Tyranny; and Tyrants are said exuisse hominem, to throw
off the Nature of men, because they do unjustly and unreasonably assume to
themselves that which agrees not with the frailty of human Nature, and set up
an Interest in themselves contrary to that of their Equals, which they ought to
defend as their own. Such as favor them are like to them; and we know of no
Tyranny that was not set up by the worst, nor of any that have bin destroyed,
unless by the best of men. The several Tyrannys of Syracuse were introduced by
Agathocles, Dionysius, Hieronymus, Hippocrates, Epicides, and others, by the
help of lend, dissolute, mercenary Villains; and overthrown by Timoleon, Dion,
Theodorus, and others, whose Virtues will be remembered in all ages. These, and
others like to them, never sought liberty without restraint, but such as was
restrained by Laws tending to the public Good; that all might concur in
promoting it, and the unruly desires of those who affected Power and Honors
which they did not deserve might be represt.

The like was seen in Rome: When Brutus, Valerius, and other virtuous Citizens
had thrown out the lewd Tarquins, they trusted to their own innocence and
reputation; and thinking them safe under the protection of the Law, contented
themselves with such Honors as their Countrymen thought they deserved. This
would not satisfy the dissolute crew that used to be Sodales adolescentium
Tarquiniorum assueti more Regio vivere, eam tum aequato jure omnium licentiam
quaerentes, libertatem aliorum in suam vertisse servitutem conquerebantur.
Regem hominem esse, a quo impetres ubi jus, ubi injuria opus sit. Esse gratiae
locum, esse bene^i^io: and ira^^i and ignoscere posse. Leges rem surdam esse
and inexorabilem, salubriorem inopi quam potenti: nihil laxamenti nec veniae
habere, si modum excesseris: periculosum esse in tot humanis erroribus sola
innocentia vivere. T. Live. l. 2.
companions to the Tarquins. I cannot say that either of these sought a Liberty
without restraint; for the virtuous were willing to be restrained by the Law,
and the vicious to submit to the Will of a man, to gain impunity in offending.
But if our Author says true, the licentious fury of these lewd young men, who
endeavored to subvert the Constitution of their Country to procure the
impunity of their own Crimes, would have bin more natural, that is more
reasonable than the ordinary proceedings of the most virtuous, who desired that
the Law might be the rule of their Actions, which is most absurd.

The like vicious Wretches have in all times endeavored to put the Power into
the hands of one man, who might protect 'em in their Villanys, and advance 'em
to exorbitant Riches or undeserved Honors; whilst the best men trusting in
their Innocence, and desiring no other Riches or Preferments than what by their
Equals they were thought to deserve, were contented with a due Liberty, under
the protection of a just Law: and I must transcribe the Historys of the World,
or at least so much of them as concerns the Tyrannys that have bin set up or
cast down, if I should here insert all the proofs that might be given of it.
But I shall come nearer to the point, which is not to compare Democracy with
Monarchy, but a regular mixed Government with such an Absolute Monarchy, as
leaves all to the will of that Man, Woman, or Child, who happens to be born in
the reigning Family, how ill soever they may be qualified. I desire those who
are lovers of Truth to consider, whether the wisest, best, and bravest of Men,
are not naturally led to be pleased with a Government that protects them from
receiving wrong, when they have not the least inclination to do any? Whether
they who desire no unjust advantage above their Brethren, will not always
desire that a People or Senate constituted as that of Rome, from the expulsion
of Tarquin to the setting up of Caesar, should rather judge of their Merit, than
Tarquin, Caesar, or his Successors? Or whether the lewd or corrupted Pretorian,
Bands, with Macro, Sejanus, Tigellinus, and the like, commanding them will not
ever, like Brutus his Sons, abhor the inexorable Power of the Laws, with the
necessity of living only by their innocence, and favor the Interest of Princes
like to those that advanced them? If this be not sufficient, they may be
pleased a little to reflect upon the Affairs of our own Country, and seriously
consider whether H -- de, Cl -- f -- d, F-lm th, Arl-ng-n and D -- nby, could
have pretended to the chief places, if the disposal of them had bin in a free
and well-regulated Parliament? Whether they did most resemble Brutus,
Publicola, and the rest of the Valerii, the Fabii, Quintii, Cornelii, etc. or
Narcissus, Pallas, Icetus, Laco, Vinnius, and the like? Whether all men, good
and bad, do not favor that state of things, which favors them and such as
they are? Whether Cl-v-l-d, P-rtsm-th, and others of the same trade, have
attained to the Riches and Honors they enjoy by Services done to the
Commonwealth? And what places Chiffinch, F -- x and Jenkins, could probably
have attained, if our Affairs had bin regulated as good men desire? Whether the
old Arts of begging, stealing and bawding, or the new ones of informing and
trepanning, thrive best under one man who may be weak or vicious, and is always
subject to be circumvented by Flatterers, or under the severe scrutinys of a
Senate or People? In a word, whether they who live by such Arts, and know no
other, do not always endeavor to advance the Government under which they
enjoy, or may hope to obtain the highest Honors, and abhor that, in which they
are exposed to all manner of scorn and punishment? Which being determined, it
will easily appear why the worst men have ever bin for Absolute Monarchy, and
the best against it; and which of the two in so doing can be said to desire an
unrestrained Liberty of doing that which is evil.

SECT. XXI. Mixed and Popular Governments preserve Peace, and manage Wars,
better than Absolute Monarchys.
BEing no way concerned in the defense of Democracy; and having proved that
Xenophon, Thucydides, and others of the Ancients, in speaking against the
overgreat Power of the common People, intended to add Reputation to the
Aristocratical Party to which they were addicted, and not to set up Absolute
Monarchy, which never fell under discourse among them, but as an object of
scorn and hatred, evil in it self, and only to be endured by base and barbarous
People; I may leave our Knight, like Don Quixote, fighting against the
Phantasms of his own brain, and saying what he pleases against such Governments
as never were, unless in such a place as San Marino near Sinigaglia in Italy,
where a hundred Clowns govern a barbarous Rock that no man invades, and relates
nothing to our question. If his Doctrine be true, the Monarchy he extols is not
only to be preferred before unruly Democracy, and mixed Governments, but is the
only one that, without a gross violation of the Laws of God and Nature, can be
established over any Nation. But having, as I hope, sufficiently proved, that
God did neither institute, nor appoint any such to be instituted, nor approve
those that were; that Nature dos not incline us to it, and that the best as
well as the wisest men have always abhorred it; that it has bin agreeable only
to the most stupid and base Nations; and if others have submitted to it; they
have done so only as to the greatest of Evils brought upon them by Violence,
Corruption or Fraud; I may now proceed to show that the Progress of it has bin
in all respects suitable to its beginning.

To this end 'twill not be amiss to examine our Author's words. Thus, says he,
do they paint to the life this Beast with many heads: Let me give the Cipher of
their Form of Government; as it is begot by Sedition, so it is nourished by
Crimes: It can never stand without Wars, either with an Enemy abroad, or with
Friends at home. And in order to this I will not criticize upon the terms, tho
the Cipher of a Form, and War with Friends, may be justly called Nonsense; but
coming to his Assertions, that popular or mixed Governments have their birth in
Sedition, and are ever afterterwards vexed with Civil or Foreign Wars, I take
liberty to say, That whereas there is no Form appointed by God or Nature, those
Governments only can be called Just, which are established by the consent of
Nations. These Nations may at the first set up popular or mixed Governments,
and without the guilt of Sedition introduce them afterward, if that which was
first established prove unprofitable or hurtful to them; and those that have
done so, have enjoyed more Justice in times of Peace, and managed Wars, when
occasion required, with more virtue and better success, than any Absolute
Monarchys have done. And whereas he says, that in popular Governments each man
has a care of his particular, and thinks basely of the common Good; They look
upon approaching Mischiefs as they do upon Thunder, only every man wishes it
may not touch his own Person: I say, that men can no otherwise be engaged to
take care of the Public, than by having such a part in it, as Absolute
Monarchy dos not allow; for under it they can neither obtain the Good for
themselves, Posterity and Friends, that they desire, nor prevent the Mischiefs
they fear, which are the principal Arguments that persuade men to expose
themselves to labors or dangers. It Is a folly to say, that the vigilance and
wisdom of the Monarch supplies the defect of care in others; for we know that
no men under the Sun were ever more void of both, and all manner of virtue
required to such a work, than very many Monarchs have bin: And, which is yet
worse, the strength and happiness of the People being frequently dangerous to
them, they have not so much as the will to promote it: nay, sometimes set
themselves to destroy it. Ancient Monarchys afford us frequent examples of this
kind; and if we consider those of France and Turkey, which seem most to flourish
in our Age, the People will appear to be so miserable under both, that they
cannot fear any change of Governor or Government; and all, except a few
Ministers, are kept so far from the knowledge of, or power in the management of
Affairs, that if any of them should fancy a possibility of something that might
befall them worse than what they suffer, or hope for that which might alleviate
their misery, they could do nothing toward the advancement of the one, or
prevention of the other. Tacitus observes, that in his time no man was able to
write what past, Inscitia Reipublicae ut alienae. They Tacit. An. l. 1.
neglected the public Affairs in which they had no part. In the same Age it was
said, that the People, who whilst they fought for their own Interests had bin
invincible, being enslaved, were grown sordid, idle, base, running after
Stage Plays and Shows; so as the whole strength of the Roman Armies consisted of
Strangers. When their Spirits were deprest by servitude, they had neither
courage to defend themselves, nor will to fight for their wicked Masters; and
least of all to increase their Power, which was destructive to themselves. The
same thing is found in all places. Tho the Turk commands many vast Provinces,
that naturally produce as good Soldiers as any, yet his greatest strength is in
Children that do not know their Fathers; who not being very many in number, may
perish in one Battle, and the Empire by that means be lost, the miserable
Nations that groan under that Tyranny having neither courage, power, nor will
to defend it. This was the fate of the Mamalukes. They had for the space of
almost two hundred years domineered in Egypt, and a great part of Asia; but the
people under them being weak and disaffected, they could never recover the
Defeat they received from Selim near Tripoli, who pursuing his Victory, in a
few months utterly abolished their Kingdom.

Notwithstanding the present Pride of France, the numbers and warlike
Inclinations of that People, the bravery of the Nobility, extent of Dominion,
convenience of Situation, and the vast Revenues of their King, his greatest
Advantages have bin gained by the mistaken Counsels of England, the valor of
our Soldiers unhappily sent to serve him, and the Strangers of whom the
strength of his Armies consists; which is so unsteddy a support, that many who
are well versed in Affairs of this nature, incline to think he subsists rather
by little Arts, and corrupting Ministers in Foreign Courts, than by the Power
of his own Armies; and that some reformation in the Counsels of his Neighbors
might prove sufficient to overthrow that Greatness which is grown formidable to
Europe; the same misery to which he has reduced his People, rendering them as
unable to defend him, upon any change of Fortune, as to defend their own Rights
against him.

This proceeds not from any particular defect in the French Government, but
that which is common to all Absolute Monarchys. And no State can be said to
stand upon a steady Foundation, except those whose strength is in their own
Soldiery, and the body of their own People. Such as serve for Wages, often
betray their Masters in distress, and always want the courage and industry
which is found in those who fight for their own Interests, and are to have a
part in the Victory. The business of Mercenarys is so to perform their duty as
to keep their Employments, and to draw profit from them; but that is not enough
to support the Spirits of men in extreme dangers. The Shepherd who is a
hireling, flies when the Thief comes; and this adventitious help failing, all
that a Prince can reasonably expect from a disaffected and oppressed People is,
that they should bear the Yoke patiently in the time of his Prosperity; but
upon the change of his Fortune they leave him to shift for himself, or join
with his Enemies to avenge the Injurys they had received. Thus did Alphonso and
Ferdinand Kings of Naples, and Lodovico Sforza Duke of Milan fall in the times
of Charles the Eighth and Louis the Twelfth, Kings of France. The two first had
bin false, violent, and cruel; nothing within their Kingdom could oppose their
fury: but when they were invaded by a foreign Power, they lost all, as
Guicciardin says, without breaking one Lance; and Sforza was by his own
mercenary Soldiers delivered into the hands of his Enemies.

I think it may be hard to find Examples of such as proceeding in the same way
have had better Success: But if it should so fall out, that a People living
under an Absolute Monarchy, should through custom, or fear of something worse (if
that can be) not only suffer patiently, but desire to uphold the Government;
neither the Nobility, nor Commonalty can do any thing toward it. They are
strangers to all public Concernments: All things are governed by one, or a sew
men, and others know nothing either of Action or Counsel. Filmer will tell us
it is no matter; the profound Wisdom of the Prince provides for all. But what if
this Prince be a Child, a Fool, a superannuated Dotard, or a Madman? Or if he
dos not fall under any of these extremitys, and possesses such a proportion of
Wit, Industry, and Courage as is ordinarily seen in men, how shall he supply
the Office that indeed requires profound Wisdom, and an equal measure of
Experience and Valor? It Is to no purpose to say a good Council may supply his
defects; for it dos not appear how he should come by this Council, nor who
should oblige him to follow their advice: If he be left to his own will to do
what he pleases, tho good advice be given to him; yet his judgment being
perverted, he will always incline to the worst: If a necessity be imposed upon
him of acting according to the advice of his Council, he is not that absolute
Monarch of whom we speak, nor the Government Monarchical, but Aristocratical.
These are imperfect Figleave coverings of Nakedness. It was in vain to give
good Counsel to Sardanapalus; and none could defend the Assyrian Empire, when
he lay wallowing amongst his Whores, without any other thought than of his
Lusts. None could preserve Rome, when Domitian's chief business was to kill
Flies, and that of Honorius to take care of his Hens. The Monarchy of France
must have perished under the base Kings they call Les Roys faineants, if the
Scepter had not bin wrested out of their unworthy hands. The World is full of
Examples in this kind: and when it pleases God to bestow a just, wise, and
valiant King as a blessing upon a Nation, it is only a momentary help, his
Virtues end with him; and there being neither any divine Promise nor human
Reason, moving us to believe that they shall always be renewed and continued in
his Successors, men cannot rely upon it; and to alledg a possibility of such a
thing is nothing to the purpose.

On the other side, in a popular or mixed Government every man is concerned:
Every one has a part according to his quality or merit; all changes are
prejudicial to all: Whatsoever any man conceives to be for the public good, he
may propose it in the Magistracy, or to the Magistrate: The body of the People
is the public defense, and every man is armed and disciplined: the advantages
of good success are communicated to all, and every one bears a part in the
losses. This makes men generous and industrious, and fills their hearts with
Love to their Country: Amor patriae, laudisque immensa cupido. Virg.
This, and the desire of that praise which is the Reward of Virtue, raised the
Romans above the rest of Mankind; and wheresoever the same ways are taken, they
will in a great measure have the same effects. By this means they had as many
Soldiers to fight for their Country as there were Freemen in it. Whilst they
had to deal with the free Nations of Italy, Greece, Africa or Spain, they never
conquered a Country, till the Inhabitants were exhausted: But when they came to
fight against Kings, the success of a Battle was enough to bring a Kingdom
under their power. Antiochus upon a ruffle received from Acilius at
Thermopylae, left all that he possessed in Greece; and being defeated by Scipio
Nasica, he quitted all the Kingdoms and Territorys of Asia on this side Taurus.
Paulus Emilius became Master of Macedon by one prosperous fight against Perses.
Syphax, Gentius, Tigranes, Ptolomy, and others, were more easily subdued. The
mercenary Armies on which they relied being broken, the Citys and Countries not
caring for their Masters, submitted to those who had more virtue, and better
fortune. If the Roman Power had not bin built upon a more sure foundation, they
could not have subsisted. Notwithstanding their Valor, they were often beaten;
but their losses were immediately repaired by the excellence of their
Discipline. When Hannibal had gained the Battles of Trebia, Ticinum, Thrasimene,
and Cannae; defeated the Romans in many other Encounters, and slain above two
hundred thousand of their Men, with Paulus Emilius, C. Servilius, Sempronius
Gracchus, Quintius, Marcellus, and many other excellent Commanders: When about
the same time the two brave Scipio's had bin cut off with their Armies in Spain,
and many great Losses had bin sustained in Sicily and by Sea, one would have
thought it impossible for the City to have resisted: But their Virtue, love to
their Country, and good Government was a strength that increased under all
their Calamitys, and in the end overcame all. The nearer Hannibal came to the
Walls, the more obstinate was their resistance. Tho he had killed more great
Captains than any Kingdom ever had, others daily stepped up in their place, who
excelled them in all manner of Virtue. I know not, if at any time that
conquering City could glory in a greater number of men fit for the highest
Enterprises, than at the end of that cruel War, which had consumed so many of
them; but I think that the finishing Victorys by them obtained, are but ill
proofs of our Author's assertion, that they thought basely of the common Good,
and sought only to save themselves. We know of none except Cecilius Metellus,
who after the Battle of Cannae had so base a thought as to design the
withdrawing himself from the public ruin; but Scipio (afterward sirnam'd
Africanus) threatening death to those who would not swear never to abandon their
Country, forced him to leave it. This may in general be imputed to good
Government and Discipline, with which all were so seasoned from their infancy,
that no affection was so rooted in them, as an ardent love to their Country,
and a resolution to die for it, or with it; but the means by which they
accomplished their great Ends, so as after their defeats to have such men as
carried on their noblest Designs with more glory than ever, was their annual
Elections of Magistrates, many being thereby advanced to the supreme Commands,
and every one by the Honors he enjoyed, filled with a desire of rendering
himself worthy of them.

I should not much insist upon these things, if they had bin seen only in Rome:
but tho their Discipline seems to have bin more perfect, better observed, and to
have produced a Virtue that surpast all others; the like has bin found, tho
perhaps not in the same degree, in all Nations that have enjoyed their Liberty,
and were admitted to such a part of the Government, as might give them a love
to it. This was evident in all the Nations of Italy. The Sabins, Volsci, Aequi,
Tuscans, Samnites and others, were never conquered, till they had no men left.
The Samnites alone inhabiting a small and barren Province, suffered more
defeats before they were subdued, than all the Kingdoms of Numidia, Egypt,
Macedon, and Asia; and, as it is expressed in their Embassy to Hannibal, never
yielded, till they who had brought vast numbers of men into the Field, and by
them defeated some of the Roman Armies, were reduced to such weakness, that they
could not resist one Legion. We hear of sew Spartans who did not willingly
expose their Lives for the service of their Country; and the Women themselves
were so far inflamed with the same affection, that they refused to mourn for
their Children and Husbands who died in the defense of it. When the brave
Brasidas was slain, some eminent men went to comfort his Mother upon the news
of his death; and telling her he was the most valiant man in the City, she
Thucyd. de Bell. Pelopon.
answered, that he was indeed a valiant man, and died as he ought to do, but
that through the goodness of the Gods, many others were left as valiant as he.

When Xerxes invaded Greece, there was not a Citizen of Athens able to bear
Arms, who did not leave his Wife and Children to shift for themselves in the
neighboring Citys, and their Houses to be burnt when they embarked with
Themistocles; and never thought of either till they had defeated the Barbarians
at Salamis by Sea, and at Platea by Land. When men are thus spirited, some will
ever prove excellent: and as none did ever surpass those who are bred under
this discipline in all moral, military and civil Virtues; those very Countries
where they flourished most, have not produced any eminent men since they lost
that Liberty which was the Mother and Nurse of them.

Tho I should fill a Volume with examples of this kind (as I might easily do)
such as our Author will say, that in Popular Governments men look upon
Mischiefs as Thunder, and only wish it may not touch themselves: But leaving
them to the scorn and hatred they deserve by their impudence and folly, I
conclude this point with the answer, that Trajano Ragion. 99.
Boccalini puts into the mouth of Apollo, to the Princes who complained that
their Subjects had not that love to their Countries, as had bin, and was daily
seen in those who lived under Commonwealths; which amounted to no more than to
tell them, that their ill Government was the cause of that defect, and that the
prejudices incurred by Rapine, Violence, and Fraud, were to be repaired only by
Liberality, Justice, and such a care of their Subjects, that they might live
happily under them.

SECT. XXII. Commonwealths seek Peace or War according to the Variety of their
Constitutions.
IF I have hitherto spoken in general of popular or mixed Governments, as if
they were all founded on the same principle, it was only because our Author
without distinction has generally blamed them all, and generally imputed to
every one those Faults, which perhaps never were many; but most certainly are
directly opposite to the temper and constitution of many among them. Malice and
Ignorance reign so equally in him, that it is not easy to determine from which of
the two this false representation proceeds. But lest any man should thereby be
imposed upon, it is time to observe, That the Constitutions of Commonwealths
have bin so various, according to the different temper of Nations and Times,
that if some of them seem to have bin principally constituted for War, others
have as much delighted in Peace; and many having taken the middle, and (as some
think) the best way, have so moderated their love to Peace, as not to suffer
the Spirits of the People to fall, but kept them in a perpetual readiness to
make War when there was occasion: and every one of those having followed
several ways and ends, deserve our particular consideration.

The Citys of Rome, Sparta, Thebes, and all the Associations of the Etolians,
Achaians, Sabins, Latins, Samnites, and many others that anciently flourished
in Greece and Italy, seem to have intended nothing but the just preservation of
Liberty at home, and making War abroad. All the Nations of Spain, Germany, and
Gaul sought the same things. Their principal work was to render their People
valiant, obedient to their Commanders, lovers of their Country, and always
ready to fight for it: And for this reason when the Senators of Rome had killed
Romulus, they persuaded Julius Proculus to affirm, that he had seen him in a
most glorious form ascending to Heaven, and promising great things to the City,
Proinde rem militarem colant. The Athenians were not less inclined to War, but
applied themselves to Trade, as subservient to that end, by increasing the
number of the People, and furnishing them with the means of carrying it on with
more vigor and power. The Phenician Citys, of which Carthage was the most
eminent, followed the same method; but knowing that Riches do not defend
themselves, or scorning slothfully to enjoy what was gained by Commerce, they
so far applied themselves to War, that they grew to a Power, which Rome only
was able to overthrow. Venice, Florence, Genoa, Lucca, and some other Citys of
Italy seem chiefly to have aimed at Trade; and placing the hopes of their
safety in the protection of more powerful States, have unwillingly entered into
Wars, especially by Land; and when they did, they made them by mercenary
Soldiers.

Again, some of those that intended War desired to enlarge their Territorys by
conquest; others only to preserve their own, and to live with freedom and
safety upon them. Rome was of the first sort; and knowing that such ends cannot
be accomplished without great numbers of men, they freely admitted Strangers
into the City, Senate, and Magistracy. Numa was a Sabin: Tarquinius Priscus was
the Son of a Grecian: One hundred of those Sabins who came with Tatius were
admitted into the Senate: Appius Claudius of the same People came to Rome, was
made a Member of the Senate, and created Consul. They demolished several Citys,
and brought the Inhabitants to their own; gave the right of Citizens to many
others (sometimes to whole Citys and Provinces) and cared not how many they
received, so they could engraft them upon the same interest with the old stock,
and season them with the same Principles, Discipline, and Manners. On the other
side, the Spartans desiring only to continue free, virtuous, and safe in the
enjoyment of their own Territory; and thinking themselves strong enough to
defend it, framed a most severe Discipline, to which few Strangers would submit.
They banished all those curious Arts, that are useful to Trade; prohibited the
importation of Gold and Silver; appointed the Helotes to cultivate their Lands,
and to exercise such Trades as are necessary to life; admitted few Strangers to
live amongst them; made none of them free of their City, and educated their
Youth in such exercises only as prepared them for War. I will not take upon me
to judge whether this proceeded from such a moderation of Spirit, as placed
Felicity rather in the fullness and stability of Liberty, Integrity, Virtue, and
the enjoyment of their own, than in Riches, Power, and Dominion over others;
nor which of these two different methods deserves most to be commended: But
certain it is that both succeeded according to the intention of the Founders.

Rome conquered the best part of the World, and never wanted men to defend what
was gained: Sparta lived in such happiness and reputation, that till it was
invaded by Epimanondas, an Enemies Trumpet had not bin heard by those within the
Town for the space of eight hundred years, and never suffered any great
disaster, till receding from their own Institutions, they were brought by
prosperity to affect the principality of Greece, and to undertake such Wars as
could not be carried on without Money, and greater numbers of men than a small
City was able to furnish; by which means they were obliged to beg assistance
from the Barbarians, whom they scorned and hated, as appears by the Storys of
Callicratidas, Lysander, and Agesilaus, and fell into such straits as were
never recovered.

The like variety has bin observed in the Constitutions of those Northern
Nations that invaded the Roman Empire: for tho all of them intended War, and
looked upon those only to be Members of their Commonwealths who used arms to
defend them, yet some did immediately incorporate themselves with those of the
conquered Countries. Of this number were the Franks, who presently became one
Nation with the Gauls; others kept themselves in a distinct Body, as the Saxons
did from the Britains: And the Goths for more than three hundred years that
they reigned in Spain, never contracted Marriages, or otherwise mixed with the
Spaniards, till their Kingdom was overthrown by the Moors.

These things, and others of the like nature, being weighed, many have doubted
whether it were better to constitute a Commonwealth for War or for Trade; and
of such as intend War, whether those are most to be praised who prepare for
defense only, or those who design by conquest to enlarge their Dominions. Or,
if they admit of Trade, whether they should propose the acquisition of Riches
for their ultimate end, and depend upon foreign or mercenary Forces to defend
them; or to be as helps to enable their own People to carry on those Wars in
which they may be frequently engaged. These Questions might perhaps be easily
decided, if Mankind were of a temper to suffer those to live in peace, who
offer no injury to any; or that men who have Money to hire Soldiers when they
stand in need of them, could find such as would valiantly and faithfully defend
them, whilst they apply themselves to their Trades. But experience teaching us
that those only can be safe who are strong; and that no People was ever well
defended but those who fought for themselves; the best Judges of these matters
have always given the preference to those Constitutions that principally intend
War, and make use of Trade as assisting to that end: and think it better to aim
at conquest, rather than simply to stand upon their own defense; since he that
loses all if he be overcome, sights upon very unequal terms; and if he obtain
the Victory, gains no other advantage, than for the present to repel the danger
that threatened him.

These Opinions are confirmed by the examples of the Romans, who prosper'd much
more than the Spartans: And the Carthaginians, who made use of Trade as a help
to War, raised their City to be one of the most potent that ever was in the
World: Whereas the Venetians having relied on Trade and mercenary Soldiers, are
always forced too much to depend upon foreign Potentats; very often to buy
Peace with ignominious and prejudicial conditions; and sometimes to fear the
infidelity of their own Commanders, no less than the violence of their Enemies.
But that which ought to be valued above all in point of Wisdom as well as
Justice, is the Government given by God to the Hebrews, which chiefly fitted
them for War, and to make Conquests. Moses divided them under several Captains,
into thousands, hundreds, fiftys, and tens: This was a perpetual Ordinance
amongst them: In numbering them, those only were counted, who were able to bear
arms: Every man was obliged to go out to War, except such as had married a
Wife, or upon other special occasions were for a time excused; and the whole
series of the sacred History shows that there were always as many Soldiers to
fight for their Country as there were men able to fight. And if this be taken
for a Picture of a many-headed Beast delighting in Blood, begotten by Sedition,
and nourished by Crimes, God himself was the drawer of it.

In this variety of Constitutions, and Effects proceeding from them, I can see
nothing more justly and generally to be attributed to them all, than that Love
to their Country, which our Author impudently affirms to be wanting in all. In
other matters their proceedings are not only different, but contrary to each
other: yet it cannot be said that any Nations have enjoyed so much Peace as
some Republics. The Venetians too great inclination to Peace is accounted to
be a mortal error in their Constitution; and they have not bin less free from
domestic Seditions than foreign Wars: the Conspiracys of the Falerii and
Tiepoli were extinguished by their punishment, and that of La Cueva crushed
before it was ripe. Genoa has not bin altogether so happy: the factions of the
Guelphs and Ghibelins that spread themselves over all Italy, infected that
City; and the malice of the Spaniards and French raised others under the
Fregosi and Adorni; but they being composed, they have for more than a hundred
and fifty years rested in quiet.

There is another sort of Commonwealth composed of many Citys associated
together, and living aequo jure; every one retaining and exercising a Sovereign
Power within it self, except in some cases expressed in the Act of Union, or
League made between them. These I confess are more hardly preserved in Peace.
Disputes may arise among them concerning Limits, Jurisdiction, and the like.
They cannot always be equally concerned in the same things. The injurys offered
to one do not equally affect all. Their Neighbors will sow Divisions among
them; and not having a Mother-City to decide their Controversys by her
authority, they may be apt to fall into quarrels, especially if they profess
Christianity; which having bin split into variety of opinions ever since it was
preached, and the Papists by their cruelty to such as dissent from them,
showing to all, that there is no other way of defending themselves against
them, than by using the same, almost every man is come to think he ought (as
far as in him lies) to impose his belief on others, and that he can give no
better testimony of his Zeal, than the excess of his violence on that account.
Nevertheless the Cantons of the Switzers, tho accompanied with all the most
dangerous circumstances that can be imagined, being thirteen in number,
independent on each other, governed in a high degree popularly, professing
Christianity differing in most important points; eight of them much influenced
by the Jesuits, and perpetually excited to War against their Brethren by the
powerful Crowns of Spain and France, have ever since they cast off the
insupportable Yoke of the Earls of Hapsburg, enjoyed more peace than any other
State of Europe, and from the most inconsiderable people, are grown to such a
Power, that the greatest Monarchs do most sollicitously seek their Friendship;
and none have dared to invade them, since Charles Duke of Burgundy did it to
his ruin: and he who for a long time had bin a terror to the great, dangerous,
and subtle King of France, gave by the loss of three Armies and his own life, a
lasting testimony of his temerity in assaulting a free and valiant, tho a poor
people, fighting in their own quarrel. Commines well relates that War; but a
vast heap of Bones remaining to this day at Muret with this inscription, Caroli
fortissimi Burgundiorum Ducis exercitus Muretum obsidens ab Helvetiis caesus,
hoc sui Monumentum reliquit, best shows the success of it. Since that time
their greatest Wars have bin for the defense of Milan; or such as they have
undertaken for pay under the Ensigns of France or Spain, that by the use of
Arms they may keep up that Courage, Reputation, and Experience which is
required for the defense of their own Country. No Government was ever more free
from popular Seditions; the revolts of their Subjects have bin few, weak, and
easily suppressed; the dissension raised by the Jesuits between the Cantons of
Zurich and Lucern was as soon composed as the rebellion of the County of Vaux
against the Canton of Bern; and those few of the like nature that have happened
among them have had the like success: So that Thuanus in the History of his
time, comprehending about fifty years, and relating the horrid domestic and
foreign Wars, that distracted Germany, France, Spain, Italy, Flanders, England,
Scotland, Poland, Denmark, Sweden, Hungary, Transylvania, Muscovy, Turkey,
Africa, and other places, has no more to say of them than to show what Arts had
bin in vain used to disturb their so much envied quiet. But if the modest
temper of the People, together with the Wisdom, Justice, and Strength of their
Government, could not be discomposed by the measures of Spain and France, by
the industry of their Ambassadors, or the malicious craft of the Jesuits, we
may safely conclude that their State is as well settled as any thing among men
can be, and can hardly comprehend what is like to interrupt it. As much might
be said of the Citys of the Hanseatick Society, if they had an entire
Sovereignty in themselves: But the Citys of the United Provinces in the Low
Countries being every one of them Sovereign within themselves, and many in
number, still continuing in their Union in spite of all the endeavors that
have bin used to divide them, give us an example of such steddiness in practice
and principle, as is hardly to be paralleled in the world, and that undeniably
prove a temper in their Constitutions directly opposite to that which our
Author imputes to all popular Governments: and if the Death of Barnevelt and De
Wit, or the preserment of some most unlike to them, be taken for a testimony
that the best men thrive worst, and the worst best, I hope it may be considered
that those Violences proceeded from that which is most contrary to Popularity,
tho I am not very willing to explain it.

If these matters are not clear in themselves, I desire they may be compared
with what has happened between any Princes that from the beginning of the world
have bin joined in League to each other, whether they were of the same or of
different Nations. Let an example be brought of six, thirteen, or more Princes
or Kings who entered into a League; and for the space of one or more Ages, did
neither break it, nor quarrel upon the explication of it. Let the States of the
Switzers, Grisons, or Hollanders, be compared with that of France, when it was
sometimes divided between two, three, or four Brothers of Meroveus or Pepin's
Races; with the Heptarchy of England; the Kingdoms of Leon, Arragon, Navarr,
Castile and Portugal, under which the Christians in Spain were divided; or
those of Cordoua, Sevil, Malaga, Granada, and others under the Power of the
Moors: and if it be not evident, that the popular States have bin remarkable
for Peace among themselves, constancy to their Union, and Fidelity to the
Leagues made with their Associats; whereas all the abovementioned Kingdoms, and
such others as are known among men to have bin joined in the like Leagues, were
ever infested with domestic Rebellions and Quarrels arising from the Ambition
of Princes, so as no Confederacy could be so cautiously made, but they would
find ways to elude it, or so solemn and sacred, but they would in far less time
break through it: I will confess, that Kingdoms have sometimes bin as free from
civil disturbances; and that Leagues made between several Princes, have bin as
constantly and religiously observed, as by Commonwealths. But if no such thing
dos appear in the World, and no man who is not impudent or ignorant dare
pretend it, I may justly conclude, that tho every Commonwealth has its Action
suitable to its Constitution, and that many associated together are not so free
from disturbances, as those that wholly depend upon the Authority of a Mother
City; yet we know of none that have not bin, and are more regular and quiet
than any Principalitys; and as to Foreign Wars, they seek or avoid them
according to their various Constitutions.

SECT. XXIII. That is the best Government, which best provides for War.
OUR Author having huddled up all popular and mixed Governments into one, has
in some measure forced me to explain the various Constitutions and Principles
upon which they are grounded: But as the wisdom of a Father is seen, not only
in providing Bread for his Family, or increasing his Patrimonial Estate, but in
making all possible provision for the security of it; so that Government is
evidently the best, which, not relying upon what it dos at first enjoy, seeks
to increase the number, strength, and riches of the People; and by the best
Discipline to bring the Power so improved into such order as may be of most use
to the Public. This comprehends all things conducing to the administration of
Justice, the preservation of domestic Peace, and the increase of Commerce,
that the People being pleased with their present condition, may be filled with
love to their Country, encouraged to fight boldly for the public Cause, which
is their own; and as men do willingly join with that which prospers, that
Strangers may be invited to fix their Habitations in such a City, and to
espouse the principles that reign in it. This is necessary for several reasons;
but I shall principally insist upon one, which is, that all things in their
beginning are weak: The Whelp of a Lion newly born has neither strength nor
fierceness. He that builds a City, and dos not intend it should increase,
commits as great an absurdity, as if he should desire his Child might ever
continue under the same weakness in which he is born. If it dos not grow, it
must pine and perish; for in this World nothing is permanent: that which dos
not grow better will grow worse. This increase also is useless, or perhaps
hurtful, if it be not in Strength, as well as in Riches or Number; for every
one is apt to seize upon ill-guarded Treasures: and the terror that the City of
London was possessed with, when a few Dutch Ships came to Chatham, shows that no
numbers of men, tho naturally valiant, are able to defend themselves, unless
they be well armed, disciplined and conducted. Their Multitude brings
confusion: their Wealth, when it is like to be made a prey, increases the fears
of the owners; and they, who if they were brought into good order, might
conquer a great part of the World, being destitute of it, durst not think of
defending themselves.

If it be said that the wise Father mentioned by me endeavors to secure his
Patrimony by Law, not by Force; I answer, that all defense terminates in force;
and if a private man dos not prepare to defend his Estate with his own Force,
it is because he lives under the protection of the Law, and expects the force of
the Magistrate should be a security to him: but Kingdoms and Commonwealths
acknowledging no Superior, except God alone, can reasonably hope to be
protected by him only; and by him, if with industry and courage they make use
of the means he has given them for their own defense. God helps those who help
themselves; and men are by several reasons (suppose to prevent the increase of
a suspected Power) induced to succor an industrious and brave People: But such
as neglect the means of their own preservation, are ever left to perish with
shame. Men cannot rely upon any League: The State that is defended by one
Potentat against another, becomes a Slave to their Protector: Mercenary
Soldiers always want Fidelity or Courage, and most commonly both. If they are
not corrupted or beaten by the Invader, they make a prey of their Masters.
These are the followers of Camps who have neither Faith nor Piety -- Ibi fas
ubi maxima merces. Lucan.
but prefer Gain before Right. They who expose their Blood to sale, look where
they can make the best bargain, and never fail of pretenses for following their
interests.

Moreover, private Familys may by several arts increase their Wealth, as they
increase in number; but when a People multiplies (as they will always do in a
good Climat under a good Government) such an enlargement of Territory as is
necessary for their subsistence can be acquired only by War. This was known to
the Northern Nations that invaded the Roman Empire; but for want of such
Constitutions as might best improve their Strength and Valor, the numbers they
sent out when they were overburden'd, provided well for themselves, but were of
no use to the Countries they left; and whilst those Goths, Vandals, Franks, and
Normans enjoyed the most opulent and delicious Provinces of the World, their
Fathers languish'd obscurely in their frozen Climats. For the like reasons, or
through the same defect, the Switzers are obliged to serve other Princes, and
often to employ that valor in advancing the power of their Neighbors, which
might be used to increase their own. Genoua, Lucca, Geneva, and other small
Commonwealths, having no Wars, are not able to nourish the men they breed; but
sending many of their Children to seek their Fortunes abroad, scarce a third
part of those that are born among them, die in those Citys; and if they did not
take this course, they would have no better than the Nations inhabiting near
the River Niger, who sell their Children as the increase of their Flocks.

This dos not less concern Monarchys than Commonwealths; nor the absolute less
than the mixed: All of them have bin prosperous or miserable, glorious or
contemptible, as they were better or worse armed, disciplined, or conducted.
The Assyrian Valor was irresistible under Nabuchodonozor; but was brought to
nothing under his base and luxurious Grandson Belshazzar: The Persians who
under Cyrus conquered Asia, were like Swine exposed to slaughter when their
Discipline failed, and they were commanded by his proud, cruel, and cowardly
Successors. The Macedonian Army overthrown by Paulus Emilius was not less in
number than that with which Alexander gained the Empire of the East; and
perhaps had not bin inferior in Valor, if it had bin as well commanded. Many
poor and almost unknown Nations have bin carried to such a height of Glory by
the Bravery of their Princes, that I might incline to think their Government as
fit as any other for disciplining a People to War, if their Virtues continued
in their Familys, or could be transmitted to their Successors. The
impossibility of this is a breach never to be repaired; and no account is to be
made of the good that is always uncertain, and seldom enjoyed. This disease is
not only in absolute Monarchys, but in those also where any regard is had to
Succession of Blood, tho under the strictest limitations. The Fruit of all the
Victorys gained by Edward the First and Third, or Henry the Fifth of England,
perished by the baseness of their Successors: the glory of our Arms was turned
into shame; and we, by the loss of Treasure, Blood, and Territory, suffered the
punishment of their Vices. The effects of these changes are not always equally
violent; but they are frequent, and must fall out as often as occasion is
presented. It was not possible for Lewis the Thirteenth of France to pursue the
great designs of Henry the Fourth: Christina of Sweden could not supply the
place of her brave Father; nor the present King in his Infancy accomplish what
the great Charles Gustavus had nobly undertaken: and no remedy can be found for
this mortal infirmity, unless the power be put into the hands of those who are
able to execute it, and not left to the blindness of fortune. When the Regal
Power is committed to an annual or otherwise chosen Magistracy, the Virtues of
excellent men are of use, but all dos not depend upon their persons: One man
finishes what another had begun; and when many are by practice rendered able to
perform the same things, the loss of one is easily supplied by the election of
another. When good Principles are planted, they do not die with the person that
introduced 'em; and good Constitutions remain, tho the Authors of 'em perish.
Rome did not fall back into slavery when Brutus was killed, who had led them to
recover their Liberty: Others like to him pursued the same ends; and
notwithstanding the loss of so many great Commanders consumed in their almost
continual Wars, they never wanted such as were fit to execute whatever they
could design. A wellgovern'd State is as fruitful to all good purposes, as the
seven-headed Serpent is said to have bin in evil; when one head is cut off,
many rise up in the place of it. Good Order being once established, makes good
men; and as long as it lasts, such as are fit for the greatest employments will
never be wanting. By this means the Romans could not be surprised: No King or
Captain ever invaded them, who did not find many excellent Commanders to oppose
him; whereas they themselves found it easy to overthrow Kingdoms, tho they had
bin established by the bravest Princes, through the baseness of their Successors.

But if our Author says true, it is of no advantage to a popular State to have
excellent men; and therefore he imposes a necessity upon every People to choose
the worst men for being the worst, and most like to themselves; lest that if
virtuous and good men should come into power, they should be excluded for being
vicious and wicked, etc. Wise men would seize upon the State, and take it from
the People. For the understanding of these words, it is good to consider whether
they are to be taken simply, as usually applied to the Devil and some of his
instruments, or relatively, as to the thing in question: If simply, it must be
concluded that Valerius, Brutus, Cincinnatus, Capitolinus, Mamercus, Paulus
Emilius, Nasica, and others like to 'em, were not only the worst men of the
City; but that they were so often advanced to the supreme Magistracy because
they were so: if in the other sense relating to Magistracy, and the command of
Armies, the worst are the most ignorant, unfaithful, slothful, or cowardly; and
our Author, to make good his proposition, must prove, that when the People of
Rome, Carthage, Athens, and other States had the power of choosing whom they
pleased, they chose Camillus, Corvinus. Torquatus, Fabius, Rullus, Scipio,
Amilcar, Hannibal, Asdrubal, Pelopidas, Epaminondas, Pericles, Aristides,
Themistocles, Phocion, Alcibiades, and others like to them, for their
Ignorance, Infidelity, Sloth, and Cowardice; and on account of those Vices,
most like to those who chose them. But if these were the worst, I desire to
know what wit or eloquence can describe or comprehend the excellency of the
best; or of the Discipline that brings whole Nations to such perfection, that
worse than these could not be found among them? And if they were not so, but
such as all succeeding Ages have justly admired for their Wisdom, Virtue,
Industry, and Valor, the impudence of so wicked and false an Assertion ought to
be rejected with scorn and hatred.

But if all Governments, whether Monarchial or Popular, absolute or limited,
deserve praise or blame as they are well or ill constituted for making War; and
that the attainment of this end dos entirely depend upon the qualifications of
the Commanders, and the Strength, Courage, Number, Affection, and temper of the
People out of which the Armies are drawn; those Governments must necessarily be
the best which take the best care that those Armies may be well commanded; and
so provide for the good of the People, that they may daily increase in Number,
Courage, and Strength, and be so satisfied with the present state of things, as
to fear a change, and fight for the preservation or advancement of the public
Interest as of their own. We have already found that in Hereditary Monarchys no
care at all is taken of the Commander: He is not chosen, but comes by chance;
and dos not only frequently prove defective, but for the most part utterly
incapable of performing any part of his duty; whereas in Popular Governments
excellent men are generally chosen; and there are so many of them, that if one
or more perish, others are ready to supply their places. And this Discourse
having (if I mistake not) in the whole series shown, that the advantages of
popular Governments, in relation to the increase of Courage, Number, and
Strength in a People, out of which Armies are to be formed, and bringing them to
such a temper as prepares 'em bravely to perform their duty, are as much above
those of Monarchys, as the prudence of Choice surpasses the accidents of Birth;
it cannot be denied that in both respects the part which relates to War is much
better performed in Popular Governments than in Monarchys.

That which we are by reason led to believe, is confirmed to us by experience.
We every where see the difference between the Courage of men fighting for
themselves and their posterity, and those that serve a Master who by good
success is often rendered insupportable. This is of such efficacy, that no King
could ever boast to have overthrown any considerable Commonwealth, unless it
were divided within it self, or weakened by Wars made with such as were also
free; which was the case of the Grecian Commonwealths when the Macedonians fell
in upon them. Whereas the greatest Kingdoms have bin easily destroyed by
Commonwealths; and these also have lost all Strength, Valor and Spirit, after
the change of their Government. The Power and Virtue of the Italians grew up,
decayed and perished with their Liberty. When they were divided into many
Commonwealths, every one of them was able to send out great Armies, and to
suffer many Defeats before they were subdued; so that their Citys were
delivered up by the old Men, Women, and Children, when all those who were able
to bear arms had bin slain: And when they were all brought under the Romans,
either as Associats or Subjects, they made the greatest Strength that ever was
in the World.

Alexander of Epirus was in Valor thought equal, and in Power little inferior
to Alexander of Macedon: but having the fortune to attack those who had bin
brought up in Liberty, taught to hazard or suffer all things for it, and to
think that God has given to men Hands and Swords only to defend it, he perished
in his attempt; whilst the other encountering slavish Nations, under the conduct
of proud, cruel and for the most part unwarlike Tyrants, became Master of Asia.

Pyrrhus seems to have bin equal to either of them; but the Victorys he
obtained by an admirable Valor and Conduct, cost him so dear, that he desired
Peace with those Enemies who might be defeated, not subdued.

Hannibal wanting the prudence of Pyrrhus, lost the fruits of all his Victorys;
and being torn out of Italy, where he had nested himself, fell under the Sword
of those whose Fathers he had defeated or slain; and died a banished man from
his ruined Country.

The Gauls did once bring Rome, when it was small, to the brink of Destruction;
but they left their Carcases to pay for the mischiefs they had done; and in
succeeding times their Invasions were mentioned as Tumults rather than Wars.

The Germans did perhaps surpass them in numbers and strength, and were equal
to them in fortune as long as Rome was free. They often entered Italy, but they
continued not long there, unless under the weight of their Chains. Whereas the
same Nations, and others like to them, assaulting that Country, or other
Provinces under the Emperors, found no other difficulty than what arose upon
contests among themselves who should be Master of them. No manly Virtue or
Discipline remained among the Italians: Those who governed them, relied upon
tricks and shifts; they who could not defend themselves, hired some of those
Nations to undertake their Quarrels against others. These trinklings could not
last. The Goths scorning to depend upon those who in Valor and Strength were
much inferior to themselves, seized upon the City that had commanded the World,
whilst Honorius was so busy in providing for his Hens, that he could not think
of defending it. Arcadius had the luck not to lose his principal City; but
passing his time among Fiddlers, Players, Eunuchs, Cooks, Dancers, and Buffoons,
the Provinces were securely plundered and ransacked by Nations, that are known
only from their Victorys against him.

It Is in vain to say that this proceeded from the fatal corruption of that Age;
for that corruption proceeded from the Government, and the ensuing desolation
was the effect of it. And as the like disorder in Government has bin ever since
in Greece and the greatest part of Italy, those Countries which for Extent,
Riches, convenience of Situation, and numbers of men, are equal to the best in
the world, and for the Wit, Courage, and Industry of the Natives, perhaps
justly preferable to any, have since that time bin always exposed as a prey to
the first Invader. Charles the Eighth of France is by Guicciardin, and other
Writers, represented as a Prince equally weak in Body, Mind, Money, and Forces;
but as an ill Hare is said to make a good Dog, he conquered the best part of
Italy without breaking a Lance. Ferdinand and Alphonso of Arragon, Kings of
Naples, had governed by Trepanners, false Witnesses, corrupt Judges, mercenary
Soldiers, and other Ministers of Iniquity: but these could afford no help
against an Invader; and neither the oppressed Nobility, nor People, concerning
themselves in the quarrel, they who had bin proud, fierce, and cruel against
their poor Subjects, never durst look an Enemy in the face; and the Father
dying with anguish and fear, the Son shamefully fled from his ill-govern'd
Kingdom.

The same things are no less evident in Spain. No People ever defended
themselves with more Obstinacy and Valor than the Spaniards did against the
Carthaginians and Romans, who surpast them in Wealth and Skill. Livy calls them
Gentem ad bella gerenda and reparanda natam, and who generally killed
themselves when they were mastered and disarmed, Nullam sine armis vitam esse
rati. But tho the mixture of Roman Blood could not impair their Race, and the
conjunction of the Goths had improved their Force; yet no more was required for
the overthrow of them all, than the weakness and baseness of the two lewd
Tyrants, Witza and Rodrigo, who disdained all Laws, and resolved to govern
according to their Lust. They who for more than two hundred years had resisted
the Romans, were entirely subdued by the vile, half-naked Moors, in one slight
Skirmish; and do not to this day know what became of the King who brought the
Destruction upon them. That Kingdom after many Revolutions, is with many others
come to the House of Austria, and enjoys all the Wealth of the Indys; whereupon
they are thought to have affected an universal Monarchy. Sed ut sunt levia
Aulicorum ingenia, this was grounded upon nothing except their own Vanity: They
had Money and Craft; but wanting that solid Virtue and Strength which makes and
preserves Conquests, their Kings have nothing but Milan that did not come to
them by Marriage: And tho they have not received any extraordinary disasters in
War, yet they languish and consume through the defects of their own Government,
and are forced to beg assistance from their mortal and formerly despised
Enemies. These are the best hopes of defense that they have from abroad; and the
only Enemy an Invader ought to fear in their desolate Territorys, is that Want
and Famine which testifys the good Order, Strength and Stability of our Author's
divine Monarchy; the profound Wisdom of their Kings in subtly finding out so
sure a way of defending the Country; their paternal care in providing for the
good of their Subjects; and that whatsoever is defective in the Prince, is
assuredly supplied by the Sedulity of a good Council.

We have already said enough to obviate the objections that may be drawn from
the prosperity of the French Monarchy. The beauty of it is false and painted.
There is a rich and haughty King, who is blessed with such Neighbors as are not
likely to disturb him, and has nothing to fear from his miserable Subjects; but
the whole body of that State is full of boils, and wounds, and putrid sores:
There is no real strength in it. The People are so unwilling to serve him, that
he is said to have put to death above four score thousand of his own Soldiers
within the space of fifteen years, for flying from their Colors; and if he
were vigorously attacked, little help could be expected from a discontented
Nobility, or a starving and despairing People. If to diminish the force of
these arguments and examples, it be said, that in two or three thousand years
all things are changed; the ancient Virtue of Mankind is extinguished; and the
love that every one had to his Country is turned into a care of his private
Interests: I answer, that Time changes nothing, and the Changes produced in
this time proceed only from the change of Governments. The Nations which have
bin governed arbitrarily, have always suffered the same Plagues, and bin
infected with the same Vices; which is as natural, as for Animals ever to
generate according to their kinds, and Fruits to be of the same nature with the
Roots and Seeds from which they come. The same Order that made men valiant and
industrious in the service of their Country during the first Ages, would have
the same effect, if it were now in being. Men would have the same love to the
Public as the Spartans and Romans had, if there was the same reason for it. We
need no other proof of this than what we have seen in our own Country, where in
a few years, good Discipline and a just Encouragement given to those who did
well, produced more examples of pure, complete, incorruptible, and invincible
Virtue than Rome or Greece could ever boast; or if more be wanting, they may
easily be found among the Switzers, Hollanders, and others: but it is not
necessary to light a Candle to the Sun.

SECT. XXIV. Popular Governments are less subject to Civil Disorders than
Monarchys; manage them more ably, and more easily recover out of them.
IT IS in vain to seek a Government in all points free from a possibility of
Civil Wars, Tumults, and Seditions: that is a Blessing denied to this life, and
reserved to complete the Felicity of the next. But if these are to be accounted
the greatest evils that can fall upon a People, the rectitude or defects of
Governments will best appear if we examine which Species is more or less exposed
to, or exempted from them.

This may be done two ways.

1. By searching into the causes from whence they may, or usually do arise.

2. Which kind has actually bin most frequently and dangerously disturbed by
them.

To the first: Seditions, Tumults, and Wars do arise from mistake, or from
malice; from just occasions, or unjust. From mistake, when a People think an
evil to be done or intended, which is not done nor intended; or take that to be
evil which is done, tho in truth it be not so. Well regulated Citys may fall
into these errors. The Romans being jealous of their newly recovered Liberty,
thought that Valerius Publicola designed to make himself King, when he built a
House in a place that seemed too strong and eminent for a private man. The
Spartans were not less suspicious of Lycurgus; and a lewd young Fellow in a
Sedition put out one of his eyes: but no People ever continued in a more
constant affection to their best deserving Citizens, than both the Romans and
Spartans afterward manifested to those virtuous and wrongfully suspected men.

Sometimes the fact is true, but otherwise understood than was intended. When
the Tarquins were expelled from Rome, the Patricians retained to themselves the
principal Magistracys; but never thought of bringing back Kings, or of setting
up a corrupt Oligarchy among themselves, as the Plebeians imagined: And this
mistake being discovered, the fury they had conceived, vanished; and they who
seemed to intend nothing less than the extirpation of all the Patrician
Familys, grew quiet. Menenius Agrippa appeased one of the most violent
Seditions that ever happened amongst them (till civil Interests were pursued by
armed Troops) with a Fable of the several parts of the Body that murmured
against the Belly: and the most dangerous of all was composed by creating
Tribuns to protect them. Some of the Patrician young men had favored the
Decemviri, and others being unwilling to appear against them, the People
believed they had all conspired with those new Tyrants: but Valerius and
Horatius putting themselves at the head of those who sought their destruction,
they perceived their Error, and looked upon the Patricians as the best
defenders of their Libertys: Et inde, says Livy, auram Libertatis captare, unde
servitutem timuissent. Democratical Governments are most liable to these
mistakes: In Aristocracys they are seldom seen, and we hear of none in Sparta
after the establishment of the Laws by Lycurgus. But Absolute Monarchys seem to
be totally exempted from them. The mischiefs designed are often dissembled or
denied, till they are past all possibility of being cured by any other way than
force: and such as are by necessity driven to use that remedy, know they must
perfect their work or perish. He that draws his Sword against the Prince, say
the French, ought to throw away the Scabbard; for tho the design be never so
just, yet the Authors are sure to be ruined if it miscarry. Peace is seldom
made, and never kept, unless the Subject retain such a Power in his hands, as
may oblige the Prince to stand to what is agreed; and in time some trick is
found to deprive them of that benefit.

Seditions proceeding from malice, are seldom or never seen in popular
Governments; for they are hurtful to the People, and none have ever willingly
and knowingly hurt themselves. There may be, and often is malice in those who
excite them; but the People are ever deceived, and whatsoever is thereupon
done, ought to be imputed to error, as I said before. If this be discovered in
time, it usually turns to the destruction of the Contriver; as in the cases of
Manlius Capitolinus, Spurius Melius, and Sp. Cassius: if not, for the most part
it produces a Tyranny, as in those of Agathocles, Dionysius, Pisistrates, and
Caesar. But in Absolute Monarchys, almost all the Troubles that arise, proceed
from malice; they cannot be reformed, the extinction of them is exceeding
difficult, if they have continued long enough to corrupt the People; and those
who appear against 'em, seek only to set up themselves, or their Friends. Thus
we see that in the Civil Wars of the East, the question was, Whether Artaxerxes
or Cyrus, Phraartes or Bardanes, should reign over the Persians and Parthians:
The People suffered equally from both whilst the Contests lasted; and the
decision left 'em under the power of a proud and cruel Master. The like is seen
in all places. After the death of Brutus and Cassius, no War was ever
undertaken in the Roman Empire upon a better account than one man's private
concernments: The Provinces suffered under all; and he, whom they had assisted
to overthrow one wicked Tyrant, very often proved worse than his Predecessor.
And the only ground of all the Dissensions with which France was vexed under
the Princes of Meroveus and Pepin's Races, were, which of them should reign,
the People remaining miserable under them all.

The case is not much different in mixed Monarchys: Some Wars may be undertaken
upon a just and public account, but the pretenses are commonly false: a
lasting Reformation is hardly introduced, an entire Change often disliked. And
tho such Kingdoms are frequently and terribly distracted, as appears by the
beforementioned Examples of England, Spain, etc. the Quarrels are for the most
part begun upon personal Titles, as between Henry the First and Robert; Stephen
and Maud; or the Houses of Lancaster and York: and the People who get nothing
by the Victory which way soever it fall, and might therefore prudently leave
the Competitors to decide their own Quarrels, like Theorestes and Polinices,
with their own Swords, become cruelly engaged in them.

It may seem strange to some that I mention Seditions, Tumults, and Wars, upon
just occasions; but I can find no reason to retract the term. God intending
that men should live justly with one another, dos certainly intend that he or
they who do no wrong, should suffer none; and the Law that forbids Injurys,
were of no use, if no Penalty might be inflicted on those who will not obey it.
If Injustice therefore be evil, and Injurys forbidden, they are also to be
punished; and the Law instituted for their prevention, must necessarily intend
the avenging of such as cannot be prevented. The work of the Magistracy is to
execute this Law; the Sword of Justice is put into their hands to restrain the
fury of those within the Society who will not be a Law to themselves; and the
Sword of War to protect the people against the violence of Foreigners. This is
without exception, and would be in vain if it were not. But the Magistrate who
is to protect the People from Injury, may, and is often known not to have done
it: he sometimes renders his Office useless by neglecting to do Justice;
sometimes mischievous by overthrowing it. This strikes at the root of God's
general Ordinance, That there should be Laws; and the particular Ordinances of
all Societys, that appoint such as seem best to them. The Magistrate therefore
is comprehended under both, and subject to both, as well as private men.

The ways of preventing or punishing Injurys, are Judicial or Extrajudicial.
Judicial proceedings are of force against those who submit or may be brought to
trial, but are of no effect against those who resist, and are of such power
that they cannot be constrained. It were absurd to cite a man to appear before
a Tribunal who can aw the Judges, or has Armies to defend him; and impious to
think that he who has added Treachery to his other Crimes, and usurped a Power
above the Law, should be protected by the enormity of his wickedness. Legal
proceedings therefore are to be used when the Delinquent submits to the Law;
and all are just, when he will not be kept in order by the legal.

The word Sedition is generally applied to all numerous Assemblys, without or
against the Authority of the Magistrate, or of those who assume that Power.
Athaliah and Jezabel were more ready to cry out Treason than David; and
examples of that sort are so frequent, that I need not alledg them.

Tumult is from the disorderly manner of those Assemblys, where things can
seldom be done regularly; and War is that Decertatio per vim, or trial by
force, to which men come when other ways are ineffectual.

If the Laws of God and Men are therefore of no effect, when the Magistracy is
left at liberty to break them; and if the Lusts of those who are too strong for
the Tribunals of Justice, cannot be otherwise restrained than by Sedition,
Tumults and War, those Seditions, Tumults, and Wars, are justified by the Laws
of God and Man.

I will not take upon me to enumerate all the cases in which this may be done,
but content my self with three, which have most frequently given occasion for
proceedings of this kind.

The first is, When one or more men take upon them the Power and Name of a
Magistracy, to which they are not justly called.

The second, When one or more being justly called, continue in their Magistracy
longer than the Laws by which they are called do prescribe.

And the third, When he or they who are rightly called, do assume a Power, tho
within the time prescribed, that the Law dos not give; or turn that which the
Law dos give, to an end different and contrary to that which is intended by it.

For the first; Filmer forbids us to examine Titles: he tells us, we must submit
to the Power, whether acquired by Usurpation or otherwise, not observing the
mischievous Absurdity of rewarding the most detestable Villanys with the
highest Honors, and rendering the veneration due to the supreme Magistrate as
Father of the People, to one who has no other advantage above his Brethren,
than what he has gained by injuriously dispossessing or murdering him that was
so. Hobbs fearing the advantages that may be taken from such desperate
nonsense, or not thinking it necessary to his end to carry the matter so far,
has no regard at all to him who comes in without Title or Consent; and denying
him to be either King or Tyrant, gives him no other name than Hostis and Latro,
and allows all things to be lawful against him, that may be done to a public
Enemy or Pyrat: which is as much as to say, any man may destroy him how he can.
Whatever he may be guilty of in other respects, he dos in this follow the voice
of Mankind, and the dictates of common sense: for no man can make himself a
Magistrate for himself, and no man can have the De Civ. l. 2.
right of a Magistrate, who is not a Magistrate. If he be justly accounted an
Enemy to all, who injures all; he above all must be the public Enemy of a
Nation, who by usurping a power over them, dos the greatest and most public
injury that a People can suffer: For which reason, by an established Law among
the most virtuous Nations, every man might kill a Tyrant; and no Names are
recorded in History with more honor, than of those who did it.

These are by other Authors called Tyranni sine titulo, and that name is given
to all those who obtain the supreme Power by illegal and unjust means. The Laws
which they overthrow can give them no protection; and every man is a Soldier
against him who is a public Enemy.

The same rule holds, tho they are more in number; as the Magi, who usurped the
Dominion of Persia after the death of Cambyses; the thirty Tyrants at Athens
overthrown by Thrasibulus; those of Thebes slain by Pelopidas; the Decemviri of
Rome, and others: For tho the multitude of Offenders may sometimes procure
impunity, yet that act which is wicked in one, must be so in ten or twenty; and
whatsoever is lawful against one Usurper, is so against them all.

2. If those who were rightly created, continue beyond the time limited by the
Law, it is the same thing. That which is expired, is as if it had never bin. He
that was created Consul for a year, or Dictator for six months, was after that
a private man; and if he had continued in the exercise of his Magistracy, had
bin subject to the same punishment as if he had usurped it at the first. This
was known to Epaminondas, who finding that his Enterprise against Sparta could
not be accomplished within the time for which he was made Boeotarches, rather
chose to trust his Countrymen with his life than to desist, and was saved
merely through an admiration of his Virtue, assurance of his good Intentions, and
the glory of the Action.

The Roman Decemviri, tho duly elected, were proceeded against as private men
usurping the Magistracy, when they continued beyond their time. Other
Magistrates had ceased; there was none that could regularly call the Senate or
People to an Assembly: but when their ambition was manifest, and the People
exasperated by the death of Virginia, they laid aside all ceremonys. The Senate
and People met, and exercising their Authority in the same manner as if they
had bin regularly called by the Magistrate appointed to that end, they
abrogated the Power of the Decemviri, proceeded against them as Enemies and
Tyrants, and by that means preserved themselves from utter ruin.

3. The same course is justly used against a legal Magistrate, who takes upon
him (tho within the time prescribed by the Law) to exercise a Power which the
Law dos not give; for in that respect he is a private man, Quia, as Grotius
says, eatenus non habet imperium; and may be restrained as well as any other,
because he is not set up to do what he lists, but what the Law appoints for the
good of the People: and as he has no other Power than what the Law allows, so
the same Law limits and directs the exercise of that which he has. This Right
naturally belonging to Nations, is no way impaired by the name of Supreme given
to their Magistrates; for it signifys no more, than that they do act sovereignly
in the matters committed to their charge. Thus are the Parliaments of France
called Course Souveraines; for they judge of Life and Death, determine
Controversys concerning Estates; and there is no appeal from their Decrees: but
no man ever thought, that it was therefore lawful for them to do what they
pleased; or that they might not be opposed, if they should attempt to do that
which they ought not. And tho the Roman Dictators and Consuls were supreme
Magistrates, they were subject to the People, and might be punished as well as
others if they transgrest the Law. Thuanus carrys the word so far, that when
Barlotta, Giustiniano, and others who were but Colonels, were sent as
Commanders in chief of three or four thousand men upon an Enterprise, he always
says, Summum Imperium ei delatum. Grotius explains this point, by
distinguishing those who have the summum Imperium summo modo, from those who
have it modo non summo. I know not where to find an Example of this Sovereign
Power, enjoyed without restriction, under a better title than Occupation; which
relates not to our purpose, who seek only that which is legal and just.
Therefore laying aside that point for the present, we may De Jur. Bell. and
Pac. l. 2.
follow Grotius in examining the right of those who are certainly limited: Vbi
partem Imperii habet Rex, partem Senatus sive Populus; in which case he says,
Regi in partem non suam involanti, vis justa opponi potest, in as much as they
who have a part, cannot but have a right of defending that part. Quia data
facultate, datur jus facultatem tuendi, without which it could be of no effect.

The particular limits of the Rights belonging to each, can only be judged by
the precise Letter, or general Intention of the Law. The Dukes of Venice have
certainly a part in the Government, and could not be called Magistrates if they
had not. They are said to be supreme; all Laws and public Acts bear their
Names. The Ambassador of that State speaking ^h^an. l. 137.
to Pope Paul the Fifth, denied that he acknowledged any other Superior than
God. But they are so well known to be under the Power of the Law, that diverse
of 'em have bin put to death for transgressing it; and a marble Gallows is seen
at the foot of the stairs in St. Mark's Palace, upon which some of them, and no
others, have bin executed. But if they may be duly opposed, when they commit
undue Acts, no man of judgment will deny, that if one of them by an outrageous
Violence should endeavor to overthrow the Law, he might by violence be
suppressed and chastis'd.

Again, some Magistrates are entrusted with a power of providing Ships, Arms,
Ammunition, and Victuals for War; raising and disciplining Soldiers, appointing
Officers to command in Forts and Garrisons, and making Leagues with Foreign
Princes and States. But if one of these should imbezel, sell, or give to an
Enemy those Ships, Arms, Ammunition or Provisions; betray the Forts; employ
only or principally, such men as will serve him in those wicked Actions; and,
contrary to the trust reposed in him, make such Leagues with Foreigners, as
tend to the advancement of his personal Interests, and to the detriment of the
Public, he abrogates his own Magistracy; and the Right he had, perishes (as
the Lawyers say) frustratione finis. He cannot be protected by the Law which he
has overthrown, nor obtain impunity for his Crimes from the Authority that was
conferred upon him, only that he might do good with it. He was singulis major on
account of the excellency of his Office; but universis minor, from the nature
and end of his Institution. The surest way of extinguishing his Prerogative,
was by turning it to the hurt of those who gave it. When matters are brought to
this posture, the Author of the mischief, or the Nation must perish. A Flock
cannot subsist under a Shepherd that seeks its ruin, nor a People under an
unfaithful Magistrate. Honor and Riches are justly heaped upon the heads of
those who rightly perform their duty, because the difficulty as well as the
excellency of the work is great. It requires Courage, Experience, Industry,
Fidelity and Wisdom. The good Shepherd, says our Savior, lays down his life
for his Sheep: The Hireling who flies in time of danger, is represented under
an ill character; but he that sets himself to destroy his Flock, is a Wolf. His
Authority is incompatible with their subsistence; and whoever disapproves
Tumults, Seditions or War, by which he may be removed from it, if gentler means
are ineffectual, subverts the Foundation of all Law, exalts the fury of one man
to the destruction of a Nation; and giving an irresistible Power to the most
abominable Iniquity, exposes all that are good to be destroyed, and Virtue to
be utterly extinguished.

Few will allow such a Preeminence to the Dukes of Venice or Genoa, the
Advoyers of Switzerland, or the Burgomasters of Amsterdam. Many will say these
are Rascals if they prove false, and ought rather to be hanged, than suffered
to accomplish the Villanys they design. But if this be confessed in relation to
the highest Magistrates that are among those Nations, why should not the same be
in all others, by what name soever they are called? When did God confer upon
those Nations the extraordinary privilege of providing better for their own
safety than others? Or was the Gift universal, tho the Benefit accrue only to
those who have banished great Titles from among them? If this be so, it is not
their Felicity, but their Wisdom that we ought to admire and imitate. But why
should any think their Ancestors had not the same care? Have not they, who
retained in themselves a Power over a Magistrate of one name, the like over
another? Is there a charm in words, or any name of such efficacy, that he who
receives it should immediately become Master of those that created him, whereas
all others do remain for ever subject to them? Would the Venetian Government
change its nature, if they should give the name of King to their Prince? Are
the Polanders less sree since the title of King is conferred upon their Dukes;
or are the Moscovites less Slaves, because their chief Magistrate has no other
than that of Duke? If we examine things but a little, 'twill appear that
Magistrates have enjoyed large Powers, who never had the name of Kings; and none
were ever more restrained by Laws than those of Sparta, Arragon, the Goths in
Spain, Hungary, Bohemia, Sweden, Denmark, Poland, and others, who had that
Title. There is therefore no such thing as a Right universally belonging to a
Name; but every one enjoys that which the Laws, by which he is, con^er upon
him. The Law that gives the Power, regulates it; and they who give no more than
what they please, cannot be obliged to suffer him to whom they give it, to take
more than they thought fit to give, or to go unpunished if he do. The
Agreements made are always confirmed by Oath, and the treachery of violating
them is consequently aggravated by Perjury. They are good Philosophers and able
Divines, who think this can create a Right to those who had none; or that the
Laws can be a protection to such as overthrow them, and give opportunity of
doing the mischiefs they design. If it do not, then he that was a Magistrate,
by such actions returns into the condition of a private man; and whatever is
lawful against a Thief who submits to no Law, is lawful against him.

Men who delight in cavils may ask, Who shall be the Judge of these occasions?
And whether I intend to give to the People the decision of their own Cause? To
which I answer, that when the contest is between the Magistrate and the People,
the party to which the determination is referred, must be the Judge of his own
case; and the question is only, Whether the Magistrate should depend on the
Judgment of the People, or the People on that of the Magistrate; and which is
most to be suspected of injustice: That is, whether the People of Rome should
judge Tarquin, or Tarquin judge the People. He that knew all good men abhorred him
for the murder of his Wife, Brother, Father-in-law, and the best of the Senate,
would certainly strike off the heads of the most eminent remaining Poppys; and
having incurred the general hatred of the people by the wickedness of his
Government, he feared revenge; and endeavoring to destroy those he feared
(that is the City) he might easily have accomplished his work, if the judgment
had bin referred to him. If the People judge Tarquin, it is hard to imagine how
they should be brought to give an unjust Sentence: They loved their former
Kings, and hated him only for his Villanys: They did not fancy, but know his
cruelty. When the best were slain, no man that any way resembled them could
think himself secure. Brutus did not pretend to be a Fool, till by the murder
of his Brother he found how dangerous a thing it was to be thought wise. If the
people, as our Author says, be always lewd, foolish, mad, wicked, and desirous
to put the Power into the hands of such as are most like to themselves, he and
his Sons were such men as they sought, and he was sure to find favorable
Judges: If virtuous and good, no injustice was to be feared from them, and he
could have no other reason to decline their judgment, than what was suggested
by his own wickedness. Caligula, Nero, Domitian, and the like, had probably the
same considerations: But no man of common sense ever thought that the Senate and
People of Rome did not better deserve to judge, whether such Monsters should
reign over the best part of mankind to their destruction, than they to determine
whether their Crimes should be punished or not.

If I mention some of these known Cases, every man's experience will suggest
others of the like nature; and whosoever condemns all Seditions, Tumults and
Wars raised against such Princes, must say, that none are wicked, or seek the
ruin of their People, which is absurd: for Caligula wished the People had but
one Neck, that he might cut it off at a blow; Nero set the City on fire; and we
have known such as have bin worse than either of them: They must either be
suffered to continue in the free exercise of their rage, that is, to do all the
mischief they design; or must be restrained by a legal, judicial, or
extrajudicial way; and they who disallow the extrajudicial, do as little like
the judicial. They will not hear of bringing a supreme Magistrate before a
Tribunal, when it may be done. They will, says our Author, depose their Kings.
Why should they not be deposed, if they become Enemies to their People, and set
up an interest in their own persons inconsistent with the public good, for the
promoting of which they were erected? If they were created by the public
consent, for the public good, shall they not be removed when they prove to be
of public damage? If they set up themselves, may they not be thrown down?
Shall it be lawful for them to usurp a Power over the liberty of others, and
shall it not be lawful for an injured People to resume their own? If injustice
exalt it self, must it be for ever established? Shall great Persons be rendered
sacred by rapine, perjury and murder? Shall the crimes for which private men do
justly suffer the most grievous punishments, exempt them from all, who commit
them in the highest excess, with most power, and most to the prejudice of
mankind? Shall the Laws that solely aim at the prevention of Crimes, be made to
patronize them, and become snares to the innocent whom they ought to protect?
Has every man given up into the common store his right of avenging the Injurys
he may receive, that the public Power which ought to protect or avenge him,
should be turned to the destruction of himself, his Posterity, and the Society
into which they enter, without any possibility of redress? Shall the Ordinance
of God be rendered of no effect; or the Powers he has appointed to be set up
for the distribution of Justice, be made subservient to the lusts of one or a
sew men, and by impunity encourage them to commit all manner of crimes? Is the
corruption of man's Nature so little known, that such as have common sense
should expect Justice from those, who sear no punishment if they do Injustice;
or that the modesty, integrity, and innocence, which is seldom found in one
man, tho never so cautiously chosen, should be constantly found in all those
who by any means attain to Greatness, and continue for ever in their
Successors; or that there can be any security under their Government, if they
have them not? Surely if this were the condition of men living under
Government, Forests would be more safe than Citys; and 'twere better for every
man to stand in his own defense, than to enter into Societys. He that lives
alone might encounter such as should assault him upon equal terms, and stand or
fall according to the measure of his courage and strength; but no Valor can
defend him, if the malice of his Enemy be upheld by a public Power. There must
therefore be a right of proceeding judicially or extrajudicially against all
persons who transgress the Laws, or else those Laws, and the Societys that
should subsist by them, cannot stand; and the ends for which Governments are
constituted, together with the Governments themselves, must be overthrown.
Extrajudicial proceedings by Sedition, Tumult, or War, must take place, when
the persons concerned are of such power, that they cannot be brought under the
Judicial. They who deny this, deny all help against an usurping Tyrant, or the
perfidiousness of a lawfully created Magistrate, who adds the crimes of
Ingratitude and Treachery to Usurpation. These of all men are the most
dangerous Enemies to supreme Magistrates: for as no man desires indemnity for
such Crimes as are never committed, he that would exempt all from punishment,
supposes they will be guilty of the worst; and by concluding that the People
will depose them if they have the power, acknowledge that they pursue an
Interest annexed to their Persons, contrary to that of their People, which they
would not bear if they could deliver themselves from it. This showing all those
Governments to be tyrannical, lays such a burden upon those who administer
them, as must necessarily weigh them down to destruction.

If it be said that the word Sedition implys that which is evil; I answer, that
it ought not then to be applied to those who seek nothing but that which is
just; and tho the ways of delivering an oppressed People from the violence of a
wicked Magistrate, who having armed a Crew of lewd Villains, and fatted them
with the Blood and Confiscations of such as were most ready to oppose him, be
extraordinary, the inward righteousness of the Act dos fully justify the
Authors. He that has virtue and power to save a People, can never want a right
of doing it. Valerius Asiaticus had no hand in the death of Caligula; but when
the furious Guards began tumultuously to inquire who had killed him, he
appeased them with wishing he had bin the man. No wise man ever asked by what
authority Thrasibulus, Harmodius, Aristogiton, Pelopidas, Epaminondas, Dion,
Timoleon, Lucius Brutus, Publicola, Horatius, Valerius, Marcus Brutus, C.
Cassius, and the like, delivered their Countries from Tyrants. Their Actions
carried in them their own justification, and their Virtues will never be
forgotten whilst the names of Greece and Rome are remembered in the World.

If this be not enough to declare the Justice inherent in, and the Glory that
ought to accompany these Works, the examples of Moses, Aaron, Othniel, Ehud,
Barac, Gideon, Samuel, Jephtha, David, Jehu, Jehoiada, the Maccabees, and other
holy men raised up by God for the deliverance of his People from their
Oppressors, decide the Question. They are perpetually renowned for having led
the People by extraordinary ways (which such as our Author express under the
names of Sedition, Tumult, and War) to recover their Libertys, and avenge the
injurys received from foreign or domestic Tyrants. The work of the Apostles
was not in their time to set up or pull down any civil State; but they so
behaved themselves in relation to all the Powers of the Earth, that they gained
the name of pestilent seditious Fellows, Disturbers of the People; and left it
as an inheritance to those, who in succeeding Ages by following their steps
should deserve to be called their Successors; whereby they were exposed to the
hatred of corrupt Magistrates, and brought under the necessity of perishing by
them, or desending themselves against them: and he that denis them that right,
dos at once condemn the most glorious Actions of the wisest, best, and holiest
men that have bin in the world, together with the Laws of God and Man, upon
which they were founded.

Nevertheless, there is a sort of Sedition, Tumult, and War proceeding from
Malice, which is always detestable, aiming only at the satisfaction of private
Lust, without regard to the public Good. This cannot happen in a Popular
Government, unless it be amongst the Rabble; or when the Body of the People is
so corrupted, that it cannot stand; but is most frequent in, and natural to
absolute Monarchys. When Abimelech desired Judge. 9.
to make himself King, he raised a Tumult among the basest of the People: He
hired light and vain Persons, some Translations call them lewd Vagabonds,
killed his Brethren, but perished in his design; the corrupt party that favored
him not having Strength enough to subdue the other, who were more sincere. Sp.
Melius, Sp. Cassius, and Manlius attempted the like in Rome: they acted
maliciously, their pretenses to procure the public Good were false. It Is
probable that some in the City were as bad as they, and knew that mischief was
intended; but the Body of the People not being corrupted, they were suppressed.
It appeared, says Livy, Nihil esse minus populare quam regnum: they who had
favored Manlius, condemned him to death when it was proved, that egregias
alioqui virtutes foeda regni cupidine maculasset. But when the People is
generally corrupted, such designs seldom miscarry, and the success is always
the erection of a Tyranny. Nothing else can please vain and profligate persons,
and no Tyranny was ever set up by such as were better qualified. The ways of
attaining it have always bin by corrupting the manners of the People, bribing
Soldiers, entertaining mercenary Strangers, opening Prisons, giving Liberty to
Slaves, alluring indigent persons with hopes of abolishing Debts, coming to a
new division of Lands, and the like. Seditions raised by such men always tend
to the ruin of popular Governments; but when they happen under absolute
Monarchys, the hurt intended is only to the Person, who being removed, the
Promoters of 'em set up another; and he that is set up, subsisting only by the
strength of those who made him, is obliged to foment the Vices that drew them
to serve him; tho another may perhaps make use of the same against him.

The consequence of this is, That those who uphold popular Governments, look
upon Vice and Indigence as mischiefs that naturally increase each other, and
equally tend to the ruin of the State. When men are by Vice brought into want,
they are ready for mischief: there is no Villainy that men of profligate Lives,
lost Reputation, and desperate Fortunes will not undertake. Popular Equality is
an enemy to these; and they who would preserve it, must preserve integrity of
Manners, Sobriety, and an honest contentedness with what the Law allows. On the
other side, the absolute Monarch, who will have no other Law than his own Will,
desires to increase the number of those who through leudness and beggary may
incline to depend upon him; tho the same temper of Mind, and condition of
Fortune prepare them also for such Seditions as may bring him into danger; and
the same corruption which led them to set him up, may invite them to sell him
to another that will give them better wages.

I do not by this conclude that all Monarchs are vicious men; but that whoever
will set up an absolute Power, must do it by these means; and that if such a
Power be already established, and should fall into the hands of a person, who
by his Virtue and the gentleness of his Nature should endeavor to render the
Yoke so easy, that a better disciplined People might be contented to bear it;
yet this method could last no longer than his life, and probably would be a
means to shorten it; that which was at first established by evil Arts always
returning to the same: That which was vicious in the principle, can never be
long upheld by Virtue; and we see that the worst of the Roman Emperors were not
in greater danger from such good men as remained undestroy'd, than the best
from the corrupt Party that would not be corrected, and sought such a Master as
would lay no restriction upon their Vices. Those few who escaped the rage of
these Villains, only gave a little breathing time to the afflicted World, which
by their Children or Successors was again plunged into that extremity of
misery, from which they intended to deliver it. An extraordinary Virtue was
required to keep a Prince in a way contrary to the principles of his own
Government; which being rarely found, and never continuing long in a Family or
Succession of men, the endeavors of the best became ineffectual, and either
they themselves perished in them, or after their death all things returned into
the old polluted Channel.

Tho the Power of the Hebrew Kings was not unlimited, yet it exceeded the Rules
set by God, and was sufficient to increase the number of the worst of men, and
to give them opportunitys of raising perpetual disturbances. On the King's side
there were Flatterers and Instruments of mischief: On the other side there were
indebted and discontented Persons. Notwithstanding the Justice of David's
cause, the Wisdom, Valor, and Piety of his Person, none would follow him,
except a few of his own Kindred (who knew what God had promised to him) and
such as were uneasy in their worldly circumstances. After the death of Saul
there was a long and bloody War between Ishbosheth and David. The former being
killed, the slightest matters were sufficient to put the whole Nation into
blood. Absalom with a few fair words was able to raise all Israel against his
Father: Sheba the Son of Bichri with as much ease raised a more dangerous
Tumult: David, by Wisdom, Valor, and the Blessing of God, surmounted these
Difficultys, and prepared a peaceable Reign for Solomon: but after his death
they broke out into a Flame that was never quenched, till the Nation was so
dispersed that no man knew where to find his Enemies. Solomon by his
Magnificence had reduced Israel to such poverty, as inclined them to revolt
upon the first offer of an opportunity by Jeroboam. From that time forward
Israel was perpetually vexed with Civil Seditions and Conspiracys, or Wars with
their Brethren of Judah. Nine Kings with their Familys were destroyed by the
first, and the latter brought such Slaughters upon the miserable People, as
were never suffered by any who were not agitated by the like Fury; and the
course of these mischiefs was never interrupted, till they had brought the
Nation into Captivity, and the Country to Desolation. Tho God according to his
promise did preserve a light in the House of David, yet the Tribe of Judah was
not the more happy. Joash was slain by a private Conspiracy, and Amaziah (as is
most probable) by public Authority, for having foolishly brought a terrible
Slaughter upon Judah. Athaliah destroyed the King's Race, and was killed her
self by Jehoiada, who not having learned from our Author to regard the Power
only, and not the ways by which it was obtained, caused her to be dragged out of
the Temple, and put to a well-deserv'd Death. The whole Story is a Tragedy: and
if it be pretended that this proceeded rather from the wrath of God against his
People for their Idolatry, than from such causes as are applicable to other
Nations; I answer, that this Idolatry was the production of the Government they
had set up, and most suitable to it; and choosing rather to subject themselves to
the Will of a man than to the Law of God, they deservedly suffered the evils
that naturally follow the worst Counsels. We know of none who, taking the like
course, have not suffered the like miserys. Notwithstanding the admirable
Virtue and Success of Alexander, his Reign was full of Conspiracys, and his
knowledge of them prompted him to destroy Parmenio, Philotas, Clitus,
Calisthenes, Hermolaus, and many more of his best Friends. If he escaped the
Sword, he fell by Poison. The Murder of his Wives, Mother, and Children, by the
rage of his own Soldiers; the Fury of his Captains employed in mutual
Slaughters, till they were consumed; his paternal Kingdom after many
Revolutions transferred to Cassander his most mortal Enemy; the utter extinction
of his conquering Army, and particularly the famous Argyraspides, who being
grown faithless and seditious, after the death of Eumenes were sent to perish
in unknown parts of the East, abundantly testify the admirable stability, good
order, peace, and quiet that is enjoyed under absolute Monarchy. The next
Government of the like nature that appeared upon the Stage of the World was
that of Rome, introduced by Wars that consumed two thirds of the People;
confirmed by Proscriptions, in which all that were eminent for Nobility,
Riches, or Virtue, perished. The peace they had under Augustus was like that
which the Devil allowed to the Child in the Gospel, whom he rent Mark 9. 26.
sorely, and left as dead. The miserable City was only cast into a Swound: after
long and violent vexations by Seditions, Tumults, and Wars, it lay as dead; and
finding no helper like to him who cured the Child, it was delivered to new
Devils to be tormented, till it was utterly destroyed. Tiberius was appointed
as a fit instrument for such a purpose. It was thought that those who should
feel the effects of his Pride, Cruelty, and Lust, would look upon the Death of
Augustus as a loss. He performed the work for which he was chosen; his Reign
was an uninterrupted Series of Murders, Subornations, Perjurys, and Poisonings,
intermixed with the most detestable Impuritys, the revolts of Provinces, and
Mutinys of Armies. The matter was not mended by his Successors: Caligula was
killed by his own Guards; Claudius poisoned by his Wife: Spain, Gaul, Germany,
Pannonia, Maesia, Syria, and Egypt, revolted at once from Nero; the People and
Senate followed the example of the Provinces. This I think was, in our Author's
sense, Sedition with a witness. Nero being dead by the hand of a Slave, or his
own, to prevent that of the Hangman, Galba entered the City with Blood and
Slaughter; but when his own Soldiers found he would not give the Money for which
they intended to sell the Empire, they killed him: and to show the stability of
Absolute Monarchy, it may be observed, that this was not done by the advice of
the Senate, or by a conspiracy of great men; Suscepere duo manipulares C. Tacit.
Hist* l. 1.
Populi Romani Imperium transferendum, and transtulerunt. Two Rascals gave the
Empire to Otho, and the whole Senate was like to be butchered for not being so
ready to follow their venerable Authority as they ought to have bin, and hardly
escaped the fury of their mad and drunken Companions. As a farther testimony
that these Monarchys are not subject to Seditions and Tumults, he had at once
only two Competitors against whom he was to defend the well-acquir'd Empire:
His Army was deseated at Brescia, he killed himself; and his Successor
Vitellius was soon after thrown into the Common-shore. The same method still
continued: Rome was filled with Blood and Ashes; and to recite all the public
Mischiefs would be to transcribe the History: For as Pyrrhus being asked who
should succeed him, answered, He who has the sharpest Sword; that was the only
Law that governed in the following ages. Whoever could corrupt two or three
Legions, thought he had a good title to the Empire; and unless he happened to
be killed by Treachery, or another Tumult of his own Soldiers, he seldom
receded from it without a Battle, wherein he that was most successful, had no
other security than what the present temper of the Soldiers afforded him: and
the miserable Provinces having neither Virtue nor Force, were obliged slavishly
to follow the fury or fortune of those Villains. In this state did Rome
dedicate to Constantine the Triumphal Arch that had bin prepared for Maxentius;
and those Provinces which had set up Albinus and Niger submitted to Septimius
Severus. In the vast variety of Accidents that in those Ages disturbed the
World, no Emperor had a better title than what he purchased by Money or
Violence; and enjoyed it no longer than those helps continued, which of all
things were the most uncertain. By this means most of the Princes perished by
the Sword, Italy was made desolate, and Rome was several times sacked and
burnt. The Mistress of the World being made a Slave, the Provinces which had
bin acquired by the Blood of her ancient virtuous Citizens, became part of an
Usurper's Patrimony, who without any regard to the public good, distributed
'em to his Children according to their number, or his passion. These either
destroyed one another, or fell under the Sword of a third who had the fortune
of their Father, the greatest part most commonly falling to the share of the
worst. If at any time the contrary happened, the Government of the best was but
a lucid interval, and well-wishing men grew more extremely to abhor the
darkness that followed when they were gone. The best of 'em could do no more
than suspend mischief for a while, but could not correct the corrupt principle
of their Government; and some of 'em were destroyed as soon as they were
thought to intend it: Others who finished their days in peace, left the Empire
to such persons of their relations as were most unlike to them. Domitian came
in as Brother to Titus. Commodus and Heliogabalus were recommended by the
memory of those Virtues that had bin found in Antoninus and Aurelius. Honorius
and Arcadius, who by their baseness brought utter ruin upon the Western and
Eastern Empires, were the Sons of the brave Theodosius. They who could keep
their hands free from Blood, and their Hearts from Malice, Covetousness, and
Pride, could not transmit their Virtues to their Successors, nor correct the
perverseness that lay at the root and foundation of their Government. The whole
mass of Blood was vitiated: the Body was but one vast Sore, which no hand but
that of the Almighty could heal; and he who from an abhorrence of iniquity had
declared he would not hear the cries of his own people, when they had chosen the
thing that was not good, would not show mercy to Strangers who had done the
same thing.

I have insisted upon the Hebrew, Macedonian and Roman Historys, because they
are the most eminent and best known to us: We are in the dark concerning the
Babylonian, Assyrian, Chaldean, Bactrian, and Egyptian Monarchys: We know
little more of them than the Scripture occasionally relates concerning their
barbarous cruelty, bestial pride, and extravagant folly. Others have bin like
to them, and I know not where to find a peaceable Monarchy unless it be in
Peru, where the Ynca Gar^ilasso de la Vega says, that a Man and a Woman,
Children of the Sun and the Moon, appearing amongst a barbarous people living
without any Religion or Law, established a Government amongst them, which
continued in much Peace and Justice for twelve Generations: But this seeming to
be as fabulous as their Birth, we may pass it over, and fix upon those that are
better known; of which there is not one that has not suffered more dangerous
and mischievous Seditions, than all the popular Governments that have bin in
the World: And the condition of those Kingdoms which are not absolute, and yet
give a preference to Birth, without consideration of Merit or Virtue, is not
much better.

This is proved by the Reasons of those Seditions and Tumults, as well as from
the Fact it self.

The Reasons arise from the violence of the Passions that incite men to them,
and the intricacy of the Questions concerning Succession.

Every man has Passions; few know how to moderate, and no one can wholly
extinguish them. As they are various in their nature, so they are governed by
various Objects; and men usually follow that which is predominant in them,
whether it proceed from Anger or Desire, and whether it terminate in Ambition,
Covetousness, Lust, or any other more or less blamable Appetite. Every manner
of life furnishes something, that in some measure may foment these; but a Crown
comprehends all that can be grateful to the most violent and vicious. He who is
covetous, has vast Revenues, besides what he may get by fraud and rapine, to
satisfy his Appetite. If he be given to Sensuality, the variety of pleasures,
and the facility of accomplishing whatever he desires, tends farther to inflame
that Passion. Such as are ambitious, are incited by the greatness of their
Power to attempt great matters; and the most sottish or lazy may discharge
themselves of Cares, and hope that others will be easily hired to take the
burden of Business upon them whilst they lie at ease. They who naturally
incline to pride and cruelty, are more violently tempted to usurp Dominion; and
the wicked Advices of Flatterers, always concurring with their Passions, incite
them to exercise the Power they have gotten with the utmost rigor, to satiate
their own rage, and to secure themselves against the effects of the public
hatred, which they know they have deserved. If there be, as our Author says, no
other Rule than Force and Success, and that he must be taken for the Father of
a People who is in possession of a Power over them; whoever has the one, may
put the other to a trial. Nay, even those who have regard to Justice, will
seldom want Reasons to persuade them that it is on their side. Something may be
amiss in the State; Injurys may be done to themselves and their Friends. Such
Honors may be denied as they think they deserve; or others of less Merit, as
they suppose, may be preferred before them. Men do so rarely make a right
estimate of their own Merits, that those who mean well may be often deceived:
and if nothing but Success be required to make a Monarch, they may think it
just to attempt whatever they can hope to accomplish. This was the case of
Julius Caesar; he thought all things Viribus utendum est quas fecimus: arma
cenenti
Omnia dat qui justa negat. Lu^an.

lawful, when the Consulat, which he supposed he had deserved, was denied.
These Enterprises seem to belong to men of great Spirits; but there are none so
base not to be capable of undertaking, and (as things may stand) of bringing
'em to perfection. History represents no man under a more contemptible
character of sottis^ Laziness, Cowardice, and Drunkenness, than Vitellius; no
one more impure and sordid than Galba: Otho was advanced for being in his
manners like to Nero: Vespasian was scorned for his Avarice, till the Power
fell into such hands as made the world believe none could be unworthy of the
Empire; and in the following Ages the worst men by the worst means most
frequently obtained it.

These Wounds are not cured by saying, that the Law of God and Nature prevents
this mischief, by annexing the Succession of Crowns to proximity of Blood; for
mankind had not bin continually afflicted with them if there had bin such a
Law, or that they could have bin prevented by it: and tho there were such a
Law, yet more Questions would arise about that Proximity, than any wise man
would dare to determine. The Law can be of no effect, unless there be a Power to
decide the Contests arising upon it: But the fundamental Maxim of the great
Monarchys is, that there can be no Interregnum: The Heir of the Crown is in
possession, as soon as he who did enjoy it is dead. Le Mort, as the French say,
Saisit le vif: There can be therefore no such Law, or it serves for nothing. If
there be Judges to interpret the Law, no man is a King till judgment be given
in his favor; and he is not King by his own Title, but by the Sentence given by
them. If there be none, the Law is merely imaginary, and every man may in his
own case make it what he pleases. He who has a Crown in his view, and Arms in
his hand, wants nothing but success to make him a King; and if he prospers, all
men are obliged to obey him.

It Is a folly to say the matter is clear, and needs no decision; for every man
knows that no Law concerning private Inheritances can be so exactly drawn, but
many Controversys will arise upon it, that must be decided by a Power to which
both Partys are subject: and the disputes concerning Kingdoms are so much the
more difficult, because this Law is no where to be found; and the more
dangerous, because the Competitors are for the most part more powerful.

Again, this Law must either be general to all Mankind, or particular to each
Nation. If particular, a matter of such importance requires good proof, when,
where, how, and by whom it was given to every one. But the Scriptures
testifying to the contrary, that God gave Laws to the Jews only, and that no
such thing as hereditary Monarchy, according to proximity of Blood, was
prescribed by them, we may safely say, that God never gave any such Law to
every particular, nor to any Nation. If he did not give it to any one, he did
not give it to all, for every one is comprehended in all; and if no one has it,
it is impossible that all can have it; or that it should be obligatory to all,
when no man knows or can tell, when, where, and by what hand it was given, nor
what is the sense of it: all which is evident by the various Laws and Customs
of Nations in the disposal of hereditary Successions: And no one of them, that
we know, has to this day bin able to show that the method followed by them, is
more according to nature than that of others.

If our Author pretends to be God's Interpreter, and to give the solution of
these doubts, I may ask which of the five following ways are appointed by God,
and then we may examine Cases resulting from them.

1. In France, Turkey, and other places, the Succession comes to the next Male,
in the straight eldest Line, according to which the Son is preferred before the
Brother of him who last enjoyed the Crown, (as the present King of France
before his Uncle the Duke of Orleans) and the Son of the eldest before the
Brothers of the eldest; as in the case of Richard the Second of England, who
was advanced preferably to all the Brothers of the black Prince his Father.

2. Others keep to the Males of the reigning Family, yet have more regard to
the eldest Man than to the eldest Line: and Representation taking no place
among them, the eldest Man is thought to be nearest to the first King; and a
second Son of the Person that last reigned, to be nearer to him than his
Grandchild by the eldest Son: according to which Rule, any one of the Sons of
Edward the Third remaining after his death, should have bin preferred before
Richard the Second who was his Grandchild.

3. In the two cases beforementioned, no manner of regard is had to Females,
who being thought naturally incapable of commanding Men, or performing the
Functions of a Magistrate, are, together with their Descendents, utterly
excluded from the supreme as well as from the inferior Magistracys; and in
Turkey, France, and other great Kingdoms, have no pretense to any Title: But in
some places, and particularly in England, the advantages of Proximity belong to
them as well as to Males; by which means our Crown has bin transported to
several Familys and Nations.

4. As in some places they are utterly rejected, and in others received simply
without any condition; so those are not wanting, where that of not marrying out
of the Country, or without the consent of the Estates, is imposed, of which
Sweden is an Example.

5. In some places Proximity of Blood is only regarded, whether the Issue be
legitimate, or illegitimate; in others Bastards are wholly excluded.

By this variety of Judgments made by several Nations upon this Point, it may
appear, that tho it were agreed by all that the next in Blood ought to succeed,
yet such Contests would arise upon the interpretation and application of the
general Rule, as must necessarily be a perpetual Spring of irreconcilable and
mortal Quarrels.

If any man say, The Rule observed in England is that which God gave to
Mankind; I leave him first to dispute that point with the Kings of France, and
many others, who can have no right to the Crowns they wear, if it be admitted;
and in the next place to prove that our Ancestors had a more immediate
communication with God, and a more certain knowledge of his Will than others,
who for any thing we know, may be of Authority equal to them: But in the mean
time we may rationally conclude, that if there be such a Rule, we have had no
King in England for the space of almost a thousand years, having not had one
who did not come to the Crown by a most manifest violation of it; as appears by
the forecited Examples of William the First and Second; Henry the First; Henry
the Second and his Children; John, Edward the Third, Henry the Fourth, Edward
the Fourth and his Children; Henry the Seventh, and all that claim under any of
them. And if Possession or Success can give a right, it will I think follow,
that Jack Straw, Wat Tyler, Perkin Warbeck, or any other Rascal, might have had
it if he had bin as happy as bold in his Enterprise. This is no less than to
expose Crowns to the first that can seize them, to destroy all Law and Rule,
and to render Right a slave to Fortune. If this be so, a late Earl of Pembroke,
whose understanding was not thought great, judged rightly when he said his
Grandfather was a wise man tho he could neither write nor read, in as much as
he resolved to follow the Crown, tho it were upon a Coalstaff. But if this be
sufficient to make a wise man, it is pity the secret was no sooner discovered,
since many, who for want of it lived and died in all the infamy that justly
accompanys Knavery, Cowardice and Folly, might have gained the reputation of
the most excellent Men in their several ages. The bloody Factions with which
all Nations subject to this sort of Monarchy have bin perpetually vexed, might
have bin prevented by throwing up cross or pile, or by battle between the
Competitors body to body, as was done by Corbis and Orsua, Cleorestes and
Polinices, Ironside and Canutus; it being most unreasonable, or rather
impiously absurd, for any to venture their Lives and Fortunes, when their
Consciences are not concerned in the Contest, and that they are to gain nothing
by the Victory.

If Reason teaches, that till this expeditious way of ending Controversys be
received, the Ambition of men will be apt to imbroil Nations in their Quarrels;
and others judging variously of those matters, which can be reduced to no
certain Rule, will think themselves in Conscience obliged to follow the party
that seems to them to be most just: Experience manifests the same, and that
Ambition has produced more violent mischiefs than all the other desires and
passions that have ever possessed the hearts of men. That this may appear, it
will not be amiss to divide these mischiefs, into such as proceed from him who
is in possession of the Power, through jealousy of State, as they call it, to
prevent the enterprises of those who would dispossess him, and such as arise
between Competitors contending for it.

Tarquin's Counsel concerning the Poppys, and Periander's heads of Corn, are of
the first sort. The most eminent are always most feared, as the readiest to
undertake, and most able to accomplish great Designs. This eminence proceeds
from Birth, Riches, Virtue, or Reputation, and is sometimes wrought up to the
greatest height by a conjunction of all these. But I know not where to find an
example of such a man, who could long subsist under Absolute Monarchy. If he be
of high Birth, he must, like Brutus, conceal his Virtue, and gain no
reputation, or resolve to perish, if he do not prevent his own death by that of
the Tyrant: All other ways are ineffectual; the suspicions, fears and hatred
thereupon arising, are not to be removed: Personal respects are forgotten, and
such services as cannot be sufficiently valued, must be blotted out by the
death of those who did them. Various ways may be taken, and pretenses used
according to the temper of Times and Nations; but the thing must be done; and
whether it be colored by a trick of Law, or performed by a Mute with a
Bowstring, imports little. Henry the fourth was made King by the Earl of
Northumberland, and his brave Son Hotspur; Edward the fourth by the valiant
Earl of Warwick; Henry the seventh by Stanley: but neither of 'em could think
himself safe, till his Benefactor was dead. No continued fidelity, no
testimonys of modesty and humility can prevent this. The modesty of Germanicus
in rejecting the Honors that were offered to him, and his industry in quieting
the mutiny'd Legions, accelerated his ruin: When 'twas evident he might be
Emperor if he pleased, he must be so, or die: There was no middle station
between the Throne and the Grave. It Is probable that Caligula, Nero, and other
Beasts like to them, might hate Virtue for the good which is in it; but I
cannot think that either they, their Predecessors or Successors, would have put
themselves upon the desperate design of extirpating it, if they had not found
it to be inconsistent with their Government; and that being once concluded,
they spared none of their nearest Relations. Artaxerxes killed his Son Darius:
Herod murdered the best of his Wives, and all his Sons except the worst.
Tiberius destroyed Agrippa Postuhmus, and Germanicus with his Wife and two
Sons. How highly soever Constantine the Great be commended, he was polluted
with the Blood of his Father-in-law, Wife, and Son. Philip the second of Spain
did in like manner deliver himself from his fears of Don Carlos; and it is not
doubted that Philip the fourth, for the same reasons, dispatched his Brother
Don Carlos, and his Son Balthazar. The like cases were so common in England,
that all the Plantagenets, and the noble Familys allied to them, being
extinguished, our Ancestors were sent to seek a King in one of the meanest in
Wales.

This method being known, those who are unwilling to die so tamely, endeavor
to find out ways of defending themselves; and there being no other than the
death of the Person who is in the Throne, they usually seek to compass it by
secret Conspiracy, or open Violence; and the number of Princes that have bin
destroyed, and Countries disturbed by those who through fear have bin driven to
extremitys, is not much less than of those who have suffered the like from men
following the impulse of their own Ambition.

The disorders arising from Contests between several Competitors, before any
one could be settled in the possession of Kingdoms, have bin no less frequent
and bloody than those abovementioned; and the miserys suffered by them,
together with the ruin brought upon the Empires of Macedon and Rome, may be
sufficient to prove it: however to make the matter more clear, I shall alledg
others. But because it may be presumption in me to think I know all the
Historys of the World, or tedious to relate all those I know, I shall content
my self with some of the most eminent and remarkable: And if it appears they
have all suffered the same mischiefs, we may believe they proceed not from
Accidents, but from the power of a permanent Cause, that always produces the
same or the like Effects.

To begin with France. The Succession not being well settled in the time of
Meroveus, who had dispossessed the Grandchildren of Pharamond, he was no sooner
dead than Gillon set up himself, and with much slaughter drove his Son
Chilperic out of the Kingdom; who after a little time returning with like fury,
is said to have seen a Vision, first of Lions and Leopards, then of Bears and
Wolves, and lastly of Dogs and Cats, all tearing one another to pieces. This
has bin always accounted by the French Hist. de France en la Vie de Chilperic 1.
to be a representation of the nature and fortune of the three Races that were
to command them, and has bin too much verified by experience. Clovis their
first Christian and most renowned King, having by good means or evil
exceedingly enlarged his Territorys, but chiefly by the murders of Alaric, and
Ragnacaire with his Children, and suborning Mezeray and de Serres.
Sigismond of Metz to kill his Father Sigebert, left his Kingdom to be torn in
pieces by the rage of his four Sons, each of 'em endeavoring to make himself
Master of the whole; and when, according to the usual fate of such Contests,
success had crowned Clothair, who was the worst of 'em all, by the ^laughter of
his Brothers and Nephews, with all the flower of the French and Gaulish
Nobility, the advantages of his Fortune only resulted to his own person. For
after his death the miserable Nations suffered as much srom the madness of his
Sons, as they had done by himself and his Brothers. They had learned from their
Predecessors not to be slow in doing mischief, but were farther incited by the
rage of two infamous Strumpets, Fredegonde and Brunehaud, which is a sort of
Vermin that, I am inclined to think, has not usually governed Senats or Popular
Assemblys. Chilperic the second, who by the slaughter of many Persons of the
Royal Blood, with infinite numbers of the Nobility and People, came to be
Master of so much of the Country as procured him the name of King of France,
killed his eldest Son on suspicion he was excited against him by Brunehaud, and
his second, lest he should revenge the death of his Brother: he married
Fredegonde, and was soon after killed by her Adulterer Landry. The Kingdom
continued in the same misery through the rage of the surviving Princes, and found
no relief, tho most of 'em fell by the Sword; and that Brunehaud who had bin a
principal Cause of those Tragedys, was tied to the tails of four wild Horses,
and suffered a death as foul as her life. These were Lions and Leopards. They
involved the Kingdom in desperate troubles; but being Men of valor and
industry, they kept up in some measure the Reputation and Power of the Nation,
and he who attained to the Crown defended it. But they being fallen by the
hands of each other, the poisonous Root put forth another Plague more mortal
than their Fury. The vigor was spent, and the Succession becoming more settled,
ten base and slothful Kings, by the French called Les Roys faineans, succeeded.
Some may say, They who do nothing, do no hurt; but the Rule is false in
relation to Kings. He that takes upon him the Government of a People, can do no
greater evil than by doing nothing, nor be guilty of a more unpardonable Crime,
than by Negligence, Cowardice, Voluptuousness, and Sloth, to desert his charge.
Virtue and Manhood perish under him; good Discipline is forgotten; Justice
slighted; the Laws perverted or rendered useless; the People corrupted; the
public Treasures exhausted; and the Power of the Government always falling
into the hands of Flatterers, Whores, Favorites, Bauds, and such base Wretches
as render it contemptible, a way is laid open for all manner of disorders. The
greatest cruelty that has bin known in the world, if accompanied with wit and
courage, never did so much hurt as this slothful bestiality; or rather these
slothful Beasts have ever bin most cruel. The Reigns of Septimius Severus,
Mahomet the second, or Selim the second, were cruel and bloody; but their fury
was turned against Foreigners, and some of their near Relations, or against
such as fell under the suspicion of making attempts against them: The condition
of the People was tolerable; those who would be quiet might be safe; the Laws
kept their right course; the Reputation of the Empire was maintained, the
Limits defended, and the public Peace preserved. But when the Sword past into
the hands of lewd, slothful, foolish, and cowardly Princes, it was of no power
against foreign Enemies, or the disturbers of domestic Peace, tho always sharp
against the best of their own Subjects. No man knew how to secure himself
against them, unless by raising civil Wars; which will always be srequent, when
a Crown defended by a weak hand is proposed as a Prize to any that dare invade
it. This is a perpetual Spring of disorders; and no Nation was ever quiet, when
the most eminent men found less danger in the most violent Attempts, than in
submitting patiently to the Will of a Prince, that suffers his Power to be
managed by vile Persons, who get credit by flattering him in his Vices. But
this is not all; such Princes naturally hate and fear those who excel them in
Virtue and Reputation, as much as they are inferior to them in Fortune; and
think their Persons cannot be secured, nor their Authority enlarged, except by
their destruction. It Is ordinary for them, inter scorta and ganeas principibus
C. Tacit.
viris perniciem machinare, and to make Cruelty a cover to Ignorance and
Cowardice. Besides the Mischiefs brought upon the Public by the loss of
eminent Men, who are the Pillars of every State, such Reigns are always
accompanied with Tumults and Civil Wars, the great Men striving with no less
violence who shall get the weak Prince into his power, when such regard is had
to succession that they think it not fit to divest him of the Title, than when
with less respect they contend for the Sovereignty it self. And whilst this
sort of Princes reigned, France was not less afflicted with the Contests
between Grimbauld, Ebroin, Grimoald, and others, for the Mayoralty of the
Palace, than they had bin before by the rage of those Princes who had contested
for the Crown. The Issue also was the same: After many Revolutions, Charles
Martel gained the Power of the Kingdom, which he had so bravely defended
against the Saracens; and having transmitted it to his Son Pepin, the General
Assembly of Estates, with the approbation of Mankind, conferred the Title also
upon him. This gave the Nation ease for the present; but the deep-rooted Evil
could not be so cured; and the Kingdom, that by the Wisdom, Valor, and
Reputation of Pepin, had bin preserved from civil Troubles during his life,
fell as deeply as ever into them so soon as he was dead. His Sons, Carloman and
Charles, divided the Dominions, but in a little time each of them would have
all. Carloman filled the Kingdom with Tumult; raised the Lombards, and marched
with a great Army against his Brother, till his course was interrupted by
death, caused, as is supposed, by such helps as Princes liberally afford to
their aspiring Relations. Charles deprived his two Sons of their Inheritance,
put them in Prison, and we hear no more of them. His third Brother Griffon was
not more quiet, nor more successful; and there could be no Peace in Gascony,
Italy, or Germany, till he was killed. But all the Advantages which Charles, by
an extraordinary Virtue and Fortune, had purchased for his Country, ended with
his Life. He left his Son Lewis the Gentle in possession of the Empire, and
Kingdom of France, and his Grandson Bernard King of Italy: But these two could
not agree, and Bernard falling into the hands of Lewis, was deprived of his
Eyes, and some time after killed. This was not enough to preserve the Peace:
Lothair, Lewis and Pepin, all three Sons to Lewis, rebel'd against him; called
a Council at Lions, deposed him, and divided the Empire amongst themselves.
After five years he escaped from the Monastery where he had bin kept, renewed
the War, and was again taken Prisoner by Lothair. When he was dead, the War
broke out more fiercely than ever between his Children: Lothair the Fmperor
assaulted Lewis King of Bavaria and Charles King of Rhetia; was defeated by
them, and confined to a Monastery, where he died. New Quarrels arose between
the two Brothers, upon the division of the Countries taken from him, and Lorrain
only was lest to his Son. Lewis died soon after, and Charles getting possession
of the Empire and Kingdom, ended an inglorious Reign in an unprosperous attempt
to deprive Hermingrade, Daughter to his Brother Lewis, of the Kingdom of Arles,
and other places left to her by her Father. Lewis his Son, called the
Stutterer, reigned two years in much trouble; and his only legitimate Son,
Charles the Simple, came not to the Crown till after the death of his two
Bastard Brothers, Lewis and Carloman, Charles le Gros, and Eudes Duke of Anjou.
Charles le Gros was deposed from the Empire and Kingdom, stripped of his Goods,
and left to perish through poverty in an obscure Village. Charles the Simple, and
the Nations under him, thrived no better: Robert Duke of Anjou raised War
against him, and was crowned at Rheims; but was himself slain soon after in a
bloody battle near Soissons. His Son-in-law, Hebert Earl of Vermandois,
gathered up the remains of his scattered Party, got Charles into his power, and
called a General Assembly of Estates, who deposed him, and gave the Crown to
Raoul Duke of Burgundy; tho he was no otherwise related to the Royal Blood than
by his Mother, which in France is nothing at all. He being dead, Lewis Son to
the deposed Charles was made King; but his Reign was as inglorious to him, as
miserable to his Subjects. This is the Peace which the French enjoyed for the
space of five or six Ages under their Monarchy; and it is hard to determine
whether they suffered most by the Violence of those who possessed, or the
Ambition of others who aspired to the Crown; and whether the fury of active, or
the baseness of slothful Princes was most pernicious to them: But upon the
whole matter, through the defects of those of the latter sort, they lost all they
had gained by sweat and blood under the conduct of the former. Henry and Otho
of Saxony, by a Virtue like that of Charlemagne, deprived them of the Empire,
and settled it in Germany, leaving France only to Lewis sirnam'd Outremer, and
his Son Lothair. These seemed to be equally composed of Treachery, Cruelty,
Ambition, and Baseness: They were always mutinous, and always beaten: Their
frantic Passions put 'em always upon unjust designs, and were such plagues to
their Subjects and Neighbors, that they became equally detested and despised.
These things extinguished the veneration due to the memory of Pepin and
Charles; and obliged the whole Nation rather to seek relief from a Stranger,
than to be ruined by their worthless Descendents. They had tried all ways that
were in their power, deposed four crowned Kings within the space of a hundred
and fifty years; crowned five who had no other Title than the People conferred
upon them, and restored the Descendents of those they had rejected, but all was
in vain: Their Vices were incorrigible, the Mischiefs produced by them
intolerable; they never ceased from murdering one another in battle, or by
treachery, and bringing the Nation into Civil Wars upon their wicked or foolish
Quarrels, till the whole Race was rejected, and the Crown placed upon the head
of Hugh Capet. These Mischiess raged not in the same extremity under him and
his Descendents, but the abatement proceeded from a cause no way advantageous
to Absolute Monarchy. The French were by their Calamitys taught more strictly
to limit the Regal Power; and by turning the Dukedoms and Earldoms into
Patrimonys, which had bin Offices, gave an Authority to the chief of the
Nobility, by which that of Kings was curbed; and tho by this means the
Commonalty were exposed to some Pressures, yet they were small in comparison of
what they had suffered in sormer times. When many great Men had Estates of
their own that did not depend upon the Will of Kings, they grew to love their
Country; and tho they cheerfully served the Crown in all cases of public
Concernment, they were not easily engaged in the personal quarrels of those who
possessed it, or had a mind to gain it. To preserve themselves in this condition,
they were obliged to use their Vassals gently; and this continuing in some
measure till within the last fifty years, the Monarchy was less tumultuous,
than when the King's Will had bin less restrained. Nevertheless they had not
much reason to boast; there was a Root still remaining, that from time to time
produced poisonous Fruit: Civil Wars were frequent among them, tho not carried
on with such desperate madness as formerly; and many of them upon the account
of disputes between Competitors for the Crown. All the Wars with England, since
Edward the Second married Isabella Daughter, and, as he pretended, Heir of
Philip Le Bell, were of this nature. The defeats of Crecy, Poitiers, and
Agincourt, with the slaughters and devastations suffered from Edward the Third,
the black Prince, and Henry the Fifth, were merely upon Contests for the Crown.
The Factions of Orleans and Burgundy, Orleans and Armagnac, proceeded from the
same Spring; and the Murders that seem to have bin the immediate causes of
those Quarrels, were only the effects of the hatred growing from their
competition. The more odious, tho less bloody Contests between Lewis the 11 th,
and his Father Charles the 7 th, with the jealousy of the former against his
Son Charles the 8 th, arose from the same Principle. Charles of Bourbon
prepared to fill France with Fire and Blood upon the like quarrel, when his
Designs were overthrown by his death in the assault of Rome. If the Dukes of
Guise had bin more fortunate, they had soon turned the cause of Religion into a
claim to the Crown, and repaired the Injury done, as they pretended, to Pepin's
Race, by destroying that of Capet: And Henry the Third thinking to prevent this
by the slaughter of Henry le Balafre, and his Brother the Cardinal de Guise,
brought ruin upon himself, and cast the Kingdom into a most horrid confusion.
Our own Age furnishes us with more than one attempt of the same kind, attended
with the like success. The Duke of Orleans was several times in arms against
Lewis the 13 th his Brother; the Queen Mother drew the Spaniards to favor him;
Montmorency perished in his Quarrel; Fontrailles revived it by a Treaty with
Spain, which struck at the King's head as well as the Cardinal's, and was
suppressed by the death of Cinq Mars and de Thou. Those who understand the
Affairs of that Kingdom, make no doubt that the Count de Soissons would have
set up for himself, and bin followed by the best part of France, if he had not
bin killed in the pursuit of his Victory at the Battle of Sedan. Since that
time the Kingdom has suffered such Disturbances as show, that more was intended
than the removal of Mazarin: And the Marechal de Turenne was often told, that
the check he gave to the Prince of Conde at Gien, after he had defeated
Hocquincourt, had preserved the Crown upon the King's Head. And to testify the
Stability, good Order, and domestic Peace that accompanys Absolute Monarchy,
we have in our own days seen the House of Bourbon often divided within it self;
the Duke of Orleans, the Count de Soissons, and the Princes of Conde and Conti
in war against the King; the Dukes of Angoulesme, Vendome, Longueville, the
Count de Moret, and other Bastards of the Royal Family, following their
example; the Houses of Guise, D' Elbeuf, Bouillon, Nemours, Rochefocault, and
almost all the most eminent in France, with the Parliaments of Paris,
Bourdeaux, and some others, joining with them. I might alledg many more
Examples, to show that this Monarchy, as well as all others, has from the first
establishment bin full of blood and slaughter, through the violence of those who
possessed the Crown, and the Ambition of such as aspired to it; and that the end
of one Civil War has bin the beginning of another: But I presume upon the
whole, these will be thought sufficient to prove, that it never enjoyed any
permanent Domestic Quiet.

The Kingdoms of Spain have bin no less disturbed by the same means; but
especially that of Castile, where the Kings had more power than in other
places. To cite all the Examples, were to transcribe their Historys; but
whoever has leisure to examine them will find, that after many troubles,
Alphonso the Second, notwithstanding his glorious surname of Wise, was deposed
by means of his ambitious Son: Don Alonso, sirnam'd El Desheredado, supplanted
by his Uncle Don Sancho el bravo: Peter the Cruel cast from the Throne, and
killed by his bastard Brother the Conde de Trastamara. From the time of the
above-named Alphonso to that of Ferdinand and Isabella, containing about two
hundred years, so few of them past without Civil Wars, that I hardly remember
two together that were free from them: And whosoever pretends that of late
years that Monarchy has bin more quiet, must, if he be ingenuous, confess their
Peace is rather to be imputed to the dexterity of removing such Persons as have
bin most likely to raise Disturbances (of which number were Don John of
Austria, Don Carlos Son to Philip the Second, another of the same name Son to
Philip the Third, and Don Belthazar Son to Philip the Fourth) than to the
rectitude of their Constitutions.

He that is not convinced of these Truths by what has bin said, may come nearer
home, and see what Mischiefs were brought upon Scotland Buchan. de reb. Scot.
by the Contests between Baliol and Bruce, with their Consequences, till the
Crown came to the Stuart Family; the quiet Reigns and happy Drummond. Melvil.
Deaths of the five James's, together with the admirable Stability and Peace of
the Government under Queen Mary, and the perfect Union in which she lived with
her Husband, Son and People, as well as the Happiness of the Nation whilst it
lasted.

But the Miserys of England, upon the like occasions, surpass all. William the
Norman was no sooner dead, but the Nation was rent in pieces by his eldest Son
Robert, contesting with his younger Sons William and Henry for the Crown. They
being all dead and their Sons, the like happened between Stephen and Maud:
Henry the Second was made King to terminate all Disputes, but it proved a
fruitless Expedient: Such as were more scandalous, and not less dangerous, did
soon arise between him and his Sons; who besides the Evils brought upon the
Nation, vexed him to death by their Rebellion. The Reigns of John and Henry the
Third were yet more tempestuous. Edward the Second's lewd, foolish, infamous
and detestable Government, ended in his deposition and death, to which he was
brought by his Wife and Son. Edward the Third employed his own and his Subjects
Valor against the French and Scots; but whilst the Foundations were out of
order, the Nation could never receive any advantage by their Victorys: All was
calculated for the Glory, and turned to the Advantage of one Man. He being
dead, all that the English held in Scotland and in France, was lost through the
baseness of his Successor, with more Blood than it had bin gained; and the
Civil Wars raised by his wickedness and madness, ended as those of Edward the
Second had done. The Peace of Henry the Fourth's Reign was interrupted by
dangerous Civil Wars; and the Victory obtained at Shrewsbury had not perhaps
secured him in the Throne, if his Death had not prevented new Troubles. Henry
the Fisth acquired such reputation by his Virtue and Victorys, that none dared
to invade the Crown during his life; but immediately after his death the Storms
prepared against his Family, broke out with the utmost violence. His Son's
weakness encouraged Richard Duke of York to set up a new Title, which produced
such Mischiefs as hardly any People have suffered, unlefs upon the like
occasion: For besides the slaughter of many thousands of the People, and
especially of those who had bin accustomed to Arms, the devastation of the best
parts of the Kingdom, and the loss of all that our Kings had inherited in
France, or gained by the blood of their Subjects, fourscore Princes of the
Blood, as Philip de Commines calls them, died in Battle, or under the hand of
the Hangman. Many of the most noble Familys were extinguished; others lost
their most eminent Men. Three Kings and two presumptive Heirs of the Crown were
murdered, and the Nation brought to that shameful exigence, to set up a young
Man to reign over them, who had no better cover for his sordid extraction than
a Welsh Pedigree, that might show how a Tailor was descended from Prince
Arthur, Cadwallader and Brutus. But the Wounds of the Nation were not to be
healed with such a Plaster. He could not rely upon a Title made up of such
stuff, and patched with a Marriage to a Princess of a very questionable Birth.
His own meanness inclined him to hate the Nobility; and thinking it to be as
easy for them to take the Crown from him, as to give it to him, he
industriously applied himself to glean up the Remainders of the House of York,
from whence a Competitor might arise, and by all means to crush those who were
most able to oppose him. This exceedingly weakened the Nobility, who held the
Balance between him and the Commons, and was a great step toward the
dissolution of our ancient Government: but he was so far from settling the
Kingdom in peace, that such Rascals as Perkin Warbeck and Simnel were able to
disturb it. The Reign of Henry the Eighth was turbulent and bloody; that of
Mary furious, and such as had brought us into subjection to the most powerful,
proud and cruel Nation at that time in the World, if God had not wonderfully
protected us. Nay, Edward the Sixth, and Queen Elizabeth, notwithstanding the
natural excellency of their Dispositions, and their knowledge of the Truth in
matters of Religion, were forced, by that which men call Jealousy of State, to
foul their hands so often with illustrious Blood, that if their Reigns deserve
to be accounted amongst the most gentle of Monarchys, they were more heavy than
the Government of any Commonwealth; and yet their Lives were never secure
against such as conspired against them upon the account of Title.

Having in some measure showed what Miserys have bin usually, if not
perpetually brought upon Nations subject to Monarchys by the violence of some
Princes, and the baseness, folly, and cowardice of others, together with what
they have suffered in Contests for the several Crowns, whilst men divided into
diverse Factions, strive with as much vehemence to advance the Person they
favor, as if they or their Country were interested in the quarrel; and fight
as fiercely for a Master as they might reasonably do to have none; I am not
able to determine which of the two Evils is the most mortal. It Is evident the
Vices of Princes result to the Damage of the People; but whether Pride and
Cruelty, or Stupidity and Sloth be the worst, I cannot tell. All Monarchys are
subject to be afflicted with Civil Wars: but whether the most frequent and
bloody do arise from the quarrels of diverse Competitors for Crowns before any
one gain the possession of them, or afterward through the fears of him that would
keep what he has gained, or the rage of those who would wrest it from him, is
not so easily decided. But Commonwealths are less troubled with those
Distempers. Women, Children, or such as are notoriously foolish or mad, are
never advanced to the Supreme Power. Whilst the Laws, and that Discipline which
nourishes Virtue is in force, Men of Wisdom and Valor are never wanting; and
every man desires to give testimony of his Virtue, when he knows 'twill be
rewarded with Honor and Power. If unworthy Persons creep into Magistracys, or
are by mistake any way preferred, their Vices for the most part turn to their
own hurt; and the State cannot easily receive any great damage by the
incapacity of one who is not to continue in Office above a year; and is usually
encompast with those who having born, or are aspiring to the same, are by their
Virtue able to supply his defects; cannot hope for a Reward from one unable to
corrupt 'em, and are sure of the favor of the Senate and People to support 'em
in the defense of the public Interest. As long as this good Order continues,
private Quarrels are suppressed by the Authority of the Magistrate, or prove to
be of little effect. Such as arise between the Nobles and Commons frequently
produce good Laws for the maintenance of Liberty, as they did in Rome for above
three hundred years after the expulsion of Tarquin; and almost ever terminate
with little or no blood. Sometimes the Errors of one or both Partys are
discovered by the discourse of a wise and good Man; and those who have most
violently opposed one another become the best Friends, every one joining to
remove the evil that causes the division. When the Senate and People of Rome
seemed to be most furiously incensed against each other, the creation of
Tribuns, communication of Honors and Marriages between the Patrician and
Plebeian Familys, or the mitigation of Usury, composed all; and these were not
only harmless things, but such as gave opportunitys of correcting the defects
that had bin in the first Constitution of the Government, without which they
could never have attained to the Greatness, Glory and Happiness they afterward
enjoyed. Such as had seen that People meeting in tumult, running through the City,
crying out against the Kings, Consuls, Senate, or Decemviri, might have thought
they would have filled all with blood and slaughter; but no such thing
happened. They desired no more than to take away the Kingdom which Tarquin had
wickedly usurped; and never went about so much as to punish one Minister of the
mischiefs he had done, or to take away his Goods, till upon pretense of
treating, his Ambassadors by a new Treachery had cast the City into greater
danger than ever. Tho the Decemviri had by the like Villanys equally provoked
the People, they were used with the like gentleness: Appius T. Live. l. 3.
Claudius and Oppius having by voluntary death subtracted themselves from
public punishment, their Colleagues were only banished, and the Magistracys of
the City reduced to the former order, without the effusion of more blood. They
who contended for their just Rights, were satisfied with the recovery of them;
whereas such as follow the impulse of an unruly Ambition, never think
themselves safe till they have destroyed all that seem able to disturb them,
and satiated their rage with the blood of their Adversarys. This makes, as well
as shows the difference between the Tumults of Rome, or the secession of the
common People to Mount Aventine, and the Battles of Towton, Teuxbury, Eveshal,
Jews, Hexham, Barnet, St. Albans, and Bosworth. It Is in vain to say these
ought rather to be compared to those of Pharsalia, Actium, or Philippi; sor
when the Laws of a Commonwealth are abolished, the Name also ceases. Whatever
is done by force or fraud to set up the Interests and Lusts of one man in
opposition to the Laws of his Country, is purely and absolutely Monarchical.
Whatsoever past between Marius, Sylla, Cinna, Catiline, Caesar, Pompey,
Crassus, Augustus, Antonius, and Lepidus, is to be imputed to the Contests that
arise between Competitors for Monarchy, as well as those that in the next age
happened between Galba, Otho, Vitellius, and Vespasian: Or, which is worse,
whereas all men in Commonwealths fight for themselves when there is occasion,
and if they succeed, enjoy the fruits of their Victory* so as even those who
remain of the vanquished party, partake of the Liberty thereby established, or
the good Laws thereupon made; such as followed the Ensigns of those men who
sought to set up themselves, did, rather like beasts than men, hazard and
suffer many unspeakable evils to purchase misery to themselves and their
Posterity, and to make one their Master, who increasing in Pride, Avarice, and
Cruelty, was to be thrown down again with as much Blood as he had bin set up.

These things, if I mistake not, being in the last degree evident, I may leave
to our Author all the advantages he can gain by his rhetorical Description of
the Tumults of Rome, when Blood was in the Marketplace sucked up with Sponges,
and the Jakes stuffed with Carcases; to which he may add the crimes of Sylla's
Life, and the miserys of his Death: But withal I desire to know what number of
Sponges were sufficient to suck up the Blood of five hundred thousand men slain
in one day, when the Houses of David and Jeroboam contended for the Crown of
Israel, or of four hundred thousand who fell in one battle between Joash and
Amaziah on the same occasion; what Jakes were capacious enough to contain the
Carcases of those that perished in the quarrels between the Successors of
Alexander, the several Competiors for the Roman Empire; or those which happened
in France, Spain, England, and other places upon the like occasions. If Sylla
for some time acted as an absolute Monarch, it is no wonder that he died like
one, or that God punished him as Herod, Philip the second of Spain, and some
others, because the hand of his fellow*Citizens had unjustly spared him. If
when he was become detestable to God and Man, he became also miserable, his
example ought to deter others srom the Crimes that are avenged by a Power which
none can escape, and to encourage those who defend, or endeavor to recover
their violated Libertys, to act vigorously in a Cause that God dos evidently
patronize.

SECT. XXV. Courts are more subject to Venality and Corruption than Popular
Governments.
THO Court-flatterers impute many evils to Popular Governments they no way
deserve, I could not think any so impudent as to lay Corruption and Venality to
their charge, till I found it in our Author. They might in my opinion have
taken those faults upon themselves, since they certainly abound most where
Bawds, Whores, Buffoons, Players, Slaves, and other base people who are
naturally mercenary, are most prevalent. And whosoever would know whether this
dos more frequently befall Commonwealths than Monarchys, especially if they are
absolute, need only to inquire whether the Cornelii, Junii, Fabii, Valerii,
Quintii, Curii, Fabritii, and others who most prevailed in Rome after the
expulsion of the Kings, or Sejanus, Macro, Narcissus, Pallas, Icetus,
Tigellinus, Vinnius, Laco, Agrippina, Messalina, Lollia, Poppaea, and the like,
were most subject to those base Vices: Whether it were more easy to corrupt one
or two of those Villains and Strumpets, or the Senats and People of Rome,
Carthage, Athens, and Sparta; and whether that sort of Rabble had more power
over the Princes they served, than such as most resembled them had whilst the
Popular Government continued. It Is in vain to say those Princes were wicked and
vile, for many others are so likewise; and when the Power is in the hands of
one man, there can be no assurance he will not be like them. Nay, when the
Power is so placed, ill men will always find opportunitys of compassing their
desires: Bonus, cautus, optimus Imperator venditur, said Dioclesian; and tho he
was no unwise man, yet that which principally induced him to renounce the
Empire, was the impossibility he found of defending himself against those that
were in credit with him, who daily betrayed and sold him. They see with the
eyes of other men, and cannot resist the frauds that are perpetually put upon
them. Antoninus Pius and Marcus Aurelius seem to have bin the best and wisest
of all the Roman Emperors; but the two Faustina's had such an ascendent over
them, as was most shameful to their persons, and mischievous to the Empire and
the best men in it. Such as these may gain too much upon the affections of one
man in the best regulated Government; but that could be of no great danger to
the Public, when many others equal, or not much inferior to him in authority,
are ready to oppose whatever he should endeavor to promote by their impulse:
but there is no remedy when all depends upon the Will of a single person who is
governed by them. There was more of acuteness and jest, than of truth in that
saying of Themistocles, That his little boy had more power than any man in
Greece; for he governed his Mother, she him, he Athens, and Athens Greece. For
he himself was found to have little power, when for private passions and
concernments he departed from the interest of the Public; and the like has bin
found in all places that have bin governed in the like manner.

Again; Corruption will always reign most, where those who have the power do
most favor it, where the rewards of such Crimes are greatest, easiest and most
valued, and where the punishment of them is least seared.

1. For the first, we have already proved that Liberty cannot be preserved, if
the manners of the People are corrupted, nor absolute Monarchy introduced where
they are sincere; which is sufficient to show that those who manage free
Governments ought always to the utmost of their power to oppose Corruption,
because otherwise both they and their Government must inevitably perish; and
that on the other hand, the absolute Monarch must endeavor to introduce it,
because he cannot subsist without it. It Is also so natural for all such
Monarchs to place men in power who pretend to love their Persons, and will
depend upon their pleasure, that possibly 'twould be hard to find one in the
world who has not made it the rule of his Government: And this is not only the
way to corruption, but the most dangerous of all. For tho a good man may love a
good Monarch, he will obey him only when he commands that which is just; and no
one can engage himself blindly to do whatever he is commanded, without
renouncing all Virtue and Religion; because he knows not whether that which
shall be commanded is consistent with either, or directly contrary to the Laws
of God and Man. But if such a Monarch be evil, and his Actions such as they are
too osten found to be, whoever bears an affection to him, and seconds his
designs, declares himself an Enemy to all that is good; and the advancement of
such men to power dos not only introduce, foment, and increase Corruption, but
fortifys it in such a manner, that without an entire renovation of that State,
it cannot be removed. Ill men may possibly creep into any Government; but when
the worst are placed nearest to the Throne, and raised to Honors for being so,
they will with that force endeavor to draw all men to a conformity of Spirit
with themselves, that it can no otherwise be prevented, than by destroying them
and the Principle in which they live.

2. To the second; Man naturally follows that which is good, or seems to him to
be so. Hence it is that in well-governed States, where a value is put upon
Virtue, and no one honored unless for such Qualitys as are beneficial to the
Public, men are from the tenderest years brought up in a belief, that nothing
in this world deserves to be sought after, but such Honors as are acquired by
virtuous Actions: By this means Virtue it self becomes popular, as in Sparta,
Rome, and other places, where Riches (which with the Vanity that follows them,
and the Honors men give to them, are the root of all evil) were either totally
banished, or little regarded. When no other advantage attended the greatest
Riches than the opportunity of living more sumptuously or deliciously, men of
great Spirits slighted them. When Aristippus told Cleanthes, that if he would
go to Court and flatter the Tyrant, he need not seek his Supper under a hedge;
the Philosopher answered, that he who could content himself with such a Supper,
neednot go to Court, or flatter the Tyrant. Epaminondas, Aristides, Phocion,
and even the Lacedemonian Kings, found no inconvenience in Poverty, whilst
their Virtue was honored, and the richest Princes in the world feared their
Valor and Power. It was not difficult for Curious, Fabricius, Cincinnatus, or
Emilius Paulus, to content themselves with the narrowest Fortune, when it was
no obstacle to them in the pursuit of those Honors which their Virtues
deserved. 'Twas in vain to think of bribing a man who supped upon the Coleworts
of his own Garden. He could not be gained by Gold, who did not think it
necessary. He that could rise from the Plow to the triumphal Chariot, and
contentedly return thither again, could not be corrupted; and he that left the
sense of his Poverty to his Executors, who found not wherewith to bury him,
might leave Macedon and Greece to the pillage of his Soldiers, without taking
to himself any part of the Booty. But when Luxury was brought into fashion, and
they came to be honored who lived magnificently, tho they had in themselves no
qualitys to distinguish them from the basest of Slaves, the most virtuous men
were exposed to scorn if they were poor: and that poverty which had bin the
mother and nurse of their Virtue, grew insupportable. The Poet well understood
what effect this change had upon the World, who said, Nullum crimen abest
facinusque libidinis, ex quo
Paupertas Romana perit. Juven.
When Riches grew to be necessary, the desire of them, which is the spring of
all mischief, followed. They who could not obtain Honors by the noblest
Actions, were obliged to get Wealth, or purchase them from Whores and Villains,
who exposed them to sale: and when they were once entered into this track, they
soon learned the Vices of those from whom they had received their Preferment,
and to delight in the ways that had brought them to it. When they were come to
this, nothing could stop them: All thought and remembrance of good was
extinguished. They who had bought the Commands of Armies or Provinces, from
Icetus or Narcissus, sought only how to draw Money from them, to enable them to
purchase higher Dignitys, or gain a more assured protection from those Patrons.
This brought the Government of the World under a most infamous Traffic; and
the Treasures arising from it were, for the most part, dissipated by worse
vices, than the Rapine, Violence and Fraud with which they had bin gotten. The
Authors of those Crimes had nothing left but their Crimes, and the necessity of
committing more, through the indigence into which they were plunged by the
extravagance of their Expenses. These things are inseparable from the life of a
Courtier: for as servile Natures are guided rather by sense than reason, such
as addict themselves to the service of Courts, find no other consolation in
their misery, than what they receive from sensual pleasures, or such vanitys as
they put a value upon; and have no other care, than to get Money for their
supply by begging, stealing, bribing, and other infamous practices. Their
Offices are more or less esteemed according to the opportunitys they afford for
the exercise of these Virtues; and no man seeks them for any other end than for
gain, nor takes any other way than that which conduces to it. The usual means
of attaining them are, by observing the Prince's Humor, flattering his Vices,
serving him in his Pleasures, fomenting his Pa^sions, and by advancing his
worst Designs, to create an opinion in him that they love his person, and are
entirely addicted to his Will. When Valor, Industry and Wisdom advanced men to
Offices, it was no easy matter for a man to persuade the Senate he had such
Qualitys as were required, if he had them not: But when Princes seek only such
as love them, and will do what they command, it is easy to impose upon them; and
because none that are good will obey them when they command that which is not
so, they are always encompast by the worst. Those who follow them only for
Reward, are most liberal in professing affection to them, and by that means
rise to places of Authority and Power. The Fountain being thus corrupted,
nothing that is pure can come from it. These mercenary Wretches having the
management of Affairs, Justice and Honors are set at a price, and the most
lucrative Traffic in the world is thereby established. -- Nunc uberiore rapina
Pecc^t in orb manus. Claud.

Eutropius when he was a Slave, used to pick Pockets and Locks; but being made
a Minister, he sold Citys, Armies and Provinces: and some have undertaken to
give probable reasons to believe, that Pallas, one of Claudius's manumis'd
Slaves, by these means brought together more Wealth in six years, than all the
Roman Dictators and Consuls had done from the expulsion of the Kings to their
passage into Asia. The rest walked in the same way, used the same arts, and
many of them succeeded in the same manner. Their Riches consisted not os Spoils
taken from Enemies, but were the base product of their own corruption. They
valued nothing but Money, and those who could bribe them, were sure to be
advanced to the highest Offices; and whatever they did, feared no punishment.
Like Effects will ever proceed from the like Causes. When Vanity, Luxury and
Prodigality are in fashion, the desire of Riches must necessarily increase in
proportion to them: And when the Power is in the hands of base mercenary
persons, they will always (to use the Courtiers phrase) make as much profit of
their places as they can. Not only matters of Favor, but of Justice too, will
be exposed to sale; and no way will be open to Honors or Magistracys, but by
paying largely for them. He that gets an Office by these means, will not
execute it gratis: he thinks he may sell what he has bought; and would not have
entered by corrupt ways, if he had not intended to deal corruptly. Nay, if a
well-meaning man should suffer himself to be so far carried away by the stream
of a prevailing Custom, as to purchase Honors of such Villains, he would be
obliged to continue in the same course, that he might gain Riches to procure
the continuance of his Benefactors protection, or to obtain the favor of such
as happen to succeed them: And the corruption thus beginning in the Head, must
necessarily diffuse it self into all the Members of the Commonwealth. Or, if
any one (which is not to be expected) after having bin guilty of one Villainy,
should resolve to commit no more, it could have no other effect than to bring
him to ruin; and he being taken away, all things would return to their former
channel.

Besides this, whosoever desires to advance himself, must use such means as are
suitable to the time in which he lives, and the humor of the persons with whom
he is to deal. It had bin as absurd for any man void of merit to set himself up
against Junius Brutus, Cincinnatus, Papirius Cursor, Camillus, Fabius Maximus,
or Scipio; and by bribing the Senate and People of Rome, think to be chosen
Captain against the Tarquins, Tuscans, Latins, Samnites, Gauls or
Carthaginians, as for the most virtuous men by the most certain proofs of their
Wisdom, Experience, Integrity and Valor, to expect advancement from Caligula,
Claudius, and Nero, or the lewd Wretches that governed them. They hated and
feared all those that excelled in Virtue, and setting themselves to destroy the
best for being the best, they placed the strength of the Government in the
hands of the worst, which produced the effects beforementioned. This seems to
have bin so well known, that no man pretended to be great at Court, but those
who had cast off all thoughts of honor and common honesty: Revertar cum Leno,
Meretrix, Scurra, Cinaedus ero, said one who saw what manners prevailed there;
and wheresoever they do prevail, such as will rise, must render themselves
conformable in all corruption and venality. And it may be observed, that a
noble Person now living amongst us, who is a great enemy to Bribery, was turned
out from a considerable Office, as a scandal to the Court; for, said the
principal Minister, he will make no profit of his place, and by that means
casts a scandal upon those that do.

If any man say, this is not generally the fate of all Courts, I confess it;
and that if the Prince be just, virtuous, wise, of great Spirit, and not
pretending to be absolute, he may choose such men as are not mercenary, or take
such a course as may render it hard for them to deserve Bribes, or to preserve
themselves from punishment, if they should deflect from his intention. And a
Prince of this Age, speaking familiarly with some great Men about him, said, he
had heard much of vast Gains made by those who were near to Princes, and asked
if they made the like? one of them answered, that they were as willing as
others to get something, but that no man would give them a farthing; for every
one finding a free admittance to his Majesty, no man needed a Solicitor: And
it was no less known that he did of himself grant those things that were just,
than that none of them had so much credit as to promote such as were not so. I
will not say such a King is a Phoenix; perhaps more than one may be found in an
Age; but they are certainly rare, and all that is good in their Government
proceeding from the excellency of their personal Virtues, it must fail when
that Virtue fails which was the root of it. Experience shows how little we can
rely upon such a help; for where Crowns are hereditary, Children seldom prove
like to their Fathers; and such as are elective have also their defects. Many
seem to be modest and innocent in private Fortunes, who prove corrupt and
vicious when they are raised to Power. The violence, pride and malice of Saul,
was never discovered till the People had placed him in the Throne. But where
the Government is Absolute, or the Prince endeavors to make it so, this
integrity can never be found: He will always seek such as are content to depend
upon his Will, which being always unruly, good men will never comply; ill men
will be paid for it, and that opens a gap to all manner of corruption.
Something like to this may befall regular Monarchys, or popular Governments.
They who are placed in the principal Offices of trust, may be treacherous; and
when they are so, they will always by these means seek to gain Partisans and
Dependents upon themselves. Their designs being corrupt, they must be carried
on by corruption: But such as would support Monarchy in its regularity, or
popular Governments, must oppose it, or be destroyed by it. And nothing can
better manifest how far Absolute Monarchys are more subject to this venality
and corruption than the regular and popular Governments, than that they are
rooted in the principle of the one, which cannot subsist without them; and are
so contrary to the others, that they must certainly perish unless they defend
themselves from them.

If any man be so far of another opinion, as to believe that Brutus, Camillus,
Scipio, Fabius, Hannibal, Pericles, Aristides, Agesilaus, Epaminondas or
Pelopidas, were as easily corrupted as Sejanus, Tigellinus, Vinnius or Laco:
That the Senate and People of Rome, Carthage, Athens, Sparta or Thebes, were to
be bought at as easy rates as one profligate Villain, a Slave, an Eunuch or a
Whore; or tho it was not in former Ages, yet it is so now: he may be pleased to
consider by what means men now rise to places of Judicature, Church-preferment,
or any Offices of trust, honor or profit under those Monarchys which we know,
that either are or would be absolute. Let him examine how all the Offices of
Justice are now disposed in France; how Mazarin came to be advanced; what
traffic he made of Abbys and Bishoprics, and what treasures he gained by that
means: Whether the like has not continued since his death, and as a laudable
Example bin transmitted to us since his Majesty's happy restoration: Whether
Bauds, Whores, Thieves, Buffoons, Parasites, and such vile wretches as are
naturally mercenary, have not more Power at Whitehall, Versailles, the Vatican,
and the Escurial, than in Venice, Amsterdam, and Switzerland: Whether H-de,
Arl-ngt-n, D-nby, their Graces of Cleveland and Portsmouth, S-nd-rl-nd, Jenkins
or Chiffinch, could probably have attained such Power as they have had amongst
us, if it had bin disposed by the Suffrages of the Parliament and People: Or
lastly, Whether such as know only how to work upon the personal Vices of a man,
have more influence upon one who happens to be born in a reigning Family, or
upon a Senate consisting of men chosen for their Virtues and Quality, or the
whole Body of a Nation.

But if he who possesses or affects an absolute Power be by his interest led to
introduce that corruption which the People, Senate, and Magistrates who uphold
Popular Governments, abhor, as that which threatens them with destruction: if
the example, arts, and means used by him and his dependents be of wonderful
efficacy toward the introduction of it: if nothing but an admirable Virtue,
which can hardly be in one that enjoys or desires such a Power, can divert him
from that design; and if such Virtue never did, nor probably ever will continue
long in any one Family, we cannot rationally believe there ever was a race of
men invested with, or possessing such a Power, or that there will ever be any,
who have not and will not endeavor to introduce that corruption, which is so
necessary for the defense of their Persons, and most important Concernments,
and certainly accomplish their great Design, unless they are opposed or removed.

SECT. XXVI. Civil Tumults and Wars are not the greatest Evils that befall
Nations.
BUT skin for skin, says our Author, and all that a man has will he give for
his life. And since it was necessary to grace his Book with some
Scripture-phrases, none could be fitter for that purpose than those that were
spoken by the Devil; but they will be of little use to him: For tho I should so
far recede from truth, as to avow those words to be true, I might safely deny
the Conclusions he draws from them, That those are the worst Governments under
which most men are slain; or, that more are slain in Popular Governments than
in Absolute Monarchys. For having proved that all the Wars and Tumults that
have happened in Commonwealths, have never produced such slaughters as were
brought upon the Empires of Macedon and Rome, or the Kingdoms of Israel, Judah,
France, Spain, Scotland or England, by Contests between several Competitors for
those Crowns; if Tumult, War, and Slaughter, be the point in question, those
are the worst of all Governments where they have bin most frequent and cruel.
But tho these are terrible Scourges, I deny that Government to be simply the
worst that has most of them. It Is ill that men should kill one another in
Seditions, Tumults and Wars; but it is worse to bring Nations to such misery,
weakness and baseness, as to have neither strength nor courage to contend for
any thing; to have nothing left worth defending, and to give the name of Peace
to desolation. I take Greece to have bin happy and glorious, when it was full
of populous Citys, flourishing in all the Arts that deserve praise among men:
When they were courted and feared by the greatest Kings, and never assaulted by
any but to his own loss and confusion: When Babylon and Susa trembled at the
motion of their Arms; and their valor exercised in these Wars and Tumults,
which our Author looks upon as the greatest Evils, was raised to such a power
that nothing upon Earth was found able to resist them: and I think it now
miserable, when Peace reigns within their empty walls, and the poor remains of
those exhausted Nations sheltering themselves under the ruins of the desolated
Citys, have neither any thing that deserves to be disputed amongst them, nor
spirit or force to repel the Injurys they daily suffer from a proud and
insupportable Master.

The like may be said of Italy: Whilst it was inhabited by Nations governing
themselves by their own Will, they fell sometimes into domestic Seditions, and
had frequent Wars with their Neighbors. When they were free, they loved their
Country, and were always ready to fight in its defense. Such as succeeded well,
increased in vigor and power; and even those that were the most unfortunate in
one Age, found means to repair their greatest losses if their Government
continued. Whilst they had a propriety in their goods, they would not suffer
the Country to be invaded, since they knew they could have none if it were
lost. This gave occasion to Wars and Tumults; but it sharpened their Courage,
kept up a good Discipline, and the Nations that were most exercised by them,
always increased in power and number; so that no Country seems ever to have bin
of greater strength than Italy was when Hannibal invaded it: and after his
defeat, the rest of the World was not able to refist their Valor and Power.
They sometimes killed one another; but their Enemies never got any thing but
burying-places within their Territorys. All things are now brought into a very
different method by the blessed Governments they are under. The fatherly care
of the King of Spain, the Pope, and other Princes, has established Peace
amongst them. We have not in many Ages heard of any Sedition among the Latins,
Sabins, Volsci, Equi, Samnites, or others. The thin, half-starv'd Inhabitants
of Walls supported by Ivy, sear neither popular Tumults, or foreign Alarms; and
their sleep is only interrupted by Hunger, the cries of their Children, or the
howling of Wolves. Instead of many turbulent, contentious Citys, they have a
few scattered silent Cottages; and the fierceness of those Nations is so
tempered, that every rascally Collector of Taxes extorts without fear from
every man, that which should be the nourishment of his Family. And if any of
those Countries are free from that pernicious Vermin, it is through the extremity of
their Poverty. Even in Rome a man may be circumvented by the fraud of a Priest,
or poisoned by one who would have his Estate, Wife, Whore, or Child; but
nothing is done that looks like Tumult or Violence. The Governors do as little
fear Gracchus as Hannibal; and instead of wearying their Subjects in Wars, they
only seek, by perverted Laws, corrupt Judges, false Witnesses, and vexatious
Suits, to cheat them of their Money and Inheritance. This is the best part of
their condition. Where these Arts are used, there are men, and they have
something to lose; but for the most part the Lands ly wast, and they who were
sormerly troubled with the disorders incident to populous Citys, now enjoy the
quiet and peaceable estate of a Wilderness.

Again; there is a way of killing worse than that of the Sword: for as
Tertullian says upon a different occasion, prohibere nasci est occidere; those
Governments are in the highest degree guilty of Blood, which by taking from men
the means of living, bring some to perish through want, drive others out of the
Country, and generally dissuade men from marriage, by taking from them all ways
of subsisting their Familys. Notwithstanding all the Seditions of Florence, and
other Citys of Tuscany, the horrid Factions of Guelphs and Gibelins, Neri and
Bianchi, Nobles and Commons, they continued populous, strong, and exceeding
rich; but in the space of less than a hundred and fifty years, the peaceable
Reign of the Medices is thought to have destroyed nine parts in ten of the
people of that Province. Amongst other things it is remarkable, that when Philip
the second of Spain gave Sienna to the Duke of Florence, his Ambassador then at
Rome sent him word, that he had given away more than six hundred and fifty
thousand Subjects; and it is not believed there are now twenty thousand Souls
inhabiting that City and Territory. Pisa, Pistoia, Arezzo, Cortona, and other
Towns that were then good and populous, are in the like proportion diminished,
and Florence more than any. When that City had bin long troubled with
Seditions, Tumults, and Wars, for the most part unprosperous, they still
retained such strength, that when Charles the eighth of France being admitted
as a Friend with his whole Army, which Guicciard.
soon after conquered the Kingdom of Naples, thought to master them, the people
taking up Arms struck such a terror into him, that he was glad to depart upon
such conditions as they thought fit to impose. Machiavel reports, that in that
time Florence alone, with the Vald' Arno, a small Territory belonging to that
City, could, in a few hours, by the sound of a Bell, bring together a hundred
and thirty five thousand well armed men; whereas now that City, with all the
others in that Province, are brought to such despicable weakness, emptiness,
poverty and baseness, that they can neither resist the oppressions of their own
Prince, nor defend him or themselves if they were assaulted by a foreign Enemy.
The People are dispersed or destroyed, and the best Familys sent to seek
Habitations in Venice, Genoa, Rome, and Lucca. This is not the effect of War or
Pestilence; they enjoy a perfect peace, and suffer no other plague than the
Government they are under. But he who has thus cured 'em of Disorders and
Tumults, dos, in my opinion, deserve no greater praise than a Physician, who
should boast there was not a sick person in a house committed to his care, when
he had poisoned all that were in it. The Spaniards have established the like
peace in the Kingdoms of Naples and Sicily, the West-Indys, and other places.
The Turks by the same means prevent Tumults in their Dominions. And they are of
such efficacy in all places, that Mario Chigi, Brother to Pope Alexander the
seventh, by one sordid cheat upon the sale of Corn, is said within eight years
to have destroyed above a third part of the people in the Ecclesiastical State;
and that Country, which was the strength of the Romans in the time of the
Carthaginian Wars, suffered more by the covetousness and fraud of that Villain,
than by all the defeats received from Hannibal.

'Twere an endless work to mention all the places where this peaceable solitude
has bin introduced by absolute Monarchy; but Popular and regular Governments
have always applied themselves to increase the Number, Strength, Power, Riches,
and Courage of their People, by providing comfortable ways of subsistence for
their own Citizens, inviting Strangers, and filling them all with such a love
to their Country, that every man might look upon the public Cause as his own,
and be always ready to defend it. This may sometimes give occasion to Tumults
and Wars, as the most vigorous Bodies may fall into Distempers: When every one
is solicitous for the Public, there may be difference of opinion, and some by
mistaking the way may bring prejudice when they intend profit: But unless a
Tyrant dos arise, and destroy the Government which is the root of their
felicity; or they be overwhelmed by the irresistible power of a Virtue or
Fortune greater than their own, they soon recover, and for the most part rise
up in greater Glory and Prosperity than before. This was seen in the
Commonwealths of Greece and Italy, which for this reason were justly called
Nurserys of Virtue, and their Magistrates Preservers of men; whereas our
Author's peacemaking Monarchs can deserve no better title than that of Enemies
and Destroyers of Mankind.

I cannot think him in earnest when he exaggerates Sylla's Crueltys, as a proof
that the mischiefs suffered under free States are more universal than under
Kings and Tyrants: For there never was a Tyrant in the World if he was not one;
tho through weariness, infirmity of body, fear, or perhaps the horror of his own
wickedness, he at length resigned his Power; but the evil had taken root so
deep, that it could not be removed: There was nothing of Liberty remaining in
Rome: The Laws were overthrown by the violence of the Sword; the remaining
Contest was who should be Lord: and there is no reason to believe that if
Pompey had gained the Battle of Pharsalia, he would have made a more modest use
of his Victory than Caesar did; or that Rome would have bin more happy under
him than under the other. His Cause was more plausible because the Senate
followed him, and Caesar was the Invader; but he was no better in his person,
and his designs seem to have bin the same. He had bin long before suarum legum
auctor and eversor. He gave the beginning to the first Triumvirat; and 'twere
folly to think that he who had bin insolent when he was not come to the highest
pitch of Fortune, would have proved moderate if success had put all into his
hands. The proceedings of Marius, Cinna, Catiline, Octavius, and Antonius were
all of the same nature. No Laws were observed: no public Good intended; the
ambition of private persons reigned; and whatsoever was done by them, or for
their interests, can no more be applied to Popular, Aristocratical or mixed
Governments, than the furys of Caligula and Nero.

SECT. XXVII. The Mischiefs and Crueltys proceeding from Tyranny, are greater
than any that can come from Popular or mixed Governments.
It Is now time to examine the reasons of our Author's general Maxims. The
Crueltys, says he, of a Tyrant extend ordinarily no farther than some
particular men that offend him, and not to the whole Kingdom. It is truly said
of his late Majesty King James, A King can never be so notoriously vicious, but
he will generally favor Justice, and maintain some order. Even cruel Domitian,
Dionysius the Tyrant, and many others are commended in Historys as great
observers of Justice, except in particular cases, wherein his inordinate lusts
may carry him away. It may be said of Popular Governments, that tho a People
through error do sometimes hurt a private person, and that injury may possibly
result to the public damage, because the man that is offended or destroyed,
might have bin useful to the Society, yet they never do it otherwise than by
error: For having the Government in themselves, whatever is prejudicial to it,
is so to them; and if they ruin it, they ruin themselves, which no man ever did
willingly and knowingly. But in absolute Monarchys the matter is quite
otherwise. A Prince that sets up an interest in himself, becomes an Enemy to
the Public: in following his own lusts he offends all, except a few of his
corrupt Creatures, by whose help he oppresses others with a Yoke they are
unwilling to bear, and thereby incurs the universal hatred. This hatred is
always proportionable to the injurys received, which being extreme, that must
be so too; and every People being powerful in comparison to the Prince that
governs, he will always fear those that hate him, and always hate those he
fears. When Luigi Farnese first Duke of Parma had by his Tyranny incensed the
People of that small City, their hatred was not less mortal to him than that of
the whole Empire had bin to Nero; and as the one burnt Rome, the other would
have destroyed Parma, if he had not bin prevented. The like has bin, and will
be every where, in as much as every man endeavors to destroy those whom he
hates and fears; and the greatness of the danger often drives this Cuncta serit
dum cuncta timet. Lucan.
fear to rage and madness. For this reason Caligula wished but one Neck to all
the People; and Nero triumphed over the burning City, thinking by that ruin he
had prevented his own danger. I know not who the good Authors are that commend
Domitian for his Justice: but Tacitus calls him Principem virtutibus infestum;
Tacit. in Vit. Agric.
and it is hard to find out how such a man can be an observer of justice; unless
it be just, that whoever dares to be virtuous under a vicious and base Prince
should be destroyed. Another Cum jam semianimem laceraret Flavius orbem
Tertius, and calvo serviret Roma Tyranno. Juvenal.

Author of the same time speaking of him, dos not say he was unjust, but gives
us reason to think he was so (unless it were just for him, who had a power over
the best part of the World, to destroy it) and that he who by his cruelty had
brought it to the last gasp, would have finished the work, if his rage had not
bin extinguished.

Many Princes not having in themselves power to destroy their People, have
stirred up foreign Nations against them, and placed the only hopes of their
safety in the public Calamity; and lawful Kings when they have fall n unto the
first degree of madness, so as to assume a power above that which was allowed
by the Law, have in fury proved equal to the worst Usurpers. Cleonymus of
Sparta was of this sort: He became, says Plutarch, an Enemy to the City,
because they would not allow him the absol^^e Plut. Vit. Pyrrh.
Power he affected; and brought Pyrrhus, the fiercest of their Enemies, with a
mighty and excellently well disciplined Army, to destroy them. Vortigern the
Britan called in the Saxons with the ruin of his own Mat. Westminster.
People, who were incensed against him for his Leudness, Cruelty, and Baseness.
King John for the like reasons offered the Kingdom of England to the Moors, and
to the Pope. Peter the Cruel, and other Kings of Castile brought vast Armies of
Moors into Spain to the ruin of their own People, who detested their Vices, and
would not part with their Privileges. Many other examples of the like nature
might be alleged; and I wish our own experience did not too well prove that
such designs are common. Let him that doubts this examine the Causes of the Wars
with Scotland in the Years 1639, 1640; the slaughters of the Protestants in
Ireland 1641; the whole course of Alliances and Treatys for the space of
fourscore Years; the friendship contracted with the French; frequent Quarrels
with the Dutch, together with other circumstances that are already made too
public. If he be not convinced by this, he may soon see a man in the Throne,
who had rather be a Tributary to France than a lawful King of England, whilst
either Parliament or People shall dare to dispute his Commands, insist upon
their own Rights, or defend a Religion inconsistent with that which he has
espoused; and then the truth will be so evident as to require no proof.

Grotius was never accused of dealing hardly with Kings, or laying too much
weight upon imaginary cases; nevertheless amongst other reasons that in his
opinion justify Subjects in taking arms against their Princes, he De Jur. Bell.
alleges this, propter immanem saevitiam, and quando Rex in Populi exitium
fertur; in as much as it is contrary to, and inconsistent with the ends for
which Governments are instituted: which were most impertinent, if no such thing
could be; for that which is not, can have no effect. There are therefore
Princes who seek the destruction of their People, or none could be justly
opposed on that account.

If King James was of another opinion, I could wish the course of his
Government had bin suited to it. When he said that whilst he had the power of
making Judges and Bishops, he would make that to be Law and Gospel which best
pleased him, and accordingly filled those places with such as turned both
according to his Will and Interests; I must think that by overthrowing Justice,
which is the rule of civil and moral Actions, and perverting the Gospel which
is the light of the spiritual man, he left nothing unattempted that he durst
attempt, by which he might bring the most extensive and universal evils upon
our Nation that any can suffer. This would stand good, tho Princes never erred,
unless they were transported with some inordinate Lusts; for it is hard to find
one that dos not live in the perpetual power of them. They are naturally
subject to the impulse of such appetites as well as others; and whatever evil
reigns in their Nature is fomented by Education. It Is the handle by which their
Flatterers lead them; and he that discovers to what Vice a Prince is most
inclined, is sure to govern him by rendering himself subservient. In this
consists the chief art of a Courtier, and by this means it comes to pass that
such Lusts as in private men are curbed by fear, do not only rage as in a wild
Beast, but are perpetually inflamed by the malice of their own Servants: their
hatred to the Laws of God or Men that might restrain them, increases in
proportion with their Vices, or their fears of being punished for them. When
they are come to this, they can set no limits to their sury, and there is no
extravagance into which they do not frequently fall. But many of 'em do not
expect these violent motives: the perversity of their own nature carrys them to
the extremitys of evil. They hate Virtue for its own sake, and virtuous men for
being most unlike to themselves. Virtue is the dictate of Reason, or the
remains of Divine Light, by which men are made beneficent and beneficial to
each other. Religion proceeds from the same spring, and tends to the same end;
and the good of Mankind so entirely depends upon these two, that no People ever
enjoyed any thing worth desiring that was not the product of them; and
whatsoever any have suffered that deserves to be abhorred and feared, has
proceeded either from the defect of these, or the wrath of God against them. If
any Prince therefore has bin an enemy to Virtue and Religion, he must also have
bin an enemy to Mankind, and most especially to the People under him.
Whatsoever he dos against those that excel in Virtue and Religion, tends to the
destruction of the People who subsist by them. I will not take upon me to
define who they are, or to tell the number of those that do this: but it is
certain there have bin such; and I wish I could say they were few in number, or
that they had lived only in past ages. Tacitus dos not fix this upon one
Prince, but upon all that he writes of; and to give his Readers a taste of what
he was to write, he says, that Nobility and Honors were dangerous, but that
Virtue Tacit, H^st. l. 1.
brought most certain destruction; and in another place, that after the
slaughter of many excellent men, Nero resolved to cut down Virtue it self, and
Annal. l. 4.
therefore killed Thraseas Paetus and Bareas Soranus. And whosoever examins the
Christian or Ecclesiastical Historys, will find those Princes to have bin no
less enemies to Virtue and Religion than their Predecessors, and consequently
enemies to the Nations under them, unless Religion and Virtue be things
prejudicial or indifferent to Mankind.

But our Author may say, these were particular cases; and so was the slaughter
of the Prophets and Apostles, the crucifixion of Christ, and all the Villanys
that have ever bin committed; yet they proceeded from a universal principle of
hatred to all that is good, exerting it self as far as it could, to the ruin of
mankind: And nothing but the overruling Power of God, who resolved to preserve
to himself a People, could set bounds to their Rage, which in other respects
had as full success as our Author or the Devil could have wished.

Dionysius (his other example of Justice) deserves observation: More falsehood,
leudness, treachery, ingratitude, cruelty, baseness, avarice, impudence and
hatred to all manner of Good, was hardly ever known in in a mortal Creature.
For this reason Diogenes seeing him at Corinth, tho in a poor and contemptible
condition, said, he rather deserved to have continued in the misery, fears and
villanys of his Tyranny, than to be suffered peaceably to converse with honest
men. And if such as these are to be called observers of Justice, it must be
concluded that the Laws of God and of Men, are either of no value, or contrary
to it; and that the destruction of Nations is a better work than their
preservation. No Faith is to be observed: Temples may be justly sacked; the
best men slain for daring to be better than their Masters; and the whole World,
if it were in the power of one Man, rightly torn in pieces and destroyed.

His Reasons for this are as good as his Doctrine: It is, says he, the multitude
of people and abundance of riches, that are the glory and strength of every
Prince: the bodies of his Subjects do him service in War, and their goods supply
his wants. Therefore if not out of affection to his people, yet out of natural
love unto himself, every Tyrant desires to preserve the lives and goods of his
Subjects. I should have thought that Princes, tho Tyrants, being God's
Vicegerents, and Fathers of their People, would have sought their good, tho no
advantage had thereby redounded to themselves, but it seems no such thing is to
be expected from them. They consider Nations, as Grasiers do their Herds and
Flocks, according to the profit that can be made of them: and if this be so, a
People has no more security under a Prince, than a Herd or Flock under their
Master. Tho he desire to be a good Husband, yet they must be delivered up to
the slaughter when he finds a good Market, or a better way of improving his
Land; but they are often foolish, riotous, prodigal, and wantonly destroy their
Stock, tho to their own prejudice. We thought that all Princes and Magistrates
had bin set up, that under them we might live quietly and peaceably, in all
godliness and honesty: but our Author teaches us, that they only seek what they
can make of our Bodies and Goods, and that they do not live and reign for us,
but for themselves. If this be true, they look upon us not as Children, but as
Beasts; nor do us any good for our own sakes, or because it is their duty, but
only that we may be useful to them, as Oxen are put into plentiful Pastures
that they may be strong for labor, or fit for slaughter. This is the divine
Model of Government that he offers to the World. The just Magistrate is the
Minister of God for our good: but this Absolute Monarch has no other care of
us, than as our Riches and Multitude may increase his own Glory and Strength.
We might easily judge what would be the issue of such a Principle, when the
Being of Nations depending upon his will, must also depend upon his opinion
whether the Strength, Multitude and Riches of a People do conduce to the
increase of Glory and Power or not, tho Historys were silent in the case; for
these things speak of themselves. The judgment of a single man is not to be
relied upon; the best and wisest do osten err, the foolish and perverse always;
and our discourse is not of what Moses or Samuel would do, but what may come
into the fancy of a furious or wicked man who may usurp the supreme Power, or a
child, a woman, or a fool, that may inherit it. Besides, the Proposition upon
which he builds his Conclusion, proves often false: for as the Riches, Power,
Number and Courage of our Friends is for our advantage, and that of our Enemies
threatens us with ruin; those Princes only can reasonably believe the strength
of their Subjects beneficial to them, who govern so as to be assured of their
Affection, and that their Strength will be employed for them: But those who
know they are, or justly deserve to be hated, cannot but think it will be
employed against them, and always seek to diminish that which creates their
danger. This must certainly befall as many as are lewd, foolish, negligent,
imprudent, cowardly, wicked, vicious, or any way unworthy the places they
obtain; for their Reign is a perpetual exercise of the most extreme and ruinous
Injustice: Every man that follows an honest Interest, is prejudiced: Every one
who finds the Power that was ordained for his good, to be turned to his hurt,
will be angry and hate him that dos it: If the People be of uncorrupted
manners, this hatred will be universal, because every one of them desires that
which is just; if composed of good and evil, the first will always be averse to
the evil Government, and the others endeavoring to uphold it, the safety of
the Prince must depend upon the prevalence of either Party. If the best prove
to be the strongest, he must perish: and knowing himself to be supported only
by the worst, he will always destroy as many of his Enemies as he can; weaken
those that remain; enrich his Creatures with their Spoils and Confiscations; by
fraud and rapine accumulate Treasures to increase the number of his Party, and
advance them into all places of power and trust, that by their assistance he
may crush his Adversarys; and every man is accounted his Adversary, who has
either Estate, Honor, Virtue or Reputation. This naturally casts all the Power
into the hands of those who have no such dangerous qualitys, nor any thing to
recommend them, but an absolute resignation of themselves to do whatever they
are commanded. These men having neither will nor knowledge to do good, as soon
as they come to be in power, Justice is perverted, military Discipline
neglected, the public Treasures exhausted, new Projects invented to raise
more; and the Prince's wants daily increasing, through their ignorance,
negligence, or deceit, there is no end of their devices and tricks to gain
supplys. To this end swarms of Spys, Informers, and false Witnesses are sent
out to circumvent the richest and most eminent men: The Tribunals are filled
with Court-Parasites of profligate Consciences, Fortunes and Reputation, that
no man may escape who is brought before them. If Crimes are wanting, the
diligence of well*chosen Officers and Prosecutors, with the favor of the
Judges, supply all defects; the Law is made a Snare; Virtue suppressed, Vice
fomented, and in a short time Honesty and Knavery, Sobriety and Leudness,
Virtue and Vice, become Badges of the several Factions; and every man's
conversation and manners showing to what Party he is addicted, the Prince who
makes himself head of the worst, must favor them to the overthrow of the best,
which is so straight a way to an universal ruin, that no State can prevent it,
unless that course be interrupted.

These things considered, no general Judgment can be made of a Magistrate's
Counsels, from his Name or Duty. He that is just, and become grateful to the
People by doing good, will find his own Honor and Security in increasing their
Number, Riches, Virtue, and Power: If on the other side, by doing evil, he has
drawn upon himself the public hatred, he will always endeavor to take from
them the power of doing him any hurt, by bringing them into the utmost
weakness, poverty, and baseness. And whoever would know whether any particular
Prince desires to increase or destroy the bodies and goods of his Subjects, must
examine whether his Government be such as renders him grateful or odious to
them; and whether he dos pursue the public Interest, or for the advancement of
his own Authority set up one in himself contrary to that of his People; which
can never befall a Popular Government, and consequently no mischief equal to it
can be produced by any such, unless something can be imagined worse than
corruption and destruction.

SECT. XXVIII. Men living under Popular or Mixed Governments, are more careful
of the public Good, than in Absolute Monarchys.
OUR Author delighting in strange things, dos in the next place, with an
admirable sagacity, discover two faults in Popular Governments, that were never
found by any man before him; and these are no less than Ignorance and
Negligence. Speaking of the Care of Princes to preserve their Subjects, he
adds; On the contrary in a Popular State, every man knows the public Good does
not wholly depend upon his Care, but the Commonwealth may be well enough
governed by others, tho he only tend his private business. And a little below,
Nor are they much to be blamed for their Negligence, since it is an even wager
their Ignorance may be as great. The Magistrates amongst the people being for
the most part annual, do always lay down their Office before they understand
it; so as a Prince of a duller understanding must needs excel them. This is
bravely determined, and the world is beholden to Filmer for the discovery of
the Errors that have hitherto bin Epidemical. Most men had believed, that such
as live in Free States, are usually pleased with their condition, desire to
maintain it; and every man finding his own good comprehended in the Public, as
those that sail in the same Ship, employs the Talent he has in endeavoring to
preserve it, knowing that he must perish if that miscarry. This was an
encouragement to Industry; and the continual Labors and Dangers to which the
Romans and other free Nations exposed themselves, have bin taken for Testimonys
that they thought themselves concerned in the businesses that past among them,
and that every one did not neglect them through an opinion that they would be done
well enough by others. It was also thought that free Citys, by frequent
Elections of Magistrates, became Nurserys of great and able Men, every man
endeavoring to excel others, that he might be advanced to the Honor he had no
other title to than what might arise from his Merit or Reputation; in which
they succeeded so well, that one of them may be justly said to have produced
more eminent Men, than all the Absolute Monarchys that have bin in the World.
But these were mistakes. Perhaps Brutus, Valerius, and other Roman Senators or
Magistrates, for the space of three hundred years, might have taken some care of
the Commonwealth, if they had thought it wholly depended upon one of them: But
believing it would be well enough governed by others, they neglected it.
Camillus, Cincinnatus, Papirius, Fabius, Rullus and Maximus, Scipio Africanus,
Amilcar, Hannibal, Pericles, Themistocles, Alcibiades, Epaminondas, Philopemen,
and others, might have proved able Men in affairs of War or Government; but
they were removed from their Offices before they understood them, and must
needs be excelled in both by Princes, tho of duller understanding. This may be
enough to excuse them for performing their Duty so slackly and meanly: But it is
strange that Tacitus, and others, should so far overlook the Reason, and so
grossly mistake the matter of Fact, as not only to say, that great and excellent
Spirits failed when Liberty was lost, and all Preferments given to those who
were most propense to Slavery; but that there wanted men Tacit. Annal. l. 1.
even to write the History, Inscitia Reipublicae ut alienae. They never applied
themselves to understand Affairs depending upon the will of one man, in whom
they were no otherwise concerned, than to avoid the effects of his Rage; and
that was chiefly to be done, by not falling under the suspicion of being
virtuous. This was the study then in request; and the most cunning in this Art
were called Scientes temporum: No other wisdom was esteemed in that and the
ensuing Ages, and no more was required, since the Paternal Care, deep Wisdom,
and profound Judgment of the Princes provided for all; and tho they were of
duller understandings, they must needs excel other Magistrates, who having bin
created only for a year, left their Offices before they could understand the
Dutys of them. This was evidenced by that tenderness and sincerity of heart, as
well as the great purity of manners observed in Tiberius; the Clemency,
Justice, solid Judgment and Frugality of Caligula; the Industry, Courage and
Sobriety of Claudius; the good Nature and prudent Government of Nero; the
Temperance, Vivacity and Diligence of Vitellius; the Liberality of Galba and
Vespasian; together with the Encouragement given by Domitian, Commodus,
Heliogabalus, and many others, to all manner of Virtues, and Favors conferred
upon those that excelled in them. Ou^ Author giving such infallible proof of his
Integrity and Understanding, by teaching us these things that would never have
come into our heads, ought surely to be credited, tho that which he proposes
seems to be most absurd. But if we believe such as lived in those times, or
those who in later ages have perused their Writings, we cannot but think the
Princes beforementioned, and the greatest part of those who possessed the same
places, not only to have bin void of all Virtue, and to have suffered none to
grow up under them, but in baseness, sottishness and malice, to have bin equal
to the worst of all Beasts. Whilst one Prince polluted with ^ust and Blood, sat
in his Grotto at Capreae, surrounded with an infamous Troop of Astrologers, and
others were governed by Whores, Bardache's, manumis'd Slaves, and other
Villains, the Empire was ruined through their negligence, incapacity and
wickedness; and the City that had flourished in all manner of Virtue, as much
or more than any that has bin yet known in the world, produced no more; the
Discipline was dissolved that nourished it; no man could hope to advance a
public Good, or obviate an Evil by his diligence and valor; and he who
acquired reputation by either, could expect no other reward than a cruel death.
If Germanicus and Corbulo, who were born when Liberty was expiring, be brought
for Examples against the first part of my Assertion, their ends will justify
the latter; and no eminent Roman Family is known to have brought forth a man
that deserved to be named in History since their time. This is as probable in
reason, as true in fact. Men are valiant and industrious, when they fight for
themselves and their Country; they prove excellent in all the Arts of War and
Peace, when they are bred up in virtuous Exercises, and taught by their Fathers
and Masters to rejoice in the Honors gained by them: they love their Country,
when the good of every particular man is comprehended in the public
Prosperity, and the success of their Achievements is improved to the general
advantage: They undertake hazards and labors for the Government, when it is
justly administered; when Innocence is safe, and Virtue honored; when no man
is distinguished from the vulgar, but such as have distinguished themselves by
the bravery of their actions; when no honor is thought too great for those who
do it eminently, unless it be such as cannot be communicated to others of equal
merit: They do not spare their Persons, Purses, or Friends, when the public
Powers are employed for the public Benefit, and imprint the like affections in
their Children from their Infancy. The discipline of Obedience in which the
Romans were bred, taught them to command: and few were admitted to the
Magistracys of inferior rank, till they had given such proof of their Virtue as
might deserve the Supreme. Cincinnatus, Camillus, Papirius, Mamercus, Fabius
Maximus, were not made Dictators, that they might learn the Dutys of the
Office; but because they were judged to be of such Wisdom, Valor, Integrity and
Experience, that they might be safely trusted with the highest Powers; and
whilst the Law reigned, not one was advanced to that honor, who did not fully
answer what was expected from him. By this means the City was so replenished
with men fit for the greatest employments, that even in its infancy, when three
hundred and six of the Fabii, Quorum neminem, says Livy, ducem sperneret
quibuslibet temporibus Senatus, were killed in one day, the City did lament the
loss, but was not so weakened to give any advantage to their Enemies: and when
every one of those who had bin eminent before the second Punic War, Fabius
Maximus only excepted, had perished in it, others arose in their places, who
surpast them in number, and were equal to them in Virtue. The City was a
perpetual spring of such men as long as Liberty lasted; but that was no sooner
overthrown, than Virtue was torn up by the roots; the People became base and
sordid, the small remains of the Nobility slothsul and effeminate; and their
Italian Associats becoming like to them, the Empire whilst it stood, was only
sustained by the strength os Foreigners.

The Grecian Virtue had the same fate, and expired with Liberty: instead of
such Soldiers as in their time had no equals, and such Generals of Armies and
Fleets, Legislators and Governors, as all succeeding Ages have justly admired,
they sent out swarms of Fiddlers, Jesters, Chariot-drivers, Players, Bawds,
Flatterers, Ministers of the most impure Lusts; or idle, babbling, hypocritical
Philosophers, not much better than they. The Emperors Courts were always
crowded with this Vermin; and notwithstanding the necessity our Author imagins
that Princes must needs understand matters of Government better than Magistrates
annually chosen, they did for the most part prove so brutish as to give
themselves and the World to be governed by such as these, and that without any
great prejudice, since none could be found more ignorant, lewd, and base than
themselves.

It Is absurd to impute this to the change of times; for time changes nothing;
and nothing was changed in those times but the Government, and that changed all
things. This is not accidental, but according to the rules given to Nature by
God, imposing upon all things a necessity of perpetually following their
Causes. Fruits are always of the same nature with the Seeds and Roots from
which they come, and Trees are known by the fruits they bear: As a Man begets a
Man, and a Beast a Beast; that Society of Men which constitutes a Government
upon the foundation of Justice, Virtue, and the common Good, will always have
men to promote those ends; and that which intends the advancement of one man's
desires and vanity, will abound in those that will foment them. Men follow that
which seems advantageous to themselves. Such as are bred under a good
discipline, and see that all benefits procured to their Country by virtuous
Actions, redound to the honor and advantage of themselves, their Children,
Friends, and Relations, contract from their infancy a love to the Public, and
look upon the common Concernments as their own. When they have learnt to be
virtuous, and see that Virtue is in esteem, they seek no other preferments than
such as may be obtained that way; and no Country ever wanted great numbers of
excellent men, where this method was established. On the other side, when it is
evident that the best are despised, hated, or marked out for destruction; all
things calculated to the humor or advantage of one man, who is often the worst,
or governed by the worst; Honors, Riches, Commands, and Dignitys disposed by
his Will, and his favor gained only by a most obsequious respect, or a
pretended affection to his person, together with a servile obedience to his
commands, all Applications to virtuous Actions will cease; and no man caring to
render himself or his Children worthy of great Employments, such as desire to
have them will, by little intrigues, corruption, scurrility and flattery,
endeavor to make way to them; by which means true Merit in a short time comes
to be abolished, as fell out in Rome as soon as the Caesar's began to reign.

He who dos not believe this, may see whether the like did not happen in all
the other Commonwealths of Italy and Greece; or if modern examples are thought
to be of more value, let him examine whether the Noblemen of Venice, who are
born and bred in Familys that never knew a Master; who act for themselves, and
have a part in all the good or evil that befalls the Commonwealth, and know that
if it be destroyed, the^ must perish, or at least that all changes are to their
prejudice, do neglect the public Interests, as thinking that the whole not
depending upon any one of them, things will be well enough governed, tho they
attend only their private benefit. Let it be observed whether they do better
understand the common concernments, than the great men of France or Spain, who
never come to the knowledge of any thing, unless they happen to be favored by
the King or his Ministers, and know themselves never to be more miserable than
when their Master is most prosperous. For my own part, I cannot think it
necessary to alledg any other proo^ of this point, than that when Maximilian
the Emperor, Lewis the twelfth of France, the fierce Pope Julius the second,
and Ferdinand the subtle and powerful King of Spain, had by the League of
Cambray combined against the Venetians, gained the Battle of La Ghirad'adda,
taken Alviano their Paol. Paruta Hist. Venet. Guicciard.
General prisoner, deprived them of all their Dominion on the Terra firma, and
prepared to assault the City, it was, under God, solely preserved by the vigor
and wisdom of their Nobility, who tho no way educated to War, unless by Sea,
sparing neither persons nor purses, did with admirable industry and courage
first recover Padoua, and then many other Citys, ^o as at the end of that
terrible War they came off without any diminution of their Territorys. Whereas
Portugal having in our age revolted from the House of Austria, no one doubts
that it had bin immediately reduced, if the great men of Spain had not bin
pleased with such a lessening of their Master's power, and resolved not to
repair it by the recovery of that Kingdom, or to deprive themselves of an easy
retreat when they should be oppressed by him or his Favorites. The like thought
was more plainly expressed by the Marshall de Bassompierre, who seeing how
hardly Rochel was pressed by Lewis the 13 th, said, Je croy qu'enfin Nous serons
assez fous pour prendre la Rochelle. Mem. de Bassom^ierre.
he thought they should be such fools to take it: but it is believed they would
never have bin such fools; and the treachery only of our Countrymen did enable
the Cardinal Richlieu to do it (as for his own Glory, and the advancement of
the Popish Cause he really intended) and nothing is to this day more common in
the mouths of their wisest and best men, tho Papists, than the acknowledgment
of their own folly in suffering that place to fall, the King having by that
means gotten power to proceed against them at his pleasure. The brave Monsieur
de Turenne is said to have carried this to a greater height in his last
Discourse to the present King of France: "You think, said he, you have Armies,
but you have none; the one half of the Officers are the Bawdy House Companions
of Monsieur de xxx, or the Creatures of his Whore Madam de xxx: the other half
may be men of experience, and fit for their Employments; but they are such as
would be pleased with nothing more than to see you lose two or three Battles,
that coming to stand in need of them, you might cause them to be better used by
your Ministers than of late they have bin." It may easily be imagined how men
in such sentiments do serve their Master; and nothing is more evident than that
the French in this age have had so great advantages, that they might have
brought Europe, and perhaps Asia, under their power, if the interest of the
Nation had bin united to that of the Government, and the Strength, Vigor, and
Bravery of the Nobility employed that way. But since it has pleased God to
suffer us to fall into a condition of being little able to help our selves, and
that they are in so good terms with the Turk as not to attack him, it is our
happiness that they do not know their own strength, or cannot without ruin to
themselves turn it to our prejudice.

I could give yet more pregnant testimonys of the difference between men
fighting for their own interests in the Offices to which they had bin advanced
by the votes of numerous Assemblys, and such as serve for pay, and get
preferments by corruption or favor, if I were not unwilling to stir the spleen
of some men, by obliging them to reflect upon what has past in our own Age and
Country; to compare the Justice of our Tribunals within the time of our memory,
and the integrity of those who for a while managed the public Treasure; the
Discipline, Valor and Strength of our Armies and Fleets; the increase of our
Riches and Trade; the success of our Wars in Scotland, Ireland, and at Sea; the
glory and reputation not long since gained, with that condition into which we
are of late fallen. But I think, I shall offend no wise or good man, if I say,
that as neither the Romans nor Grecians in the time of their Liberty ever
performed any actions more glorious than freeing the Country from a Civil War
that had raged in every part, the conquest of two such Kingdoms as Scotland and
Ireland, and crushing the formidable power of the Hollanders by Sea; nor ever
produced more examples of Valor, Industry, Integrity, and in all respects
complete, disinterested, unmovable and incorruptible Virtue than were at that
time seen in our Nation: So neither of them upon the change of their Affairs
did exceed us in weakness, cowardice, baseness, venality, leudness, and all
manner of corruption. We have reason therefore not only to believe that all
Princes do not necessarily understand the affairs of their People, or provide
better for them than those who are otherwise chosen; but that as there is
nothing of Greatness, Power, Riches, Strength, and Happiness, which we might
not reasonably have hoped for if we had rightly improved the advantages we had;
so there is nothing of shame and misery which we may not justly fear, since we
have neglected them.

If any man think that this evil of advancing Officers for personal respects,
favor or corruption, is not of great extent, I desire him to consider, that the
Officers of State, Courts of Justice, Church, Armies, Fleets and Corporations,
are of such number and power as wholly to corrupt a Nation when they themselves
are corrupted; and will ever be corrupt, when they attain to their Offices by
corruption. The good management of all Affairs, Civil, Military, and
Ecclesiastical, necessarily depends upon good order and discipline; and it is not
in the power of common men to reform abuses patronized by those in Authority,
nor to prevent the mischiefs thereupon ensuing; and not having power to direct
public actions to the public good, they must consequently want the industry
and affection that is required to bring them to a good issue. The Romans were
easily beaten under the Decemviri, tho immediately before the erection, and
after the extinction of that Power, none of their Neighbors were able to
resist them. The Goths, who with much Glory had reigned in Spain for about
three hundred years, had neither strength nor courage under their lewd and
odious King Rodrigo, and were in one day subdued with little loss of blood by
the Saracens, and could not in less than eight hundred years free their Country
from them. That brave Nation having of late fallen under as base a conduct, has
now as little heart or power to defend it self: Court-Parasites have rendered
Valor ridiculous; and they who have ever showed themselves as much inclined to
Arms as any people of the world, do now abhor them, and are sent to the Wars by
force, laid in Carts, bound like Calves brought to the Shambles, and left to
starve in Flanders as soon as they arrive. It may easily be judged what service
can be expected from such men, tho they should happen to be well commanded: but
the great Officers, by the corruption of the Court, think only of enriching
themselves; and increasing the misery of the Soldiers by their frauds, both
become equally useless to the State.

Notwithstanding the seeming prosperity of France, matters there are not much
better managed. The warlike temper of that people is so worn out by the frauds
and crueltys of corrupt Officers, that few men list themselves willingly to be
Soldiers; and when they are engaged or forced, they are so little able to
endure the miserys to which they are exposed, that they daily run away from
their Colors, tho they know not whither to go, and expect no mercy if they are
taken. The King has in vain attempted to correct this humor by the severity of
martial Law; but men's minds will not be forced; and tho his Troops are
perfectly well armed, clothed, and exercised, they have given many testimonys
of little worth. When the Prince of Conde had by his own Valor, and the
Strength of the King's Guards, broken the first line of the Prince of Orange's
Army at the battle of Seneff, he could not make the second and third line of
his own Army to advance and reinforce the first, by which means he lost all the
fair hopes he had conceived of an entire Victory. Not long after, the Marshall
de Crequi was abandoned by his whole Army near Trier, who ran away, hardly
striking a stroke, and left him with sixteen horse to shift for himself. When
Monsieur de Turenne, by the excellency of his Conduct and Valor, had gained
such a Reputation amongst the Soldiers, that they thought themselves secure
under him, he did not suffer such disgraces; but he being killed, they returned
to the usual temper of forced and ill-us'd Soldiers: half the Army was lost in
a retreat, little differing from a flight; and the rest, as they themselves
confess, saved by the bravery of two English Regiments. The Prince of Conde was
soon after sent to command; but he could not with all his courage, skill and
reputation, raise their fallen Spirits, nor preserve his Army any other way,
than by lodging them in a Camp near Schlestadt, so fortified by Art and Nature
that it could not be forced.

To these we may add some Examples of our own. In our late War the Scots Foot,
whether Friends or Enemies, were much inferior to those of the Parliament, and
their Horse esteemed as nothing. Yet in the year 1639 and 1640, the King's
Army, tho very numerous, excellently armed and mounted, and in appearance able
to conquer many such Kingdoms as Scotland, being under the conduct of
Courtiers, and affected as men usually are toward those that use them ill, and
seek to destroy them, they could never resist a wretched Army commanded by
Leven; but were shamefully beaten at Newborn, and left the Northern Countys to
be ravaged by them.

When Van Tromp set upon Blake in Foleston-Bay, the Parliament had not above
thirteen Ships against threescore, and not a man that had ever seen any other
fight at Sea, than between a Merchant-ship and a Pirat, to oppose the best
Captain in the world, attended with many others in valor and experience not
much inserior to him. Many other difficultys were observed in the unsettled
State: Few Ships, want of Money, several Factions, and some who to advance
particular Interests betrayed the Public. But such was the power of Wisdom and
Integrity in those that sat at the Helm, and their diligence in choosing men
only for their Merit, was blessed with such success, that in two years our Fleets
grew to be as famous as our Land Armies; the Reputation and Power of our Nation
rose to a greater height, than when we possessed the better half of France, and
the Kings of France and Scotland were our Prisoners. All the States, Kings and
Potentates of Europe, most respectfully, not to say submissively, sought our
Friendship; and Rome was more afraid of Blake and his Fleet, than they had bin
of the great King of Sweden, when he was ready to invade Italy with a hundred
thousand men. This was the work of those, who, if our Author says true, thought
basely of the public Concernments; and believing things might be well enough
managed by others, minded only their private Affairs. These were the effects of
the negligence and ignorance of those, who being suddenly advanced to Offices,
were removed before they understood the Dutys of them. These Diseases, which
proceed from popular corruption and irregularity, were certainly cured by the
restitution of that Integrity, good Order and Stability that accompany divine
Monarchy. The Justice of the War made against Holland in the year 1665; the
probity of the Gentleman, who without partiality or bribery, chose the most
part of the Officers that carried it on; the Wisdom, Diligence and Valor
manifested in the conduct, and the Glory with which it was ended, justifys all
that our Author can say in its commendation. If any doubt remains, the subtilty
of making the King of France desire that the Netherlands might be an accession
to his Crown; the ingenious ways taken by us to facilitate the conquest of
them; the Industry of our Ambassadors in diverting the Spaniards from entering
into the War till it was too late to recover the Losses sustained; the
honorable Design upon the Smyrna Fleet, and our frankness in taking the
quarrel upon our selves, together with the important Figure we now make in
Europe, may wholly remove it; and in confirmation of our Author's Doctrine,
show, that Princes do better perform the Offices that require Wisdom, Industry
and Valor, than annual Magistrates; and do more seldom err in the choice of
Officers, than Senats and popular Assemblys.

SECT. XXIX. There is no assurance that the Distempers of a State shall be
cured by the Wisdom of a Prince.
BUT, says our Author, the Virtue and Wisdom of a Prince supplys all. Tho he
were of a duller understanding, by use and experience he must needs excel all:
Nature, Age, or Sex, are, as it seems, nothing to the case. A Child as soon as
he comes to be a King, has experience; the head of a Fool is filled with
Wisdom, as soon as a Crown is set upon it, and the most vicious do in a moment
become virtuous. This is more strange than that an Ass being trained to a
Course, should outrun the best Arabian Horse; or a Hare bred up in an Army,
become more strong and fierce than a Lion: for Fortune dos not only supply all
natural defects in Princes, and correct their vices, but gives them the benefit
of use and experience when they have none. Some Reasons and Examples might have
bin expected to prove this extraordinary Proposition: But according to his
laudable custom, he is pleased to trouble himself with neither; and thinks that
the impudence of an Assertion is sufficient to make that to pass, which is
repugnant to experience and common sense, as may appear by the following
discourse.

I will not insist upon terms; for tho duller understanding signisys nothing,
in as much as no understanding is dull, and a man is said to be dull only
because he wants it; but presuming he means little understanding, I shall so
take it. This defect may possibly be repaired in time; but to conclude it must
be so, is absurd, for no one has this use and experience when he begins to
reign. At that ^ime many Errors may be committed to the ruin of himself or
people, and many have perished even in their beginning. Edward the fifth and
sixth of England, Francis the second of France, and diverse other Kings have
died in the beginning of their youth: Charles the ninth lived only to add the
furys of youth to the follys of his childhood; and our Henry the second, Edward
the second, Richard the second, and Henry the sixth, seem to have bin little
wiser in the last, than in the first year of their Reign or Life. The present
Kings of Spain, France, and Sweden, came to the Crowns they wear before the
sixth year of their Age; and if they did then surpass all annual Magistrates in
Wisdom and Valor, it was by a peculiar Gift of God, which, for any thing we
know, is not given to every King, and it was not Use and Experience that made
them to excel. If it be pretended that this Experience, with the Wisdom that it
gives, comes in time and by degrees; I may modestly ask, what time is required
to render a Prince excellent in Wisdom who is a Child or a Fool? and who will
give security that he shall live to that time, or that the Kingdom shall not be
ruined in the time of his folly? I may also doubt how our Author, who concludes
that every King in time must needs become excellent in Wisdom, can be
reconciled to Solomon, who in preferring a wise Child before an old and foolish
King that will not be advised, shows that an old King may be a Fool, and he
that will not be advised is one. Some are so naturally brutish and stupid, that
neither education nor time will mend them. It Is probable that Solomon took what
care he could to instruct his only Son Rehoboam; but he was certainly a Fool at
forty years of age, and we have no reason to believe that he deserved a better
name. He seems to have bin the very Fool his Father intended, who tho brayed in
a mortar would never leave his folly: He would not be advised, tho the hand of
God was against him; ten Tribes revolted from him, and the City and Temple was
pillaged by the Egyptians. Neither experience nor afflictions could mend him,
and he is called to this day by his own Countrymen Stultitia Gentium. I might
offend tender ears, if I should alledg all the Examples of Princes mentioned in
History, or known in our own Age, who have lived and died as foolish and
incorrigible as he: but no man, I presume, will be scandalized if I say, that
the ten last Kings of Meroveus his Race, whom the French Historians call Les
Roys faineants, were so far from excelling other men in understanding, that
they lived and died more like beasts than men. Nay, the Wisdom and Valor of
Charles Martel expired in his Grandchild Charles the Great; and his Posterity
grew to be so sottish, that the French Nation must have perished under their
conduct, if the Nobility and People had not rejected them, and placed the Crown
upon a more deserving Head.

This is as much as is necessary to be said to the general Proposition; for it
is false, if it be not always true; and no conclusion can be made upon it. But
I need not be so strict with our Author, there being no one fou d part in his
Assertion. Many Children come to be Kings when they h^^e no experience; and
die, or are deposed, before they can gain any. Many are by nature so sottish
that they can learn nothing: Others falling under the power of Women, or
corrupt Favorites and Ministers, are persuaded and seduced from the good ways
to which their own natural understanding or experience might lead them; the
Evils drawn upon themselves or their Subjects, by the Errors committed in the
time of their ignorance, are often grievous, and sometimes irreparable, tho
they should be made wise by time and experience. A person of royal Birth and
excellent Wit, was so sensible of this as to tell me, "That the condition of
Kings was most miserable, in as much as they never heard Truth till they were
ruined by Lies; and then every one was ready to tell it to them, not by way of
advice, but reproach, and rather to vent their own spite, than to seek a remedy
to the evils brought upon them and the people." Others attain to Crowns when
they are of full Age, and have experience as Men, tho none as Kings; and
therefore are apt to commit as great mistakes as Children: And upon the whole
matter all the Historys of the world show, that instead of this profound
Judgment and incomparable Wisdom which our Author generally attributes to all
Kings, there is no sort of men that do more frequently and entirely want it.

But tho Kings were always wise by nature, or made to be so by experience, it
would be of little advantage to Nations under them, unless their Wisdom were
pure, perfect, and acompany'd with Clemency, Magnanimity, Justice, Valor and
Piety. Our Author himself durst hardly have said, that these Virtues or Graces
are gained by Experience, or annexed by God to any rank of Men or Familys. He
gives them where he pleases without distinction. We sometimes see those upon
Thrones, who by God and Nature seem to have bin designed for the most sordid
Offices; and those have bin known to pass their lives in meanness and poverty,
who had all the Qualitys that could be desired in Princes. There is likewise a
kind of ability to dispatch some sort of Affairs, that Princes who continue
long in a Throne may to a degree acquire or increase: Some men take this for
Wisdom, but K James more rightly called it by the name of Kingcraft; and as it
principally consists in Dissimulation, and the arts of working upon men's
Passions, Vanitys, private Interests or Vices, to make them for the most part
instruments of Mischief, it has the advancement or security of their own
Persons for its object, is frequently exercised with all the excesses of Pride,
Avarice, Treachery and Cruelty; and no men have bin ever found more notoriously
to deflect from all that deserves praise in a Prince, or a Gentleman, than
those that have most excelled in Tacit. An. l. 11, 12.
it. Pharasmenes King of Iberia, is recorded by Tacitus to have bin well versed
in this Science. His Brother Mithradates King of Armenia had married his
Daughter, and given his own Daughter to Rhadamistus Son of Pharasmenes. He had
some Contests with Mithradates, but by the help of these mutual Alliances,
nearness of Blood, the diligence of Rhadamistus, and an Oath, strengthened with
all the Ceremonys that amongst those Nations were esteemed most sacred, not to
use Arms or Poison against him, all was composed; and by this means getting him
into his power, he stifled him with a great weight of clothes thrown upon him,
killed his Children, and not long after his own Son Rhadamistus also. Louis the
eleventh of France, James the third of Scotland, Henry the seventh of England,
were great Masters of these Arts; and t^ose who are acquainted with History,
will easily judge how happy Nations would be if all Kings did in time certainly
learn them.

Our Author, as a farther testimony of his Judgment, having said that Kings
must needs excel others in Understanding, and grounded his Doctrine upon their
profound Wisdom, imputes to them those base and panick sears which are
inconsistent with it, or any royal Virtue: and to carry the point higher, tells
us, There is no Tyrant so barbarously wicked, but his own reason and sense will
tell him, that tho he be a God, yet he must die like a Man; and that there is
not the meanest of his Subjects, but may find a means to revenge himself of the
Injurys offered him: and from thence concludes, that there is no such Tyranny
as that of a Multitude which is subject to no sach fears. But if there be such
a thing in the World, as a barbarous and wicked Tyrant, he is something
different from a King, or the same; and his Wisdom is consistent or
inconsistent with Barbarity, Wickedness, and Tyranny. If there be no
difference, the praises he gives, and the rights he ascribes to the one belong
also to the other: and the excellency of Wisdom may consist with Barbarity,
Wickedness, Tyranny, and the panick fears that accompany them; which hitherto
have bin thought to comprehend the utmost excesses of Folly and Madness; and I
know no better testimony of the truth of that Opinion, than that Wisdom always
distinguishing good from evil, and being seen only in the rectitude of that
distinction, in following and adhering to the good, rejecting that which is
evil, preferring safety before danger, happiness before misery, and in knowing
rightly how to use the means of attaining or preserving the one, and preventing
or avoiding the other, there cannot be a more extravagant deviation from
Reason, than for a man, who in a private condition might live safely and
happily, to invade a Principality: or if he be a Prince, who by governing with
Justice and Clemency might obtain the inward satisfaction of his own Mind, hope
for the blessing of God upon his just and virtuous Actions, acquire the love
and praises of men, and live in safety and happiness amongst his safe and happy
Subjects, to fall into that Barbarity, Wickedness, and Tyranny, which brings
upon him the displeasure of God, and detestation of men, and which is always
attended with those base and panick fears, that comprehend all that is shameful
and miserable. This being perceived by Machiavel, he could not think Discors.
sopra T. Live. l. 1. c. 10.
that any man in his senses would not rather be a Scipio than a Caesar; or if he
came to be a Prince, would not rather choose to imitate Agesilaus, Timoleon, or
Dion, than Nabis, Phalaris, or Dionysius; and imputes the contrary choice to
madness. Nevertheless it is too well known that many of our Author's profound
wise men in the depth of their Judgment, made perfect by use and experience,
have fallen into it.

If there be a difference between this barbarous wicked Tyrant, and a King, we
are to examine who is the Tyrant, and who the King; for the name conferred or
assumed cannot make a King, unless he be one. He who is not a King, can have no
Title to the rights belonging to him who is truly a King: so that a People who
find themselves wickedly and barbarously oppressed by a Tyrant, may destroy him
and his Tyranny without giving offense to any King.

But it is strange that Filmer should speak of the Barbarity and Wickedness of a
Tyrant, who looks upon the World to be the Patrimony of one man; and for the
foundation of his Doctrine, asserts such a power in every one that makes himself
master of any part, as cannot be limited by any Law. His Title is not to be
questioned; Usurpation and Violence confer an incontestable Right: the exercise
of his Power is no more to be disputed than the Acquisition: his will is a Law
to his Subjects; and no Law can be imposed by them upon his Conduct. For if
these things be true, I know not how any man could ever be called a Tyrant,
that name having never bin given to any unless for usurping a Power that did
not belong to him, or an unjust exercise of that which had bin conferred upon
him, and violating the Laws which ought to be a rule to him. It Is also hard to
imagine how any man can be called barbarous and wicked, if he be obliged by no
Law but that of his own Pleasure; for we have no other notion of wrong, than
that it is a breach of the Law which determins what is right. If the lives and
goods of Subjects depend upon the Will of the Prince, and he in his profound
Wisdom preserve them only to be beneficial to himself, they can have no other
right than what he gives, and without injustice may retain when he thinks fit:
If there be no wrong, there can be no just revenge; and he that pretends to
seek it, is not a free man vindicating his Right, but a perverse slave rising
up against his Master. But if there be such a thing as a barbarous and wicked
Tyrant, there must be a rule relating to the acquisition and exercise of the
Power, by which he may be distinguished from a just King; and a Law superior to
his Will, by the violation of which he becomes barbarous and wicked.

Tho our Author so sar forgets himself, to confess this to be true, he seeks to
destroy the fruits of it by such flattery as comprehends all that is most
detestable in Profaneness and Blasphemy, and gives the name of Gods to the most
execrable of men. He may by such language deserve the name of Heylin's
Disciple; but will find few among the Heathens so basely servile, or so boldly
impious. Tho Claudius Caesar was a drunken sot, and transported with the
extravagance of his Fortune, he detested the impudence of his Predecessor
Caligula, (who affected that Title) and in his Rescript to the Procurator of
Judea, gives it no better name than turpem Caii insaniam. For this reason it
was rejected by all his Pagan Successors, who were not as furiously wicked as
he: yet Filmer has thought fit to renew it, for the benefit of Mankind, and the
Glory of the Christian Religion.

I know not whether these extreme and barbarous Errors of our Author are to be
imputed to wickedness or madness; or whether, to save the pains of a
distinction, they may not rightly be said to be the same thing: but nothing
less than the excess of both could induce him to attribute any thing of good to
the fears of a Tyrant, since they are the chief causes of all the mischiefs he
dos. Tertullian says they are Metu quam furore saeviores; and Tacitus, speaking
of a most wicked King, says, that he did Saevitiam ignaviae obtendere: and we
do not more certainly find that Cowards are the cruellest of men, than that
wickedness makes them Cowards; that every man's fears bear a proportion with
his guilt, and with the number, virtue, and strength of those he has offended.
He who usurps a power over all, or abuses a Trust reposed in him by all, in the
highest measure offends all; he fears and hates those he has offended, and to
secure himself, aggravates the former Injurys: When these are public, they
beget a universal Hatred, and every man desires to extinguish a Mischief that
threatens ruin to all. This will always be terrible to one that knows he has
deserved it; and when those he dreads are the body of the People, nothing but a
public destruction can satisfy his rage, and appease his fears.

I wish I could agree with Filmer, in exempting multitudes from fears; for they
having seldom committed any injustice, unless through fear, would, as far as human
fragility permits, be free from it. Tho the Attick Ostracism was not an extreme
Punishment, I know nothing usually practiced in any Commonwealth, that did so
much savor of injustice: but it proceeded solely from a fear that one man, tho
in appearance virtuous, when he came to be raised too much above his
fellow-Citizens, might be tempted to invade the public Liberty. We do not find
that the Athenians, or any other free Citys, ever injured any man, unless through
such a jealousy, or the perjury of Witnesses, by which the best Tribunals that
ever were, or can be established in the world, may be misled; and no injustice
could be apprehended from any, if they did not fall into such fears.

But tho Multitudes may have fears as well as Tyrants, the Causes and Effects
of them are very different. A People, in relation to domestic Affairs, can
desire nothing but Liberty, and neither hate or fear any but such as do, or
would, as they suspect, deprive them of that Happiness: Their endeavors to
secure that seldom hurt any except such as invade their Rights; and if they
err, the mistake is for the most part discovered before it produce any
mischief; and the greatest that ever came that way, was the death of one, or a
few men. Their Hatred and desire of Revenge can go no farther than the sense of
the Injury received or feared, and is extinguished by the death or banishment
of the Persons; as may be gathered from the examples of the Tarquins,
Decemviri, Cassius, Melius, and Manlius Capitolinus. He therefore that would
know whether the hatred and fear of a Tyrant, or of a People, produces the
greater mischiefs, needs only to consider, whether it be better that the Tyrant
destroy the People, or that the People destroy the Tyrant: or at the worst,
whether one that is suspected of affecting the Tyranny should perish, or a
whole People, amongst whom very many are certainly innocent; and experience
shows that such are always first sought out to be destroyed for being so:
Popular furys or fears, how irregular or unjust soever they may be, can extend
no farther; general Calamitys can only be brought upon a People by those who
are enemies to the whole Body, which can never be the Multitude, for they are
that Body. In all other respects, the fears that render a Tyrant cruel, render
a People gentle and cautious; for every single man knowing himself to be of
little power, not only fears to do injustice because it may be revenged upon
his Person, by him, or his Friends, Kindred and Relations, that suffers it; but
because it tends to the overthrow of the Government, which comprehends all
public and private Concernments, and which every man knows cannot subsist
unless it be so easy and gentle, as to be pleasing to those who are the best,
and have the greatest power: and as the public Considerations divert them from
doing those Injurys that may bring immediate prejudice to the Public, so there
are strict Laws to restrain all such as would do private Injurys. If neither
the People nor the Magistrates of Venice, Switzerland, and Holland, commit such
extravagances as are usual in other places, it dos not perhaps proceed from the
temper of those Nations different from others, but from a knowledge, that
whosoever offers an injury to a private person, or attempts a public mischief,
is exposed to the impartial and inexorable Power of the Law; whereas the chief
work of an absolute Monarch is to place himself above the Law, and thereby
rendering himself the Author of all the evils that the People suffer, it is
absurd to expect that he should remove them.

SECT. XXX. A Monarchy cannot be well regulated, unless the Powers of the
Monarch are limited by Law.
OUR Author's next step is not only to reject Popular Governments, but all such
Monarchys as are not absolute: for if the King, says he, admits the People to
be his Companions, he leaves to be a King. This is the language of French
Lackeys, Valet de Chambre's, Tailors, and others like them in Wisdom, Learning
and Policy, who when they fly to England for fear of a well deserved Gally,
Gibbet, or Wheel, are ready to say, Il faut que le Roy soit absolu, autrement
il n'est point Roy. And finding no better men to agree with Filmer in this
sublime Philosophy, I may be pardoned if I do not follow them, till I am
convinced in these ensuing points.

1. It seems absurd to speak of Kings admitting the Nobility or People to part
of the Government: for tho there may be, and are Nations without Kings, yet no
man can conceive a King without a People. These must necessarily have all the
power originally in themselves; and tho Kings may and often have a power of
granting Honors, Immunitys, and Privileges to private Men or Corporations, he
dos it only out of the public Stock, which he is entrusted to distribute; but
can give nothing to the People, who give to him all that he can rightly have.

2. It Is strange that he who frequently cites Aristotle and Plato, should
unluckily acknowledge such only to be Kings as they call Tyrants, and deny the
name of King to those, who in their opinion are the only Kings.

3. I cannot understand why the Scripture should call those Kings whose Powers
were limited, if they only are Kings who are absolute; Deuteronomy. 17.
or why Moses did appoint that the power of Kings in Israel should be limited
(if they resolved to have them) if that limitation destroyed the being of a
King.

4. And lastly, how he knows that in the Kingdoms which have a show of
Popularity, the Power is wholly in the King.

The first point was proved when we examined the beginning of Monarchys, and
found it impossible that there could be any thing of justice in them, unless
they were established by the common consent of those who were to live under
them; or that they could make any such establishment, unless the right and
power were in them.

Secondly, Neither Plato nor Aristotle acknowledge either reason or justice in
the power of a Monarch, unless he has more of the Virtues conducing to the good
of the Civil Society than all those who compose it; and employ them for the
public advantage, and not to his own pleasure and profit, as being set up by
those who seek their own good, for no other reason than that he should procure
it. To this end a Law is set as a rule to him, and the best men, that is such
as are most like to himself, Plat. de Leg. Arist. Polit.
made to be his Assistants, because, say they, Lex est men's sine affectu, and
quasi Deus; whereas the best of men have their affections and passions, and are
subject to be misled by them: Which shows, that as the Monarch is not for
himself nor by himself, he dos not give, but receive power, nor admit others to
the participation of it, but is by them admitted to what he has. Whereupon they
conclude, that to prefer the absolute power of a man, as in those Governments
which they call Barbarorum regna, before the regular Government of Kings justly
exercising a power instituted by Law, and directed to the public good, is to
choose rather to be subject to the lust of a Beast, than to be governed by a
God. And because such a choice can only be made by a Beast, I leave our Author
to find a description of himself in their Books, which he so often cites.

But if Aristotle deserves credit, the Princes who reign for themselves and not
for the People, preferring their own pleasure or profit before the public,
become Tyrants; which in his language is Enemies to God and Man. On this account
Boccalini introduces the Princes of Europe raising a mutiny against him in
Parnassus, for giving such definitions of Tyrants as they said comprehended
them all; and forcing the poor Philosopher to declare by a new definition, that
Che I Tiranni furono ce^ti h ^omini del tempo antico de i quali hoggidi si e
perdu^^ la razz^* ^occal. Rag. d^ Parn.
Tyrants were certain men of ancient times whose race is now extinguished. But
with all his Wit and Learning he could not give a reason why those who do the
same things that rendered the ancient Tyrants detestable, should not be so also
in our days.

In the third place, The Scriptures declare the necessity of setting bounds to
those who are placed in the highest dignitys. Moses seems to have had as great
abilitys as any man that ever lived in the world; but he alone was not able to
bear the weight of the Government, and therefore God appointed Seventy chosen
men to be his assistants. This was a perpetual Law to Israel; and as no King
was to have more power than Moses, or more abilitys to perform the Dutys of his
Office, none could be exempted from the necessity of wanting the like helps.
Our Author therefore must confess that they are Kings who have them, or that
Kingly Government is contrary to the Scriptures. When God by Moses gave liberty
to his People to make a King, he did it under these conditions. He must be one
Deuteronomy. 17.
of their Brethren: They must choose him: he must not multiply Gold, Silver,
Wives, or Horses: he must not lift up his Heart above his Brethren. And
Josephus paraphrasing upon the place, says, He shall do nothing without the
Antiq. Jud.
advice of the Sanhedrin; or if he do, they shall oppose him. This agrees with
the confession of Zedekiah to the Princes (which was the Sanhedrin) The King
can do nothing without you; and seems to have bin in pursuance of the Law of
the Kingdom, which was written in a Book, and laid up Jer. ^8.
before the Lord; and could not but agree with that of Moses, unless they spoke
by different Spirits, or that the Spirit by which they did speak was subject to
error or change: and the whole series of God's Law shows, that the Pride,
Magnificence, Pomp and Glory usurped by their Kings was utterly contrary to the
will of God. They did lift up their hearts above their Brethren, which was
forbidden by the Law. All the Kings of Israel, and most of the Kings of Judah,
utterly rejected it; and every one of them did very much depart from the
observation of it. I will not deny that the People in their institution of a
King intended they should do so: they had done it themselves, and would have a
King that might uphold them in their disobedience; they were addicted to the
Idolatry of their accursed Neighbors, and desired that Government by which it
was maintained amongst them. In doing this they did not reject Samuel; but they
rejected God that he should not reign over them. They might perhaps believe
that unless their King were such as the Law did not permit, he would not
perform what they intended; or that the name of King did not belong to him,
unless he had a power that the Law denied. But since God and his Prophets give
the name of King to the chief Magistrate, endowed with a power that was
restrained within very narrow limits, whom they might without offense set up,
we also may safely give the same to those of the same nature, whether it please
Filmer or not.

4. The practice of most Nations, and (I may truly say) of all that deserve
imitation, has bin as directly contrary to the absolute power of one man as
their Constitutions: or if the original of many Governments lie hid in the
impenetrable darkness of Antiquity, their progress may serve to show the
intention of the Founders. Aristotle seems to think that the first Monarchs
having bin chosen for their Virtue, were little restrained in the exercise of
their Power; but that they or their Children falling into Corruption and Pride,
grew odious; and that Nations did on that account either abolish their
Authority, or create Senats and other Magistrates, who having part of the Power,
might keep them in order. The Spartan Kings were certainly of this nature; and
the Persian, till they conquered Babylon. Nay, I may safely say, that neither
the Kings which the frantic people set up in opposition to the Law of God, nor
those of the bordering Nations, whose example they chose to follow, had that
absolute power which our Author attributes to all Kings as inseparable from the
name. Achish the Philistin loved and admired David; he looked upon him as an
Angel of God, and promised that he should be the keeper of 1 Samuel 29.
his Head for ever: but when the Princes suspected him, and said he shall not go
down with us to Battle, he was obliged to dismiss him. This was not the
language of Slaves, but of those who had a great part in the Government; and
the King's submission to their will, shows that he was more like to the Kings
of Sparta, than to an absolute Monarch, who dos whatever pleases him. I know
not whether the Spartans were descended from the Hebrews, as some think; but
their Kings were under a regulation much like that of the 17 th of Deuter. tho
they had two: Their Senate of twenty eight, and the Ephori, had a power like to
that of the Sanhedrin; and by them Kings were condemned to fines, imprisonment,
banishment, and death, as appears by the examples of Pausanias, Cleonymus,
Leonidas, Agis, and others. The Hebrew Discipline was the same; More Nevochim.
Reges Davidicae stirpis, says Maimonides, judicabant and judicabantur. They
gave testimony in judgment when they were called, and testimony was given
against them. Whereas the Kings of Israel, as the same Author Ibid.
says, were superbi, cord elati, and spertores legis, nec judicabant, nec
judicabantur; proud, insolent, and contemners of the Law, who would neither
judge, nor submit to judgment as the Law commanded. But the Fruits they gathered
were suitable to the Seed they had sown, and their Crimes were not left
unpunished: they who despised the Law were destroyed without Law; and when no
ordinary course could be taken against them for their excesses, they were
overthrown by force, and the Crown within the space of few years was
transported into nine several Familys* with the utter extirpation of those that
had possessed it. On the other hand, there never was any Sedition against the
Spartan Kings; and after the moderate Discipline, according to which they lived,
was established, none of them died by the hands of their Subjects, except only
two, who were put to death in a way of Justice: the Kingdom continued in the
same races, till Cleomenes was defeated by Antigonus, and the Government
overthrown by the Macedonians. This gave occasion to those bestial Tyrants
Nabis and Machanidas to set up such a Government as our Author recommends to
the World, which immediately brought destruction upon themselves, and the whole
City. The Germans, who pretended to be descended from the Spartans, had the
like Government. Their (...) de (...) Germ.
Princes according to their merit had the credit of persuading, not the power of
commanding; and the question was not what part of the Government they would
allow to the Nobility and People, but what the Nobility and People would give
to their Princes: and it is not much material to our present dispute, whether
they learnt this from ^ome obscure knowledge of the Law which God gave to his
People, or whether led by the light of Reason, which is also from God, they
discovered what was altogether conformable to that Law. Whoever understands the
affairs of Germany, knows that the present Emperors, notwithstandiug their
haughty Title, have a power limited as in the days of Tacitus. If they are good
and wise, they may persuade; but they can command no farther than the Law
allows. They do not admit the Princes, Noblemen, and Citys to the power which
they all exercise in their general Diets, and each of them within their own
Precincts; but they exercise that which has bin by public consent bestowed
upon them. All the Kingdoms peopled from the North observed the same rules. In
all of them the powers were divided between the Kings, the Nobility, Clergy,
and Commons; and by the Decrees of Councils, Diets, Parliaments, Cortez, and
Assemblys of Estates, Authority and Liberty were so balanced, that such Princes
as assumed to themselves more than the Law did permit, were severely punished;
and those who did by force or fraud invade Thrones, were by force thrown down
from them.

This was equally beneficial to Kings and People. The Powers, as Theopompus
King of Sparta said, were most safe when they were least envied and hated.
Lewis the 11 th of France was one of the first that broke this Golden Chain;
and by more subtle Arts than had bin formerly known, subverted the Laws, by
which the fury of Kings had bin restrained, and taught others to do the like;
tho all of them have not so well saved themselves from punishment. James the
third of Scotland was one of his most apt Scholars; and Ab hominibus infimae
sortis in omnia simul vitia est praeceps datus: tempora etiam corrupta and
vicinorum regum exempla non parum ad eum evertendum juverunt: Nam and Edvardus
in A^glia, Car^lus in Burgundia, Ludovicus undecimus in Gallia, Joannes
secundus in Lusitania, tyran^idis fundamenta jec^runt: Richardus tertius in
A^glia eam immanissime exercuit. Hist. Scot. l. 12.
Buchanan in his Life says, That he was precipitated into all manner of Infamy
by men of the most abject condition; that the corruption of those times, and
the ill Example of neighboring Princes, were considerable motives to pervert
him: for Edward the fourth of England, Charles of Burgundy, Lewis the 11 th of
France, and John the second of Portugal, had already laid the Foundations of
Tyranny in those Countries; and Richard the third was then most cruelly
exercising the same in the Kingdom of England.

This could not have bin, if all the Power had always bin in Kings, and neither
the People nor the Nobility had ever had any: For no man can be said to gain
that which he and his Predecessors always possessed, or to take from others that
which they never had; nor to set up any sort of Government, if it had bin
always the same. But the aforesaid Lewis the 11 th did assume to himself a
Power above that of his Predecessors; and Philip de Commines shows the ways by
which he acquired it, with the miserable effects of his Acquisition both to
himself and to his people: Modern Authors observe that the change was made by
him, and for that reason he is said by Mezeray, and others, to have brought
those Kings out of Davoir mi^ les Roys hor^ de page.
Guardianship: they were not therefore so till he emancipated them.
Nevertheless this Emancipation had no resemblance to the unlimited Power of
which our Author dreams. The General Assemblys of Estates were often held long
after his death, and continued in the exercise of the Sovereign Power of the
Nation. Davila, speaking of the General Assembly Hist. delle Guerre Civ.
held at Orleans in the time of Francis the second, asserts the whole Thuan.
Hist. l. 1.
Power of the Nation to have bin in them. Monsieur de Thou says the same thing,
and adds, that the King dying suddenly, the Assembly continued even at the
desire of the Council, in the exercise of that Power, till they had settled the
Regency, and other Affairs of the highest importance, according to their own
judgment. Hottoman, a Lawyer of that Hottom. Franco-Gallia.
Time and Nation, famous for his Learning, Judgment, and Integrity, having
diligently examined the ancient Laws and Historys of that Kingdom, distinctly
proves that the French Nation never had any Kings but of their own choosing;
that their Kings had no Power except what was conferred upon them; and that they
had bin removed, when they excessively abused or rendered themselves unworthy
of that Trust. This is sufficiently clear by the forecited examples of
Pharamond's Grandchildren, and the degenerated Races of Meroveus and Pepin; of
which many were deposed, some of the nearest in Blood excluded; and when their
Vices seemed to be incorrigible, they were wholly rejected. All this was done
by virtue of that rule which they call the Salique Law: And tho some of our
Princes pretending to the Inheritance of that Crown by marrying the Heirs
General, denied that there was any such thing, no man can say that for the
space of above twelve hundred years, Females, or their Descendents, who are by
that Law excluded, have ever bin thought to have any right to the Crown: And no
Law, unless it be explicitly given by God, can be of greater Authority than
one which has bin in force for so many Ages. What the beginning of it was is
not known: But Charles the sixth receding from this Law, and thinking to
dispose of the Succession otherwise than was ordained by it, was esteemed mad,
and all his Acts rescinded. And tho the Reputation, Strength and Valor of the
English, commanded by Henry the fifth, one of the bravest Princes that have
ever bin in the world, was terrible to the French Nation; yet they opposed him
to the utmost of their power, rather than suffer that Law to be broken. And tho
our Success under his Conduct was great and admirable; yet soon after his
death, with the expense of much Blood and Treasure, we lost all that we had on
that side, and suffered the Penalty of having unadvisedly entered into that
Quarrel. By virtue of the same Law, the Agreement made by King John when he was
Prisoner at London, by which he had alienated part of that Dominion, as well as
that of Francis the first, concluded when he was under the same Circumstances
at Madrid, were reputed null; and upon all occasions that Nation has given
sufficient testimony, that the Laws by which they live are their own, made by
themselves, and not imposed upon them. And it is as impossible for them who made
and deposed Kings, exalted or deprest reigning Familys, and prescribed Rules to
the Succession, to have received from their own Creatures the Power, or part of
the Government they had, as for a man to be begotten by his own Son. Nay, tho
their Constitution was much changed by Lewis the 11 th, yet they retained so
much of their ancient Liberty, that in the last Age, when the House of Valois
was as much depraved as those of Meroveus and Pepin had bin, and Henry the
third by his own Leudness, Hypocrisy, Cruelty and Impurity, together with the
baseness of his Minions and Favorites, had rendered himself odious and
contemptible to the Nobility and People; the great Citys, Parliaments, the
greater and (in political matters) the sounder part of the Nation declared him
to be fallen from the Crown, and pursued him to the death, tho the blow was
given by the hand of a base and half-distracted Monk.

Henry of Bourbon was without controversy the next Heir; but neither the
Nobility nor the People, who thought themselves in the Government, would admit
him to the Crown, till he had given them satisfaction that he would govern
according to their Laws, by abjuring his Religion which they judged
inconsistent with them.

The later Commotions in Paris, Bourdeaux, and other places, together with the
Wars for Religion, show, that tho the French do not complain of every
Grievance, and cannot always agree in the defense and vindication of their
violated Libertys, yet they very well understand their Rights: and that, as
they do not live by, or for the King, but he reigns by, and for them; so their
Privileges are not from him, but that his Crown is from them; and that,
according to the true Rule of their Government, he can do nothing against their
Laws, or if he do, they may oppose him.

The Institution of a Kingdom is the act of a free Nation; and whoever denies
them to be free, denies that there can be any thing of right in what they set
up. That which was true in the beginning is so, and must be so for ever. This
is so far acknowledged by the highest Monarchs, that in a Treatise published in
the year 1667, by Authority of the present King of France, to justify his
pretensions to some part of the Low Countries, notwithstanding all the Acts of
himself, and the King of Spain to extinguish them, it is said, Que les Roys ont
certe bienheureuse impuissance de ne pouvoir rien fair contre les loix de leut
pays. Traite des dro^^ de la Reyne.
That Kings are under the happy inability to do any thing against the Laws of
their Country. And tho perhaps he may do things contrary to Law, yet he grounds
his Power upon the Law; and the most able and most trusted of his Ministers
declare the same. About the year 1660, the Count D' Aubijoux, a man of eminent
quality in Languedoc, but averse to the Court, and hated by Cardinal Mazarin,
had bin tried by the Parliament of Toulouse for a Duel, in which a Gentleman
was killed; and it appearing to the Court (then in that City) that he had bin
acquitted upon forged Letters of Grace, false Witnesses, powerful Friends, and
other undue means, Mazarin desired to bring him to a new Trial: but the
Chancellor Seguier told the Queen Mother it could not be; for the Law did not
permit a man once acquitted to be again questioned for the same Fact; and that
if the course of the Law were interrupted, neither the Salique Law, nor the
succession of her Children, or any thing else could be secure in France.

This is farther proved by the Historys of that Nation. The Kings of Meroveus
and Pepin's Races, were suffered to divide the Kingdom amongst their Sons; or,
as Hottoman says, the Estates made the Division, and allotted to each such a
part as they thought fit. But when this way was found to be prejudicial to the
Public, an Act of State was made in the time of Hugh Capet, by which it was
ordained, that for the future the Kingdom should not be dismembered; which
Constitution continuing in force to this day, the Sons or Brothers of their
Kings receive such an Apannage (they call it) as is bestowed on them, remaining
subject to the Crown as well as other men. And there has bin no King of France
since that time (except only Charles the sixth) who has not acknowledged that
he cannot alienate any part of their Dominion.

Whoever imputes the acknowledgment of this to Kingcraft, and says, that they
who avow this when it is for their advantage, will deny it on a different
occasion, is of all men their most dangerous Enemy. In laying such fraud to
their charge, he destroys the veneration by which they subsist, and teaches
Subjects not to keep Faith with those, who by the most malicious deceits show,
that they are tied by none. Human Societys are maintained by mutual Contracts,
which are of no value if they are not observed. Laws are made, and Magistrates
created to cause them to be performed in public and private matters, and to
punish those who violate them. But none will ever be observed, if he who
receives the greatest benefit by them, and is set up to oversee others, give
the example Suarum legum lator and eversor. Tacit.
to those who of themselves are too much inclined to break them. The first step
that Pompey made to his own ruin was, by violating the Laws he himself had
proposed. But it would be much worse for Kings to break those that are
established by the Authority of a whole People, and confirmed by the succession
of many Ages.

I am far from laying any such blemishes on them, or thinking that they deserve
them. I must believe the French King speaks sincerely, when he says he can do
nothing against the Laws of his Country: And that our King James did the like,
when he acknowledged himself to be the Servant of the Commonwealth; and the
rather, because it is true, and that he is placed in the Throne to that end.
Nothing is more essential and fundamental in the Constitutions of Kingdoms,
than that Diets, Parliaments, and Assemblys of Estates should see this
performed. It Is not the King that gives them a right to judge of matters of War
or Peace, to grant Supplys of men and money, or to deny them; and to make or
abrogate Laws at their pleasure: All the Powers rightly belonging to Kings, or
to them, proceed from the same root. The Northern Nations seeing what mischiefs
were generally brought upon the Eastern, by referring too much to the irregular
will of a man; and what those who were more generous had suffered, when one man
by the force of a corrupt mercenary Soldiery had overthrown the Laws by which
they lived, feared they might fall into the same misery; and therefore retained
the greater part of the Power to be exercised by their General Assemblys, or by
Delegates, when they grew so numerous that they could not meet. These are the
Kingdoms of which Grotius speaks, where the King has his part, and the Senate or
People their part of the supreme Authority; and where the Law prescribes such
limits, that if the King attempts to seize that part which is not his, he may
justly be opposed: Which is as much as to say, that the Law upholds the Power
it gives, and turns against those who abuse it.

This Doctrine may be displeasing to Court-Parasites; but is no less profitable
to such Kings as follow better Counsels, than to the Nations that live under
them: the Wisdom and Virtue of the best is always fortified by the concurrence
of those who are placed in part of the Power; they always do what they will,
when they will nothing but that which is good; and it is a happy impotence in
those, who through ignorance or malice desire to do evil, not to be able to effect
it. The weakness of such as by defects of Nature, Sex, Age, or Education, are
not able of themselves to bear the weight of a Kingdom, is thereby supported,
and they together with the People under them preserved from ruin; the furious
rashness of the Insolent is restrained; the extravagance of those who are
naturally lewd, is awed; and the bestial madness of the most violently wicked
and outrageous, suppressed. When the Law provides for these matters, and
prescribes ways by which they may be accomplished, every man who receives or
fears any Injury, seeks a remedy in a legal way, and vents his Passions in such
a manner as brings no prejudice to the Commonwealth: If his Complaints against
a King may be heard, and redrest by Courts of Justice, Parliaments, and Diets,
as well as against private men, he is satisfied, and looks no farther for a
Remedy. But if Kings, like those of Israel, will neither judge nor be judged,
and there be no Power orderly to redress private or public Injurys, every man
has recourse to force, as if he lived in a Wood where there is no Law; and that
force is generally mortal to those who provoke it: No Guards can preserve a
hated Prince from the vengeance of one resolute hand; and they as often fall by
the Swords of their own Guards as of others: Wrongs will be done, and when they
that do them cannot or will not be judged publicly, the injured Persons become
Judges in their own case, and Executioners of their own sentence. If this be
dangerous in matters of private concernment, it is much more so in those
relating to the public. The lewd extravagances of Edward and Richard the
Seconds, whilst they acknowledged the power of the Law, were gently reproved
and restrained with the removal of some profligate Favorites; but when they
would admit of no other Law than their own Will, no relief could be had but by
their Deposition. The lawful Spartan Kings, who were obedient to the Laws of
their Country, lived in safety, and died with glory; whereas it is a strange
thing to see a lawless Tyrant die without such infamy and misery, as held a
just proportion with the wickedness of his Life. They did, as Plutarch says of
Dionysius, many mischiefs, and suffered Vit. Timoleon*
more. This is confirmed by the examples of the Kingdom of Israel, and of the
Empires of Rome and Greece; they who would submit to no Law, were destroyed
without any. I know not whether they thought themselves to be Gods, as our
Author says they were; but I am sure the most part of them died like Dogs, and
had the burial of Asses rather than of Men.

This is the happiness to which our Author would promote them all. If a King
admits a People to be his companions, he ceases to be a King, and the State
becomes a Democracy. And a little farther: If in such Assemblys, the King,
Nobility, and People, have equal shares in the Sovereignty, then the King has
but one voice, the Nobility likewise one, and the People one; and then any two
of these voices should have power to overrule the third: Thus the Nobility and
Commons should have a power to make a Law to bridle the King, which was never
seen in any Kingdom. We have heard of Nations that admitted a man to reign over
them (that is, made him King) but of no man that made a People. The Hebrews
made Saul, David, Jeroboam, and other Kings: when they returned from Captivity,
they conferred the same Title upon the Asmonean race, as a reward of their Valor
and Virtue. The Romans chose Romulus, Numa, Hostilius, and others to be their
Kings; the Spartans instituted two, one of the Heraclidae, the other of the
Aeacid^e. Other Nations set up one, a few, or more Magistrates to govern them:
and all the World agrees, that Qui dat esse, dat modum esse; He that makes him
to be, makes him to be what is: and nothing can be more absurd than to say,
that he who has nothing but what is given, can have more than is given to him.
If Saul and Romulus had no other title to be Kings, than what the People
conferred upon them, they could be no otherwise Kings than as pleased the
People: They therefore did not admit the People to be partakers of the
Government; but the People who had all in themselves, and could not have made a
King if they had not had it, bestowed upon him what they thought fit, and
retained the rest in themselves. If this were not so, then instead of saying to
the multitude, Will ye have this man to reign? they ought to say to the man,
Will thou have this multitude to be a People? And whereas the Nobles of Arragon
used to say to their new made King, We who are as good as you, make you our
King, on condition you keep and maintain our Rights and Libertys, and if not,
not; he should have said to them, I who am better than you, make you to be a
People, and will govern you as I please. But I doubt whether he would have
succeeded, till that Kingdom was joined to others of far greater strength, from
whence a power might be drawn to force them out of their usual method.

That which has bin said of the Governments of England, France, and other
Countries, shows them to be of the same nature; and if they deserve not the name
of Kingdoms, and that their Princes will by our Author's Arguments be persuaded
to leave them, those Nations perhaps will be so humble to content themselves
without that magnificent Title, rather than resign their own Libertys to
purchase it: and if this will not please him, he may seek his glorious
sovereign Monarchy among the wild Arabs, or in the Island of Ceylon; for it
will not be found among civilized Nations.

However more ignorance cannot be expressed, than by giving the name of Democracy
to those Governments that are composed of the three simple species, as we have
proved that all the good ones have ever bin: for in a strict sense it can only
suit with those, where the People retain to themselves the administration of
the supreme Power; and more largely, when the popular part, as in Athens,
greatly overbalances the other two, and that the denomination is taken from the
prevailing part. But our Author, if I mistake not, is the first that ever took
the ancient Governments of Israel, Sparta and Rome, or those of England,
France, Germany and Spain, to be Democracys, only because every one of them had
Senats and Assemblys of the People, who in their Persons, or by their Deputys,
did join with their chief Magistrates in the exercise of the supreme Power. That
of Israel, to the time of Saul, is called by Josephus an Aristocracy. The same
name is ^ven to that of Sparta by all the Greek Authors; and the great contest
in the Peloponnesian War was between the two kinds of Government; the Citys
that were governed Aristocratically, or desired to be so, following the
Lacedaemonians, and such as delighted in Democracy, taking part with the
Athenians. In like manner Rome, England, and France, were said to be under
Monarchys; not that their Kings might do what they pleased, but because one man
had a pre-eminence above any other. Yet if the Romans could take Romulus, the
Son of a man that was never known, Numa a Sabin, Hostilius and Ancus Martius
private men, and Tarquinius Priscus the Son of a banished Corinthian, who had
no Title to a preference before others till it was bestowed upon them; it is
ridiculous to think, that they who gave them what they had, could not set what
limits they pleased to their own gift.

But, says our Author, The Nobility will then have one Voice, and the People
another, and they joining may overrule the third, which was never seen in any
Kingdom. This may perhaps be one way of regulating the Monarchical Power, but
it is not necessary, nor the only one: There may be a Senate, tho the People be
excluded; that Senate may be composed of men chosen for their Virtue, as well
as for the Nobility of their Birth: The Government may consist of King and
People without a Senate; or the Senate may be composed only of the Peoples
Delegates. But if I should grant his assertion to be true, the reasonableness
of such a Constitution cannot be destroyed by the consequences he endeavors to
draw from it; for he who would instruct the world in matters of State, must
show what is, or ought to be, not what he fancys may thereupon ensue. Besides,
it dos not follow, that where there are three equal Votes, Laws should be
always made by the plurality; for the consent of all the three is in many
places required: and it is certain that in England, and other parts, the King
and one of the Estates cannot make a Law without the concurrence of the other.
But to please Filmer, I will avow, that where the Nobles and Commons have an
equal Vote, they may join and overruled or limit the power of the King: and I
leave any reasonable man to judge, whether it be more safe and fit, that those
two Estates comprehending the whole body of the Nation in their Persons, or by
representation, should have a right to overruled or limit the power of that
man, woman, or child, who sits in the Throne; or that he or she, young or old,
wise or foolish, good or bad, should over rule them, and by their vices,
weakness, folly, impertinence, incapacity, or malice, put a stop to their
proceedings; and whether the chief concernments of a Nation may more safely and
prudently be made to depend upon the votes of so many eminent Persons, amongst
whom many wise and good men will always be found if there be any in the Nation,
and who in all respects have the same interest with them, or upon the will of
one, who may be, and often is as vile, ignorant, and wretched as the meanest
Slave; and either has, or is for the most part made to believe he has, an
interest so contrary to them, that their suppression is his Advancement. Common
sense so naturally leads us to the decision of this Question, that I should not
think it possible for Mankind to have mistaken, tho we had no examples of it in
History: and it is in vain to say, that all Princes are not such as I represent;
for if a right were annexed to the being of a Prince, and that his single
judgment should over-balance that of a whole Nation, it must belong to him as a
Prince, and be enjoyed by the worst and basest, as well as by the wisest and
best, which would inevitably draw on the absurditys above mentioned. But that
many are, and have bin such, no man can deny, or reasonably hope that they will
not often prove to be such, as long as any preference is granted to those who
have nothing to recommend them, but the Familys from whence they derive; a
continual succession of those who excel in Virtue, Wisdom, and Experience,
being promised to none, nor reasonably to be expected from any. Such a Right
therefore cannot be claimed by all; and if not by all, then not by any, unless
it proceed from a particular grant in consideration of personal Virtue,
Ability, and Integrity, which must be proved: and when any one goes about to do
it, I will either acknowledge him to be in the right, or give the reasons of my
denial.

However this is nothing to the general Proposition: nay, if a man were to be
found, who had more of the qualitys required for making a right judgment in
matters of the greatest importance, than a whole Nation, or an Assembly of the
best men chosen out of it (which I never heard to have bin, unless in the
Persons of Moses, Joshua, or Samuel, who had the Spirit of God for their guide)
it would be nothing to our purpose; for even he might be biased by his
personal Interests, which Governments are not established to promote.

I may go a step farther, and truly say, that as such vast Powers cannot be
generally granted to all who happen to succeed in any Familys without evident
danger of utter Destruction, when they come to be executed by children, women,
fools, vicious, incapable or wicked persons, they can be reasonably granted to
none, because no man knows what any one will prove till he be tried; and the
importance of the Affair requires such a trial as can be made of no man till he
be dead. He that resists one Temptation may fall under the Power of another;
and nothing is more common in the world, than to see those men fail grossly in
the last actions of their lives, who had passed their former days without
reproach: Wise and good men will with Moses say of themselves, I cannot bear
the burden; and every man who is concerned for the public Good, ought to let
fools know they are not fit to undergo it, and by Law to restrain the fury of
such as will not be guided by reason. This could not be denied, tho Governments
were constituted for the good of the Governor. It Is good for him that the Law
appoints helps for his Infirmitys, and restrains his Vices: but all Nations
ought to do it tho it were not so, in as much as Kingdoms are not established
for the good of one man, but of the People; and that King who seeks his own
good before that of the People, departs from the end of his Institution.

This is so plain, that all Nations who have acted freely, have some way or
other endeavored to supply the defects, or restrain the vices of their supreme
Magistrates; and those among them deserve most praise, who by appointing means
adequate to so great a work, have taken care that it might be easily and safely
accomplished: Such Nations have always flourished in Virtue, Power, Glory, and
Happiness, whilst those who wanted their Wisdom, have suffered all manner of
Calamitys by the weakness or injustice of their Princes, or have had their
hands perpetually in Blood to preserve themselves from their fury. We need no
better example of the first, than that of the Spartans, who by appointing such
Limits to the power of their Kings as could hardly be transgrest, continued
many Ages in great union with them, and were never troubled with civil Tumults.
The like may be said of the Romans from the expulsion of the Tarquins, till
they overthrew their own Orders, by continuing Marius for five years in the
Consulat, whereas the Laws did not permit a man to hold the same Office two
years together; and when that rule was broken, their own Magistrates grew too
strong for them, and subverted the Commonwealth. When this was done, and the
power came into the hands of one man, all manner of evils and calamitys broke
in like a flood: It Is hard to judge, whether the mischiefs he did, or those he
suffered were the greater. He who set up himself to be Lord of the World, was
like to a Beast crowned for the slaughter, and his greatness was the forerunner
of his ruin. By this means some of those who seem not to have bin naturally
prone to evil, were by their fears put upon such courses to preserve
themselves, as being rightly estimated, were worse than the death they
apprehended: and the so much celebrated Constantine the Great died no less
polluted with the Blood of his nearest Relations and Friends, than Nero
himself. But no place can show a more lively (...) de (...) de (...).
picture of this, than the Kingdoms of Granada, and others possessed by the Moors
in Spain, where there being neither Senate nor Assemblys of the Nobility and
People, to restrain the violence and fury of their Kings, they had no other way
than to kill them when their vices became insupportable; which happening for
the most part, they were almost all murdered; and things were brought to such
extremity, that no man would accept a Crown, except he who had neither Birth
nor Virtue to deserve it.

If it be said that Kings have now found out more easy ways of doing what they
please, and securing themselves; I answer, that they have not proved so to all,
and it is not yet time for such as tread in the same steps to boast of their
success: many have fallen when they thought their designs accomplished; and no
man, as long as he lives, can reasonably assure himself the like shall not
befall him. But if in this corrupted Age, the treachery and perjury of Princes
be more common than formerly; and the number of those who are brought to
delight in the rewards of injustice, be so increased, that their partys are
stronger than formerly: this rather shows that the balance of Power is broken,
or hard to be kept up, than that there ought to be none; and it is difficult for
any man, without the Spirit of Prophecy, to tell what this will produce. Whilst
the ancient Constitutions of our Northern Kingdoms remained entire, such as
contested with their Princes, sought only to reform the Governments, and by
redressing what was amiss, to reduce them to their first Principles; but they
may not perhaps be so modest, when they see the very nature of their Government
changed, and the foundations overthrown. I am not sure that they who were well
pleased with a moderate Monarchy, will submit to one that is absolute; and it is
not improbable, that when men see there is no medium between Tyranny and
Popularity, they who would have bin contented with the reformation of their
Government, may proceed farther, and have recourse to Force, when there is no
help in the Law. This will be a hard work in those places where Virtue is
wholly abolished; but the difficulty will lie on the other side, if any sparks
of that remain: if Vice and Corruption prevail, Liberty cannot subsist; but if
Virtue has the advantage, arbitrary Power cannot be established. Those who
boast of their Loyalty, and think they give testimonys of it, when they addict
themselves to the will of one Man, tho contrary to the Law from whence that
Quality is derived, may consider, that by putting their Masters upon illegal
courses, they certainly make them the worst of men, and bring them into danger
of being also the most miserable. Few or no good Princes have fallen into
disasters, unless through an extremity of corruption introduced by the most
wicked; and cannot properly be called unhappy, if they perished in their
Innocence; since the bitterness of Death is assuag'd by the tears of a loving
People, the assurance of a glorious memory, and the quiet of a well-satisfy'd
mind. But of those who have abandoned themselves to all manner of Vice,
followed the impulse of their own fury, and set themselves to destroy the best
men for opposing their pernicious designs, very few have died in peace. Their
Lives have bin miserable, Death infamous, and Memory detestable.

They therefore who place Kings within the power of the Law, and the Law to be
a guide to Kings, equally provide for the good of King and People: Whereas they
who admit of no participants in power, and acknowledge no rule but their own
Will, set up an interest in themselves against that of their People, lose their
affections, which is their most important Treasure, and incur their hatred,
from whence results their greatest danger.

SECT. XXXI. The Libertys of Nations are from God and Nature, not from Kings.
WHatsoever is usually said in opposition to this, seems to proceed from a
groundless conceit, that the Libertys enjoyed by Nations arise from the
Concessions of Princes. This point has bin already treated: but being the
foundation of the Doctrine I oppose, it may not be amiss farther to examine how
it can be possible for one man, born under the same condition with the rest of
Mankind, to have a Right in himself that is not common to all others, till it
be by them or a certain number of them conferred upon him; or how he can without
the utmost absurdity be said to grant Libertys and Privileges to them who made
him to be what he is.

If I had to do with a man that sought after Truth, I should think he had bin
led into this extravagant opinion by the terms ordinarily used in Patents and
Charters granted to particular men; and not distinguishing between the
Proprietor and the Dispenser, might think Kings had given, as their own, that
which they only distribute out of the public Treasury, and could have had
nothing to distribute by parcels, if it had not bin given to them in gross by
the Public. But I need not use our Author so gently. The perversity of his
judgment, and obstinate hatred to Truth, is sufficient to draw him into the
most absurd errors, without any other inducement; and it were not charity, but
folly to think otherwise of one who attributes in general to all Princes,
without any regard to the ways by which they attain to their Power, such an
Authority as never justly belonged to any.

This will be evident to all those who consider, that no man can confer upon
others that which he has not in himself: If he be originally no more than they,
he cannot grant to them or any of them more than they to him. In the 7 th, 8
th, 9 th, and subsequent Sections of the first Chapter, it has bin proved that
there is no resemblance between the paternal Right, and the absolute Power
which he asserts in Kings: that the right of a Father, whatever it be, is only
over his Children; that this right is equally inherited by them all when he
dies: that every one cannot inherit Dominion; for the right of one would be
inconsistent with that of all others: that the right which is common to all is
that which we call Liberty, or exemption from Dominion: that the first Fathers
of Mankind after the Flood had not the exercise of Regal Power; and whatsoever
they had was equally devolved to every one of their Sons, as appears by the
examples of Noah, Shem, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and their Children: that the
erection of Nimrod's Kingdom was directly contrary to, and inconsistent with
the paternal right, if there was any regality in it: that the other Kingdoms of
that time were of the same nature: that Nimrod not exceeding the age of
threescore years when he built Babel, could not be the Father of those that
assisted him in that attempt: that if the seventy two Kings, who, as our Author
says, went from Babylon upon the consusion of Languages, were not the Sons of
Nimrod, he could not govern them by the right of a Father; if they were, they
must have bin very voung, and could not have Children of their own to people
the Kingdoms they set up: that whose Children soever they were, who out of a
part of Mankind did within a hundred and thirty two years after the Flood,
divide into so many Kingdoms, they showed that others in process of time might
subdivide into as many as they pleased; and Kingdoms multiplying in the space
of four thousand years since the 72, in the same proportion they did in one
hundred and thirty two years into seventy two, there would now be as many Kings
in the World as there are men; that is, no man could be subject to another:
that this equality of Right and exemption from the domination of any other, is
called Liberty: that he who enjoys it cannot be deprived of it, unless by his
own consent, or by force: that no one man can force a Multitude, or if he did,
it could confer no right upon him: that a Multitude consenting to be governed
by one man, dos confer upon him the power of governing them; the powers
therefore that he has, are from them, and they who have all in themselves can
receive nothing from him, who has no more than every one of them, till they do
invest him with it. This is proved by sacred and profane Historys. The Hebrews
in the creation of Judges, Kings, or other Magistrates, had no regard to
Paternity, or to any who by extraction could in the least pretend to the right
of Fathers: God did never direct them to do it, nor reprove them for neglecting
it: If they would choose a King, he commanded them to take one of their
Brethren, not one who called himself their Father: When they did resolve to
have one, he commanded them to choose him by lot, and caused the Lot to fall
upon a young man of the youngest Tribe: David and the other Kings of Israel or
Judah had no more to say for themselves in that point than Saul: All the Kings
of that Nation before and after the Captivity, ordinarily or extraordinarily
set up, justly or unjustly, were raised without regard to any Prerogative they
could claim or arrogate to themselves on that account. All that they had
therefore was from their elevation, and their elevation from those that
elevated them: 'Twas impossible for them to confer any thing upon those from
whom they received all they had; or for the People to give power to Kings, if
they had not had it in themselves; which Power universally residing in every
one, is that which we call Liberty. The method of other Nations was much like
to this. They placed those in the Throne who seemed best to deserve so great an
Honor, and most able to bear so great a Burden: The Kingdoms of the Heroes
were nothing else but the Government of those who were most beneficent to the
Nations amongst whom they lived, and whose Virtues were thought fit to be
raised above the ordinary level of the World. Tho perhaps there was not any one
Athenian or Roman equal to Theseus or Romulus in courage and strength, yet they
were not able to subdue many: or if any man should be so vain to think that
each of them did at first subdue one man, then two, and so proceeding by
degrees conquered a whole People, he cannot without madness ascribe the same to
Numa, who being sent for from a soreign Country, was immediately made King of a
fierce People, that had already conquered many of their Neighbors, and was
grown too boisterous even for Romulus himself. The like may be said of the
first Tarquin, and of Servius; they were Strangers: and tho Tullus Hostilius
and Ancus Martius were Romans, they had as little title to a Dominion over
their Fellow-Citizens, or means of attaining to it, as if they had come srom
the farthest parts of the Earth. This must be in all places, unless one man
could prove by a perfect and uninterrupted Genealogy, that he is the eldest Son
of the eldest Line of Noah, and that Line to have continued perpetually in the
Government of the World: for if the Power has bin divided, it may be subdivided
to infinity; if interrupted, the chain is broken, and can never be made whole.
But if our Author can perform this for the service of any man, I willingly
surrender my Arms, and yield up the Cause I defend. If he fail, it is ridiculous
to pretend a Right that belongs to no man, or to go about to retrieve a Right
which for the space of four thousand years has lain dormant; and much more to
create that which never had a subsistence. This leads us necessarily to a
conclusion, That all Kingdoms are at the first erected by the consent of
Nations, and given to whom they please; or else all are set up by force, or
some by force, and some by consent: If any are set up by the con^ent of
Nations, their Kings do not confer Libertys upon those Nations, but receive all
from them, and the general Proposition is false. If our Author therefore, or
his Followers, would confute me, they must prove that all the Kingdoms of the
World have their beginning from force, and that Force dos always create a
Right; or if they recede from the general Proposition, and attribute a peculiar
right to one or more Princes, who are so absolute Lords of their People, that
those under them have neither Liberty, Privilege, Property or Part in the
Government, but by their Concessions, they must prove that those Princes did by
force gain the Power they have, and that their Right is derived from it. This
Force also must have bin perpetually continued; for if that force be the root
of the Right that is pretended, another force by the same rule may overturn,
extinguish or transfer it to another hand. If Contracts have intervened, the
force ceases; and the Right that afterward dos accrue to the persons, must
proceed from, and be regulated according to those Contracts.

This may be sufficient to my purpose: For having already proved, that the
Kingdoms of Israel, Judah, Rome, Sparta, France, Spain, England, and all that
we are concerned in, or that deserve to be examples to us, did arise from the
consent of the respective Nations, and were frequently reduced to their first
Principles, when the Princes have endeavored to transgress the Laws of their
Institution; it could be nothing to us, tho Attila or Tamerlan had by force
gained the Dominions they possessed. But I dare go a step further, and boldly
assert, that there never was or can be a man in the world that did, or can
subdue a Nation; and that the right of one grounded upon force, is a mere
whimsy. It was not Agathocles, Dionysius, Nabis, Marius, Sylla or Caesar, but
the mercenary Soldiers, and other Villains that joined with them, who subdued
the Syracusans, Spartans, or Romans: And as the work was not performed by those
Tyrants alone, if a right had bin gained by the violence they used, it must
have bin common to all those that gained it; and he that commanded them could
have had no more than they thought fit to conser upon him. When Plut. in V^t.
C^^.
Miltiades desired leave to wear an Olive Garland, in commemoration of the
Victory obtained at Marathon, an Athenian did in my opinion rightly say, "If
you alone did fight against the Persians, it is just that you only should be
crowned; but if others did participate in the Victory, they ought also to have
a part in the Honor." And the principal difference that I have observed between
the most regular proceedings of the wisest Senats or Assemblys of the people in
their Persons or Delegats, and the sury of the most dissolute Villains, has
bin, that the first seeking the public good, do usually set up such a Man, and
invest him with such Powers as seem most conducing to that Good: whereas the
others following the impulse of a bestial rage, and aiming at nothing but the
satisfaction of their own lusts, always advance one from whom they expect the
greatest advantages to themselves, and give him such Powers as most conduce to
the accomplishment of their own ends: but as to the Person it is the same thing.
Caesar and Nero did no more make themselves what they were, than Numa; and could
no more confer any Right, Liberty or Privilege upon the Army that gave them all
they had, than the most regular Magistrate could upon the Senate or People that
chose him.

This also is common to the worst as well as the best, that they who set up
either, do, as into a public Treasury, confer upon the Person they choose, a
Power of distributing to particular men, or numbers of men, such Honors,
Privileges and Advantages, as they may seem, according to the Principles of the
Government, to deserve. But there is this difference, that the ends of the one
being good, and those of the other evil, the first do for the most part limit
the Powers, that something may remain to reward Services done to the Public,
in a manner proportioned to the merit of every one; placing other Magistrates to
see it really performed, so as they may not, by the weakness or vices of the
Governor, be turned to the public detriment: the others think they never give
enough, that the Prince having all in his Power, may be able to gratify their
most exorbitant desires, if by any ways they can get his favor; and his
infirmitys and vices being most beneficial to them, they seldom allow to any
other Magistrate a power of opposing his Will, or suffer those who for the
public good would assume it. The World affords many examples of both sorts,
and every one of them have had their progress suitable to their Constitution.
The regular Kingdoms of England, France, Spain, Poland, Bohemia, Denmark,
Sweden, and others, whether elective or hereditary, have had High Stewards,
Constables, Mayors of the Palace, Rixhofmeisters, Parliaments, Diets, Assemblys
of Estates, Cortez, and the like, by which those have bin admitted to succeed
who seemed most fit for the public Service; the unworthy have bin rejected;
the infirmitys of the weak supplied; the malice of the unjust restrained; and
when necessity required, the Crown transferred from one Line or Family to
another. But in the furious Tyrannys that have bin set up by the violence of a
corrupted Soldiery, as in the ancient Roman Empire, the Kingdoms of the Moors
and Arabians, the Tyrannys of Ezzelino of Padoa, those of the Visconti and
Sforzeschi of Milan, Castruccio Castraccani of Lucca, Caesar Borgia, and others,
there was nothing of all this. The Will of the Prince was a Law; all Power was
in him, and he kept it, till another stepped up and took it from him, by the same
means that he had gained it. This fell out so frequently, that tho all the
Roman Emperors endeavored to make their Power hereditary, it hardly continued
three Generations in one Line from Augustus to Augustulus, unless in that of
Constantine, and that with extreme confusion and disorder. They who had madly
set up a Man to be their Head, and exposed so much of the World as was under
their power, to be destroyed by him, did by the like fury throw him down, and
never ceased till they had brought the Empire to utter ruin.

But if this paternal Sovereignty be a mere fiction that never had any effect;
and no Nation was ever commanded by God to make it their rule, nor any reproved
for the neglect of it; none ever learnt it from the light of nature, nor were
by wise men taught to regard it: If the first Fathers claimed no Privilege from
it when every man's Genealogy was known; and tho there were such a thing in
nature, it could be of no use at this day, when the several Races of men are so
confused, that not one in the world can prove his own Original: If the first
Kingdoms, whether well or ill constituted, according to the Command of God, or
the Inventions of Men, were contrary to, and incompatible with it; and there
can have bin no justice in any, if such a Rule was to have bin observed; the
continuance of an unjust usurpation can never have created a Right, but
aggravated the injustice of overthrowing it: If no man could ever by his own
strength and courage subdue a multitude, nor gain any other right over them, if
he did, than they might have to tear it from him; Whoever denies Kingdoms or
other Magistracys to have bin set up by men, according to their own will, and
from an opinion of receiving benefit by them, accuses all the Governments that
are, or ever have bin in the world, of that outrageous injustice in their
Foundation which can never be repaired. If there be therefore, or ever was any
just Government amongst men, it was constituted by them; and whether their
Proceedings were regular or violent, just or unjust, the Powers annexed to it
were their Donation: The Magistracys erected by them, whether in one or more
men, temporary or perpetual, elective or hereditary, were their Creatures; and
receiving all from them, could confer nothing upon them.

SECT. XXXII. The Contracts made between Magistrates, and the Nations that
created them, were real, solemn, and obligatory.
OUR Author having with big words and little sense inveighed against Popular
and Mixed Governments, proceeds as if he had proved that they could not, or
ought not to be. If it be, says he, unnatural for the Multitude to choose their
Governors, or to govern, or to partake in the Government; what can be thought
of that damnable Conclusion which is made by too many, that the Multitude may
correct or depose their Princes, if need be? Surely the unnaturalness and
injustice of this Position cannot sufficiently be expressed. For admit that a
King make a Contract or Paction with his People originally in his Ancestors, or
personally at his Coronation (for both these Pactions some dream of, but cannot
offer any proof of either) yet by no Law of any Nation can a Contract be
thought broken, except first a lawful trial be had by the ordinary Judge of the
breakers thereof; or else every man may be both Party and Judge in his own case,
which is absurd once to be thought: for then it will lie in the hands of the
headless multitude, when they please, to cast off the Yoke of Government that
God has laid upon them, and to judge and punish him, by whom they should be
judged and punished themselves. To this I answer first briefly, That if it be
natural for the Multitude to choose their Governors, or to govern, or to
participate of the Government as best pleases themselves; or that there never
was a Government in the World that was not so set up by them, in pursuance of
the Power naturally inherent in themselves; what can be thought of that
damnable Conclusion, which has bin made by Fools or Knaves, That the Multitude
may not, if need be, correct or depose their own Magistrates? Surely the
unnaturalness and injustice of such a Position cannot be sufficiently expressed.
If that were admitted, all the most solemn Pacts and Contracts made between
Nations and their Magistrates, originally or personally, and confirmed by Laws
and mutual Oaths, would be of no value. He that would break the most sacred
Bonds that can be amongst men, should by perjury and wickedness become Judge of
his own case, and by the worst of crimes procure impunity for all. It would be
in his power, by folly, wickedness and madness, to destroy the Multitude which
he was created and sworn to preserve, tho wise, virtuous and just, and headed
by the wisest and justest of men; or to lay a Yoke upon those who by the Laws
of God and Nature ought to be free: He might in his own case judge that Body by
which he ought to be judged; and who in consideration of themselves and their
own good, made him to be whatsoever he is more than every one of them: The
Governments instituted for the preservation of Nations, would turn to their
destruction: It would be impossible to check the fury of a corrupt and
perfidious Magistrate: The worst of men would be raised to a height that was
never deserved by the best; and the assurance of indemnity would, by increasing
their insolence, turn their other vices into madness, as has bin too often seen
in those who have had more power than they deserved, and were more hardly
brought to account for their actions than ought to have bin; tho I never heard
of any who had so much as our Author asserts to be in all, nor that any was
absolutely assured he should not be questioned for the abuse of what he had.

Besides, if every People may govern, or constitute and choose one or more
Governors, they may divide the Powers between several Men, or ranks of men,
allotting to every one so much as they please, or retaining so much as they
think fit. This has bin practiced in all the Governments, which under several
forms have flourished in Palestine, Greece, Italy, Germany, France, England,
and the rest of the World. The Laws of every place show what the Power of the
respective Magistrate is, and by declaring how much is allowed to him, declare
what is denied; for he has not that which he has not, and is to be accounted a
Magistrate whilst he exercises that which he has.

If any doubts do hereupon arise, I hope to remove them, proving in the first
place, that several Nations have plainly and explicitly made Contracts with
their Magistrates.

2. That they are implicit, and to be understood, where they are not plainly
expressed.

3. That they are not dreams, but real things, and perpetually obliging.

4. That Judges are in many places appointed to decide the Contests arising
from the breach of these Contracts; and where they are not, or the party
offending is of such force or pride that he will not submit, Nations have bin
obliged to take the extremest courses.

To the first: I suppose it will not be denied, that the annual Magistrates of
diverse Commonwealths are under some Compact, and that there is a power of
constraining them to perform the contents, or to punish them for the violation.
The modest behavior of the Roman Consuls and Dictators (as long as their Laws
were in force) might not probably proceed from their good nature. Tho the
people had not bin, as our Author says, mad, foolish, and always desirous to
choose the worst men for being most like to themselves, but admirably wise and
virtuous, it is not to be imagined that in the space of three or four hundred
years they should never have fallen upon one who would have transgrest, if he
could have done it safely, tho they had used the utmost caution in their
choice. But the power of the Consuls being only for a year, that of the
Dictator for six months at most, and the Commission that he should take care Ne
quid detrimenti Respubl. accipiat.
the Commonwealth might suffer no damage, show the end and condition upon which
they were chosen; and tho their Power is by some thought to have bin absolute,
yet the Consuls were frequently opposed and brought into order by the Senate,
Tribuns, or People, and sometimes Plut. Vit. Camil.
the Dictator himself. Camillus in his fourth Dictatorship was threatened by the
Tribuns with a great Fine, and by that means obliged to abdicate his
Magistracy. I have already mentioned Marcus Fabius Maximus, who in the behalf
of his Son Quintus condemned to die by Papirius the Dictator, appealed to the
Qui solus plus quam rua Dictatura potest polletque cui and reges cessere, etc.
T. Live. l. 8.
People: And when the Conduct of Fabius in the War against Hannibal was not
approved, the Tribun thought he made a very modest Proposition, in that he did
not desire his Magistracy should be abrogated; but that the Master of the Horse
should be made equal to him in power, which was done accordingly. It Is agreed
by all, that the Consuls were in the place of Kings, and that the Power of the
Dictator was at least equal to what theirs had bin. If they therefore were
under such a rule, which they could not transgress, or might be reduced to
order if they did, and forced to submit to the People, as the Kings had done,
the Kings were also made upon the same conditions, and equally obliged to
perform them.

The Scripture is more clear in the case. The Judges are said to have bin in
power equal to Kings; and I may perhaps ackowledg it, with relation to the
Deuteronomical King, or such as the People might have chosen without offending
God. The Gileadites made a Covenant with Jephtha, that he should be their Head
and Captain: He would not return to his Country till they had done it. This was
performed solemnly before the Lord in Mispeth, and all Israel followed them.
They might therefore make a Covenant with their Kings, for the difference of
name dos not increase or diminish the Right. Nay, they were in duty obliged to
do it: The words of the 17 th of Deuter. He shall not multiply Wives, etc. that
his Heart be not lifted up above his Brethren, can have no other signification,
than that they should take care he did it not, or, as Josephus says, hinder him
if he attempt it; for the Law was not given to the King who was not, but those
who might make him if they thought fit. In pursuance of this Law --

[The rest of this Chapter is wanting in the Original Manuscript.]

CHAP. III.
SECT. I. Kings not being Fathers of their People, nor excelling all others in
Virtue, can have no other just Power than what the Laws give; nor any title to
the privileges of the Lord's Anointed.
HAVING proved that the right of Fathers is from Nature, and incommunicable, it
must follow, that every man dos perpetually owe all love, respect, service, and
obedience to him that did beget, nourish, and educate him, and to no other
under that name. No man therefore can claim the right of a Father over any,
except one that is so; no man can serve two Masters; the extent and perpetuity
of the Duty which every man owes to his Father, renders it impossible for him
to owe the same to any other: This right of Father cannot be devolved to the
Heir of the Father, otherwise than as every Son by the Law of Nature is Heir to
his Father, and has the same right of commanding his Children, as his Father
had of commanding him when he was a Child: no man can owe to his Brother that
which he owed to his Father, because he cannot receive that from him which he
had from his Father: but the utmost of all absurditys that can enter into the
Heart of man is, for one to exact the rights due to a Father, who has no other
title than force and usurpation, it being no less than to say, that I owe as
much to one who has done me the greatest of all Injurys, as to him who has
conferred upon me the greatest Benefits: or, which is yet worse, if possible,
that as these usurpations cannot be made but by robbing, spoiling, imprisoning,
or killing the Person in possession; that Duty, which by the eternal Law of
Nature I owe to my Father, should oblige me to pay the same veneration,
obedience, and service, to the man that has spoiled, imprisoned, or killed my
Father, as I owed to him; or that the same Law which obliged me to obey and
defend my Father, because he was so, should oblige me to obey and defend his
enemy, because he has imprisoned or killed him; and not only to pass over the
Law of God, which makes me the avenger of my Father's Blood, but to reward his
Murderer with the rights that comprehend all that is most tender and sacred in
Nature, and to look upon one that has done me the greatest of all injustices
and injurys, as upon him to whom I owe my Birth and Education. This being
evident to all those who have any measure of common sense, I suppose it may be
safely concluded, that what right soever a Father may have over his Family, it
cannot relate to that which a King has over his People; unless he, like the man
in the Island of Pines, mentioned before, be also the Father of them all. That
which is absolutely unlike in manner and substance, institution and exercise,
must be unlike in all respects; and the Conclusions, which have their strength
from Similitude and Parity, can have none when there is not the least
similitude of either. And tho it were true, that Fathers are held by no
contracts, (which generally it is not; for when the Son is of age, and dos
something for the Father to which he is not obliged, or gives him that which he
is not bound to give, suppose an Inheritance received from a Friend, goods of
his own acquisition, or that he be emancipated, all good Laws look upon those
things as a valuable consideration, and give the same force to contracts
thereupon made, as to those that pass between strangers) it could have no
relation to our question concerning Kings. One principal reason that renders it
very little necessary by the Laws of Nations, to restrain the power of Parents
over their Children is, because it is presumed they cannot abuse it: they are
thought to have a Law in their Bowels, obliging them more strictly to seek
their good, than all those that can be laid upon them by another Power; and yet
if they depart from it, so as inhumanly to abuse or kill their Children, they
are punished with as much rigor, and accounted more unpardonable than other
men. Ignorance or wilful malice persuading our Author to pass over all this, he
boldly affirms, That the Father of a Family governs it by no other Law than his
own Will; and from thence infers, that the condition of Kings is the same. He
would seem to soften the harshness of this Proposition by saying, That a King
is always tied by the same Law of Nature to keep this general ground, that the
safety of the Kingdom is his chief Law. But he spoils it in the next page, by
asserting, That it is not right for Kings to do injury, but it is right that
they go unpunished by the People, if they do; so that in this point it is all
one, whether Samuel describe a King or a Tyrant, for patient obedience is due
unto both; no remedy in the Text against Tyrants, but crying and praying unto
God in that day. In this our Author, according to the custom of Theaters, runs
round in a Circle, pretends to grant that which is true, and then by a lie
endeavors to destroy all again. Kings by the Law of Nature are obliged to seek
chiefly the good of the Kingdom; but there is no remedy if they do it not:
which is no less than to put all upon the Conscience of those who manifestly
have none. But if God has appointed that all other transgressions of the Laws
of Nature, by which a private man receives damage, should be punished in this
world, notwithstanding the right reserved to himself of a future punishment; I
desire to know, why this alone, by which whole Nations may be, and often are
destroyed, should escape the hands of Justice? If he presume no Law to be
necessary in this case, because it cannot be thought that Kings will
transgress, as there was no Law in Sparta against Adultery, because it was not
thought possible for men educated under that discipline, to be guilty of such a
Crime; and as diverse Nations left a liberty to Fathers to dispose of their
Children as they thought fit, because it could not be imagined that any one
would abuse that power; he ought to remember that the Spartans were mistaken,
and for want of that Law which they esteemed useless, Adulterys became as
common there as in any part of the world: and the other error being almost
every where discovered, the Laws of all civilized Nations make it capital for a
man to kill his Children; and give redress to Children, if they suffer any
other extreme injurys from their Parents, as well as to other persons. But tho
this were not so, it would be nothing to our question, unless it could be
supposed, that whoever gets the power of a Nation into his hands, must be
immediately filled with the same tenderness of affection to the People under
him, as a Father naturally has toward the Children he has begotten. He that is
of this opinion, may examine the lives of Herod, Tiberius, Caligula, and some
later Princes of like inclinations, and conclude it to be true, if he find that
the whole course of their actions, in relation to the People under them, do
well suit with the tender and sacred name of Father; and altogether false, if
he find the contrary. But since every man that considers what has bin, or sees
what is every day done in the world, must confess, that Princes, or those who
govern them, do most frequently so utterly reject all thoughts of tenderness
and piety toward the Nations under them, as rather to seek what can be drawn
from them, than what should be done for them, and sometimes become their most
bitter and public enemies; it is ridiculous to make the safety of Nations to
depend upon a supposition, which by daily experience we find to be false; and
impious, to prefer the lusts of a man who violates the most sacred Laws of
Nature, by destroying those he is obliged to preserve, before the welfare of
that People for whose good he is made to be what he is, if there be any thing
of justice in the Power he exercises.

Our Author foolishly thinks to cover the enormity of this nonsense, by turning
Salutem Populi into Salutem Regni: for tho Regnum may be taken for the power of
commanding, in which sense the preservation of it is the usual object of the
care of Princes, yet it dos more rightly signify the Body of that Nation which
is governed by a King. And therefore if the Maxim be true, as he acknowledges
it to be, then Salus Populi est Lex suprema; and the first thing we are to
inquire is, whether the Government of this or that man dos conduce to the
accomplishment of that supreme Law, or not; for otherwise it ought to have bin
said, Salus Regis est Lex suprema, which certainly never entered into the head
of a wiser or better man than Filmer.

His Reasons are as good as his Doctrine: No Law, says he, can be imposed on
Kings, because there were Kings before any Laws were made. This would not
follow, tho the Proposition were true; for they, who imposed no Laws upon the
Kings they at first made, from an opinion of their Virtue, as in those called
by the Ancients Heroum regna, might lay restrictions upon them, when they were
found not to answer the expectation conceived of them, or that their Successors
degenerated from their Virtue. Other Nations also being instructed by the ill
effects of an unlimited Power given to some Kings (if there was any such) might
wisely avoid the Rock upon which their Neighbors had split, and justly
moderate that Power which had bin pernicious to others. However a Proposition
of so great importance ought to be proved; but that being hard, and perhaps
impossible, because the original of Nations is almost wholly unknown to us, and
their practice seems to have bin so various, that what is true in one is not so
in another; he is pleased only to affirm it, without giving the least shadow of
a reason to persuade us to believe him. This might justify me, if I should
reject his assertion as a thing said gratis: but I may safely go a step
farther, and affirm, That men lived under Laws before there were any Kings;
which cannot be denied, if such a Power necessarily belongs to Kings as he
ascribes to them. For Nimrod, who established his Kingdom in Babel, is the
first who by the Scripture is said to have bin a mighty one in the Earth. He
was therefore the first King, or Kings were not mighty; and he being the first
King, Mankind must have lived till his time without Laws, or else Laws were
made before Kings. To say that there was then no Law, is in many respects most
absurd; for the Nature of man cannot be without it, and the violences committed
by ill men before the Flood, could not have bin blamed if there had bin no Law;
for that which is not, cannot be transgrest. Cain could not have feared that
every man who met him would slay him, if there had not bin a Law to slay him
that had slain another. But in this case the Scripture is clear, at least from
the time that Noah went out of the Ark; for God then gave him a Law sufficient
for the state of things at that time, if all violence was prohibited under the
name of shedding Blood, tho not under the same penalty as Murder. But Penal
Laws being in vain, if there be none to execute them, such as know God dos
nothing in vain, may conclude that he who gave this Law, did appoint some way
for its execution, tho unknown to us. There is therefore a Law not given by
Kings, but laid upon such as should be Kings, as well as on any other Persons,
by one who is above them; and perhaps I may say, that this Law presses most
upon them, because they who have most power, do most frequently break out into
acts of Violence, and most of all disdain to have their Will restrained: and he
that will exempt Kings from this Law, must either find that they are excepted
in the Text, or that God who gave it has not a Power over them.

Moreover, it has bin proved at the beginning of this Treatise, that the first
Kings were of the accursed race, and reigned over the accursed Nations, whilst
the holy Seed had none. If therefore there was no Law where there was no King,
the accursed Posterity of Cham had Laws, when the blessed Descendents of Shem
had none, which is most absurd; the word Outlaw or Lawless, being often given
to the wicked, but never to the just and righteous.

The impious folly of such Assertions goes farther than our Author perhaps
suspected: for if there be no Law where there is no King, the Israelites had no
Law till Saul was made King, and then the Law they had was from him. They had
no King before, for they asked one. They could not have asked one of Samuel, if
he had bin a King. He had not bin offended, and God had not imputed to them the
sin of rejecting him, if they had asked that only which he had set over them.
If Samuel were not King, Moses, Joshua, and the other Judges were not Kings;
for they were no more than he. They had therefore no King, and consequently, if
our Author says true, no Law. If they had no Law till Saul was King, they never
had any; for he gave them none; and the Prophets were to blame for denouncing
judgments against them for receding from, or breaking their Law, if they had
none. He cannot say that Samuel 1 Samuel 10.
gave them a Law; for that which he wrote in a Book, and laid up before the
Lord, was not a Law to the People, but to the King. If it had bin a Law to the
People, it must have bin made public; but as it was only to the King, he laid
it up before God, to testify against him if he should adventure to break it. Or
if it was a Law to the People, the matter is not mended; for it was given in
the time of a King by one who was not King. But in truth it was the Law of the
Kingdom by which he was King, and had bin wholly impertinent, if it was not to
bind him; for it was given to no other person, and to no other end.

Our Author's Assertion on which all his Doctrine is grounded, That there is no
Nation that allows Children any action or remedy for being unjustly governed,
is as impudently false as any other proposed by him: for tho a Child will not
be heard that complains of the Rod; yet our own Law gives relief to Children
against their Fathers, as well as against other persons that do them injurys,
upon which we see many ill effects, and I do rather relate than commend the
practice. In other places the Law gives relief against the extravagances of
which Fathers may be guilty in relation to their Children, tho not to that
excess as to bring them so near to an equality as in England: They cannot
imprison, sell, or kill their Children, without exposing themselves to the same
punishments with other men; and if they take their Estates from them, the Law
is open, and gives relief against them: but on the other side, Children are
punished with Death, if they strike or outrageously abuse their Parents; which
is not so with us.

Now, if the Laws of Nations take such care to preserve private men from being
too hardly used by their true and natural Fathers, who have such a love and
tenderness for them in their own Blood, that the most wicked and barbarous do
much more frequently commit crimes for them than against them; how much more
necessary is it to restrain the fury that Kings, who at the best are but
fantastical Fathers, may exercise to the destruction of the whole People? It Is
a folly to say that David and some other Kings have had, or that all should
have as tender an affection toward their People as toward their Children; for
besides that even the first Proposition is not acknowledged, and will be hardly
verified in any one instance, there is a vast distance between what men ought
to be, and what they are. Every man ought to be just, true and charitable; and
if they were so, Laws would be of no use: but it were a madness to abolish them
upon a supposition that they are so; or to leave them to a future punishment,
which many do not believe, or not regard. I am not obliged to believe that
David loved every Israelite as well as his Son Absalom; but tho he had, I could
not from thence infer that all Kings do so, unless I were sure that all of them
were as wise and virtuous as he.

But to come more close to the matter: Do we not know of many Kings who have
come to their Power by the most wicked means that can enter into the heart of
man, even by the most outrageous injurys done to the People, sometimes by a
foreign aid? as Kings were by the power of the Romans imposed upon the Britans,
that they might wast the Forces, and break the Spirits of that fierce people.
This Tacitus acknowledges, and says, Inter instrumenta servitutis reges
habuere. Tacit.
That among other instruments of inslaving Nations, they imposed Kings upon
them. The Medices were made Masters of Florence by the force of Charles the
Fifth's Army. Sometimes by a corrupt party in their own Country they have
destroyed the best men, and subdued the rest; as Agathocles, Dionysius, and
Caesar did at Rome and Syracuse. Others taking upon them to defend a People,
have turned the Arms with which they were entrusted against their own Masters;
as Francesco Sforza, who being chosen by those of Milan to be their General
against the Venetians, made peace with them, and by their assistance made
himself Prince, or, in our Author's phrase, Father of that great City. If these
be acts of tenderness, love, justice, and charity, those who commit them may
well think they have gained the affections of their People, and grow to love
those from whom they fear nothing, and by whom they think they are loved. But
if on the other hand they know they have attained to their greatness by the
worst of all Villanys, and that they are on that account become the object of
the public hatred, they can do no less than hate and fear those by whom they
know themselves to be hated. The Italians ordinarily say that Chi fa in^uria
non perdona may.
he who dos an injury never pardons, because he thinks he is never pardoned: But
he that enslaves and oppresses a People dos an injury which can never be
pardoned, and therefore fears it will be revenged.

Other Princes who come to their Thrones by better ways, and are not contented
with the power that the Law allows, draw the same hatred upon themselves when
they endeavor by force or fraud to enlarge it; and must necessarily fear and
hate their own People as much as he who by the ways beforementioned has
betrayed or subdued them. Our Author makes nothing of this; but taking it for
granted that it was all one whether Samuel spoke of a King or a Tyrant,
declares that the same patient obedience is due to both; but not being pleased
to give any reason why we should believe him, I intend to offer some why we
should not.

First, there is nothing in the nature or institution of Monarchy that obliges
Nations to bear the exorbitances of it when it degenerates into Tyranny.

In the second place, we have no precept for it.

Thirdly, we have many approved examples, and occasional particular commands to
the contrary.

1. To the first: The point of Paternity being explained; the duty of Children
to Parents proved to proceed from the benefits received from them, and that the
power over them, which at the first seems to have bin left at large, because it
was thought they would never abuse it, has long since bin much restrained in
all civilized Nations, and particularly in our own; We may conclude that men
are all made of the same paste, and that one ows no more to another than
another to him, unless for some benefit received, or by virtue of some promise
made. The duty arising from a benefit received must be proportionable to it:
that which grows from a promise is determined by the promise or contract made,
according to the true sense and meaning of it. He therefore that would know
what the Babylonians, Hebrews, Athenians, or Romans did owe to Nimrod, Saul,
Theseus or Romulus, must inquire what benefits were received from them, or what
was promised to them. It cannot be said that any thing was due to them for the
sake of their Parents; they could have no prerogative by birth: Nimrod was the
sixth Son of Chush the Son of Cham, who was the youngest Son of Noah; his
Kingdom was erected whilst Noah and his elder Sons Shem and Japhet, as well as
Cham, Chush and his elder Sons were still living. Saul was the Son of Chish, a
man of Benjamin, who was the youngest Son of Jacob; and he was chosen in the
most Democratical way by Lot amongst the whole People. Theseus according to the
custom of the times pretended to be the Son of Neptune; and Rhea was so well
pleased with the Soldier that had gotten her with child, that she resolved to
think or say that Mars was the Father of the Children, that is to say they were
Bastards; and therefore whatever was due to them was upon their own personal
account, without any regard to their Progenitors. This must be measured
according to what they did for those Nations before they were Kings, or by the
manner of their advancement. Nothing can be pretended before they were Kings:
Nimrod rose up after the confusion of Languages, and the People that understood
the tongue he spoke, followed him; Saul was a young man unknown in Israel;
Theseus and Romulus had nothing to recommend them before other Athenians and
Romans, except the reputation of their Valor; and the Honors conferred upon them
for that reason, must proceed from expectation or hope, and not from gratitude
or obligation. It must therefore proceed from the manner by which they came to
be Kings. He that neither is nor has any title to be a King, can come to be so
only by force or by consent. If by force, he dos not confer a Benefit upon the
People, but injures them in the most outrageous manner. If it be possible
therefore or reasonable to imagine that one man did ever subdue a multitude, he
can no otherwise resemble a Father, than the worst of all Enemies who dos the
greatest mischiefs, resembles the best of all Friends who confers the most
inestimable benefits; and consequently dos as justly deserve the utmost effects
of hatred, as the other dos of love, respect, and service. If by consent, he
who is raised from amongst the people, and placed above his Brethren, receives
great honors and advantages, but confers none. The obligations of gratitude are
on his side, and whatsoever he dos in acknowledgment to his Benefactors for
their love to him, is no more than his duty; and he can demand no more from
them than what they think fit to add to the favors already received. If more be
pretended, it must be by virtue of that contract, and can no otherwise be
proved than by producing it to be examined, that the true sense, meaning, and
intention of it may be known.

This Contract must be in form and substance according to a general Rule given
to all mankind, or such as is left to the will of every Nation. If a general
one be pretended, it ought to be shown, that by inquiring into the contents, we
may understand the force and extent of it. If this cannot be done, it may
justly pass for a fiction, no conclusion can be drawn from it; and we may be
sure, that what Contracts soever have bin made between Nations and their Kings,
have bin framed according to the will of those Nations; and consequently how
many soever they are, and whatsoever the sense of any or all of them may be,
they can oblige no man, except those, or at the most the Descendents of those
that made them. Whoever therefore would persuade us, that one or more Nations
are, by virtue of those Contracts, bound to bear all the insolences of Tyrants,
is obliged to show, that by those Contracts they did for ever indefinitely bind
themselves so to do, how great soever they might be.

I may justly go a step farther, and affirm, That if any such should appear in
the world, the folly and turpitude of the thing would be a sufficient evidence
of the madness of those that made it, and utterly destroy the contents of it:
but no such having bin as yet produced, nor any reason given to persuade a wise
man, that there has ever bin any such, at least among civilized Nations, (for
whom only we are concerned) it may be concluded there never was any; or is
there were, they do not at all relate to our subject; and consequently that
Nations still continue in their native Liberty, and are no otherwise obliged to
endure the insolence of Tyrants, than they, or each of them may esteem them
tolerable.

2. To the second: Tho the words of Samuel had implied a necessity incumbent
upon the Hebrews to bear all the Injurys that their Kings should do to them, it
could no way relate to us; for he dos not speak of all Kings, but of such as
they had asked, even such as reigned over the slavish Asiaticks their
Neighbors, who are no less infamous in the world for their baseness and
cowardice, than detestable for their idolatry and vices. It was not a plot or
trick of Samuel to keep the Government in himself and Family; such scurrilous
expressions or thoughts are fit only for Filmer, Heylin, and their Disciples:
But the Prophet being troubled at the folly and wickedness of the people, who
chose rather to subject themselves to the irregular Will of a Man, than to be
governed by God and his Law, did, by the immediate command of God, declare to
them what would be the event of their fury; that since they would be like to
their Neighbors in sin and folly, he told 'em they should be like to them in
shame and misery; since they desired to cast off the thing that was good, they
should suffer evil as the product of their own Counsels; and that when they
should cry to the Lord from a sense of their miserys, he dos not tell them, as
our Author falsely says, they should have no other remedy against Tyrants but
crying and praying, but that their cries and prayers should not be heard. It was
just that when they had rejected God, he should reject them, and leave them
under the weight of the calamitys they had brought upon themselves. In all
other cases God had ever said, that when his People returned to him, he would
hear and save them. When they cried by reason of the oppressions they suffered
under the Egyptians, Cananites, Midianites, Philistines, and others, tho their
crimes had deserved them all, yet God heard and relieved them. But when they
meditated this final defection from his Law, and rejection of his Government,
God seemed to change his Nature, and forget to be gracious; When ye shall cry
to me by reason of your King, I will not hear you. This was the strongest
dehortation from their wicked Intention that can be imagined; but being not
enough to reclaim them, they answered, Nay, but we will have a King. They were
like to their Neighbors in folly and vice, and would be like to them in
Government; which brought all the Calamitys upon them that the others suffered.
But I know not what conclusion can be drawn from hence in favor of our Author's
Doctrine, unless all Nations are obliged furiously to run into the same crimes
with the Israelites, or to take upon themselves the same punishment, tho they
do not commit the same crimes.

If this was not a Precept to the Israelites, instructing them what they should
do, but a denunciation of what they should suffer for the evil which they had
committed, the Old Testament will afford none; and I hope in due time to answer
such as he alleges from the New. Nay, we may conclude there can be none there,
because being dictated by the same Spirit, which is always uniform and constant
to it self, it could not agree with the 17 th of Deuteron. which so extremely
restrains such a King as God allowed, as not to suffer him in any manner to
raise his heart above his Brethren; and was said in vain, if at the same time
it gave him a Power which might not be resisted, or forbad others to resist him
if he would not obey the Law.

3. To the third: Whatsoever was done by the Command of God against Pharaoh
King of Egypt, and against the Kings of the Cananites, Midianites, Moabites,
Edomites, Amorites or Philistines, by Moses, Joshua, Ehud, Barak, Gideon,
Sampson, Jephtha, Samuel, and the rest of the Judges, comes expressly under the
particular Precepts and Examples promised by me, to show, that God had
occasionally commanded, and his Servants executed his Commands in resisting and
destroying the Persons of Kings, who were their own Kings also, if Possession
was only to be regarded. And tho this be sufficient to overthrow our Author's
Doctrine; That we are not to examine the Titles of Kings, whether they be from
usurpation, or any other means; but only to look upon the Power: Yet they who
seek Truth, ought not to content themselves merely with Victory; or to esteem
that a Victory, which is obtained by what the Schools call Argumentum ad
hominem, grounded upon a false Proposition, and is of no force except against
those who are so ill advised to advance it. Therefore laying aside the
advantages that may be justly taken against Filmer, for the folly of asserting
the same Right to be in a Usurper as in a lawful Prince; and confessing that
tho such as have no Title, may and ought to be suppressed as Enemies and Robbers,
when respect and obedience is due to those who are rightly instituted; I say,
that none can be claimed by a Prince lawfully instituted, if he assumes to
himself a Power which is not granted to him by the Law of his Institution, Quia
eat^nus non hab^t imperium. De Jur. Bell.
because, as Grotius says, his legal Power does not extend so far; or turn the
Power that is given him, to ends contrary to those for which it was given,
because he thereby destroys it, and puts himself into the same condition as if
it had never bin. This is proved by the Example of Saul; Tho the people sinned
grievously in asking a King, yet God assenting to their demand, no Prince was
ever more solemnly instituted than he. The People chose him by Lot from amongst
all the Tribes, and he was placed in the Throne by the general consent of the
whole Nation: But he turning his lawful Power into Tyranny, disobeying the word
of the Prophet, slaying the Priests, sparing the Amalekites, and oppressing the
Innocent, overthrew his own Right; and God declared the Kingdom, which had bin
given him under a conditional promise of perpetuity, to be entirely abrogated.
This did not only give a right to the whole People of opposing him, but to
every particular man; and upon this account David did not only fly from his
fury, but resisted it. He made himself head of all the discontented Persons
that would follow him: he had at first four, and afterward six hundred men; he
kept these in Arms against Saul, lived upon the Country, and resolved to
destroy Nabal with all his House, only for refusing to send Provisions for his
men. Finding himself weak and unsafe, he went to Achish the Philistin, and
offered his service even against Israel. This was never reputed a sin in David,
or in those that followed him, by any except the wicked Court-flatterer Doeg
the Edomite, and the drunken fool Nabal, who is said to have bin a man of
Belial.

If it be objected, That this was rather a Flight than a War, in as much as he
neither killed Saul nor his men, or that he made war as a King anointed by
Samuel; I answer, that he who had six hundred men, and entertained as many as
came to him, sufficiently showed his intention rather to resist than to fly:
And no other reason can be given why he did not farther pursue that intention,
than that he had no greater power: and he who arms six hundred men against his
Prince, when he can have no more, can no more be said to obey patiently, than
if he had so many hundreds of thousands. This holds, tho he kills no man, for
that is not the War, but the manner of making it: and 'twere as absurd to say
David made no War, because he killed no men, as that Charles the eighth made no
War in Italy, because Guicciardin says, he conquered Naples without breaking a
Lance. But as David's strength increased, he grew to be less sparing of Blood.
Those who say Kings never die, but that the right is immediately transferred to
the next Heirs, cannot deny that Ishbosheth inherited the right of Saul, and
that David had no other right of making war against him, than against Saul,
unless it were conferred upon him by the Tribe of Judah that made him King. If
this be true, it must be confessed that not only a whole People, but a part of
them, may at their own pleasure abrogate a Kingdom, tho never so well
established by common consent; for none was ever more solemnly instituted than
that of Saul; and few Subjects have more strongly obliged themselves to be
obedient. If it be not true, the example of Nabal is to be followed; and David,
tho guided by the Spirit of God, deserves to be condemned as a fellow that rose
up against his Master.

If to elude this it be said, That God instituted and abrogated Readiness Kingdom,
and that David to whom the right was transmitted, might therefore proceed
against him and his Heirs as private men: I answer, that if the obedience due to
Saul proceeded from God's Institution, it can extend to none but those who are
so peculiarly instituted and anointed by his Command, and the hand of his
Prophet, which will be of little advantage to the Kings that can give no
testimony of such an Institution or Unction; and an indisputable right will
remain to every Nation of abrogating the Kingdoms which are instituted by and
for themselves. But as David resisted the Authority of Saul and Ishbosheth,
without assuming the Power of a King, tho designed by God, and anointed by the
Prophet, till he was made King of Judah by that Tribe; or arrogating to himself
a Power over the other Tribes till he was made King by them, and had entered
into a Covenant with them; it is much more certain that the Persons and
Authority of ill Kings, who have no title to the Privileges due to Saul by
virtue of his institution, may be justly resisted; which is as much as is
necessary to my purpose.

1 Samuel 26.
Object. But David's Heart smote him when he had cut off the skirt of Readiness
Garment, and he would not suffer Abishai to kill him. This might be of some
force, if it were pretended that every man was obliged to kill an ill King,
whenever he could do it, which I think no man ever did say; and no man having
ever affirmed it, no more can be concluded than is confessed by all. But how is
it possible that a man of a generous Spirit, like David, could see a great and
valiant King, chosen from amongst all the Tribes of Israel, anointed by the
command of God and the hand of the Prophet, famous for victorys obtained
against the enemies of Israel, and a wonderful deliverance thereby purchased to
that People, cast at his feet to receive Life or Death from the hand of one
whom he had so furiously persecuted, and from whom he least deserved, and could
least expect mercy, without extraordinary commotion of mind, most especially
when Abishai, who saw all that he did, and thereby ought best to have known his
thoughts, expressed so great a readiness to kill him? This could not but make him
reflect upon the instability of all that seemed to be most glorious in men, and
show him that if Saul, who had bin named even among the Prophets, and assisted
in an extraordinary manner to accomplish such great things, was so abandoned
and given over to fury, misery and shame; he that seemed to be most firmly
established ought to take care lest he should fall.

Surely these things are neither to be thought strange in relation to Saul, who
was God's Anointed, nor communicable to such as are not: Some may suppose he
was King by virtue of God's unction (tho if that were true, he had never bin
chosen and made King by the People) but it were madness to think he became
God's Anointed by being King: for if that were so, the same Right and Title
would belong to every King, even to those who by his command were accursed and
destroyed by his Servants Moses, Joshua and Samuel. The same men, at the same
time, and in the same sense, would be both his anointed and accursed, loved and
detested by him, and the most sacred Privileges made to extend to the worst of
his enemies.

Again; the War made by David was not upon the account of being King, as
anointed by Samuel, but upon the common natural right of defending himself
against the violence and fury of a wicked man; he trusted to the promise, that
he should be King, but knew that as yet he was not so: and when Saul found he
had spared his Life, he said, I now know well that thou shall surely be King,
and that the Kingdom of Israel shall surely be established in thy hand; not
that it was already Nay David himself was so far from taking upon him to be
King, till the Tribe of Judah had chosen him, that he often acknowledged Saul
to be his Lord. When Baanah and Rechab brought the head of Ishbosheth to him,
he commanded them to be slain; Because they had killed a righteous man upon his
Bed, in 2 Samuel 4.
his own House; which he could not have said, if Ishbosheth had unjustly
detained from him the ten Tribes, and that he had a right to reign over them
before they had chosen him. The Word of God did not make him King, but only
foretold that he should be King; and by such ways as he pleased prepared the
hearts of the People to set him up; and till the time designed by God for that
work was accomplished, he pretended to no other Authority, than what the six
hundred men who first followed him, afterward the Tribe of Judah, and at last
all the rest of the People, conferred upon him.

I no way defend Absalom's revolt; he was wicked, and acted wickedly: but after
his death no man was ever blamed or questioned for siding with him; and Amasa
who commanded his Army, is represented in Scripture as a good man, even David
saying, that Joab, by slaying Abner and Amasa, had killed two men who were
better than himself: which could 2 Samuel 20* ^
not have bin, unless the People had a right of looking into matters of
Government, and of redressing abuses; tho being deceived by Absalom, they so
far erred, as to prefer him, who was in all respects wicked, before the man,
who, except in the matter of Vriah, is said to be after God's own heart. This
right was acknowledged by David himself, when he commanded Hushai to say to
Absalom, I will be thy Servant, O King; and by 2 Kings.
Hushai in the following Chapter, Nay, but whom the Lord and his People, and
all the men of Israel choose, his will I be, and with him will I abide: which
could have no sense in it, unless the People had a right of choosing, and that
the choice in which they generally concurred, was esteemed to be from God.

But if Saul, who was made King by the whole People, and anointed by the
command of God, might be lawfully resisted when he departed from the Law of his
Institution; it cannot be doubted that any other for the like reason may be
resisted. If David, tho designed by God to be King, and anointed by the hand of
the Prophet, was not King till the People had chosen him, and he had made a
Covenant with them; it will, if I mistake not, be hard to find a man who can
claim a right which is not originally from them. And if the People of Israel
could erect and pull down, institute, abrogate, or transfer to other Persons or
Familys, Kingdoms more firmly established than any we know, the same right
cannot be denied to other Nations.

SECT. II. The Kings of Israel and Judah were under a Law not safely to be
transgrest.
OUR Author might be pardoned if he only vented his own follys; but he
aggravates his crime, by imputing them to men of more Credit; and tho I cannot
look upon Sir Walter Raleigh as a very good Interpreter of Scripture, he had
too much understanding to say, That if practice declare the greatness of
Authority, even the best Kings of Israel and Judah were not tied to any Law,
but they did whatsoever they pleased in the greatest matters; for there is no
sense in those words. If Practice declares the greatness of Authority, even the
best of Kings were tied to no Law, signifies nothing, for Practice cannot
declare the greatness of Authority. Peter the Cruel of Castille, and Christiern
the 2 d of Denmark, killed whom they pleased; but no man ever thought they had
therefore a right to do so: and if there was a Law, all were tied by it, and
the best were less likely to break it than the worst. But if Sir Walter
Raleigh's opinion, which 2 L. Hist. c. 19.
he calls a conjecture, be taken, there was so great a difference between the
Kings of Israel and Judah, that as to their general proceedings in point of
Power, hardly any thing can be said which may rightly be applied to both; and
he there endeavors to show, that the reason why the ten Tribes did not return
to the house of David, after the destruction of the houses of Jeroboam and
Baasha, was, because they would not endure a Power so absolute as that which
was exercised by the house of David. If he has therefore any where said that
the Kings did what they pleased, it must be in the sense that Moses Maimonides
says, The Kings of Israel committed many extravagances, because they were Quia
superbi erant cord, impii, and spretores Legis. Mor. Nevoch.
insolent, impious, and despisers of the Law. But whatsoever Sir Walter Raleigh
may say (for I do not remember his words, and have not leisure to seek whether
any ^^ch are found in his Books) it is most evident they did not what they
pleased. The Tribes that did not submit to David, nor crown him till they
thought fit, and then made a Covenant with him, took care it might be observed
whether he would or not. Absalom's Rebellion followed by almost all Israel, was
a terrible check to his Will. That of Sheba, the Son of Bichri, was like to
have bin worse, if it had not bin suppressed by Joab's diligence; and David often
confessed the Sons of Zerviah were too hard for him. Solomon indeed, overthrowing
the Law given by Moses, multiplying Gold and Silver, Wives and Horses,
introducing Idolatry, and lifting up his heart above his Brethren, did what he
pleased; but Rehoboam paid for all: the ten Tribes revolted from him, by reason
of the heavy burdens laid upon them; stoned Adoram who was sent to levy the
Tributes, and set up Jeroboam, who, as Sir Walter Raleigh says in the place
before cited, had no other Title than the courtesy of the People, and utterly
rejected the house of David. If practice therefore declares a right, the
practice of the People to avenge the injurys they suffered from their Kings, as
soon as they found a man fit to be their Leader, shows they had a right of
doing it.

It Is true, the best of the Kings, with Moses, Joshua, and Samuel, may in one
sense be said to have done what they pleased, because they desired to do that
only which was good. But this will hardly be brought to confer a right upon all
Kings: And I deny that even the Kings of Judah did what they pleased, or that
it were any thing to our question if they did. Zedekiah professed to the great
men (that is, to the Sanhedrin) that without Jerem. 38.
them he could do nothing. When Amaziah, by his folly, had brought a great
slaughter upon the Tribe of Judah, they conspired against him in Public
Council; whereupon he fled to Lachish, and they pursuing him 2 Kings 14.
thither, killed him, avowed the Fact, and it was neither questioned, nor
blamed: which examples agree with the paraphrase of Josephus on Deuteronomy. Antiq. Jud
17. He shall do nothing without the consent of the Sanhedrin; and if he attempt
it, they shall hinder him. This was the Law of God, not to be abrogated by Man;
a Law of Liberty directly opposite to the necessity of submitting to the will
of a man. This was a Gift bestowed by God upon his Children and People; whereas
slavery was a great part of the Curse denounced against Cham for his
wickedness, and perpetually incumbent upon his Posterity. The great Sanhedrin
were constituted Judges, as Grotius says, most particularly of such matters as
concerned their Kings; and Maimonides affirms, that the Kings were judged by
them: The distribution of the power to the inferior Sanhedrins, in every Tribe
and City, with the right of calling the People together in general Assemblys as
often as occasion required, were the foundations of their Liberty; and being
added to the Law of the Kingdom prescribed in the 17 th of Deuteronomy, if they
should think fit to have a King, established the Freedom of that People upon a
solid foundation. And tho in their fury they did in a great measure wave the
benefits God had bestowed upon 'em; yet there was enough left to restrain the
Lusts of their Kings. Ahab did not treat with Naboth as with a Servant, whose
Person and Estate depended upon his Will; and dos not seem to have bin so
tenderhearted to grieve much for his refusal, if by virtue of his Royal
Authority he could have taken away his Vineyard and his Life: But that failing,
he had no other way of accomplishing his design, than by the fraud of his
accursed Wife, and the perfidious Wretches she employed. And no better proof
that it did fail, can reasonably be required, than that he was obliged to have
recourse to such sordid, odious, and dangerous Remedys: But we are furnished
with one that is more unquestionable; Have thou killed, and also taken
possession? 1 Kings 21.
In the place where Dogs licked the blood of Naboth, shall they lick thy Blood,
even thine. This shows that the Kings were not only under a Law, but under a
Law of equality with the rest of the People, even that of Retaliation. He had
raised his heart above his Brethren; but God brought him down, and made him to
suffer what he had done; he was in all respects wicked, but the justice of this
sentence consisted in the Law he had broken, which could not have bin, if he
had bin subject to none. But as this Retaliation was the sum of all the
Judicial Law given by God to his People, the Sentence pronounced against Ahab
in conformity to it, and the execution committed to Jehu, shows, that the Kings
were no less obliged to perform the Law than other men, tho they were not so
easily punished for transgressing it as others were; and if many of them did
escape, it perfectly agrees with what had bin foretold by Samuel.

SECT. III. Samuel did not describe to the Israelites the glory of a free
Monarchy; but the Evils the People should suffer, that he might divert them
from desiring a King.
THO no restraint had bin put upon the Hebrew Kings, it could be no prejudice
to any other Nation. They deflected from the Law of God; and rejecting him that
he should reign over them no longer, they fell into that misery which could
affect none but those who enjoy the same Blessings, and with the same fury
despise them. If their Kings had more Power than consisted with their welfare,
they gave it, and God renounces the institution of Ye have chosen Kings, but
not by me; and Princes, but I know them not. Hos.
such. He gave them a Law of Liberty; and if they fell into the shame and misery
that accompanys slavery, it was their own work. They were not obliged to have
any King; and could not without a crime have any but one, who must not raise
his heart above the rest of them. This was taught by Moses: And Samuel, who
spoke by the same Spirit, could not contradict him; and in telling the People
what such a King as they desired would do when he should be established, he did
announce to them the misery they would bring upon themselves, by choosing such a
one as he had forbidden. This free Monarchy, which our Author thinks to be so
majestically described, was not only displeasing to the Prophet, but declared
by God to be a rejection of him, and inconsistent with his reign over them.
This might have bin sufficient to divert any other people from their furious
resolution; but the Prophet farther enforcing his dissuasion, told them, that
God (who had in all other cases bin their helper) would not hear them when they
should cry to him by reason of their King. This is the majestic description of
that free Monarchy with which our Author is so much pleased: It was displeasing
to the Prophet, hateful to God, an aggravation of all the crimes they had
committed since they came out of Egypt, and that which would bring (as it did)
most certain and irreparable destruction upon them.

But it seems the Regal Majesty in that Age was in its infancy, and little in
comparison of that which we find described by Tacitus, Suetonius, and others in
later times. He shall take your Sons, says Samuel, and set them over his
Chariots, and your Daughters to make them Confectioners and Cooks; but the
Majesty of the Roman Emperors was carried to a higher pitch of Glory. Ahab
could not, without employing treachery and fraud, get a small spot of ground
for his money to make a Garden of Herbs: But Tiberius, Caligula and Nero killed
whom they pleased, and took what they pleased of their Estates. When they had
satiated their cruelty and avarice by the murders and confiscations of the most
eminent and best men, they commonly exposed their Children to the Lust of their
Slaves. If the power of doing evil be glorious, the utmost excess is its
perfection; and it is pity that Samuel knew no more of the effects produced by
unrestrained Lust, that he might have made the description yet more majestic:
and as nothing can be suffered by man beyond constupration, torments and death,
instead of such trifles as he mentioned, he might have showed them the effects
of Fury in its greatest exaltation.

If it be good for a Nation to live under such a Power, why did not God of his
own goodness institute it? Did his Wisdom and Love to his People fail? or if he
himself had not set up the best Government over them, could he be displeased
with them for asking it? Did he separate that Nation from the rest of Mankind,
to make their condition worse than that of others? Or can they be said to have
sinned and rejected God, when they desired nothing but the Government, which by
a perpetual Ordinance he had established over all the Nations of the World? Is
not the Law of Nature a Rule which he has given to things? and the Law of man's
Nature, which is Reason, an emanation of the divine Wisdom, or some footsteps
of divine Light remaining in us? Is it possible that this which is from God,
can be contrary to his Will; and can he be offended with those who desire to
live in a conformity to that Law? Or could it justly be said, The People had
chosen that which is not good, if nothing in Government be good but what they
chose?

But as the worst men delight in the worst things, and Fools are pleased with
the most extreme absurditys, our Author not only gives the highest praises to
that which bears so many marks of God's hatred; but after having said that
Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and Moses were Kings, he tells us, The Israelites begged
a King of Samuel; which had bin impertinent, if the Magistrates instituted by
the Law were Kings: and tho it might be a folly in them to ask what they had
already, it could be no sin to desire that which they enjoyed by the Ordinance
of God. If they were not Kings, it follows that the only Government set up by
God amongst men wanted the principal part, even the Head and Foundation, from
whence all the other parts have their action and being; that is, God's Law is
against God's Law, and destroys it self.

But if God did neither by a general and perpetual Ordinance establish over all
Nations the Monarchy which Samuel describes, nor prescribe it to his own People
by a particular Command, it was purely the Peoples Creature, the production of
their own fancy, conceived in wickedness, and brought forth in iniquity, an
Idol set up by themselves to their own destruction, in imitation of their
accursed Neighbors; and their Reward was no better than the concession of an
impious Petition, which is one of God's heaviest Judgments. Samuel's words are
acknowledged by all Interpreters, who were not malicious or mad, to be a
dissuasion from their wicked purpose; not a description of what a King might
justly do by virtue of his Office, but what those who should be set up against
God and his Law would do when they came to have the power in their hands: And I
leave such as have the understandings of men, and are not abandoned by God, to
judge what influence this ought to have upon other Nations, either as to
obligation or imitation.

SECT. IV. No People can be obliged to suffer from their Kings what they have
not a right to do.
OUR Author's next work is to tell us, That the scope of Samuel was to teach
the People a dutiful obedience to their King, even in the things that they
think mischievous or inconvenient: For by telling them what the King would do,
he indeed instructs them what a Subject must suffer: Yet not so that it is
right for Kings to do injury, but it is right for them to go unpunished by the
People if they do it; so that in this point it is all one whether Samuel
describe a King or a Tyrant. This is hard, but the Conclusion is grounded upon
nothing. There is no relation between a Prediction that a thing shall be
attempted or done to me, and a Precept that I shall not defend my self, or
punish the person that attempts or dos it. If a Prophet should say that a Thief
lay in the way to kill me, it might reasonably persuade me not to go, or to go
in such a manner as to be able to defend my self; but can no way oblige me to
submit to the violence that shall be offered, or my Friends and Children not to
avenge my death if I fall: much less can other men be deprived of the natural
right of defending themselves, by my imprudence or obstinacy in not taking the
warning given, whereby I might have preserved my life. For every man has a
right of resisting some way or other that which ought not to be done to him;
and tho human Laws do not in all cases make men Judges and Avengers of the
Injurys offered to them, I think there is none that dos not justify the man who
kills another that offers violence to him, if it appears that the way
prescribed by the Law for the preservation of the Innocent cannot be taken.
This is not only true in the case of outrageous attempts to assassinate or rob
on the high way, but in diverse others of less moment. I knew a man who being
appointed to keep his Master's Park, killed three men in one night that came to
destroy his Deer; and putting himself into the hands of the Magistrate, and
confessing the Fact both in matter and manner, he was at the public Assizes
not only acquitted, but commended for having done his duty; and this in a time
when it is well known Justice was severely administered, and little favor
expected by him or his Master. Nay, all Laws must fall, human Societys that
subsist by them be dissolved, and all innocent persons be exposed to the
violence of the most wicked, if men might not justly defend themselves against
injustice by their own natural right, when the ways prescribed by public
Authority cannot be taken.

Our Author may perhaps say, this is true in all except the King: And I desire
to know why, if it be true in all except the King, it should not be true in
relation to him? Is it possible that he who is instituted for the obtaining of
Justice, should claim the liberty of doing Injustice as a Privilege? Were it
not better for a people to be without Law, than that a Power should be
established by Law to commit all manner of violences with impunity? Did not
David resist those of Saul? Did he not make himself head of the Tribe of Judah,
when they revolted against his Son, and afterward of the ten Tribes that
rejected his Posterity? Did not the Israelites stone Adoram who collected the
Taxes, revolt from the House of David, set up Jeroboam; and did not the Prophet
say it was from the Lord? If it was from the Lord, was it not good? If it was
good then, is it not so for ever? Did good proceed from one root then, and from
another now? If God had avenged the Blood of Naboth by fire from Heaven, and
destroyed the House of Ahab, as he did the two Captains and their men who were
sent to apprehend Elijah, it might be said, he reserved that vengeance to
himself; but he did it by the Sword of Jehu and the Army (which was the People
who had set him up) for an Example to others.

But it is good to examine what this dutiful Obedience is that our Author
mentions. Men usually owe no more than they receive. It Is hard to know what the
Israelites owed to Saul, David, Jeroboam, Ahab, or any other King, whether good
or bad, till they were made Kings: And the Actof the People by which so great a
dignity was conferred, seems to have laid a duty upon them, who did receive more
than they had to give: so that something must be due from them, unless it were
released by virtue of a Covenant or Promise made; and none could accrue to them
from the people afterward, unless from the merit of the person in rightly
executing his Office. If a Covenant or Promise be pretended, the nature and
extent of the Obligation can only be known by the contents expressed, or the true
intention of it. If there be a general form of Covenant set and agreed upon, to
which all Nations must submit, it were good to know where it may be found, and
by whose Authority it is established, and then we may examine the sense of it.
If no such do appear, we may rationally look upon those to be Impostors, who
should go about from thence to derive a right: And as that which dos not
appear, is as if it were not, we may justly conclude there is no other, or none
that can have any effect, but such as have bin made by particular Nations with
their Princes; which can be of no force or obligation to others, nor to
themselves, any farther than according to the true intention of those that made
them. There is no such thing therefore as a dutiful obedience, or duty of being
obedient, incumbent upon all Nations by virtue of any Covenant; nor upon any
particular Nation, unless it be expressed by a Covenant: and whoever pretends to
a right of taking our Sons and Daughters, Lands or Goods, or to go unpunished
if he do, must show that these things are expressed or intended by the Covenant.

But tho Nations for the most part owe nothing to Kings till they are Kings,
and that it can hardly be conceived, that any people did ever owe so much to a
man, as might not be fully repaid by the honor and advantages of such an
advancement; yet it is possible that when they are made Kings, they may by their
good Government lay such Obligations upon their Subjects, as ought to be
recompensed by obedience and service. There is no mortal Creature that deserves
so well from mankind, as a wise, valiant, diligent and just King, who as a
Father cherishes his People; as a Shepherd feeds, defends, and is ready to lay
down his life for his flock; who is a terror to evil doers, and a praise to
those that do well. This is a glorious Prerogative, and he who has it is happy.
But before this can be adjudg'd to belong to all, it must be proved that all
have the Virtues that deserve it; and he that exacts the dutiful Obedience that
arises from them, must prove that they are in him. He that dos this, need not
plead for impunity when he dos injurys; for if he do them, he is not the man we
speak of: Not being so, he can have no title to the duty by human Institution
or Covenant; nor by divine Law, since, as is already proved, God has neither
established Kings over all Nations by Precept, nor recommended them by Example,
in setting them over his own People. He has not therefore done it at all; there
is no such thing in nature; and Nations can owe nothing to Kings merely as
Kings, but what they owe by the Contract made with them.

As these Contracts are made voluntarily, without any previous obligation, it is
evident that men make them in consideration of their own good, and they can be
of force no longer, than he with whom they are made perform his part in
procuring it; and that if he turn the power which was given to him for the
public good, to the public inconvenience and damage, he must necessarily lose
the benefit he was to receive by it. The word think is foolishly and affectedly
put in by our Author; for those matters are very often so evident, that even
the weakest know them. No great sagacity is required to understand that lewd,
slothful, ignorant, false, unjust, covetous and cruel Princes bring
inconveniences and mischiefs upon Nations; and many of them are so evidently
guilty of some or all these Vices, that no man can be mistaken in imputing
them; and the utmost Calamitys may rationally be expected from them, unless a
Remedy be applied.

But, says he, Samuel by telling them what the King would do, instructs them
what the Subjects must suffer, and that it is right he should go unpunished.
But, by his favor, Samuel says no such thing; neither is it to be concluded,
that because a King will do wickedly, he must be suffered, any more than a
private man, who should take the same Resolution. But he told them, that when
they should cry to the Lord by reason of their King, he would not hear them.
This was as much as to say, their ruin was unavoidable; and that, having put
the power into the hands of those, who instead of protecting would oppress
them; and thereby having provoked God against them, so as he would not hearken
to their cries, they could have no relief. But this was no security to the
Authors of their Calamity. The Houses of Jeroboam, Baasha and Omri, escaped not
unpunished, tho the People did not thereby recover their Liberty. The Kings had
introduced a Corruption that was inconsistent with it. But they who could not
settle upon a right Foundation to prevent future mischiefs, could avenge such
as they had suffered, upon the heads of those who had caused 'em, and
frequently did it most severely. The like besel the Romans, when by the
violence of Tyranny all good Order was overthrown, good Discipline extinguished,
and the People corrupted. Ill Princes could be cut in pieces, and mischiefs
might be revenged, tho not prevented. But it is not so every where, nor at all
times; and nothing is more irrational, than from one or a few Examples to
conclude a general necessity of future Events. They alter according to
Circumstances: and as some Nations by destroying Tyrants could not destroy
Tyranny; others in removing the Tyrant, have cut up Tyranny by the roots. This
variety has bin seen in the same Nation at different times: The Romans
recovered their Liberty by expelling Tarquin; but remained Slaves
notwithstanding the slaughter of Caesar. Whilst the Body of the People was
uncorrupted, they cured the Evil wrought by the Person, in taking him away. It
was no hard matter to take the Regal Power that by one man had bin enjoyed for
life, and to place it in the hands of two annual Magistrates, whilst the
Nobility and People were, according to the condition of that Age, strong and
ready to maintain it. But when the mischief had taken deeper root; when the
best part of the people had perished in the Civil Wars; when all their eminent
men had fallen in battle, or by the Proscriptions; when their Discipline was
lost, and Virtue abolished, the poor remains of the distressed people were
brought under the power of a mercenary Soldiery, and found no relief. When they
killed one Tyrant, they often made room for a worse: It availed them nothing to
cut off a rotten Branch, whilst the accursed Root remained, and sent forth new
Sprouts of the same nature to their destruction, Other generous Nations have
bin subdued beyond a possibility of recovery; and those that are naturally
base, slide into the like misery without the impulse of an exterior Power. They
are Slaves by nature, and have neither the understanding nor courage that is
required for the constitution and management of a Government within themselves.
They can no more subsist without a Master, than a flock without a Shepherd.
They have no comprehension of Liberty, and can neither desire the good they do
not know, nor enjoy it if it were bestowed upon them. They bear all burdens;
and whatever they suffer, they have no other remedy or refuge, than in the
mercy of their Lord. But such Nations as are naturally strong, stout, and of
good understanding, whose vigor remains unbroken, manners uncorrupted,
reputation unblemished, and increasing in numbers; who neither want men to make
up such Armies as may defend 'em against foreign or domestic Enemies, nor
Leaders to head them, do ordinarily set limits to their patience. They know how
to preserve their Liberty, or to vindicate the violation of it; and the more
patient they have bin, the more inflexible they are when they resolve to be so
no longer. Those who are so foolish to put them upon such courses, do to their
cost find there is a difference between Lions and Asses; and he is a fool who
knows not that Ignoratque datos ne quisquam serviat enses. Lucan.
Swords were given to men, that none might be Slaves, but such as know not how
to use them.

SECT. V. The Mischiefs suffered from wicked Kings are such as render it both
reasonable and just for all Nations that have Virtue and Power, to exert both
in repelling them.
IF our Author deserve credit, we need not examine whether Nations have a right
of resisting, or a reasonable hope of succeeding in their endeavors to prevent
or avenge the Mischiefs that are feared or suffered, for it is not worth their
pains. The Inconveniences, says he, and Miserys which are reckoned up by
Samuel, as belonging to Kingly Government, were not intolerable, but such as
have bin and still are born by the Subjects free consent from their Princes.
Nay at this day, and in this Land, many Tenants by their Tenures are tied unto
the same subjection, even unto subordinate and inferior Lords. He is an
excellent Advocate for Kingly Government, that accounts Inconveniences and
Miserys to be some of the essentials of it; which others esteem to be only
incidents. Tho many Princes are violent and wicked, yet some have bin gentle
and just: tho many have brought misery upon Nations, some have bin beneficial
to them: and they who are esteemed most severe against Monarchy, think the
evils often suffered under that form of Government proceed from the Corruption
of it, or deviation from the principle of its institution; and that they are
rather to be imputed to the vices of the Person, than to the thing it self: but
if our Author speak truth, it is universally and eternally naught,
inconvenience and misery belong to it.

He thinks to mend this by saying, they are not intolerable: but what is
intolerable, if Inconveniences and Miserys be not? For what end can he think
Governments to have bin established, unless to prevent or remove Inconveniences
and Miserys? or how can that be called a Government which dos not only permit,
but cause them? What can incline Nations to set up Governments? Is it that they
may suffer Inconveniences, and be brought to misery? or if it be to enjoy
happiness, how can that subsist under a Government, which not by accident,
deflection or corruption, but by a necessity inherent in it self, causes
Inconveniences and Miserys? If it be pretended that no human Constitution can
be altogether free from Inconveniences; I answer, that the best may to some
degree fall into them, because they may be corrupted: but evil and misery can
properly belong to none that is not evil in its own nature. If Samuel deserve
credit, or may be thought to have spoken sense, he could not have enumerated
the evils which he foresaw the People should suffer from their Kings, nor say
that they should cry to the Lord by reason of them, unless they were in
themselves grievous, and in comparison greater than what they had suffered or
known; since that would not have diverted them from their intention, but rather
have confirmed 'em in it. And I leave it to our Author to show, why any People
should for the pleasure of one or a few men, erect or suffer that Government
which brings more of evil with it than any other.

Moreover, there is a great difference between that which Nations sometimes
suffer under Kings, and that which they willingly suffer; most especially if
our Author's Maxim be received, That all Laws are the Mandates of Kings, and
the Subjects Libertys and Privileges no more than their gracious Concessions;
for how patient soever they are under the Evils they suffer, it might
reasonably be believed they are so because they know not how to help it: And
this is certainly the case of too many places that are known to us. Whoever
doubts of this, if he will not put himself to the trouble of going to Turkey or
Morocco, let him pass only into Normandy, and ask the naked, barefooted and
half-starv'd people whether they are willing to suffer the Miserys under which
they groan; and whether the magnificence of Versailles, and the pomp of their
haughty Master, do any way alleviate their Calamitys. If this also be a matter
of too much pains, the Wretches that come hither every day will inform him,
that it is not by their own consent they are deprived of all Honors and Offices
in the Commonwealth, even of those, which by a corrupt Custom that had gained
the force of a Law, they had dearly bought; prohibited to exercise any trade;
exposed to the utmost effects of fraud and violence, if they refuse to adore
their Master's Idols. They will tell him, that it is not willingly they leave
their Lands and Estates to seek a shelter in the most remote parts of the
World; but because they are under a force which they are notable to resist; and
because one part of the Nation, which is enriched with the Spoils of the other,
have foolishly contributed to lay a Yoke upon them which they cannot break.

To what he says concerning Tenures, I answer; No man in England ows any
service to his Lord, unless by virtue of a Contract made by himself or his
Predecessors, under which he holds the Land granted to him on that condition by
the Proprietor. There may be something of hardship, but nothing of injustice.
It Is a voluntary act in the beginning and continuance; and all men know that
what is done to one who is willing Volenti non fit injuria.
is no injury. He who did not like the Conditions, was not obliged to take the
Land; and he might leave it, if afterward he came to dislike them. If any man
say, the like may be done by any one in the Kingdom, I answer, That it is not
always true; the Protestants now in France cannot without extreme hazard go out
of that Country, tho they are contented to lose their Estates. It Is accounted a
Crime, for which they are condemned perpetually to the Gallys, and such as are
aiding to them to grievous Fines. But before this be acknowledged to have any
similitude or relation to our discourse concerning Kings, it must be proved,
that the present King, or those under whom he claims, is or were Proprietors of
all the Lands in England, and granted the several parcels under the condition
of suffering patiently such Inconveniences and Miserys as are abovementioned:
or that they who did confer the Crown upon any of them, did also give a
Propriety in the Land; which I do not find in any of the fifteen or sixteen
Titles that have bin since the coming in of the Normans: and if it was not done
to the first of every one, it cannot accrue to the others, unless by some new
act to the same purpose, which will not easily be produced.

It will be no less difficult to prove that any thing unworthy of Freemen is by
any Tenures imposed in England, unless it be the offering up of the Wives and
Daughters of Tenants to the Lust of Abbots and Monks; and they are so far from
being willingly suffered, that since the Dens and Nurserys of those Beasts were
abolished, no man that succeeds them has had impudence sufficient to exact the
performance: and tho the letter of the Law may favor them, the turpitude of the
thing has extinguished the usage.

But even the Kings of Israel and Judah, who brought upon the People those
evils that had bin foretold by Samuel, did not think they had a right to the
Powers they exercised. If the Law had given a right to Ahab to take the best of
their Vineyards, he might without ceremony have taken that of Naboth, and by
the majestic power of an absolute Monarch, have chastis'd the churlish Clown,
who refused to sell or change it for another: but for want of it, he was
obliged to take a very different course. If the lives of Subjects had in the
like manner depended on the will of Kings, David might without scruple have
killed Vriah, rather than to place him in the front of the Army that he might
fall by his own courage. The malice and treachery of such Proceedings argues a
defect of power; and he that acts in such an oblique manner, shows that his
actions are not warranted by the Law which is boldly executed in the face of
the Sun. This shows the interpretation put upon the words, Against thee only
have I sinned, by Court-flatterers, to be false. For if he had not sinned
against Bathsheba whom he corrupted, Vriah whom he caused to be killed, the
People that he scandalized, and the Law which he violated, he had never
endeavored to cover his guilt by so vile a fraud. And as he did not thereby
fly the sight of God, but of men, it is evident that in that action he feared
men more than God.

If by the Examples of Israel and Judah, we may judge whether the Inconveniences
and Miserys brought upon Nations by their Kings be tolerable or intolerable, it
will be enough to consider the madness of Readiness cruelty toward his Subjects,
and the slaughter brought upon them by the hand of the Philistines on Mount
Gilboa, where he fell with the flower of all Israel; the Civil Wars that
happened in the time of David, and the Plague brought upon the People by his
wickedness; the heavy burdens laid upon them by Solomon, and the Idolatry
favored by him; the wretched folly of Rehoboam, and the defection of the ten
Tribes caused by it; the Idolatry established by Jeroboam and the Kings of
Israel, with that of many of those of Judah also; the frequent Wars and unheard
of Slaughters ensuing thereupon between the Tribes; the daily devastations of
the Country by all sorts of Strangers; the murders of the Prophets; the
abolition of God's Worship; the desolation of Towns and Provinces; the
dispersion of the ten Tribes carried away into unknown Countries; and in the end
the abolition of both Kingdoms, with the captivity of the Tribe of Judah, and
the utter destruction of the City. It cannot be said that these things were
suffered under Kings, and not from or by them; for the desolation of the Citys,
People and Country, is in many places of Scripture imputed to the Kings that
taught Israel to sin, as appears by 1 King. 14. 2 King. 21. 2 King. 20.
what was denounced against Jeroboam, Jehu, Ahaz, Manasseh, Zedekiah, and
others. Nay, the Captivity of Babylon with the evils ensuing, were first
announc'd to Hezekiah for his vanity; and Josiah by the like, brought a great
slaughter upon himself and people. But if mischiefs fell upon the People by the
frailty of these, who after David were the best, nothing surely less than the
utmost of all Miserys could be expected from such as were set to do evil, and
to make the Nation like to themselves, in which they met with too great success.

If it be pretended that God's People living under an extraordinary
Dispensation can be no example to us, I desire other Historys may be examined;
for I confess I know no Nation so great, happy and prosperous, nor any Power so
well established, that two or three ill Kings immediately succeeding each other,
have not bin able to destroy and bring to such a condition, that it appeared
the Nations must perish, unless the Senats, Diets, and other Assemblys of State
had put a stop to the mischief, by restraining or deposing them. And tho this
might be proved by innumerable Testimonys, I shall only say, that the Roman
Empire perished by the vices, corruption, and baseness of their Princes: the
noble Kingdom of the Goths in Spain was overthrown by the Tyranny of Witza and
Rodrigo: the present state of Spain now languishes and threatens ruin from the
same causes: France was brought to the last degree of misery and weakness by
the degenerate races of Pharamond and Charles; to which may be added those of
our own Country, which are so well known that I need not mention them.

SECT. VI. It Is not good for such Nations as will have Kings, to suffer them to
be glorious, powerful, or abounding in Riches.
OUR Author having hitherto spoken of all Nations, as born under a necessity of
being subject to Absolute Monarchy, which he pretends to have bin set up by the
universal and indispensible Law of God and Nature, now seems to leave to their
discretion, whether they will have a King or not; but says, that those who will
have a King, are bound to allow him Royal Maintenance, by providing Revenues
for the Crown; since it is for the Honor, Profit and Safety of the People, to
have their King glorious, powerful, and abounding in Riches. If there be any
thing of sense in this Clause, there is nothing of truth in the foundation or
principle of his whole Book. For as the right and being of a Father is natural
or inherent, and no ways depending upon the will of the Child; that of a King
is so also, if he be, and ought to enjoy the Rights belonging to the Father of
the People: And it is not less ridiculous to say, those who will have a King,
than it would be to say, he that will have a Father; for every one must have
one whether he will or not. But if the King be a Father, as our Author from
thence infers, that all Laws are from him, none can be imposed upon him; and
whatsoever the Subject enjoys is by his concessions; it is absurd to speak of an
Obligation lying upon the people to allow him Royal maintenance, by providing
Revenues, since he has all in himself, and they have nothing that is not from
him, and depending upon his Will. For this reason a worthy Gentleman of the
House of Commons in the year 1640. desired that the business of the Judges, who
in the Star Chamber had given for their Opinion concerning Shipmony, That in
cases of Necessity the King might provide it by his own Authority, and that he
was Judge of that Necessity, might be first examined, that they might know
whether they had any thing to give, before they should speak of giving. And as
it is certain, that if the Sentence of those perjured Wretches had stood, the
Subjects of England by consequence would have bin sound to have nothing to
give; it is no less sure, that if our Author's principle concerning the Paternal
and Absolute Power of Kings be true, it will by a more compendious way appear,
that it is not left to the choice of any Nation, whether they will have a King
or not; for they must have him, and can have nothing to allow him, but must
receive all from him.

But if those only who will have a King, are bound to have one, and to allow
this Royal maintenance, such as will not have a King, are by one and the same
act delivered from the necessity of having one, and from providing Maintenance
for him: which utterly overthrows the magnificent Fabric of Paternal Monarchy;
and the Kings who were lately represented by our Author, placed on the Throne
by God and Nature, and endowed with an absolute Power over all, appear to be
purely the Creatures of the People, and to have nothing but what is received
from them.

From hence it may be rationally inferred, that Qui dat esse, dat modum esse.
he who makes a thing to be, makes it to be only what he pleases. This must hold
in relation to Kings as well as other Magistrates; and as they who made Consuls,
Dictators, and Military Tribuns, gave them only such Power, and for such a time
as best pleased themselves, it is impossible they should not have the same right
in relation to Kings, in making them what they please, as well as not to make
them unless they please; except there be a Charm belonging to the Name, or the
Letters that compose it; which cannot belong to all Nations, for they are
different in every one according to the several Languages.

But, says our Author, it is for the Honor, Profit, and Safety of the People
that the King should be glorious, powerful, and abounding in Riches. There is
therefore no obligation upon them, and they are to judge whether it be so or
not. The Scripture says plainly the contrary: He shall not multiply Silver and
Gold, Wives and Horses; he shall not lift up his Heart above his Brethren. He
shall not therefore be glorious, powerful, or abounding in Riches. Reason and
Experience teach us the same thing: If those Nations that have bin proud,
luxurious and vicious, have desired by Pomp and Riches to foment the Vices of
their Princes, thereby to cherish their own; such as have excelled in Virtue and
good Discipline have abhorred it, and except the immediate exercise of their
Office, have kept their supreme Magistrates to a manner of living little
different from that of private men: and it had bin impossible to maintain that
frugality, in which the integrity of their manners did chiefly consist, if they
had set up an Example directly contrary to it, in him who was to be an Example
to others; or to provide for their own safety, if they had overthrown that
integrity of manners by which it could only be obtained and preserved. There is
a necessity incumbent upon every Nation that lives in the like Principle, to
put a stop to the entrance of those Vices that arise from the superfluity of
Riches, by keeping their Kings in that honest Poverty, which is the Mother and
Nurse of Modesty, Sobriety, and all manner of Virtue: And no man can deny this
to be well done, unless he will affirm that Pride, Luxury and Vice is more
profitable to a Nation than the Virtues that are upheld by frugality.

There is another reason of no less importance to those Nations, who tho they
think fit to have Kings, yet desire to preserve their Liberty, which obliges
them to set limits to the Glory, Power and Riches of their Kings; and that is,
That they can no otherwise be kept within the Rules of the Law. Men are
naturally propense to corruption; and if he whose Will and Interest it is to
corrupt them, be furnished with the means, he will never fail to do it. Power,
Honors, Riches, and the Pleasures that attend them, are the baits by which men
are drawn to prefer a personal Interest before the public Good; and the number
of those who covet them is so great, that he who abounds in them will be able
to gain so many to his service as shall be sufficient to subdue the rest. It Is
hard to find a Tyranny in the world that has not bin introduced this way: for
no man by his own strength could ever subdue a multitude; none could ever bring
many to be subservient to his ill designs, but by the rewards they received or
hoped. By this means Caesar accomplished his work, and overthrew the Liberty of
his Country, and with it all that was then good in the world. They who were
corrupted in their minds, desired to put all the Power and Riches into his
hands, that he might distribute them to such as served him. And he who was
nothing less than covetous in his own nature, desired Riches, that he might
gain Followers; and by the plunder of Gaul he corrupted those that betrayed
Rome to him. And tho I do not delight to speak of the Affairs of our own time,
I desire those who know the present State of France to tell me, whether it were
possible for the King to keep that Nation under servitude, if a vast Revenue
did not enable him to gain so many to his particular service as are sufficient
to keep the rest in subjection: and if this be not enough, let them consider
whether all the dangers that now threaten us at home, do not proceed from the
madness of those who gave such a Revenue, as is utterly unproportionable to the
Riches of the Nation, unsuitable to the modest behavior expected from our
Kings, and which in time will render Parliaments unnecessary to them.

On the other hand, the poverty and simplicity of the Spartan Kings was no less
safe and profitable to the People than truly glorious to them. Agesilaus denied
that Artaxerxes was greater than he, unless he were more temperate or more
valiant; and he made good his words so well, that without any other assistance
than what his Wisdom and Valor afforded, he struck such a terror into that
great, rich, powerful and absolute Monarch, that he did not think himself safe
in Babylon or Ecbatane, till the poor Spartan was, by a Captain of as great
valor, and greater poverty, obliged to return from Asia to the defense of his
own Country. This was not peculiar to the severe Laconic Discipline. When the
Roman Kings were expelled, a few Carts were prepared to transport their goods:
and their Lands, which were consecrated to Mars, and now go under the name of
Campus Martius, hardly contain ten Acres of ground. Nay the Kings of Israel,
who led such vast Armies into the field (that is, were followed by all the
people who were able to bear Arms) seem to have possessed little. Ahab, one of
the most powerful, was so fond of Naboth's Vineyard (which being the
Inheritance of his Fathers, according to their equal division of Lands, could
not be above two Acres) that he grew sick when it was refused.

But if an allowance is to be made to every King, it must be either according
to a universal Rule or Standard, or must depend upon the Judgment of Nations.
If the first, they who have it, may do well to produce it; if the other, every
Nation proceeding according to the measure of their own discretion, is free
from blame.

It may also be worth observation, whether the Revenue given to a King be in
such manner committed to his care, that he is obliged to employ it for the
public Service without the power of Alienation; or whether it be granted as a
Propriety, to be spent as he thinks fit. When some of the ancient Jews and
Christians scrupled the payment of Tribute to the Emperors, the reasons
alleged to persuade them to a compliance, seem to be grounded upon a
supposition of the first: for, said they, the defense of the State lies upon
them, which cannot be performed without Armies and Garrisons; these cannot be
maintained without pay, nor money raised to pay them without Tributes and
Customs. This carrys a face of reason with it, especially in those Countries
which are perpetually or frequently subject to Invasions; but this will not
content our Author. He speaks of employing the revenue in keeping the Kings
House, and looks upon it as a propriety to be spent as he thinks convenient:
which is no less than to cast it into a Pit, of which no man ever knew the
bottom. That which is given one day, is squandered away the next: The people
are always oppressed with Impositions, to foment the Vices of the Court: These
daily increasing, they grow insatiable, and the miserable Nations are compelled
to hard Labor, in order to satiate those Lusts that tend to their own ruin.

It may be considered that the virtuous -- Saevior armis
Luxuria incubuit, victumque ulciscitur orbem. Lucan.

Pagans, by the light of Nature, discovered the truth of this. Poverty grew
odious in Rome, when great men by desiring Riches put a value upon them, and
introduced that pomp and luxury which could not be born by men of small
Fortunes. Nullum crimen abest, facinusque libidinis, ex quo
Paupertas Romana perit. Juvenal.

From thence all furys and mischiefs seemed to break loose: The base, slavish,
and so often subdued Asia, by the basest of men revenged the defeats they had
received from the bravest; and by infusing into them a delight in pomp and
luxury, in a short time rendered the strongest and bravest of Nations the
weakest and basest. I wish our own experience did not too plainly manifest,
that these Evils were never more prevalent than in our days, when the luxury,
majestic pomp, and absolute power of a neighboring King must be supported by
an abundance of Riches torn out of the bowels of his Subjects, which renders
them in the best Country of the World, and at a time when the Crown most
flourishes, the poorest and most miserable of all the Nations under the Sun. We
too well know who are most apt to learn from them, and by what means and steps
they endeavor to lead us into the like misery. But the Bird is safe when the
Snare is discovered; and if we are not abandoned by God to destruction, we
shall never be brought to consent to the settling of that Pomp, which is
against the practice of all virtuous people, and has brought all the Nations
that have bin taken with it into the ruin that is intended for us.

SECT. VII. When the Israelites asked for such a King as the Nations about them
had, they asked for a Tyrant, tho they did not call him so.
NOW that Saul was no Tyrant, says our Author, note, that the people asked a
King as all Nations had: God answers, and bids Samuel to hear the voice of the
People in all things which they spoke, and appoint them a King. They did not
ask a Tyrant; and to give them a Tyrant when they asked a King, had not bin to
hear their voice in all things, but rather when they asked an Egg to have given
them a Scorpion; unless we will say that all Nations had Tyrants. But before he
drew such a Conclusion, he should have observed, that God did not give them a
Scorpion when they asked an Egg, but told them that was a Scorpion which they
called an Egg: They would have a King to judge them, to go out before them, and
to fight their Battles; but God in effect told them, he would overthrow all
Justice, and turn the Power that was given him, to the ruin of them and their
Posterity. But since they would have it so, he commanded Samuel to hearken to
their Voice, and for the punishment of their sin and folly to give them such a
King as they asked, that is, one who would turn to his own profit and their
misery, the Power with which he should be entrusted; and this truly denominates
a Tyrant. Aristotle makes no other distinction between a King and a Tyrant,
than that the King governs for the good of the People, the Tyrant for his own
pleasure or profit: and they who asked such a one, asked a Tyrant, tho they
called him a King. This is all could be done in their Language: for as they who
are skilled in the Oriental Tongues assure me, there is no name for a Tyrant in
any of them, or any other way of expressing the thing than by circumlocution,
and adding proud, insolent, lustful, cruel, violent, or the like Epithets, to
the word Lord, or King. They did in effect ask a Tyrant: They would not have
such a King as God had ordained, but such a one as the Nations had. Not that
all Nations had Tyrants; but those who were round about them, of whom they had
knowledge, and which in their manner of speaking went under the name of all,
were blessed with such Masters. This way of expression was used by Lot's
Daughters, who said, There was not a man in all the earth to come in to them;
because there was none in the neighborhood with whom it was thought fit they
should accompany. Now that the Eastern Nations were then, and are still under
the Government of those which all free People call Tyrants, is evident to all
men. God therefore in giving them a Tyrant, or rather a Government that would
turn into Tyranny, gave them what they asked under another name; and without
any blemish to the Mercy promised to their Fathers, suffered them to bear the
penalty of their wickedness and folly in rejecting him that he should not reign
over them.

But tho the name of Tyrant was unknown to them, yet in Greece, from whence the
word comes, it signified no more than one who governed according to his own
will, distinguished from Kings that governed by Law; and was not taken in an
ill sense, till those who had bin advanced for their Justice, Wisdom and Valor,
or their Descendents, were found to depart from the ends of their Institution,
and to turn that Power to the oppression of the people, which had bin given for
their protection. But by these means it grew odious, and that kind of
Government came to be thought only tolerable by the basest of men; and those
who destroyed it, were in all places esteemed to be the best.

If Monarchy had bin universally evil, God had not in the 17 th of Deuteronomy
given leave to the Israelites to set up a King; and if that kind of King had
bin asked, he had not bin displeased: and they could not have bin said to
reject God, if they had not asked that which was evil; for nothing that is good
is contrary, or inconsistent with a peoples obedience to him. The Monarchy they
asked was displeasing to God, it was therefore evil. But a Tyrant is no more
than an evil or corrupted Monarch: The King therefore that they demanded was a
Tyrant: God in granting one who would prove a Tyrant, gave them what they
asked; and that they might know what they did, and what he would be, he told
'em they rejected him, and should cry by reason of the King they desired.

This denotes him to be a Tyrant: for as the Government of a King ought to be
gentle and easy, tending to the good of the people, resembling the tender care
of a Father to his Family; if he who is set up to be a King, and to be like to
that Father, dos lay a heavy Yoke upon the people, and use them as Slaves and
not as Children, he must renounce all resemblance of a Father, and be accounted
an Enemy.

But, says our Author, whereas the peoples crying argues some tyrannical
oppression, we may remember that the peoples Cries are not always an Argument of
their living under a Tyrant. No man will say Solomon was a Tyrant, yet all the
Congregation complained that Solomon made their Yoke grievous. It Is strange,
that when Children, nay when Whelps cry, it should be accounted a mark that
they are troubled, and that the Cry of the whole People should be none: Or that
the Government which is erected for their ease, should not be esteemed
tyrannical if it prove grievous to those it should relieve. But as I know no
example of a People that did generally complain without cause, our Adversarys
must alledg some other than that of Solomon, before I believe it of any. We are
to speak reverently of him: He was excellent in Wisdom; he built the Temple,
and God appeared twice to him: But it must be confessed, that during a great part
of his life he acted directly contrary to the Law given by God to Kings, and
that his ways were evil and oppressive to the people, if those of God were
good. Kings were forbidden to multiply Horses, Wives, Silver and Gold: But he
brought together more Silver and Gold, and provided more Horses, Wives and
Concubines than any man is known to have had: And tho he did not actually
return to Egypt, yet he introduced their abominable Idolatry, and so far raised
his heart above his Brethren, that he made them subservient to his Pomp and
Glory. The People might probably be pleased with a great part of this; but when
the Yoke became grievous, and his foolish Son would not render it more easy,
they threw it off; and the thing being from the Lord, it was good, unless he be
evil.

But as just Governments are established for the good of the governed, and the
Israelites desired a King, that it might be well with them, not with him who
was not yet known to them; that which exalts one to the prejudice of those that
made him, must always be evil, and the People that suffers the prejudice must
needs know it better than any other. He that denies this, may think the state
of France might have bin best known from Bulion the late Treasurer, who finding
Lewis the Thirteenth to be troubled at the peoples misery, told him they were
too happy, since they were not reduced to eat grass. But if words are to be
understood as they are ordinarily used, and we have no other than that of
Tyranny to express a Monarchy that is either evil in the institution, or fallen
into corruption, we may justly call that Tyranny which the Scripture calls a
grievous Yoke, and which neither the old nor the new Counselors of Rehoboam
could deny to be so; for tho the first advised him to promise amendment, and
the others to do worse, yet all agreed that what the people said was true.

This Yoke is always odious to such as are not by natural stupidity and
baseness fitted for it; but those who are so, never complain. An Ass will bear
a multitude of blows patiently, but the least of them drives a Lion into rage.
He that said, the rod is made for the back of fools, confessed that oppression
will make a wise man mad. And the most unnatural of all oppressions is to use
Lions like Asses, and to lay that Yoke upon a generous Nation, which only the
basest can deserve; and for want of a better word we call this Tyranny.

Our Author is not contented to vindicate Solomon only, but extends his
Indulgence to Saul. His custom is to patronize all that is detestable, and no
better testimony could be given of it. It is true, says he, Saul lost his
Kingdom, but not for being too cruel or tyrannical to his Subjects, but for
being too merciful to his Enemies. But he alleges no other reason, than that
the slaughter of the Priests is not blamed; not observing that the Writers of
the Scripture in relating those things that are known to be abominable by the
Light of Nature, frequently say no more of them: And if this be not so, Lot's
drunkenness and incest, Reuben's pollution of his Father's bed, Abimelech's
slaughter of his seventy Brothers, and many of the most wicked Acts that ever
were committed, may pass for laudable and innocent. But if Saul were not to be
blamed for killing the Priests, why was David blamed for the death of Thou have
killed Uriah with the Sword of the Children of Ammon: Now therefore the Sword
shall never depart from thy House, 2 Samuel 12.
Vriah? Why were the Dogs to lick the blood of Ahab and Jezebel, if they did
nothing more than Kings might do without blame? Now if the slaughter of one man
was so severely avenged upon the Authors and their Familys, none but such as
Filmer can think that of so many innocent men, with their Wives and Children,
could escape unreprov'd or unpunished. But the whole series of the History of
Saul showing evidently that his Life and Reign were full of the most violent
cruelty and madness, we are to seek no other reason for the ruin threatened and
brought upon him and his Family. And as those Princes who are most barbarously
savage against their own people, are usually most gentle to the Enemies of their
Country, he could not give a more certain testimony of his hatred to those he
ought to have protected, than by preserving those Nations who were their most
irreconcilable Enemies. This is proved by reason as well as by experience; for
every man knows he cannot bear the hatred of all mankind: Such as know they
have Enemies abroad, endeavor to get Friends at home: Those who command
powerful Nations, and are beloved by them, fear not to offend Strangers. But if
they have rendered their own people Enemies to them, they cannot hope for help
in a time of distress, nor so much as a place of retreat or refuge, unless from
strangers, nor from them unless they deserve it, by favoring them to the
prejudice of their own Country. As no man can serve two Masters, no man can
pursue two contrary Interests. Moses, Joshua, Gideon and Samuel, were severe to
the Amorites, Midianites and Cananites, but mild and gentle to the Hebrews.
Saul, who was cruel to the Hebrews, spared the Amalekites, whose preservation
was their destruction: and whilst he destroyed those he should have saved, and
saved those that by a general and particular command of God he should have
destroyed, he lost his ill governed Kingdom, and left an example to posterity
of the end that may be expected from pride, folly and tyranny.

The matter would not be much altered, if I should confess, that in the time of
Saul all Nations were governed by Tyrants (tho it is not true, for Greece did
then flourish in Liberty, and we have reason to believe that other Nations did
so also) for tho they might not think of a good Government at the first,
nothing can oblige men to continue under one that is bad, when they discover
the evils of it, and know how to mend it. They who trusted men that appeared to
have great Virtues, with such a power as might easily be turned into Tyranny,
might justly retract, limit or abolish it, when they found it to be abused. And
tho no condition had bin reserved, the public Good, which is the end of all
Salus populi suprema Lex.
Government, had bin sufficient to abrogate all that should tend to the
contrary. As the malice of Men and their Inventions to do mischief increase
daily, all would soon be brought under the power of the worst, if care were not
taken, and opportunitys embraced to find new ways of preventing it. He that
should make War at this day as the best Commanders did two hundred years past,
would be beaten by the meanest Soldier. The Places then accounted impregnable
are now slighted as indefensible; and if the Arts of defending were not
improved as well as those of assaulting, none would be able to hold out a day.
Men were sent into the World rude and ignorant; and if they might not have used
their natural Facultys to find out that which is good for themselves, all must
have bin condemned to continue in the ignorance of our first Fathers, and to
make no use of their understanding to the ends for which it was given.

The bestial Barbarity in which many Nations, especially of Africa, America and
Asia, do now live, shows what human Nature is, if it be not improved by Art and
Discipline: and if the first errors, committed through ignorance, might not be
corrected, all would be obliged to continue in them; and for any thing I know,
we must return to the Religion, Manners and Policy that were found in our
Country at Cesar's landing. To affirm this is no less than to destroy all that
is commendable in the world, and to render the understanding given to men
utterly useless. But if it be lawful for us by the use of that understanding to
build Houses, Ships and Forts better than our Ancestors, to make such Arms as
are most fit for our defense, and to invent Printing, with an infinite number
of other Arts beneficial to mankind, why have we not the same right in matters
of Government, upon which all others do almost absolutely depend? If men are
not obliged to live in Caves and hollow Trees, to eat Acorns, and to go naked,
why should they be for ever obliged to continue under the same form of
Government that their Ancestors happened to set up in the time of their
ignorance? Or if they were so ignorant to set up one that was not good enough
for the age in which they lived, why should it not be altered, when tricks are
found out to turn that to the prejudice of Nations, which was erected for their
good? From whence should malice and wickedness gain a privilege of putting new
Inventions to do mischief every day into practice? and who is it that so far
protects them, as to forbid good and innocent men to find new ways also of
defending themselves? If there be any that do this, they must be such as live
in the same principle; who whilst they pretend to exercise Justice, provide
only for the indemnity of their own Crimes, and the advancement of unjust
designs. They would have a right of attacking us with all the advantages of the
Arms now in use, and the Arts which by the practice of so many ages have bin
wonderfully refined, whilst we should be obliged to employ no others in our
just defense, than such as were known to our naked Ancestors when Caesar invaded
them, or to the Indians when they fell under the dominion of the Spaniards.
This would be a compendious way of placing uncontrol'd Iniquity in all the
Kingdoms of the World, and of overthrowing all that deserves the name of Good
by the introduction of such accursed Maxims. But if no man dares to acknowledge
any such, except those whose acknowledgment is a discredit, we ought not to
suffer them to be obliquely obtruded upon us, nor to think that God has so far
abandoned us into the hands of our Enemies, as not to leave us the liberty of
using the same Arms in our defense as they do to offend and injure us.

We shall be told, that Prayers and Tears were the only Arms of the first
Christians, and that Christ commanded his Disciples to pray for those that
persecuted them. But besides that those Precepts of the most extreme lenity do
ill suit with the violent practices of those who attempt to enslave Nations,
and who by alleging them do plainly show either that they do not extend to all
Christians, or that they themselves are none whilst they act contrary to them;
they are to know, that those Precepts were merely temporary, and directed to
the Persons of the Apostles, who were armed only with the sword of the Spirit;
that the Primitive Christians used Prayers and Tears only no longer than whilst
they had no other arms. But knowing that by listing themselves under the
ensigns of Christianity they had not lost the rights belonging to all Mankind,
when Nations came to be converted, they no way thought themselves obliged to
give their Enemies a certain opportunity of destroying them, when God had put
means into their hands of defending themselves; and proceeded so far in this
way, that the Christian Valor soon became no less famous and remarkable than
that of the Pagans. They did with the utmost vigor defend both their civil and
religious Rights against all the Powers of Earth and Hell, who by force and
fraud endeavored to destroy them.

SECT. VIII. Under the name of Tribute no more is understood than what the Law
of each Nation gives to the supreme Magistrate for the defraying of public
Charges; to which the Customs of the Romans, or sufferings of the Jews have no
relation.
IF any desire the directions of the New Testament, says our Author, he may
find our Savior limiting and distinguishing Royal Power, by giving to Caesar
those things that are Caesar 's, and to God the things that are God's. But that
will be of no advantage to him in this contest. We do not deny to any man that
which is his due; but do not so well know who is Caesar, nor what it is that can
truly be said to be due to him. I grant that when those words were spoken, the
power of the Romans exercised by Tiberius was then expressed by the name of
Caesar, which he without any Title had assumed. The Jews amongst many other
Nations having bin subdued, submitted to it; and being no way competent Judges
of the rights belonging to the Senate or People of Rome, were obliged to
acknowledge that Power which their Masters were under. They had no Commonwealth
of their own, nor any other Government among themselves, that was not
precarious. They thought Christ was to have restored their Kingdom, and by them
to have reigned over the Nations; but he showed them they were to be subject to
the Gentiles, and that within few years their City and Temple should be
destroyed. Their Commonwealth must needs expire when all that was prefigur'd by
it was accomplished. It was not for them at such a time to presume upon their
abrogated Privileges, nor the Promises made to them, which were then fulfilled.
Nay, they had by their Sins profaned themselves, and given to the Gentiles a
right over them, which none could have had, if they had continued in their
obedience to the Law of God. This was the foundation of the Cesars dominion
over them, but can have no influence upon us. The first of the Cesars had not
bin set up by them: The series of them had not bin continued by their consent:
They had not interrupted the succession by placing or displacing such as they
pleased: They had not brought in Strangers or Bastards, nor preferred the
remotest in blood before the nearest: They had no part in making the Laws by
which they were governed, nor had the Cesars sworn to them: They had no Great
Charter, acknowledging their Libertys to be innate or inherent in them,
confirmed by immemorial Custom, and strengthened by thirty acts of their own
general Assemblys, with the assent of the Romans: The Caesar who then governed
came not to the power by their consent: The question, Will ye have this man to
reign? had never bin asked; but he being imposed upon them, they were to submit
to the Laws by which he governed their Masters. This can be nothing to us,
whose case is in every respect most unlike to theirs. We have no Dictatorian
Power over us; and neither we nor our Fathers have rendered or owed obedience
to any human Laws but our own, nor to any other Magistracy than what we have
established. We have a King who reigns by Law. His power is from the Lex facit
ut sit Rex. Bracton.
Law that makes him King: and we can know only from thence what he is to
command, and what we are obliged to obey. We know the power of the Cesars was
usurped, maintained and exercised with the most detestable violence, injustice
and cruelty. But tho it had bin established by the consent of the Romans, from
an opinion that it was good for them in that state of affairs, it were nothing
to us: and we could be no more obliged to follow their example in that, than to
be governed by Consuls, Tribuns, and Decemviri, or to constitute such a
Government as they set up when they expelled their Kings. Their Authority was as
good at one time as at the other; or if a difference ought to be made, the
preference is to be given to what they did when their Manners were most pure,
the People most free, and when Virtue was most flourishing among them. But if
we are not obliged to set up such a Magistracy as they had, it is ridiculous to
think that such an obedience is due to one who is not in being as they paid to
him that was. And if I should confess that Caesar holding the Senate and People
of Rome under the power of the Sword, imposed what tribute he pleased upon the
Provinces; and that the Jews, who had no part in the Government, were obliged
to submit to his will, our liberty of paying nothing, except what the
Parliament appoints, and yielding obedience to no Laws but such as are made to
be so by their Authority, or by our own immemorial Customs, could not be
thereby infringed. But we may justly affirm, that the Tribute imposed was not,
as our Author infers, all their Coin, nor a considerable part of it, nor more
than what was understood to go for the defraying of the public Charges. Christ
by asking whose Image and Superscription was stamped upon their Money, and
thereupon commanding them to give to Caesar that which was Cesar's, did not
imply that all was his; but that Cesar's Money being current amongst them, it
was a continual and evident testimony, that they acknowledged themselves to be
under his jurisdiction, and therefore could not refuse to pay the Tribute laid
upon them by the same Authority, as other Nations did.

It may also be observed, that Christ did not so much say this to determine the
questions that might arise concerning Cesar's Power; for he plainly says, that
was not his work; but to put the Pharisees to silence who tempted him.
According to the opinion of the Jews, that the Messiah would restore the
Kingdom of Israel, they thought his first work would be to throw off the Roman
Yoke; and not believing him to be the man, they would have brought him to avow
the thing, that they might destroy him. But as that was not his business, and
that his time was not yet come, it was not necessary to give them any other
answer, than such as might disappoint their purpose. This shows that, without
detracting from the honor due to Austin, Ambrose, or Tertullian, I may justly
say, that the decision of such questions as arise concerning our Government
must be decided by our Laws, and not by their Writings. They were excellent
Men; but living in another time, under a very different Government, and
applying themselves to other matters, they had no knowledge at all of those that
concern us. They knew what Government they were under, and thereupon judged
what a broken and dispersed People owed to that which had given Law to the best
part of the World before they were in being, under which they had bin educated,
and which after a most cruel persecution was become propitious to them. They
knew that the Word of the Emperor was a Law to the Senate and People, who were
under the power of that man that could get the best Army; but perhaps had never
heard of such mixed Governments as ours, tho about that time they began to
appear in the world. And it might be as reasonably concluded, that there ought
to be no rule in the Succession or Election of Princes, because the Roman
Emperors were set up by the violence of the Soldiers, and for the most part by
the slaughter of him who was in possession of the Power, as that all other
Princes must be absolute when they have it, and do what they please, till
another more strong and more happy may by the like means wrest the same Power
from them.

I am much mistaken if this be not true; but without prejudice to our Cause, we
may take that which they say, according to their true meaning, in the utmost
extent. And to begin with Tertullian: It Is good to consider the subject of his
Discourse, and to whom he wrote. The Treatise cited by our Author is the
Apologetick, and tends to persuade the Pagans, that Civil Magistrates might not
intermeddle with Religion; and that the Laws made by them touching those
matters, were of no value, as relating to things of which they had no
cognizance. Leges non annorum numerus, nec conditorum dignitas, sed sola
aequitas commendat; atque ideo si iniquae cognoscuntur, merito damnantur.
Tertul. Ap.
It Is not, says he, length of time, nor the dignity of the Legislators, but
equity only that can commend Laws; and when any are found to be unjust, they
are deservedly condemned. By which words he denied that the Magistratical Power
which the Romans acknowledged in Caesar, had any thing to do in spiritual
things. And little advantage can be taken by Christian Princes from what he
says concerning the Roman Emperors; for he expressly declares, Sed and Caesares
super Christo credidissent, si aut Caesares non essent saeculo necessarii, aut
Christiani potuissent esse Caesares. Ibid.
That the Cesars would have believed in Christ, if they had either not bin
necessary to the secular Government, or that Christians might have bin Cesars.
This seems to have proceeded from an opinion received by Christians in the
first Ages, that the use of the Civil as well as the Military Sword was equally
accursed: That Christians were to be Filii pacis, nullius hosts; and Christus
exarmando Petrum, omnem Christianum militem in ^aeteranum discinxit. Tertul.
ibid.
Sons of peace, Enemies to no man; and that Christ by commanding Peter to put up
his Sword, did for ever disarm all Christians. He proceeds to say, Nobis omnis
gloriae and dignitatis ardore frigentibus, etc. Nec alia res est nobis magis
aliena quam publica: Unam nobis Rempublicam Mundum agnoscimus. Ibid.
We cannot fight to defend our Goods, having in our Baptism renounced the
World, and all that is in it; nor to gain Honors, accounting nothing more
foreign to us than public Affairs, and acknowledging no other Commonwealth
than that of the whole World; nor to save our lives, because we account it a
happiness to be killed. He dissuades the Pagans from executing Christians,
rather from charity to them in keeping them from the crime of slaughtering the
Innocent, than that they were unwilling to suffer: and gives no other reasons
of their Prayers for the Emperors, than that they were commanded to love their
Enemies, and to pray for those who persecuted them, except such as he drew from
a mistake, that the World was shortly to finish with the dissolution of the
Empire. All his Works, as well those that were written before he fell into
Montanism, as those published afterward, are full of the like Opinions: and if
Filmer acknowledges them to be true, he must confess, That Princes are not
Fathers, but Qui enim magis inimici Christianorum, quam de quorum Majestate
conv^nimur in crimen. Ibid.
Enemies; and that not only they, but all those who render themselves Ministers
of the Powers they execute, in taking upon them the Sword that Christ had
cursed, do renounce him; and we may consider how to proceed with such as do so.
If our Author will not acknowledge this, then no man was ever guilty of a more
vile prevarication than he, who alleges those words in favor of his Cause,
which have their only strength in Opinions that he thinks false, and in the
Authority of a man whom in that very thing he condemns; and must do so, or
overthrow all that he endeavors to support. But Tertullian's Opinions
concerning these matters have no relation to our present Question. The design
of his Apology, and the Treatise to Scapula almost upon the same subject, was
to show, that the Civil Magistracy which he comprehends under the name of
Caesar, had nothing to do with matters of Religion; and that, as no man could be
a Christian who would undertake the work of a Magistrate, they who were jealous
the public Offices might be taken out of their hands, had nothing to fear from
Christians who resolved not to meddle with them. Whereas our question is only,
Whether that Magistratical Power, which by Law or Usurpation was then in Caesar,
must necessarily in all times, and in all places, be in one man, or may be
divided and balanced according to the Laws of every Country, concerning which
he says nothing: Or whether we, who do not renounce the use of the Civil or
Military Sword, who have a part in the Government, and think it our duty to
apply our selves to public Cares, should lay them aside because the ancient
Christians every hour expecting death, did not trouble themselves with them.

If Ambrose after he was a Bishop, employed the ferocity of a Soldier, which he
still retained, rather in advancing the power of the Clergy, than the good of
Mankind by restraining the rage of Tyrants, it can be no prejudice to our
Cause, of which he had no cognizance. He spoke of the violent and despotical
Government, to which he had bin a Minister before his Baptism, and seems to
have had no knowledge of the Gothic Polity, that within a few years grew famous
by the overthrow of the Roman Tyranny, and delivering the world from the Yoke
which it could no longer bear. And if Austin might say, That the Emperor is
subject to no Laws, because he has a Power of making Laws; I may justly say,
that our Kings are subject to Laws, because they can make no Law, and have no
Power but what is given by the Laws. If this be not the case, I desire to know
who made the Laws, to which they and their Predecessors have sworn; and whether
they can according to their own will abrogate those ancient Laws, by which they
are made to be what they are, and by which we enjoy what we have; or whether
they can make new Laws by their own Power? If no man but our Author have
impudence enough to assert any such thing; and if all the Kings we ever had,
except Richard the second, did renounce it, we may conclude that Austin's words
have no relation to our dispute; and that 'twere to no purpose to examine,
whether the Fathers mention any reservation of Power to the Laws of the Land,
or to the People; it being as lawful for all Nations, if they think fit, to
frame Governments different from those that were then in being, as to build
Bastions, Halfmoons, Hornworks, Ravelins or Counterscarps, or to make use of
Muskets, Cannon, Mortars, Carabines or Pistols, which were unknown to them.

What Solomon says of the Hebrew Kings, dos as little concern us. We have
already proved their Power not to have bin absolute, tho greater than that
which the Law allows to ours. It might upon occasion be a prudent advice to
private persons living under such Governments as were usual in the Eastern
Countries, to keep the King's Commandments, and not to say, What do thou?
because where the Word of a King is, there is Power, and all that he pleases
he will do. But all these words are not his; and those that are, must not be
taken in a general sense; for tho his Son was a King, yet in his words there
was no power: He could not do what he pleased, nor hinder others from doing
what they pleased: He would have added weight to the Yoke that lay upon the
necks of the Israelites, but he could not; and we do not find him to have bin
master of much more than his own Tongue, to speak as many foolish things as he
pleased. In other things, whether he had to deal with his own people, or with
strangers, he was weak and impotent; and the wretches who flattered him in his
follys, could be of no help to him. The like has befallen many others: Those
who are wise, virtuous, valiant, just, and lovers of their People, have and
ought to have Power; but such as are lewd, vicious, foolish, and haters of
their People, ought to have none, and are often deprived of all. This was well
known to Solomon, who says, That a wise Child is better than an old and foolish
King that will not be advised. When Nabuchodonosor set himself in the place of
God, his Kingdom was taken from him, and he was driven from the society of men
to herd with beasts. There was Power for a time in the word of Nero: he
murdered many excellent men; but he was called to account, and the World
abandoned the Monster it had too long endured. He found none to defend him, nor
any better help, when he desired to die, than the hand of a Slave. Besides,
some Kings by their Institution have little Power; some have bin deprived of
what they had, for abusing, or rendering themselves unworthy of it; and Historys
afford us innumerable examples of both sorts.

But tho I should confess that there is always Power in the word of a King, it
would be nothing to us who dispute concerning Right, and have no regard to that
Power which is void of it. A Thief or a Pyrat may have Power: but that avails
him not, when, as often befell the Cesars, he meets with one who has more; and
is always unsafe, since having no effect upon the Consciences of men, every one
may destroy him that can. And I leave it to Kings to consider how much they
stand obliged to those, who placing their Rights upon the same foot, expose
their Persons to the same dangers.

But if Kings desire that in their Word there should be power, let them take
care that it be always accompanied with Truth and Justice. Let them seek the
good of their People, and the hands of all good men will be with them. Let them
not exalt themselves insolently, and every one will desire to exalt them. Let
them acknowledge themselves to be the Servants of the Public, and all men will
be theirs. Let such as are most addicted to them, talk no more of Cesars, nor
the Tributes due to them. We have nothing to do with the name of Caesar. They
who at this day live under it, reject the Prerogatives anciently usurped by
those who had it, and are governed by no other Laws than their own. We know no
Law to which we owe obedience, but that of God, and our selves. Asiatick Slaves
usually pay such Tributes as are imposed upon them; and whilst braver Nations
lay under the Roman Tyranny, they were forced to submit to the same burdens.
But even those Tributes were paid for maintaining Armies, Fleets and Garrisons,
without which the poor and abject life they led could not have bin preserved.
We owe none but what we freely give. None is or can be imposed upon us, unless
by our selves. We measure our Grants according to our own Will, or the present
occasions, for our own safety. Our Ancestors were born free, and, as the best
provision they could make for us, they left us that Liberty entire, with the
best Laws they could devise to defend it. It Is no way impaired by the Opinions
of the Fathers. The words of Solomon do rather confirm it. The happiness of
those who enjoy the like, and the shameful misery under which they lie, who
have suffered themselves to be forced or cheated out of it, may persuade, and
the justice of the Cause encourage us to think nothing too dear to be hazarded
in the defense of it.

SECT. IX. Our own Laws confirm to us the enjoyment of our native Rights.
IF that which our Author calls Divinity did reach the things in dispute
between us, or that the Opinions of the Fathers which he alleges, related to
them, he might have spared the pains of examining our Laws: for a municipal
Sanction were of little force to confirm a perpetual and universal Law given by
God to mankind, and of no value against it, since man cannot abrogate what God
has instituted, nor one Nation free it self from a Law that is given to all.
But having abused the Scriptures, and the Writings of the Fathers, (whose
Opinions are to be valued only so far as they rightly interpret them) he seems
desirous to try whether he can as well put a false sense upon our Law.
According to his custom he takes pieces of passages from good Books, and turns
them directly against the plain meaning of the Authors, expressed in the whole
scope and design of their Writings. To show that he intends to spare none, he
is not ashamed to cite Bracton, who of all our ancient Law-writers is most
opposite to his Maxims. He lived, says he, in Henry the third's time, since
Parliamenns were instituted: as if there had bin a time when England had wanted
them; or that the establishment of our Liberty had bin made by the Normans,
who, if we will believe our Author, came in by force of Arms, and oppressed us.
But we have already proved the Essence of Parliaments to be as ancient as our
Nation, and that there was no time in which there were not such Councils or
Assemblys of the People as had the power of the whole, and made or unmade such
Laws as best pleased themselves. We have indeed a French word from a People
that came from France, but the Power was always in our selves: and the Norman
Kings were obliged to swear they would govern according to the Laws that had
bin made by those Assemblys. It imports little whether Bracton lived before or
after they came amongst us. His words are, Omnes sub eo, and ipse sub nullo,
sed tantum sub Deo; All are under him, and he under none but God only. If he
offend, since no Writ can go out against him, their Remedy is by petitioning
him to amend his Faults; which if he will not do, it is punishment enough for
him to expect God as an avenger. Let none presume to look into his Deeds, much
less to oppose him. Here is a mixture of Sense and Nonsense, Truth and
Falsehood, the words of Bracton, with our Author's foolish Inferences from them.
Bracton spoke of the politic capacity of the King, when no Law had forbidden
him to divide it from his natural. He gave the name of King to the sovereign
Power of the Nation, as Jacob called that of his Descendents The Scepter; which
he said should not depart from Judah till Shiloh came, tho all men know that
his Race did not reign the third part of that time over his own Tribe, nor full
sourscore years over the whole Nation. The same manner of speech is used in all
parts of the world. Tertullian under the name of Caesar comprehended all
magistratical Power, and imputed to him the Acts of which in his person he
never had any knowledge. The French say, their King is always present, sur son
lit de justice, in all the Sovereign Courts of the Kingdom, which are not
easily numbered; and that Maxim could have in it neither sense nor truth, if by
it they meant a Man, who can be but in one place at one time, and is always
comprehended within the Dimensions of his own Skin. These things could not be
unknown to Bracton, the like being in use amongst us; and he thought it no
offense so far to follow the dictates of Reason prohibited by no Law, as to
make a difference between the invisible and omnipresent King, who never dies,
and the Person that wears the Crown, whom no man without the guilt of Treason
may endeavor to kill since there is an Act of Parliament in the case. I will
not determine whether he spoke properly or no as to England; but if he did not,
all that he said being upon a false supposition, is nothing to our purpose. The
same Bracton says, the King dos no wrong, in as much as he dos nothing but by
Law. Potestas Regis est potestas Legis, potestas juris non injuriae. Bract. de
Leg. Angl.
The Power of the King is the Power of the Law, a power of right not of wrong.
Again, If Qui si sacit injuriam, non est Rex. Ibid.
the King dos injustice, he is not King. In another place he has these words;
Exercere igitur debet Rex potestatem juris sicut Dei vicarius and minister in
terra, quia illa potestas solius Dei est, potestas autem injuriae Diaboli est
non Dei; and cujus horum opera fecerit Rex, e^us minister erit: Igitur dum
facit justitiam, vicarius est regis aeterni: Minister autem Diaboli dum
declinet ad injuriam. Ibid. l. 3.
The King therefore ought to exercise the Power of the Law, as becomes the
Vicar and Minister of God upon Earth, because that Power is the Power of God
alone; but the Power of doing wrong is the Power of the Devil, and not of God.
Aad the King is his Minister whose Work he dos: Whilst he dos Justice, he is
the Vicar of the Eternal King; but if he deflect from it to act unjustly, he is
the Minister of the Devil. He also says that the King is singulis major,
universis minor; and that he who is in justitia exequenda omnibus major, in
justitia recipienda cuilibet ex plebe fit aequalis. I shall not say Bracton is
in the right when he speaks in this manner; but it is a strange impudence in
Filmer to cite him as a Patron of the absolute Power of Kings, who dos so
extremely depress them. But the grossest of his follys is yet more pardonable
than his detestable fraud in falsifying Bracton's words, and leaving out such
as are not for his purpose, which show his meaning to be directly contrary to
the sense put upon them. That this may appear, I shall set down the words as
they are found in Bracton: Ipse autem Rex non debet esse sub homine, sed sub
Deo, and sub Lege, quia Lex facit Regem. Attribuat ergo Rex Legi quod Lex
attribuit ei, id est dominationem and potestatem: Non est enim Rex ubi
dominatur voluntas and non Lex; and quod sub Lege esse debeat, cum sit Dei
vicarius, evidenter apparet. If Bracton therefore be a competent Judge, the King
is under the Law; and he is not a King, nor God's Vicegerent unless he be so;
and we all know how to proceed with those who being under the Law, offend
against it. For the Law is not made in vain. In this case something more is to
be done than petitioning; and it is ridiculous to say, that if he will not
amend, it is punishment enough for him to expect God an Avenger: for the same
may be said of all Malefactors. God can sufficiently punish Thieves and
Murderers: but the future Judgment, of which perhaps they have no belief, is
not sufficient to restrain them from committing more Crimes, nor to deter
others from following their example. God was always able to punish Murderers,
but yet by his Law he commands man to shed the blood of him who should shed
man's blood; and declares that the Land cannot be purged of the Guilt by any
other means. He had Judgments in store for Jeroboam, Ahab, and those that were
like them; but yet he commanded, that, according to that Law, their Houses
should be destroyed from the earth. The dogs licked up the blood of Ahab, where
they had licked that of Naboth, and eat Jezebel who had contrived his murder.
But, says our Author, we must not look into his deeds, much less oppose them.
Must not David look into Readiness deeds, nor oppose them? Why did he then bring
together as many men as he could to oppose, and make foreign Alliances against
him, even with the Moabites and the accursed Philistines? Why did Jehu not only
destroy Ahab's house, but kill the King of Judah and his forty Brothers, only
for going to visit his Children? Our Author may perhaps say, because God
commanded them. But if God commanded them to do so, he did not command them and
all mankind not to do so; and if he did not forbid, they have nothing to
restrain them from doing the like, unless they have made municipal Laws of
their own to the contrary, which our Author and his Followers may produce when
they can find them.

His next work is to go back again to the Tribute paid by Christ to Caesar, and
judiciously to infer, that all Nations must pay the same Duty to their
Magistrates, as the Jews did to the Romans who had subdued them. Christ did not,
says he, ask what the Law of the Land was, nor inquire whether there was a
Statute against it, nor whether the Tribute were given by the consent of the
People, but upon sight of the superscription concluded, etc. It had bin strange
if Christ had inquired after their Laws, Statutes or Consent, when he knew that
their Commonwealth, with all the Laws by which it had subsisted, was abolished;
and that Israel was become a Servant to those who exercised a most violent
domination over them: which being a peculiar punishment for their peculiar
sins, can have no influence upon Nations that are not under the same
circumstances.

But of all that he says, nothing is more incomprehensible, than what he can
mean by lawful Kings to whom all is due that was due to the Roman Usurpers. For
lawful Kings are Kings by the Law: In being Kings by the Law they are such
Kings as the Law makes them, and that Law only must tell us what is due to
them; or by a universal Patriarchical Right, to which no man can have a title,
as is said before, till he prove himself to be the right Heir of Noah. If
neither of these are to be regarded, but that Right follows Possession, there
is no such thing as a Usurper; he who has the Power has the Right, as indeed
Filmer says, and his Wisdom as well as his Integrity is sufficiently declared
by the Assertion.

This wicked extravagancy is followed by an attempt of as singular ignorance
and stupidity, to shuffle together Usurpers and Conquerors, as if they were the
same; whereas there have bin many Usurpers who were not Conquerors, and
Conquerors that deserved not the name of Usurpers. No wise man ever said that
Agathocles or Dionysius conquered Syracuse; Tarquin, Galba or Otho, Rome;
Cromwell, England; or that the Magi, who seized the Government of Persia after
the death of Cambyses, conquered that Country. When Moses and Joshua had
overthrown the Kingdoms of the Amorites, Moabites and Cananites; or when David
subdued the Ammonites, Edomites, and others, none, as I suppose, but such
Divines as Filmer, will say they usurped a Dominion over them. There is such a
thing amongst men as just War, or else ttue Valor could not be a Virtue but a
Crime; and instead of glory, the utmost infamy would always be the companion of
Victory. There are, says Belli aque ac pacis jura. De jur. bell. and pac.
Grotius, Laws of War as well as of Peace. He who for a just Cause, and by just
Means, carrys on a just War, has as clear a right to what is acquired as can be
enjoyed by Man; but all Usurpation is detestable and abominable.

SECT. X. The words of St. Paul enjoining obedience to higher Powers, favor all
sorts of Governments no less than Monarchy.
OUR Author's next quarrel is with St. Paul, who did not, at he says, in
enjoining subjection to the higher Powers, signify the Laws of the Land, or
mean the highest Powers, as well Aristocratical and Democratical as Regal, but
a Monarch that carries the Sword, etc. But what if there be no Monarch in the
place? or what if he do not carry the Sword? Had the Apostle spoken in vain, if
the liberty of the Romans had not bin overthrown by the fraud and violence of
Caesar? Was no obedience to be exacted whilst that people enjoyed the benefit of
their own Laws, and Virtue flourished under the moderate Government of a legal
and just Magistracy, established for the common good, by the common consent of
all? Had God no Minister amongst them till Law and Justice was overthrown, the
best part of the people destroyed by the fury of a corrupt mercenary Soldiery,
and the world subdued under the Tyranny of the worst Monsters that it had ever
produced? Are these the ways of establishing God's Vicegerents, and will he
patronize no Governors or Governments but such as these? Dos God uphold evil,
and that only? If the world has bin hitherto mistaken, in giving the name of
evil to that which is good, and calling that good which is evil; I desire to
know what can be called good amongst men, if the Government of the Romans, till
they entered Greece and Asia, and were corrupted by the Luxury of both, do not
deserve that name? or what is to be esteemed evil, if the establishment and
exercise of the Cesars Power were not so? But says he, Will thou not be afraid
of the Power? And was there no Power in the Governments that had no Monarchs?
Were the Carthaginians, Romans, Grecians, Gauls, Germans and Spaniards without
Power? Was there no Sword in that Nation and their Magistrates, who overthrew
the Kingdoms of Armenia, Egypt, Numidia, Macedon, with many others, and whom
none of the Monarchs were able to resist? Are the Venetians, Switzers, Grisons
and Hollanders now le^t in the same weakness, and no obedience at all due to
their Magistrates? If this be so, how comes it to pass that Justice is so well
administered amongst them? Who is it that defends the Hollanders in such a
manner, that the greatest Monarchs with all their Swords have had no great
reason to boast of any Advantages gained against them? at least till we (whom
they could not resist when we had no Monarch, tho we have bin disgracefully
beaten by them since we had one) by making Leagues against them, and sowing
divisions amongst them, instigated and assisted the greatest Power now in the
world to their destruction and our own. But our Author is so accustomed to
fraud, that he never cites a passage of Scripture which he dos not abuse or
vitiate; and that he may do the same in this place, he leaves out the following
words, For there is no power but of God, that he might entitle one sort only to
his protection. If therefore the People and popular Magistrates of Athens; the
two Kings, Ephori and Senate of Sparta; the Sanhedrins amongst the Hebrews, the
Consuls, Tribuns, Pretors and Senate of Rome; the Magistrates of Holland,
Switzerland and Venice, have or had power, we may conclude that they also were
ordained by God; and that according to the precept of the Apostle, the same
obedience for the same reason is due to them as to any Monarch.

The Apostle farther explaining himself, and showing who may be accounted a
Magistrate, and what the duty of such a one is, informs us when we should fear,
and on what account. Rulers, says he, are not a terror to good works, but to
the evil: Will thou then not be afraid of the Power? do that which is good, and
thou shall have praise of the same; for he is the Minister of God, a revenger
to execute wrath upon him that does evil. He therefore is only the Minister of
God, who is not a terror to good works, but to evil; who executes wrath upon
those that do evil, and is a praise to those that do well. And he who dos well,
ought not to be afraid of the power, for he shall receive praise. Now if our
Author were alive, tho he was a man of a hard forehead, I would ask him,
whether in his Conscience he believed, that Tiberius, Caligula, Claudius, Nero,
and the rabble of succeeding Monsters, were a praise to those who did well, and
a terror to those who did ill; and not the contrary, a praise to the worst, and
a terror to the best men of the world? or for what reason Ob virtutes
certissimum exitium.
Tacitus could say, that Virtue brought men who lived under 'em to certain
destruction, and recite so many Examples of the brave and good, who were
murdered by them for being so, unless they had endeavored to extinguish all
that was good, and to Ipsam exscindere virtutem.
tear up Virtue by the roots? Why did he call Domitian an Virtutibus infestum.
Enemy to Virtue, if he was a terror only to those that did evil? If the world
has hitherto bin misled in these things, and given the name of Virtue to Vice,
and of Vice to Virtue, then Germanicus, Valerius Asiaticus, Corbulo, Helvidius
Priscus, Thraseas, Soranus and others that resembled them, who fell under the
rage of those Beasts, nay Paul himself and his Disciples were evil doers; and
Macro, Narcissus, Pallas, Vinnius, Laco and Tigellinus were virtuous and good
men. If this be so, we are beholden to Filmer for admonishing mankind of the
error in which they had so long continued. If not, those who persecuted and
murdered them for their Virtues, were not a terror to such as did evil, and a
praise to those who did well. The worst men had no need to fear them; but the
best had, because they were the best. All Princes therefore that have power are
not to be esteemed equally the Ministers of God. They that are so, must receive
their dignity from a title that is not common to all, even from a just
employment of their power to the encouragement of Virtue, and to the
discouragement of Vice. He that pretends to the veneration and obedience due to
the Ministers of God, must by his actions manifest that he is so. And tho I am
unwilling to advance a proposition that may sound harshly to tender ears, I am
inclined to believe, that the same rule, which obliges us to yield obedience to
the good Magistrate who is the Minister of God, and assures us that in obeying
him we obey God, dos equally oblige us not to obey those who make themselves
the Ministers of the Devil, lest in obeying them, we obey the Devil, whose
works they do.

That none but such as are wilfully ignorant may mistake Paul's meaning, Peter,
who was directed by the same Spirit, says distinctly, Submit your selves to
every Ordinance of man for the Lord's sake. If therefore there be several
Ordinances of men tending to the same end, that is, the obtaining of Justice,
by being a terror to* the evil and a praise to the good, the like obedience is
for conscience sake enjoined to all, and upon the same condition. But as no man
dares to say, that Athens and Persia, Carthage and Egypt, Switzerland and
France, Venice and Turkey were and are under the same Government; the same
obedience is due to the Magistrate in every one of those places, and all others
on the same account, whilst they continue to be the Ministers of God.

If our Author say, that Peter cannot comprehend Kings under the name of human
Ordinances, since Paul says they are the Ordinance of God, I may as well say
that Paul cannot call that the Ordinance of God, which Peter calls the
ordinance of man. But as it was said of Moses and Samuel, that they who spoke
by the same Spirit could not contradict each other, Peter and Paul being full
of Wisdom and Sanctity, and inspired by the same Spirit, must needs say the
same thing; and Grotius shows that they perfectly agree, tho the one calls
Kings, Rulers and Governors, the Ordinance of Man, and the other the Ordinance
of God; inasmuch as God having from the beginning ordained that men should not
live like Wolves in woods, every man by himself, but together in Civil
Societys, left to every one a liberty of joining with that Society which best
pleased him, and to every Society to create such Magistrates, and frame such
Laws as should seem most conducing to their own good, according to the measure
of light and reason they might have. And every Magistracy so instituted might
rightly be called the Ordinance of Man who was the Instituter, and the
Ordinance of God according to which it was instituted; Quia salubrem hominum
Constitutionem Deus probavit and sauxie. De Jur. Bell. and Pac.
because, says he, God approved and ratified the salutary Constitutions of
Government made by men.

But, says our Author, Peter expounds his own words of the human Ordinance to
be the King, who is the Lex loquens: but he says no such thing, and I do not
find that any such thought ever entered into the Apostle's mind. The words are
often found in the works of Plato and Aristotle, but applied only to such a man
as is a King by nature, who is endowed with all the virtues that tend to the
good of human Societys in a greater measure than any or all those that compose
them; which Character, I think, will be ill applied to all Kings. And that this
may appear to be true, I desire to know whether it would well have agreed with
Nero, Caligula, Domitian, or others like to them; and if not with them, then
not with all, bot only with those who are endowed with such Virtues. But if the
King be made by man, he must be such as man makes him to be; and if the power
of a Law had bin given by any human Sanction to the word of a foolish, mad or
wicked man (which I hardly believe) it would be destroyed by its own iniquity
and turpitude, and the People left under the obligation of rendering obedience
to those, who so use the Sword that the Nations under them may live soberly,
peaceably and honestly.

This obliges me a little to examine what is meant by the Sword. The Pope says
there are two Swords, the one temporal, the other spiritual; and that both of
them were given to Peter and to his Successors. Others more rightly understand
the two Swords to be that of War and that of Justice, which according to
several Constitutions of Government have bin committed to several hands, under
several conditions and limitations. The Sword of Justice comprehends the
Legislative and the Executive Power: the one is exercised in making Laws, the
other in judging Controversys according to such as are made. The military Sword
is used by those Magistrates who have it, in making War or Peace with whom they
think fit; and sometimes by others who have it not, in pursuing such Wars as
are resolved upon by another Power. The Jewish Doctors generally agree that the
Kings of Judah could make no Law, because there was a curse denounced against
those who should add to, or detract from that which God had given by the hand
of Moses; that they might sit in Judgment with the High Priest and Sanhedrin,
but could not judge by themselves, unless the Sanhedrin did plainly fail of
performing their duty. Upon this account Maimonides excuses David for
commanding Solomon not to suffer the gray hairs of Joab to go down to the grave
in peace, and Solomon for appointing him to be killed at the foot of the Altar:
for he having killed Abner and Amasa, and by those actions shed the blood of
war in time of peace, the Sanhedrin should have punished him; but being
protected by favor or power, and even David himself fearing him, Solomon was
put in mind of his duty, which he performed, tho Joab laid hold upon the horns
of the Altar, which by the express words of the Law gave no protection to
wilful Murderers.

The use of the military Sword amongst them was also moderated. Their Kings
might make War upon the seven accursed Nations that they were commanded to
destroy, and so might any other man; for no peace was to be made with them: but
not against any other Nation, without the assent of the Sanhedrin. And when
Amaziah contrary to that Law had foolishly made war upon Joash King of Israel,
and thereby brought a great slaughter upon Judah, the Princes, that is the
Sanhedrin, combined against him, pursued him to Lachish, and killed him there.

The Legislative Power of Sparta was evidently in the People. The Laws that go
under the name of Lycurgus, were proposed by him to the general Assembly of the
People, and from them received their Authority: But the discipline they
contained was of such efficacy sor framing the minds of men to virtue, and by
banishing Silver and Gold they so far banished all manner of Crimes, that from
the institution of those Laws to the times of their Corruption, which was more
than eight hundred years, we hardly find that three men were put to death, of
whom two were Kings; so that it seems difficult to determine where the power of
judging did reside, tho it is most probable, considering the nature of their
Government, that it was in the Senate, and in Cases extraordinary in the Ephori,
with a right of appealing to the People. Their Kings theresore conld have
little to do with the Sword of Justice, neither the Legislative nor the
Judicial Power being any ways in them.

The military Sword was not much more in their power, unless the excellency of
their Virtues gave them the credit of persuading, when the Law denied the right
of commanding. They were obliged to make war against those, and those only, who
were declared Enemies by the Senate and Ephori, and in the manner, place and time
they directed: so that Agesilaus, tho carrying on a glorious War in Persia, no
sooner received the Parchment Roll, wherein he was commanded by the Ephori to
come home for the desence of his own Country, than he immediately returned, and
is on that account called by no less a man than Xenophon, a good and faithful
King rendering obedience to the Laws of his Country.

By this it appears that there are Kings, who may be feared by those that do
ill, and not by such as do well; for having no more power than what the Law
gives, and being obliged to execute it as the Law directs, they cannot depart
from the Precept of the Apostle. My own actions therefore, or the sense of my
own guilt arising from them, is to be the measure of my fear of that Magistrate
who is the Minister of God, and not his Power.

The like may be said of almost all the Nations of the world, that have had any
thing of Civil Order amongst them. The supreme Magistrate, under what name
soever he was known, whether King, Emperor, Asymnetes, Suffetes, Consul,
Dictator, or Archon, has usually a part assigned to him in the administration
of Justice and making War; but that he may know it to be assigned and not
inherent, and so assigned as to be employed for the public good, not to his
own profit or pleasure, it is circumscribed by such rules as he cannot safely
transgress. This is above all seen in the German Nations, from whom we draw our
Original and Government; and is so well described by Tacitus in his treatise of
their Customs and Manners, that I shall content my self to refer to it, and to
what I have cited from him in the former part of this Work. The Saxons coming
into our Country, retained to themselves the same rights. They had no Kings but
such as were set up by themselves, and they abrogated their Power when they
pleased. Ad Libertatis vestrae tuitionem non meis meritis, sed sola
liberalitate vestra.
Offa acknowledged that he was chosen for the defense of their Liberty, not
from his own merit, but by their favor; and in the Conventus Pananglicus, at
which all the chief men as well Secular as Ecclesiastical were present, it was
decreed by the King, Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Dukes and Senators, that
the Kings should be chosen by the Priests, and by the Elders of the People. In
pursuance of which, Egbert, who had no right to the succession, was made King.
Ethelwerd was chosen in the same manner Omnium consensu.
by the consent of all. Ethelwolf a Monk, for want of a better, was advanced to
the same Honor. His Son Alfred, tho crowned by the Pope, and marrying without
the consent of the Nobility and Kingdom Contra morem and statuta.
against their Customs and Statutes, acknowledged that he had received the Crown
from the bounty of the Princes, Elders, and People; and in his Will declared,
that he left the People as he had found them, free as the inward thoughts of
Man. His Son Edward Successor Monarchiae electus.
was elected to be his Successor. Ethelstan, tho a Bastard, and without all
Title, was elected by the consent of the Nobility and People. Eadred by the
same Authority was elected and preferred before the Sons of Edmond his
Predecessor. Edwin, tho rightly chosen, was deposed for his ill life, and Edgar
Et eligerunt Deo dictante Edgarum in Regem annuente populo.
elected King, by the will of God, and consent of the People. But he also was
deprived of the Crown for the Rape of a Nun, and after seven years restored by
the whole People, coram omni multitudine populi Anglorum. Ethelred, who is said
to have bin Saevus in principio, miser in medio, turpis in exitu.
cruel in the beginning, wretched in the course, and infamous in the end of his
Reign, was deposed by the same Power that had advanced him. Canutus made a
Canutus ^oedus cum principibus and omni populo, and illi cum ipso percusserunt.
Contract with the Princes and the whole People, and thereupon was by general
consent crowned King over all England. After him Harold was chosen in the usual
manner. He being dead, a Message was sent to Hardi Canute with an offer of the
Crown, which he accepted, and accordingly was received. Edward the Confessor
was Annuente Clero and populo Londini, in regem eligitur.
elected King with the consent of the Clergy and People at London; and Harold
excused himself for not performing his Oath to William the Norman, because he
said he had made it unduly and presumptuously, Absque generali Senatus and
Populi conventu and edicto. Matthew. Paris. Gul. Gemit. etc.
without consulting the Nobility and People, and without their Authority.
William was received with great joy by the Clergy and People, and saluted King
by all, swearing to observe the ancient, good, and approved Laws of England:
and tho he did but ill perform his Oath, yet before his death he seemed to
repent of the ways he had taken; and only wishing his Son might be King of
England, he confessed in his last Will made at Caen in Normandy, Neminem Anglici
regni constituo haeredem, non enim tantum decus hareditario jure possedi. Ibid.
that he neither found nor left the Kingdom as an Inheritance. If he possessed no
right except what was conferred upon him, no more was conferred than had bin
enjoyed by the ancient Kings, according to the approved Laws which he swore to
observe. Those Laws gave no power to any, till he was elected; and that which
they did then give was so limited, that the Nobility and People reserved to
themselves the disposition of the greatest Affairs, even to the deposition and
expulsion of such as should not well perform the duty of their Oath and Office.
And I leave it to our Author to prove, how they can be said to have had the
Sword and the Power so as to be feared, otherwise than, as the Apostle says, by
those that do evil; which we acknowledge to be not only in the King, but in the
lowest Officer of Justice in the world.

If it be pretended that our later Kings are more to be feared than William the
Norman, or his Predecessors, it must not be, as has bin proved, either from the
general right of Kings, or from the Doctrine of the Apostle, but from something
else that is peculiar and subsequent, which I leave our Author's Disciples to
prove, and an answer may be found in due time. But to show that our Ancestors
did not mistake the words of the Apostle, it is good to consider when, to whom,
and upon what occasion he spoke. The Christian Religion was then in its
infancy: his discourses were addressed to the Professors of it, who tho they soon
grew to be considerable in number, were for the most part of the meanest sort
of People, Servants or Inhabitants of the Citys, rather than Citizens and
Freemen; joined in no civil Body or Society, nor such as had or could have any
part in the Government. The occasion was to suppress the dangerous mistake of
many converted Jews and others, who knowing themselves to be freed from the
power of Sin and the Devil, presumed they were also freed from the obligation
of human Laws. And if this Error had not bin crop'd in the bud, it would have
given occasion to their Enemies, (who desired nothing more) to destroy them all;
and who knowing that such Notions were stirring among them, would have bin
glad, that they who were not easily to be discovered, had by that means
discovered themselves.

This induced a necessity of diverting a poor, mean, scattered People from such
thoughts concerning the State; to convince them of the Error into which they
were fallen, that Christians did not owe the same obedience to Civil Laws and
Magistrates as other men; and to keep them from drawing destruction upon
themselves by such ways, as not being warranted by God, had no promise of his
Protection. St. Paul's work was to preserve the Professors of Christianity, as
appears by his own words: 1 Timothy 2.
I exhort, that first of all, Supplications, Prayers, Intercessions, and giving
of thanks be made for all men; for Kings, and for all that are in Authority,
that we may live a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty. Put
Tit. 3.
them in mind to be subject to Principalitys and Powers, to obey Magistrates, to
be ready for every good work. St. Peter agrees with him fully in describing the
Magistrate and his Duty; showing the reasons why obedience should be paid to
him, and teaching Christians to be humble and contented with their condition,
as free, yet not using their Liberty for a cover to malice; and not only to
fear God and honor the King (of which conjunction of words such as Filmer are
very proud) but to honor all men, as is said in the same verse. This was in a
peculiar manner the work of that time, in which those who were to preach and
propagate the Gospel, were not to be diverted from that Duty, by entangling
themselves in the care of State Affairs; but it dos in some sense agree with
all times: for it can never be the duty of a good man to oppose such a
Magistrate as is the Minister of God, in the exercise of his Office, nor to
deny to any man that which is his due.

But as the Christian Law exempts no man from the Duty he ows to his Father,
Master, or the Magistrate, it dos not make him more a Slave than he was before,
nor deprive him of any natural or civil Right; and if we are obliged to pay
Tribute, Honor, or any other thing where it is not due, it must be by some
Precept very different from that which commands us to give to Caesar that which
is Cesar's. If he define the Magistrate to be the Minister of God doing
Justice, and from thence draws the Reasons he gives for rendering Obedience to
him, we are to inquire whose Minister he is who overthrows it, and look for
some other reason for rendering obedience to him than the words of the Apostles.
If David, who was willing to lay down his life for the people, who hated
iniquity, and would not suffer a liar to come into his presence, was the
Minister of God, I desire to know whose Minister Caligula was, who set up
himself to be worshipped for a God, and would at once have destroyed all the
people that he ought to have protected? Whose Minister was Nero, who, besides
the abominable impuritys of his life, and hatred to all Virtue as contrary to
his Person and Government, set fire to the great City? If it be true, that
contrariorum contraria est ratio, these questions are easily decided; and if
the reasons of things are eternal, the same distinction grounded upon truth
will be good for ever. Every Magistrate and every man by his works will for
ever declare whose Minister he is, in what spirit he lives, and consequently
what obedience is due to him according to the Precept of the Apostle. If any
man ask what I mean by Justice, I answer, That the Law of the Land, as far as
it is Sanctio rect a, jubens honesta, prohibens contraria, declares what it is.
But there have bin and are Laws that are neither just nor commendable. There
was a Law in Rome, that no God should be worshipped without the consent of the
Senate: Upon which Tertullian says scoffingly, Nisi homini Deus placuerit, Deus
non erit.
That God shall not be God, unless he please Man: and by virtue of this Law the
first Christians were exposed to all manner of crueltys; and some of the
Emperors (in other respects excellent Men) most foully polluted themselves and
their Government with innocent Blood. Antoninus Pius was taken in this snare;
and Tertullian bitterly derides Trajan for glorying in his Clemency, when he
had commanded Pliny, who was Proconsul in Asia, not to make any search for
Christians, but only to punish them according to Law when they should be
brought before him. No Municipal Law can be more firmly established by human
Authority, than that of the Inquisition in Spain, and other places: And those
accursed Tribunals, which have shed more Christian blood than all the Pagans
that ever were in the world, are commonly called The Holy Office. If a
Gentleman in Poland kill a Peasant, he is by a Law now in use free from
punishment, if he lay a Ducat upon the dead Body. Evenus the Third, King of
Scotland, caused a Law to pass, by which the Wives and Daughters of Noblemen
were exposed to his Lust, and those of the Commons to the Lust of the Nobility.
These, and an infinite number of others like to them, were not right Sanctions,
but such as have produced unspeakable mischiefs and calamitys. They were not
therefore Laws: the name of Justice is abusively attributed to them: Those that
govern by them cannot be the Ministers of God: and the Apostle commanding our
obedience to the Minister of God for our good, commands us not to be obedient
to the Minister of the Devil to our hurt; for we cannot serve two Masters.

SECT. XI. That which is not just, is not Law; and that which is not Law, ought
not to be obeyed.
OUR Author having for a long time pretended Conscience, now pulls off his
Mask, and plainly tells us, that it is not on account of Conscience, but for
fear of punishment or in hope of reward, that Laws are to be obeyed. That
familiar distinction of the Schoolmen, says he, whereby they subject Kings to
the directive, but not to the coactive Power of the Law, is a confession, that
Kings are not bound by the positive Laws of any Nation, since the compulsory
Power of Laws is that which properly makes Laws to be Laws. Not troubling my
self with this distinction of the Schoolmen, nor acknowledging any truth to be
in it, or that they are competent Judges of such matters, I say, that if it be
true, our Author's conclusion is altogether false; for the directive Power of
the Law, which is certain, and grounded upon the inherent good and rectitude
that is in it, is that alone which has a power over the Conscience, whereas the
coercive is merely contingent; and the most just powers commanding the most
just things, have so osten fallen under the violence of the most unjust men
commanding the most execrable villanys, that if they were therefore to be
obeyed, the Consciences of men must be regulated by the success of a Battle or
Conspiracy, than which nothing can be affirmed more impious and absurd. By this
rule David was not to be obeyed, when by the wickedness of his Son he was
driven from Jerusalem, and deprived of all coercive Power; and the
conscientious obedience that had bin due to him was transferred to Absalom, who
sought his life. And in St. Paul's time, it was not from him who was guided
only by the Spirit of God, and had no manner of coercive Power, that Christians
were to learn their duty, but from Caligula, Claudius, and Nero, who had that
Power well established by the mercenary Legions. If this were so, the
Governments of the World might be justly called Magna Latrocinia; and men
laying aside all considerations of Reason or Justice, ought only to follow
those who can inflict the greatest Punishments, or give the greatest Rewards.
But since the reception of such opinions would be the extirpation of all that
can be called good, we must look for another rule of our obedience, and shall
find that to be the Law, which being, as I said before, Sanctio recta, must be
founded upon that eternal Principle of Reason and Truth, from whence the rule
of Justice which is sacred and pure ought to be deduced, and not from the
depraved will of man, which fluctuating according to the different Interests,
Humors and Passions that at several times reign in several Nations, one day
abrogates what had bin enacted the other. The Sanction therefore that deserves
the name of a Law, which derives not its excellency from Antiquity, or from the
dignity of the Legislators, but from an intrinsic equity and justice, ought to
be made in pursuance of that universal Reason to which all Nations at all times
owe an equal veneration and obedience. By this we may know whether he who has
the Power dos justice or not: Whether he be the Minister of God to our good, a
protector of good, and a terror to ill men; or the Minister of the Devil to our
hurt, by encouraging all manner of evil, and endeavoring by vice and
corruption to make the people worse that they may be miserable, and miserable
that they may be worse. I dare not say I shall never fear such a man if he be
armed with power: But I am sure I shall never esteem him to be the Minister of
God, and shall think I do ill if I fear him. If he has therefore a coercive
Power over me, it is through my weakness; for Qui cogi potest nescit mori.
he that will suffer himself to be compelled, knows not how to die. If therefore
he who dos not follow the directive Power of the Law, be not the Minister of
God, he is not a King, at least not such a King as the Apostle commands us to
obey: And if that Sanction which is not just be not a Law, and can have no
obligation upon us, by what Power soever it be established, it may well fall
out, that the Magistrate who will not follow the directive Power of the Law,
may fall under the coercive; and then the fear is turned upon him, with this
aggravation, that it is not only actual, but just. This was the case of Nero;
the coercive Power was no longer in him, but against him. He that was forced to
fly and to hide himself, that was abandoned by all men, and condemned to die
More Majorum. Sueton.
according to ancient Custom, did, as I suppose, fear, and was no way to be
feared. The like may be said of Amaziah King of Judah, when he fled to Lachish;
of Nabuchodonozor, when he was driven from the society of men; and of many
Emperors and Kings of the greatest Nations in the world, who have bin so
utterly deprived of all Power, that they have bin imprisoned, deposed, confined
to Monasterys, killed, drawn through the Streets, cut in pieces, thrown into
Rivers, and indeed suffered all that could be suffered by the vilest Slaves.

If any man say these things ought not to have bin done, an answer may be given
in a proper place; tho 'twere enough to say, that the Justice of the world is
not to be overthrown by a mere Assertion without proof: but that is nothing to
the present Question. For if it was ill done to drive Nero to despair, or to
throw Vitellius into the common Shore, it was not because they were the
Ministers of God; for their Lives were no way conformable to the character
which the Apostle gives of those who deserve that Sacred Name. If those only
are to be feared who have the Power, there was a time when they were not to be
feared, for they had none; and if such Princes are not obliged by the Law as
are not under the coercive Power, it gave no exemption to those, for they fell
under it: and as we know not what will befall others who walk in their steps
till they are dead, we cannot till then know whether they are free from it or
not.

SECT. XII. The Right and Power of a Magistrate depends upon his Institution,
not upon his Name.
IT IS usual with Impostors to obtrude their deceits upon men, by putting false
names upon things, by which they may perplex men's minds, and from thence deduce
false Conclusions. But the points above*mention'd being settled, it imports
little whether the Governors to whom Peter enjoins obedience, were only Kings,
and such as are employed by them, or all such Magistrates as are the Ministers
of God; for he informs us of their Works that we may know them, and accordingly
yield obedience to them. This is that therefore which distinguishes the
Magistrate to whom obedience is due, from him to whom none is due, and not the
name that he either assumes, or others put upon him. But if there be any virtue
in the word King, and that the admirable Prerogatives, of which our Author
dreams, were annexed to that Name, they could not be applied to the Roman
Emperors, nor their substituted Officers, for they had it not. It Is true, Mark
Anthony, in a drunken fit, at the celebration of the impure Lupercalia, did
offer a Diadem to Julius Caesar, which some flatterers pressed him to accept, (as
our great Lawyers did Cromwell) but he durst not think of putting it upon his
Head. Caligula's affectation of that title, and the ensigns of Royalty he wore,
were taken for the most evident marks of his madness: and tho the greatest and
bravest of their men had fallen by the Wars or Proscriptions; tho the best part
of the Senate had perished in Thessaly; tho the great City was exhausted, and
Italy brought to desolation, yet they were not reduced so low as to endure a
King. Piso was sufficiently addicted to Tiberius, yet he could not suffer that
Germanicus should be treated as the Son of a King; Principis Romani non
Parthorum regis silio has epulas dari. And whoever understands the Latin
Tongue, and the History of those times, will easily perceive that the word
Princeps signified no more than a principal or eminent man, as has bin already
proved: and the words of Piso could have no other meaning, than that the Son of
a Roman ought not to be distinguished from others, as the Sons of the Parthian
Kings were. This is verified by his Letter to Tiberius under the name of
Friend, and the answer of Tiberius promising to him Quod amicus amico praestare
potest. Tacit.
whatsoever one friend could do for another. Here was no mention of Majesty or
Sovereign Lord, nor the base subscriptions of Servant, Subject, or Creature.
And I fear, that as the last of those words was introduced amongst us by our
Bishops, the rest of them had bin also invented by such Christians as were too
much addicted to the Asiatick Slavery. However, the name of King was never
solemnly assumed by, nor conferred upon those Emperors, and could have conferred
no right, if it had. They exercised as they pleased, or as they durst, the
power that had bin gained by violence or fraud. The exorbitances they
committed, could not have bin justified by a Title, any more than those of a
Pyrat who should take the same. It was no otherwise given to 'em than by way of
assimilation, when they were guilty of the greatest Crimes: and Tacitus
describing the detestable Lust of Annal. l. 6.
Tiberius, says, Quibus adeo indomitis exarserat, ut more Regio pubem ingenuam
stupris pollueret; nec formam tantum and decora corporis, sed in his modestam
pueritiam, in aliis majorum imagines, incitamentum cupiditatis habebat. He also
informs us that Nero took his time to put Bareas Soranus to death, who was one
of the most virtuous men of that age, when Tiridates King of Armenia was at
Rome; Ut magnitudinem Imperatoriam caede insignium virorum quasi Regio facinore
ostentaret. An. ^. 16.
That he might show the Imperial Grandeur by the slaughter of the most
illustrious men, which he accounted a Royal Action. I leave it to the judgment
of all wise men, whether it be probable that the Apostles should distinguish
such as these from other Magistrates; and dignify those only with the Title of
God's Ministers, who distinguished themselves by such ways; or that the
succeeding Emperors should be ennobled with the same Prerogative, who had no
other Title to the name than by resembling those that had it in such things as
these. If this be too absurd and abominable to enter into the heart of a man,
it must be concluded, that their intention was only to divert the poor People
to whom they preached, from involving themselves in the care of Civil matters,
to which they had no call. And the Counsel would have bin good (as things stood
with them) if they had bin under the power of a Pyrat, or any other villain
substituted by him.

But tho the Apostles had looked upon the Officers set over the Provinces
belonging to the Roman Empire, as sent by Kings, I desire to know whether it
can be imagined, that they could think the subordinate Governors to be sent by
Kings, in the Countries that had no Kings; or that obedience became due to the
Magistrates in Greece, Italy, or other Provinces under the jurisdiction of Rome,
only after they had Emperors, and that none was due to them before? The Germans
had then no King: The brave Arminius had bin lately killed for aiming at a
Crown. When he had blemished all his Virtues by that attempt, they forgot his
former Services. They never considered how many Roman Legions he had cut in
pieces, nor how many thousands of their Allies he had destroyed. His Valor was
a crime deserving death, when he sought to make a Prey of his Country, which he
had so bravely defended, and to enslave those who with him had fought for the
public Liberty. But if the Apostles were to be understood to give the name of
God's Ministers only to Kings, and those who are employed by them, and that
obedience is due to no other, a domestic Tyrant had bin their greatest
Benefactor. He had set up the only Government that is authorized by God, and to
which a conscientious obedience is due. Agathocles, Dionysius, Phalaris,
Phaereus, Pisistratus, Nabis, Machanidas, and an infinite number of the most
detestable Villains that the world has ever produced, did confer the same
benefits upon the Countries they enslaved. But if this be equally false,
sottish, absurd, and execrable, all those Epithets belong to our Author and his
Doctrine, for attempting to depress all modest and regular Magistracys, and
endeavoring to corrupt the Scripture to patronize the greatest of Crimes. No
man therefore who dos not delight in error, can think that the Apostle designed
precisely to determine such questions as might arise concerning any one man's
right, or in the least degree to prefer any one form of Government before
another. In acknowledging the Magistrate to be Man's Ordinance, he declares
that Man who makes him to be, may make him to be what he pleases; and tho there
is found more prudence and virtue in one Nation than in another, that
Magistracy which is established in any one ought to be obeyed, till they who
made the establishment think fit to alter it. All therefore whilst they
continue, are to be looked upon with the same respect. Every Nation acting
freely, has an equal right to frame their own Government, and to employ such
Officers as they please. The Authority, Right and Power of these must be
regulated by the judgment, right and power of those who appoint them, without
any relation at all to the name that is given; for that is no way essential to
the thing. The same name is frequently given to those, who differ exceedingly
in right and power; and the same right and power is as often annexed to
Magistracys that differ in name. The same power which had bin in the Roman
Kings, was given to the Consuls; and that which had bin legally in the
Dictators for a time not exceeding six months, was afterward usurped by the
Cesars, and made perpetual. The supreme Power (which some pretend belongs to
all Kings) has bin and is enjoyed in the fullest extent by such as never had
the name; and no Magistracy was ever more restrained than those that had the
name of Kings in Sparta, Arragon, England, Poland, and other places. They
therefore that did thus institute, regulate and restrain, create Magistracys,
and give them names and powers as seemed best to them, could not but have in
themselves the coercive as well as the directive over them: for the regulation
and restriction is coercion; but most of all the institution, by which they
could make them to be or not to be. As to the exterior sorce, it is sometimes on
the side of the Magistrate, and sometimes on that of the People; and as
Magistrates under several names have the same work incumbent upon 'em, and the
same Power to persorm it, the same Duty is to be exacted from them, and
rendered to them: which being distinctly proportioned by the Laws of every
Country, I may conclude, that all Magistratical Power being the Ordinance of
Man in pursuance of the Ordinance of God, receives its being and measure from
the Legislative Power of every Nation. And whether the power be placed simply
in one, a few, or many men; or in one body composed of the three simple
Species; whether the single Person be called King, Duke, Marquess, Emperor,
Sultan, Mogol, or Grand Signor; or the number go under the name of Senate,
Council, Pregadi, Diet, Assembly of Estates and the like, it is the same thing.
The same obedience is equally due to all, whilst according to the Precept of
the Apostle, they do the work of God for our good: and if they depart from it,
no one of them has a better Title than the other to our obedience.

SECT. XIII. Laws were made to direct and instruct Magistrates, and, if they
will not be directed, to restrain them.
I Know not who they are that our Author introduces to say, that the first
invention of Laws was to bridle or moderate the overgreat Power of Kings; and
unless they give some better proof of their judgment in other things, shall
little esteem them. They should have considered, that there are Laws in many
places where there are no Kings; that there were Laws in many before there were
Kings, as in Israel the Law was given three hundred years before they had any;
but most especially, that as no man can be a rightful King except by Law, nor
have any just Power but from the Law, if that Power be found to be overgreat,
the Law that gave it must have bin before that which was to moderate or
restrain it; for that could not be moderated which was not in being. Leaving
therefore our Author to fight with these Adversarys if he please when he finds
them, I shall proceed to examine his own Positions. The truth is, says he, the
Original of Laws was for the keeping of the Multitude in order. Popular Estates
could not subsist at all without Laws, whereas Kingdoms were governed many Ages
without them. The People of Athens, as soon as they gave over Kings, were
forced to give power to Draco first, then to Solon, to make them Laws. If we
will believe him therefore, wheresoever there is a King, or a man who by having
power in his hands is in the place of a King, there is no need of Law. He takes
them all to be so wise, just, and good, that they are Laws to themselves, Leges
viventes. This was certainly verified by the whole succession of the Cesars,
the ten last Kings of Pharamond's Race, all the Successors of Charles the
Great, and others that I am not willing to name; but referring my self to
History, I desire all reasonable men to consider, whether the piety and tender
care that was natural to Caligula, Nero or Domitian, was such a security to the
Nations that lived under them, as without Law to be sufficient for their
preservation: for if the contrary appear to be true, and that their Government
was a perpetual exercise of rage, malice and madness, by which the worst of men
were armed with power to destroy the best, so that the Empire could only be
saved by their destruction, it is most certain, that mankind can never fall into
a condition which stands more in need of Laws to protect the innocent, than
when such Monsters reign who endeavor their extirpation, and are too well
furnished with means to accomplish their detestable designs. Without any
prejudice therefore to the Cause that I defend, I might confess that all
Nations were at the first governed by Kings, and that no Laws were imposed upon
those Kings, till they or the Successors of those who had bin advanced for
their virtues, by falling into vice and corruption, did manifestly discover the
inconveniences of depending upon their will. Besides these, there are also
children, women and fools, that often come to the succession of Kingdoms, whose
weakness and ignorance stands in as great need of support and direction, as the
desperate fury of the others can do of restriction. And if some Nations had bin
so sottish, not to foresee the mischief of leaving them to their will, others,
or the same in succeeding Ages discovering them, could no more be obliged to
continue in so pernicious a folly, than we are to live in that wretched
Barbarity in which the Romans found our Ancestors, when they first entered this
Island.

If any man say, that Filmer dos not speak of Monsters, nor of Children, Women
or Fools, but of wise, just and good Princes: I answer, that if there be a
right inherent in Kings, as Kings, of doing what they please; and in those who
are next in blood, to succeed them and inherit the same, it must belong to all
Kings, and such as upon title of blood would be Kings. And as there is no
family that may not, and dos not often produce such as I mentioned, it must
also be acknowledged in them: and that power which is left to the wise, just
and good, upon a supposition that they will not make an ill use of it, must be
devolved to those who will not or cannot make a good one; but will either
maliciously turn it to the destruction of those they ought to protect, or through
weakness suffer it to fall into the hands of those that govern them, who are
found by experience to be for the most part the worst of all, most apt to use
the basest arts, and to flatter the humors, and foment the vices that are most
prevalent in weak and vicious Princes. Germanicus, Corbulo, Valerius Asiaticus,
Thraseas, Soranus, Helvidius Priscus, Julius Agricola, and other excellent men
lived in the times of Tiberius, Caligula, Claudius and Nero; but the power was
put into the hands of Sejanus, Macro, Tigellinus, and other Villains like to
them: and I wish there were not too many modern examples to show that weak and
vicious Princes will never choose such as shall preserve Nations from the
mischiefs that would ensue upon their own incapacity or malice; but that they
must be imposed upon them by some other power, or Nations be ruined for want of
them. This imposition must be by Law or by Force. But as Laws are made to keep
things in good order without the necessity of having recourse to force, it
would be a dangerous extravagance to arm that Prince with force, which probably
in a short time must be opposed by force; and those who have bin guilty of this
error, as the Kingdoms of the East, and the ancient Roman Empire, where no
provision was made by Law against ill-governing Princes, have found no other
remedy than to kill them, when by extreme sufferings they were driven beyond
patience: and this fell out so often, that few of their Princes were observed
to die by a common death. But since the Empire was transmitted to Germany, and
the Emperors restrained by I aws, that Nation has never bin brought to the
odious extremitys of suffering all manner of Indignitys, or revenging them upon
the heads of Princes. And if the Pope had not disturbed 'em upon the account of
Religion, nor driven their Princes to disturb others, they might have passed
many ages without any civil Dissension, and all their Emperors might have lived
happily, and died peaceably, as most of them have done.

This might be sufficient to my purpose: for if all Princes without
distinction, whether good or bad, wise or foolish, young or old, sober or mad,
cannot be entrusted with an unlimited power; and if the power they have, ought
to be limited by Law, that Nations may not, with danger to themselves, as well
as to the Prince, have recourse to the last remedy, this Law must be given to
all, and the good can be no otherwise distinguished from the bad, and the wise
from the foolish, than by the observation or violation of it. But I may justly
go a step farther, and affirm, that this Law which by restraining the Lusts of
the vicious and foolish, frequently preserves them from the destruction they
would bring upon themselves or people, and sometimes upon both, is an
assistance and direction to the wisest and best; so that they also as well as
the Nations under them are gainers by it. This will appear strange only to
those who know not Quam grave and intolerandum sit cuncta regendi onus. Tacit.
how difficult and insupportable the Government of great Nations is, and how
unable the best man is to bear it. And if it surpass the strength of the best,
it may easily be determined how ordinary men will behave themselves under it,
or what use the worst will make of it. I know there have bin wise and good
Kings; but they had not an absolute Power, nor would have accepted it, tho it
had bin offered: much less can I believe that any of them would have
transmitted such a power to their posterity, when none of them could know any
more than Solomon, whether his Son would be a wise man or a fool. But if the
best might have desired, and had bin able to bear it (tho Moses by his own
confession was not) that could be no reason why it should be given to the worst
and weakest, or those who probably will be so: Since the assurance that it will
not be abused during the life of one man, is nothing to the constitution of a
State which aims at perpetuity: And no man knowing what men will be, especially
if they come to the power by succession, which may properly enough be called by
chance, it is reasonably to be feared they will be bad, and consequently
necessary so to limit their power, that if they prove to be so, the
Commonwealth may not be destroyed, which they were instituted to preserve. The
Law provides for this in leaving to the King a full and ample power of doing as
much good as his heart can wish, and in restraining his power so, that if he
should depart from the duty of his Office, the Nation may not perish. This is a
help to those who are wise and good, by directing them what they are to do,
more certainly than any one man's personal judgment can do; and no prejudice at
all, since no such man did ever complain he was not suffered to do the evil
which he would abhor if it were in his power; and is a most necessary curb to
the fury of bad Princes, preventing them from bringing destruction upon the
people. Men are so subject to vices and passions, that they stand in need of
some restraint in every condition; but most especially when they are in power.
The rage of a private man may be pernicious to one or a few of his Neighbors;
but the fury of an unlimited Prince would drive whole Nations into ruin: And
those very men who have lived modestly when they had little power, have often
proved the most savage of all Monsters, when they thought nothing able to
resist their rage. It Is said of Caligula, that no man ever knew Nec meliorem
servum, nec deteriorem dominum.
a better Servant, nor a worse Master. The want of restraint made him a Beast,
who might have continued to be a Man. And tho I cannot say, that our Law
necessarily admits the next in Blood to the Succession (for the contrary is
proved) yet the facility of our Ancestors, in receiving children, women, or
such men as were not more able than themselves to bear the weight of a Crown,
convinces me fully, that they had so framed our Laws, that even children,
women, or ill men, might either perform as much as was necessarily required of
'em, or be brought to reason if they transgrest, and arrogated to themselves
more than was allowed. For it is not to be imagined, that a company of men
should so far degenerate from their own Nature, which is Reason, to give up
themselves and their Posterity, with all their concernments in the world, to
depend upon the will of a child, a woman, an ill man, or a fool.

If therefore Laws are necessary to popular States, they are no less to
Monarchys; or rather, that is not a State or Government which has them not: and
it is no less impossible for any to subsist without 'em, than for the body of a
man to be, and perform its functions without Nerves or Bones. And if any People
had ever bin so foolish to establish that which they called a Government,
without Laws to support and regulate it, the impossibility of subsisting would
evidence the madness of the Constitution, and ought to deter all others from
following their example.

It Is no less incredible, that those Nations which rejected Kings, did put
themselves into the Power of one man, to prescribe to 'em such Laws as he
pleased. But the instances alleged by our Author are evidently false. The
Athenians were not without Laws when they had Kings: Aegeus was subject to the
Laws, and did nothing of importance without the consent of the People; and
Theseus not being able to please them, died a banished man: Draco and Solon did
not make, but propose Laws, and Plut. vit. Solon.
they were of no force till established by the Authority of the People. The
Spartans dealt in the same manner with Lycurgus; he invented their Laws, but
the People made them: and when the Assembly of all the Citizens had approved
and sworn to observe them till his return from Crete, he resolved rather to die
in a voluntary banishment, than by his return to absolve them from the Oath
they had taken. The Romans also had Laws during the Government of their Kings;
but not finding in 'em that Perfection they desired, the Decemviri were chosen
to frame others, which yet were of no value till they were passed by the People
in the Ingenti hominum consensu propositis december Tabulis Populum ad concionem
convocarunt, and quod bonum, faustum foelixque sit Reipublicae, ipsis,
liberisque eorum esset, ire, and legere propositas jussere. T. Live. l. 3.
Comitia Centuriata; and being so approved, they were established. But this
Sanction, to which every man, whether Magistrate or private Citizen, was
subject, did no way bind the whole body of the People, who still retained in
themselves the Power of changing both the matter and the form of their
Government, as appears by their instituting and abrogating Kings, Consuls,
Dictators, Tribuns with consular Power, and Decemviri, when they thought good
for the Commonwealth. And if they had this Power, I leave our Author to show,
why the like is not in other Nations.

SECT. XIV. Laws are not made by Kings, not because they are busied in greater
matters than doing Justice, but because Nations will be governed by Rule, and
not Arbitrarily.
OUR Author, pursuing the mistakes to which he seems perpetually condemned,
says, that when Kings were either busied in War, or distracted with public
Cares, so that every private man could not have access unto their Persons, to
learn their Wills and Pleasures, then of necessity were Laws invented, that so
every particular Subject might find his Prince's Pleasure. I have often heard
that Governments were established for the obtaining of Justice; and if that be
true, it is hard to imagine what business a supreme Magistrate can have to divert
him from accomplishing the principal end of his Institution. And it is as
commonly said, that this distribution of Justice to a People, is a work
surpassing the strength of any one Exodus 18.
man. Jethro seems to have bin a wise man, and it is probable he thought Moses to
be so also; but he found the work of judging the People to be too heavy for
him, and therefore advised him to leave the judgment of Causes to others who
should be chosen for that purpose; which advice Moses accepted, and God
approved. The governing power was as insupportable to him as the Judicial. He
desired rather to die than to bear so great a burden; and God neither accusing
him of sloth or impatience, gave him seventy Assistants. But if we may believe
our Author, the Powers Judicial and Legislative, that of judging as well as
that of governing, is not too much for any man, woman, or child whatsoever: and
that he stands in no need, either of God's Statutes to direct him, or Man's
Counsel to assist him, unless it be when he is otherwise employed; and his Will
alone is sufficient for all. But what if he be not busied in greater matters,
or distracted with public cares; is every Prince capable of this work? Tho
Moses had not found it too great for him; or it should be granted that a man of
excellent natural Endowments, great Wisdom, Learning, Experience, Industry, and
Integrity might perform it, is it certain that all those who happen to be born
in reigning Familys are so? If Moses had the Law of God before his eyes, and
could repair to God himself for the application or explanation of it; have all
Princes the same Assistance? Do they all speak with God face to face, or can
they do what he did, without the Assistance he had? If all Kings of mature
years are of that perfection, are we assured that none shall die before his Heir
arrive to the same? Or shall he have the same ripeness of Judgment in his
Infancy? If a Child come to a Crown, dos that immediately infuse the most
admirable Endowments and Graces? Have we any promise from Heaven, that Women
shall enjoy the same Prerogatives in those Countries where they are made capable
of the Succession? Or dos that Law which renders them capable, not only defend
them against the frailty of their own Nature, but confer the most sublime
virtues upon them? But who knows not, that no Familys do more frequently
produce weak or ill men, than the greatest? and that which is worse, their
greatness is a snare to them; so that they, who in a low condition might have
passed unregarded, being advanced to the highest, have often appeared to be, or
became the worst of all Beasts; and they who advance them are like to them: For
if the Power be in the Multitude, as our Author is forced to confess (otherwise
the Athenians and Romans could not have given all as he says, nor a part as I
say, to Draco, Solon, or the Decemviri) they must be Beasts also, who should
have given away their Right and Liberty, in hopes of receiving Justice from
such as probably will neither understand nor regard it, or protection from
those who will not be able to help themselves, and expect such Virtue, Wisdom,
and Integrity should be, and for ever remain in the Family they set up, as was
never known to continue in any. If the Power be not conferred upon them, they
have it not; and if they have it not, their want of leisure to do Justice,
cannot have bin the cause for which Laws are made; and they cannot be the
signification of their Will, but are that to which the Prince ows obedience, as
well as the meanest Subject. This is that which Bracton calls esse sub lege,
and says, that Rex in regno superiores habet Deum and Legem. Fortescue says,
The Kings of England cannot change the Laws: and indeed, they are so far from
having any such Power, that the Judges swear to have no regard to the King's
Letters or Commands, but if they receive any, to proceed according to Law, as
if they had not bin. And the breach of this Oath dos not only bring a blemish
upon their Reputation, but exposes them to capital Punishments, as many of them
have found. It Is not therefore the King that makes the Law, but the Law that
makes the King. It gives the rule for Succession, making Kingdoms sometimes
Hereditary, and sometimes Elective, and (more often than either simply)
Hereditary under condition. In some places Males only are capable of
inheriting, in others Females are admitted. Where the Monarchy is regular, as
in Germany, England, etc. the Kings can neither make nor change Laws: They are
under the Law, and the Law is not under them; their Letters or Commands are not
to be regarded: In the administration of Justice, the question is not what
pleases them, but what the Law declares to be right, which must have its
course, whether the King be busy or at leisure, whether he will or not. The
King who never dys, is always present in the supreme Courts, and neither knows
nor regards the pleasure of the man that wears the Crown. But lest by his
Riches and Power he might have some influence upon judicial Proceedings, the
great Charter that recapitulates and acknowledges our ancient inherent
Libertys, obliges him to swear, that he will neither sell, delay, nor deny
Justice to any man, according to the Laws of the Land: which were ridiculous
and absurd, if those Laws were only the signification of his Pleasure, or any
way depended upon his Will. This Charter having bin confirmed by more than
thirty Parliaments, all succeeding Kings are under the obligation of the same
Oath, or must renounce the benefit they receive from our Laws, which if they
do, they will be sound to be equal to every one of us.

Our Author, according to his custom, having laid down a false proposition, gos
about to justify it by misapplying the examples of Draco, Solon, the Decemviri,
and Moses, of whom no one had the Power he attributes to them, and it were
nothing to us if they had. The Athenians and Romans, as was said before, were
so far from resigning the absolute Power without appeal to themselves, that
nothing done by their Magistrates was os any force, till it was enacted by the
People. And the power given to the Decemviri, sine provocatione, was only in
private cases, there being no superior Magistrate then in being, to whom
Appeals could be made. They were vested with the same Power the Kings and
Dictators enjoyed, from whom there lay no Appeal, but to the People, and always
to them; as appears by the case of Horatius in the time of Tullus Hostilius,
that of Marcus Fabius when Papyrius Cursor was Dictator, and of Nenius the
Tribun when Q. Fabius Maximus was in the same Office; all which I have cited
already, and refer to them. There was therefore a reservation of the supreme
Power in the People, notwithstanding the creation of Magistrates without Appeal;
and as it was quietly exercised in making Strangers, or whom they pleased
Kings, restraining the power of Dictators to six months, and that of the
Decemviri to two years; when the last did, contrary to Law, endeavor by force
to continue their Power, the People did by force destroy it and them.

The case of Moses is yet more clear: he was the most humble and gentle of all
men: he never raised his heart above his brethren, and commanded Kings to live
in the same modesty: he never desired the People should depend upon his will:
In giving Laws to them he fulfilled the will of God, not his own; and those
Laws were not the signification of his will, but of the will of God. They were
the production of God's Wisdom and Goodness, not the invention of Man; given to
purify the People, not to advance the glory of their Leader. He was not proud
and insolent, nor pleased with that ostentation of Pomp, to which Fools give
the name of Majesty: and whoever so far exalts the power of a man, to make
Nations depend upon his pleasure, dos not only lay a burden upon him, which
neither Moses nor any other could ever bear, and every wise man will always
abhor; but with an impious fury, endeavors to set up a Government contrary to
the Laws of God, presumes to accuse him of want of wisdom, or goodness to his
own People, and to correct his Errors, which is a work fit to be undertaken by
such as our Author.

From hence, as upon a solid foundation, he proceeds, and making use of King
James's words, infers, that Kings are above the Laws, because he so teaches us.
But he might have remembered, that having affirmed the People could not judge of
the disputes that might happen between them and Kings, because they must not be
judges in their own case, it is absurd to make a King judge of a case so nearly
concerning himself, in the decision of which his own Passions and Interests may
probably lead him into errors. And if it be pretended that I do the same, in
giving the judgment of those matters to the People, the case is utterly
different, both in the nature and consequences. The King's judgment is merely
for himself; and if that were to take place, all the Passions and Vices that
have most power upon men, would concur to corrupt it. He that is set up for the
public good, can have no contest with the whole People whose good he is to
procure, unless he deflect from the end of his Institution, and set up an
Interest of his own in opposition to it. This is in its nature the highest os
all delinquencys; and if such a one may be judge of his own crimes, he is not
only sure to avoid punishment, but to obtain all that he sought by them; and
the worse he is, the more violent will his d^sires be, to get all the power
into his hands, that he may grati^y his lusts, and execute his pernicious
designs. On the other side, in a popular Assembly, no man judges for himself,
otherwise than as his good is comprehended in that of the public: Nothing
hurts him, but what is prejudicial to the Commonwealth: Such amongst them as
may have received private injurys, are so far only considered by others, as
their sufferings may have influence upon the public; if they be few, and the
matters not great, others will not suffer their quiet to be disturbed by them;
if they are many and grievous, the Tyranny thereby appears to be so cruel, that
the Nation cannot subsist, unless it be corrected or suppressed. Corruption of
Judgment proceeds from private Passions, which in these cases never govern: and
tho a zeal for the public good may possibly be misguided, yet till it be so,
it can never be capable of excess. The last Tarquin, and his lewd Son,
exercised their Fury and Lust in the murders of the best men in Rome, and the
rape of Lucretia. Appius Claudius was filled with the like madness. Caligula
and Nero were so well established in the power of committing the worst of
Villanys, that we do not hear of any man that offered to defend himself, or
woman that presumed to refuse them. If they had bin judges in these cases, the
utmost of all Villanys and Mischiefs had bin established by Law: but as long as
the judgment of these matters was in the People, no private or corrupt Passion
could take place. Lucius Brutus, Valerius, Horatius and Virginius, with the
People that followed them, did not by the expulsion of the Kings, or the
suppression of the Decemviri, assume to themselves a power of committing Rapes
and Murders, nor any advantages beyond what their equals might think they
deserved by their virtues, and services to the Commonwealth; nor had they more
credit than others for any other reason, than that they showed themselves most
forward in procuring the public Good, and by their Valor and Conduct best able
to promote it.

Whatsoever happened after the overthrow of their Liberty, belongs not to my
Subject, for there was nothing of popularity in the judgments that were made.
One Tyrant destroyed another; the same Passions and Vices for the most part
reigned in both: The last was often as bad as his Predecessor whom he had
overthrown; and one was sometimes approved by the People for no other reason,
than that it was thought impossible for him to be worse than he who was in
possession of the Power. But if one instance can be of force amongst an
infinite number of various Accidents, the words of Valerius Asiaticus, who, by
wishing he had bin the man that had killed Caligula, did in a moment pacify the
fury of the Soldiers who were looking for those that had done it, show, that as
long as men retain any thing of that Reason which is truly their Nature, they
never fail of judging rightly of Virtue and Vice; whereas violent and ill
Princes have always done the contrary, and even the best do often deflect from
the rules of Justice, as appears not only by the examples of Edward the first
and third, who were brought to confess it, but even those of David and Solomon.

Moreover, to show that the decision of these Controversys cannot belong to any
King, but to the People, we are only to consider, that as Kings and all other
Magistrates, whether supreme or subordinate, are constituted only for the good
of the People, the People only can be fit to judge whether the end be
accomplished. A Physician dos not exercise his Art for himself, but for his
Patients; and when I am, or think I shall be sick, I send for him of whom I
have the best opinion, that he may help me to recover or preserve my health;
but I lay him aside if I find him to be negligent, ignorant or unfaithful: and
it would be ridiculous for him to say, I make my self judge in my own case, for
I only, or such as I shall consult, am fit to be the judge of it. He may be
treacherous, and through corruption or malice endeavor to poison me, or have
other defects that render him unfit to be trusted: but I cannot by any corrupt
passion be led wilfully to do him injustice, and if I mistake, it is only to my
own hurt. The like may be said of Lawyers, Stewards, Pilots, and generally of
all that do not act for themselves, but for those who employ them. And if a
Company going to the Indys, should find that their Pilot was mad, drunk, or
treacherous, they whose lives and goods are concerned, can only be fit to judge,
whether he ought to be trusted or not, since he cannot have a right to destroy
those he was chosen to preserve; and they cannot be thought to judge perversely,
because they have nothing to lead them but an opinion of truth, and cannot err
but to their own prejudice. In the like manner, not only Solon and Draco, but
Romulus, Numa, Hostilius, the Consuls, Dictators and Decemviri, were not
distinguished from others, that it might be well with them, Sed ut bonum,
faelix, faustumque sit Populo Romano; but that the prosperity and happiness of
the People might be procured: which being the thing always intended, it were
absurd to refer the judgment of the performance to him who is suspected of a
design to overthrow it, and whose passions, interests, and vices, if he has
any, lead him that way. If King James said any thing contrary to this, he might
be answered with Speech in Star Chamber, 1616.
some of his own words; I was, says he, sworn to maintain the Laws of the Land,
and therefore had bin perjured if I had broken them. It may also be presumed,
he had not forgotten what his Master Buchanan had taught Hist. Scot.
in the Books he wrote chiefly for his Instruction, that the violation of the
Laws of Scotland could not have bin so fatal to most of his Predecessors, De
Jure Reg. apud Scot.
Kings of that Country (nor as he himself had made them to his Mother) if Kings
as Kings were above them.

SECT. XV. A general presumption that Kings will govern well, is not a
sufficient security to the People.
BUT, says our Author, yet will they rule their Subjects by the Law; and a King
governing in a settled Kingdom, leaves to be a King, and degenerates into a
Tyrant, so soon as he ceases to rule according unto his Laws: Yet where he sees
them rigorous or doubtful, he may mitigate or interpret. This is therefore an
effect of their goodness; they are above Laws, but will rule by Law, we have
Filmer's word for it. But I know not how Nations can be assured their Princes
will always be so good: Goodness is always accompanied with Wisdom, and I do
not find those admirable qualitys to be generally inherent or entailed upon
supreme Magistrates. They do not seem to be all alike, and we have not hitherto
found them all to live in the same Spirit and Principle. I can see no
resemblance between Moses and Caligula, Joshua and Claudius, Gideon and Nero,
Samson and Vitellius, Samuel and Otho, David and Domitian; nor indeed between
the best of these and their own Children. If the Sons of Moses and Joshua had
bin like to them in wisdom, valor and integrity, it is probable they had bin
chosen to succeed them; if they were not, the like is less to be presumed of
others. No man has yet observed the Moderation of Gideon to have bin in
Abimelech; the Piety of Eli in Hophni and Phineas; the Purity and Integrity of
Samuel in Joel and Abiah, nor the Wisdom of Solomon in Rehoboam. And if there
was so vast a difference between them and their Children, who doubtless were
instructed by those excellent men in the ways of Wisdom and Justice, as well by
Precept as Example, were it not madness to be confident, that they who have
neither precept nor good example to guide them, but on the contrary are
educated in an utter ignorance or abhorrence of all virtue, will always be just
and good; or to put the whole power into the hands of every man, woman, or
child that shall be born in governing Familys, upon a supposition, that a thing
will happen which never did; or that the weakest and worst will perform all
that can be hoped, and was seldom accomplished by the wisest and best, exposing
whole Nations to be destroyed without remedy, if they do it not? And if this be
madness in all extremity, it is to be presumed that Nations never intended any
such thing, unless our Author prove that all Nations have bin mad from the
beginning, and must always continue to be so. To cure this, he says, They
degenerate into Tyrants; and if he meant as he speaks, it would be enough. For
a King cannot degenerate into a Tyrant by departing from that Law which is only
the product of his own will. But if he do degenerate, it must be by departing
from that which dos not depend upon his will, and is a rule prescribed by a
power that is above him. This indeed is the Doctrine of Bracton, who having said
that the Power of the King is the Power of the Law, because the Law makes him
King, adds, Quia si faciat injuriam, definit esse Rex, and degenerat in
tyrannum, and fit vicarius Diaboli. Bract.
That if he do injustice, he ceases to be King, degenerates into a Tyrant, and
becomes the Vicegerent of the Devil. But I hope this must be understood with
temperament, and a due consideration of human frailty, so as to mean only those
injurys that are extreme; for otherwise he would terribly shake all the Crowns
of the World.

But lest our Author should be thought once in his life to have dealt
sincerely, and spoken truth, the next lines show the fraud of his last
Assertion, by giving to the Prince a power of mitigating or interpreting the
Laws that he sees to be rigorous or doubtful. But as he cannot degenerate into
a Tyrant by departing from the Law which proceeds from his own will, so he
cannot mitigate or interpret that which proceeds from a superior Power, unless
the right of mitigating or interpreting be conferred upon him by the same. For
as all wise men confess that Cujus est instituere, ejus est abrogare.
none can abrogate but those who may institute, and that all mitigation and
interpretation varying from the true sense is an alteration, that alteration is
an abrogation; for Quicquid mutatut dissolvitur, interit ergo.
whatsoever is changed is dissolved, and therefore the power of mitigating is
inseparable from that of instituting. This is sufficiently evidenced by Henry
the Eighth's Answer to the Speech made to him by the Speaker of the House of
Commons 1545. in which he, tho one of the most violent Princes we ever had,
confesses the Parliament to be the Lawmakers, and that an obligation lay upon
him rightly to use the power with which he was entrusted. The right therefore
of altering being inseparable from that of making Laws, the one being in the
Parliament, the other must be so also. Fortescue says plainly, the King cannot
change any Law; Magna Charta casts all upon Leges terrae and Consuetudines
Angliae.
the Laws of the Land and Customs of England: But to say that the King can by
his will make that to be a Custom, or an ancient Law, which is not, or that not
to be so, which is, is most absurd. He must therefore take the Laws and Customs
as he finds them, and can neither detract from, nor add any thing to them. The
ways are prescribed as well as the end. Judgments are given by equals, per
Pares. The Judges who may be assisting to those, are sworn to proceed according
to Law, and not to regard the King's Letters or Commands. The doubtful Cases
are reserved, and to be referred to the Parliament, as in the Statute of 35 Edw.
3 d concerning Treasons, but never to the King. The Law intending that these
Parliaments should be annual, and leaving to the King a power of calling them
more often if occasion require, takes away all pretense of a necessity that
there should be any other power to interpret or mitigate Laws. For it is not to
be imagined that there should be such a pestilent evil in any ancient Law,
Custom, or later Act of Parliament, which being on the sudden discovered, may
not without any great prejudice continue for forty days, till a Parliament may
be called; whereas the force and essence of all Laws would be subverted, if
under color of mitigating and interpreting, the power of altering were allowed
to Kings, who often want the inclination, and for the most part the capacity of
doing it rightly. It Is not therefore upon the uncertain will or understanding
of a Prince, that the safety of a Nation ought to depend. He is sometimes a
child, and sometimes overburden'd with years. Some are weak, negligent,
slothful, foolish or vicious: others, who may have something of rectitude in
their intentions, and naturally are not incapable of doing well, are drawn out
of the right way by the subtilty of ill men who gain credit with them. That
rule must always be uncertain, and subject to be distorted, which depends upon
the fancy of a man. He always fluctuates, and every passion that arises in his
mind, or is infused by others, disorders him. The good of a People ought to be
established upon a more solid foundation. For this reason the Law is
established, which no passion can disturb. It Is void of desire and fear, lust
and anger. It Is Men's sine affectu, written Reason, retaining some measure of
the Divine Perfection. It dos not enjoin that which pleases a weak, frail man,
but without any regard to persons commands that which is good, and punishes
evil in all, whether rich or poor, high or low. It Is deaf, inexorable,
inflexible.

By this means every man knows when he is safe or in danger, because he knows
whether he has done good or evil. But if all depended upon the will of a man,
the worst would be often the most safe, and the best in the greatest hazard:
Slaves would be often advanced, the good and the brave scorned and neglected.
The most generous Nations have above all things sought to avoid this evil: and
the virtue, wisdom and generosity of each may be discerned by the right fixing
of the rule that must be the guide of every man's life, and so constituting
their Magistracy that it may be duly observed. Such as have attained to this
perfection, have always flourished in virtue and happiness: They are, as
Aristotle says, governed by God, rather than by men, whilst those who subjected
themselves to the will of a man were governed by a beast.

This being so, our Author's next clause, That tho a King do frame all his
Actions to be according unto Law, yet he is not bound thereunto, but as his
good will, and for good example, or so far forth as the general Law for the
safety of the Commonwealth does naturally bind him, is wholly impertinent. For
if the King who governs not according to Law, degenerates into a Tyrant, he is
obliged to frame his actions according to Law, or not to be a King; for a
Tyrant is none, but as contrary to him, as the worst of men is to the best. But
if these obligations were untied, we may easily guess what security our
Author's words can be to us, that the King of his own good will, and for a good
example, will frame his actions according to the Laws; when experience
instructs us, that notwithstanding the strictest Laws, and most exquisite
Constitutions, that men of the best abilitys in the world could ever invent to
restrain the irregular appetites of those in power, with the dreadful examples
of vengeance taken against such as would not be restrained, they have
frequently broken out; and the most powerful have for the most part no
otherwise distinguished themselves from the rest of men, than by the enormity
of their vices, and being the most forward in leading others to all manner of
crimes by their example.

SECT. XVI. The observation of the Laws of Nature is absurdly expected from
Tyrants, who set themselves up against all Laws: and he that subjects Kings to
no other Law than what is common to Tyrants, destroys their being.
OUR Author's last clause, acknowledging Kings to be bound by a general Law to
provide for the safety of the People, would be sufficient for my purpose if it
were sincere; for municipal Laws do only show how that should be performed: and
if the King by departing from that rule degenerates, as he says, into a Tyrant,
it is easily determined what ought then to be done by the People. But his whole
Book being a heap of contradictions and frauds, we can rely upon nothing that
he says: And his following words, which under the same Law comprehend both
Kings and Tyrants, show that he intends Kings should be no otherwise obliged
than Tyrants, which is, not at all. By this means, says he, are all Kings, even
Tyrants and Conquerors, bound to preserve the Lands, Goods, Libertys and Lives
of all their Subjects, not by any municipal Law of the Land, so much as by the
natural Law of a Father, which obliges them to ratify the Acts of their
Forefathers and Predecessors in things necessary for the public good of their
Subjects. If he be therefore in the right, Tyrants and Conquerors are Kings and
Fathers. The words that have bin always thought to comprehend the most
irreconcilable contrariety, the one expressing the most tender love and care,
evidently testified by the greatest obligations conferred upon those who are
under it; the other the utmost of all injurys that can be offered to men,
signify the same thing: There is no difference between a Magistrate who is what
he is by Law, and a public Enemy, who by force or fraud sets himself up
against all Law: And what he said before, that Kings degenerated into Tyrants,
signifys nothing, for Tyrants also are Kings.

His next words are no less incomprehensible; for neither King nor Tyrant can
be obliged to preserve the Lands, Goods and Libertys of their Subjects if they
have none. But as Liberty consists only in being subject to no man's will, and
nothing denotes a Slave but a dependence upon the will of another; if there be
no other Law in a Kingdom than the will of a Prince, there is no such thing as
Liberty. Property also is an appendage to Liberty; and it is as impossible for a
man to have a right to Lands or Goods, if he has no Liberty, and enjoys his
Life only at the pleasure of another, as it is to enjoy either when he is
deprived of 'em. He therefore who says Kings and Tyrants are bound to preserve
their Subjects Lands, Libertys, Goods and Lives, and yet lays for a foundation,
that Laws are no more than the significations of their Pleasure, seeks to
delude the world with words which signify nothing.

The vanity of these Whimsys will farther appear, if it be considered, that as
Kings are Kings by Law, and Tyrants are Tyrants by overthrowing the Law, they
are most absurdly joined together; and it is not more ridiculous to set him
above the Law, who is what he is by the Law, than to expect the observation of
the Laws that enjoin the preservation of the Lands, Libertys, Goods and Lives
of the People, from one who by fraud or violence makes himself master of all,
that he may be restrained by no Law, and is what he is by subverting all Law.

Besides, if the safety of the People be the supreme Law, and this safety
extend to, and consist in the preservation of their Libertys, Goods, Lands and
Lives, that Law must necessarily be the root and beginning, as well as the end
and limit of all magistratical Power, and all Laws must be subservient and
subordinate to it. The question will not then be what pleases the King, but
what is good for the People; not what conduces to his profit or glory, but what
best secures the Libertys he is bound to preserve: he dos not therefore reign
for himself, but for the People; he is not the Master, but the Servant of the
Commonwealth; and the utmost extent of his Prerogative is to be able to do more
good than any private Man. If this be his work and duty, it is easily seen
whether he is to judge of his own performance, or they by whom and for whom he
reigns; and whether in order to this he be to give Laws, or to receive them.
It Is ordinarily said in France, Il faut que chacun soit servi a sa mode; Every
man's business must be done according to his own mind: and if this be true in
particular Persons, it is more plainly so in whole Nations. Many eyes see more
than one: the collected wisdom of a People much surpasses that of a single
Person; and tho he should truly seek that which is best, it is not probable he
would so easily find it, as the body of a Nation, or the principal men chosen
to represent the whole. This may be said with justice of the best and wisest
Princes that ever were; but another Language is to be used when we speak of
those who may succeed, and who very often, through the defects of Age, Person, or
Sex, are neither fit to judge of other men's affairs, nor of their own; and are
so far from being capable of the highest Concernments relating to the safety of
whole Nations, that the most trivial cannot reasonably be referred to them.

There are few men (except such as Filmer, who by bidding defiance to the Laws
of God and Man, seems to declare war against both) whom I would not trust to
determine whether a People, that can never fall into Nonage or Dotage, and can
never fail of having men of Wisdom and Virtue amongst 'em, be not more fit to
judge in their own Persons, or by Representatives, what conduces to their own
good, than one who at a venture may be born in a certain Family, and who,
besides his own Infirmitys, Passions, Vices, or Interests, is continually
surrounded by such as endeavor to divert him from the ways of Truth and
Justice. And if no reasonable man dare prefer the latter before the former, we
must rely upon the Laws made by our Forefathers, and interpreted by the Nation,
and not upon the will of a man.

It Is in vain to say that a wise and good Council may supply the defects, or
correct the Vices of a young, foolish, or ill disposed King. For Filmer denis
that a King, whatever he be without exception, (for he attributes profound
wisdom to all) is obliged to follow the advice of his Council; and even he
himself would hardly have had the impudence to say, That good Counsel given to
a foolish or wicked Prince were of any value, unless he were obliged to follow
it. This Council must be chosen by him, or imposed upon him: if it be imposed
upon him, it must be by a Power that is above him, which he says cannot be. If
chosen by one who is weak, foolish, or wicked, it can never be good; because
such virtue and wisdom is required to discern and choose a few good and wise
men, from a multitude of foolish and bad, as he has not. And it will generally
fall out, that he will take for his Counselors rather those he believes to be
addicted to his Person or Interests, than such as are fitly qualified to
perform the duty of their places. But if he should by chance, or contrary to
his intentions, make choice of some good and wise men, the matter would not be
much mended, for they will certainly differ in opinion from the worst. And tho
the Prince should intend well, of which there is no assurance, nor any reason
to put so great a power into his hands if there be none; it is almost impossible
for him to avoid the snares that will be laid to seduce him. I know not how to
put a better face upon this matter: for if I examine rather what is probable
than possible, foolish or ill Princes will never choose such as are wise and
good; but favoring those who are most like to themselves, will prefer such as
second their vices, humors, and personal Interests, and by so doing will rather
fortify and rivet the evils that are brought upon the Nation through their
defects, than cure them. This was evident in Rehoboam: he had good Counsel, but
he would not hearken to it. We know too many of the same sort; and tho it were
not impossible (as Machiavelli says it is) for a weak Prince to receive any
benefit from a good Council, we may certainly conclude, that a People can never
expect any good from a Council chosen by one who is weak or vicious.

If a Council be imposed upon him, and he be obliged to follow their advice, it
must be imposed by a Power that is above him; his Will therefore is not a Law,
but must be regulated by the Law: the Monarchy is not above the Law; and if we
will believe our Author, it is no Monarchy, because the Monarch has not his
will, and perhaps he says true. For if that be an Aristocracy, where those that
are, or are reputed to be the best do govern, then that is certainly a mixed
State, in which the will of one man dos not prevail. But if Princes are not
obliged by the Law, all that is founded upon that supposition falls to the
ground: They will always follow their own humors, or the suggestions of those
who second them. Tiberius hearkened to none but Chaldeans, or the ministers of
his impuritys and crueltys: Claudius was governed by Slaves, and the profligate
Strumpets his Wives. There were many wise and good men in the Senate during the
reigns of Caligula, Nero, and Domitian; but instead of following their Counsel,
they endeavored to destroy them all, lest they should head the People against
them; and such Princes as resemble them will always follow the like courses.

If I often repeat these hateful names, it is not for want of fresher examples
of the same nature; but I choose such as Mankind has universally condemned,
against whom I can have no other cause of hatred than what is common to all
those who have any love to virtue, and which can have no other relation to the
Controversys of later Ages, than what may flow from the similitude of their
causes, rather than such as are too well known to us, and which every man,
according to the measure of his experience, may call to mind in reading these.
I may also add, that as nothing is to be received as a general Maxim, which is
not generally true, I need no more to overthrow such as Filmer proposes, than
to prove how frequently they have bin found false, and what desperate mischiefs
have bin brought upon the World as often as they have bin practiced, and
excessive Powers put into the hands of such as had neither inclination nor
ability to make a good use of them: And therefore,

1. If the safety of Nations be the end for which Governments are instituted,
such as take upon them to govern, by what Title soever, are by the Law of
Nature bound to procure it; and in order to this, to preserve the Lives, Lands,
Libertys and Goods of every one of their Subjects: and he that upon any title
whatsoever pretends, assumes, or exercises a power of disposing of them
according to his own will, violates the Laws of Nature in the highest degree.

2. If all Princes are obliged by the Law of Nature to preserve the Lands,
Goods, Lives and Libertys of their Subjects, those Subjects have by the Law of
Nature a right to their Libertys, Lands, Goods, etc. and cannot depend upon the
will of any man, for that dependence destroys Liberty, etc.

3. Ill men will not, and weak men cannot provide for the safety of the People;
nay the work is of such extreme difficulty, that the greatest and wisest men
that have bin in the world are not able by themselves to perform it; and the
assistance of Counsel is of no use, unless Princes are obliged to follow it.
There must be therefore a power in every State to restrain the ill, and to
instruct weak Princes by obliging them to follow the Counsels given, else the
ends of Government cannot be accomplished, nor the rights of Nations preserved.

All this being no more than what is said by our Author, or necessarily to be
deduced from his Propositions, one would think he were become as good a
Commonwealths-man as Cato; but the washed Swine will return to the Mire. He
overthrows all by a preposterous conjunction of the rights of Kings which are
just and by Law, with those of Tyrants which are utterly against Law; and gives
the sacred and gentle name of Father to those Beasts, who by their actions
declare themselves enemies not only to all Law and Justice, but to Mankind that
cannot subsist without them. This requires no other proof, than to examine
whether Attila or Tamerlan did well deserve to be called Fathers of the
Countries they destroyed. The first of these was usually called the scourge of
God, and he gloried in the Name. The other being reproved for the detestable
crueltys he ^.
exercised, made answer, You speak to me as to a man; I am not a man, but the
scourge of God and plague of Mankind. This is certainly sweet and gentle
Language, savouring much of a fatherly tenderness: There is no doubt that those
who use it will provide for the safety of the Nations under them, and the
preservation of the Laws of Nature is rightly referred to them; and it is also
very probable, that they who come to burn the Countries, and destroy the Nations
that fall under their power, should make it their business to preserve them,
and look upon the former Governors as their Fathers, whose Acts they are
obliged to confirm, tho they seldom attain to the Dominion by any other means
than the slaughter of them and their Familys.

But if the enmity be not against the Nation, and the cause of the war be only
for Dominion against the ruling Person or Family, as that of Baasha against the
house of Jeroboam, of Zimri against that of Baasha, of Omri against Zimri, and
of Jehu against Joram, the prosecution of it is a strange way of becoming the
Son of the Person destroyed. And Filmer alone is subtle enough to discover,
that Jehu by extinguishing the house of Ahab, drew an obligation upon himself,
of looking on him as his Father, and confirming his acts. If this be true,
Moses was obliged to confirm the acts of the Kings of the Amalekites, Moabites
and Amorites that he destroyed; the same duty lay upon Joshua, in relation to
the Canaanites: but it is not so easily decided, to which of them he did owe
that deference; for the same could not be due to all, and it is hard to believe,
that by killing above thirty Kings, he should purchase to himself so many
Fathers; and the like may be said of diverse others.

Moreover, there is a sort of Tyrant who has no Father, as Agathocles,
Dionysius, Caesar, and generally all those who subvert the Libertys of their own
Country. And if they stood obliged to look upon the former Magistrates as their
Predecessors, and to confirm their Acts, the first should have bin to give
impunity and reward to any that would kill them, it having bin a fundamental
Maxim in those States, Uni^uique licere Tyrannum occidere.
That any man might kill a Tyrant.

This being in all respects ridiculous and absurd, it is evident that our
Author, who by proposing such a false security to Nations for their Libertys,
endeavors to betray them, is not less treacherous to Kings, when under a
pretense of defending their Rights, he makes them to be the same with those of
Tyrants, who are known to have none (and are Tyrants because they have none)
and gives no other hopes to Nations of being preserved by the Kings they set up
for that end, than what upon the same account may be expected from Tyrants,
whom all wise men have ever abhorred, and affirmed to have bin produced In
generis humani exitium natos.
to bring destruction upon the World, and whose Lives have verified the
Sentence.

This is truly to depose and abolish Kings, by abolishing that by which and for
which they are so. The greatness of their Power, Riches, State, and the
pleasures that accompany them cannot but create enemies. Some will envy that
which is accounted Happiness; others may dislike the use they make of their
Power: some may be unjustly exasperated by the best of their Actions when they
find themselves incommoded by them; others may be too severe judges of slight
miscarriages. These things may reasonably temper the joys of those who delight
most in the advantages of Crowns. But the worst and most dangerous of all their
enemies are these accursed Sycophants, who, by making those that ought to be the
best of men, like to the worst, destroy their Being; and by persuading the
world they aim at the same things, and are bound to no other rule than is
common to all Tyrants, give a fair pretense to ill men to say, They are all of
one kind. And if this should be received for truth, even they who think the
miscarriages of their Governors may be easily redrest, and desire no more,
would be the most fierce in procuring the destruction of that which is naught
in Principle, and cannot be corrected.

SECT. XVII. Kings cannot be the Interpreters of the Oaths they take.
OUR Author's Book is so full of absurditys and contradictions, that it would
be a rope of Sand, if a continued series of frauds did not, like a string of
Poisons running through the whole, give it some consistence with it self, and show
it to be the work of one and the same hand. After having endeavored to subvert
the Laws of God, Nature and Nations, most especially our own, by abusing the
Scriptures, falsely alleging the Authority of many good Writers, and seeking to
obtrude upon Mankind a universal Law, that would take from every Nation the
right of constituting such Governments within themselves as seem most
convenient for them, and giving rules for the administration of such as they
had established, he gives us a full view of his Religion and Morals, by
destroying the force of the Oath taken by our Kings at their Coronation.
Others, says he, affirm, that although Laws of themselves do not bind Kings, yet
the Oaths of Kings at their Coronation ty them to keep all the Laws of their
Kingdoms. How far this is true, let us but examine the Oath of the Kings of
England at their Coronation, the words whereof are these. Art thou pleased to
cause to be administered in all thy judgments, indifferent and upright Justice,
and to use discretion with Mercy and Verity? Art thou pleased that our upright
Laws and Customs be observed, and do thou promise that those shall be
protected and maintained by thee? etc. To which the King answers in the
Affirmative, being first demanded by the Archbishop of Canterbury, Pleases it
you to confirm and observe the Laws and Customs of the ancient times, granted
from God by just and devout Kings unto the English Nation, by Oath unto the
said People, especially the Laws, Libertys and Customs granted unto the Clergy
and Laity by the famous King Edward? From this he infers, That the King is not
to observe all Laws, but such as are upright, because he finds evil Laws
mentioned in the Oath of Richard the 2d, which he swears to abolish: Now what
Laws are upright and what evil, who shall judge but the King? etc. So that in
effect the King does swear to keep no Laws but such as in his judgment are
upright, etc. And if he did strictly swear to observe all Laws, he could not
without Perjury give his consent to the repealing or abrogating of any Statute
by Act of Parliament, etc. And again, But let it be supposed for Truth, the
Kings do swear to observe all Laws of their Kingdoms; yet no man can think it
reason, that the Kings should be more bound by their voluntary Oaths than
common Persons: Now if a private Person make a Contract, either with Oath or
without Oath, he is no farther bound than the equity and justice of the
Contract tys him; for a man may have relief against an unreasonable and unjust
Promise, if either deceit or error, force or fear induced him thereunto; or if
it be hurtful or grievous in the performance, since the Law in many cases gives
the King a Prerogative above common persons. Lest I should be thought to insist
upon small advantages, I will not oblige any man to show where Filmer found
this Oath, nor observe the faults committed in the Translation; but
notwithstanding his false representation, I find enough for my purpose, and
intend to take it in his own words. But first I shall take leave to remark,
that those who for private interests addict themselves to the personal service
of Princes, tho to the ruin of their Country, find it impossible to persuade
Mankind that Kings may govern as they please, when all men know there are Laws
to direct and restrain them, unless they can make men believe they have their
power from a universal and superior Law; or that Princes can attempt to
dissolve the obligations laid upon them by the Laws, which they so solemnly
swear to observe, without rendering themselves detestable to God and Man, and
subject to the revenging hands of both, unless they can invalidate those Oaths.
Mr. Hobbes I think was the first, who very ingeniously contrived Lib. de Cive*
a compendious way of justifying the most abominable Perjurys, and all the
mischiefs ensuing thereupon, by pretending, that as the King's Oath is made to
the People, the People may absolve him from the obligation; and that the People
having conferred upon him all the Power they had, he can do all that they could:
he can therefore absolve himself, and is actually free, since he is so when he
pleases. This is only false in the minor: for the People not having conferred
upon him all, but only a part of their Power, that of absolving him remains in
themselves, otherwise they would never have obliged him to take the Oath. He
cannot therefore absolve himself. The Pope indeed finds a help for this, and as
Christ's Vicar pretends the power of Absolution to be in him, and exercised it
in absolving K. John. But our Author despairing to impose either of these upon
our Age and Nation, with more impudence and less wit, would enervate all
Coronation-Oaths by subjecting them to the discretion of the taker; whereas all
men have hitherto thought their force to consist in the declared sense of those
who give them. This doctrine is so new, that it surpasses the subtilty of the
Schoolmen, who, as an ingenious Person said of 'em, had minced Oaths so fine,
that a million of 'em, as well as Angels, may stand upon the point of a needle;
and were never yet equaled but by the Jesuits, who have overthrown them by
mental reservations; which is so clearly demonstrated from their books, that it
cannot be denied, but so horrible, that even those of their own Order who have
the least spark of common honesty condemn the practice. And one of them, being
a Gentleman of a good family, told me, he would go the next day and take all
the Oaths that should be offered, if he could satisfy his conscience in using
any manner of equivocation or mental reservation, that he might put any other
sense upon them, than he knew to be intended by those who offered them. And if
our Author's conscience were not more corrupted than that of the Jesuit, who
had lived fisty years under the worst Discipline that I think ever was in the
world, I would ask him seriously, if he truly believe, that the Nobility,
Clergy and Commonalty os England, who have bin always so zealous for their
ancient Laws, and so resolute in defending 'em, did mean no more by the Oaths
they so solemnly imposed, and upon which they laid so much weight, than that
the King should swear to keep 'em, so far only as he should think fit.

But he swears only to observe those that are upright, etc. How can that be
understood otherwise than that those who give the Oath, do declare their Laws
and Customs to be upright and good, and he by taking the Oath affirms them to
be so? Or how can they be more precisely specified than by the ensuing Clause,
Granted from God by just and devout Kings by Oath, especially those os the
samous King Edward? But, says he, by the same Oath Richard the 2d was bound to
abolish those that were evil. I^ any such had ^^ept in ^hro error, or bin
obtruded by malice, the evil being discovered and declared by the Nobility and
Commons who were concerned, he was not to take advantage of them, or by his
refusal to evade the abolition, but to join with his people in annulling them,
according to the general Clause of assenting to those Quas vulgus elegerit.

Magna Charta being only an abridgment of our ancient Laws and Customs, the
King that swears to it, swears to them all; and not being admitted to be the
interpreter of it, or to determine what is good or evil, fit to be observed or
annul'd in it, can have no more power over the rest. This having bin confirmed
by more Parliaments than we have had Kings since that time, the same obligation
must still lie upon them all, as upon John and Henry, in whose time that claim
of right was compiled. The Act was no less solemn than important; and the most
dreadful curses that could be conceived in words, which were denounced against
such as should any way infringe it, by the Clergy in Westminster Hall, in the
presence and with the assent of K. Henry III. many of the principal Nobility,
and all the Estates of the Kingdom, show whether it was referred to the King's
Judgment or not; when it is evident they feared the violation from no other than
himself, and such as he should employ. I confess the Church (as they then
called the Clergy) was fallen into such corruption, that their Arms were not
much to be feared by one who had his conscience clear; but that could not be in
the case of perjury: and our Ancestors could do no better, than to employ the
spiritual sword, reserving to themselves the use of the other in case that
should be despised. Tho the Pope's Excommunications proved sometimes to be but
bruta fulmina, when a just cause was wanting, it may be easily judged what
obedience a Prince could expect from his Subjects, when every man knew he had
by perjury drawn the most heavy curses upon himself. K. John was certainly
wicked, but he durst not break these bonds till he had procured the Pope's
absolution for a cover; and when he had done so, he found himself unsafe under
it, and could not make good what he had promised to the Pope to obtain it, the
Parliament declaring that his grants to the Pope were unjust, illegal, contrary
to his Coronation Oath, and that they would not be held by them. This went so
far in that King's time, that Writs were issued out to men of all conditions to
oblige themselves by oath to keep the great Charter; and if other means sailed,
Er quod ipsum Regem per captionem distringerent and gravarent ad prafata
exequenda.
to compel the King to perform the conditions. It Is expressly said in his
Charter, Et ip^^ Barons cum Communitate totius terra distringent and gravabunt
nos modis omnibus qui^us poterunt, sci^cet per captionem castrorum, terrarum,
pos^e^sionum, and aliis modis quibus potuerint, don^^ emendatum ^uerit secundum
arbitrium cor^m.
"That the Barons and Commonalty of the land shall straiten and compel us by
all means possible, as by seizing our Towns, Lands, and Possessions, or any
other way, till satisfaction be made according to their pleasure." And in the
Charter of his Son Henry, it is, upon the same supposition of not performing the
agreement, said, Licet omnibus de regno nostro contra no^ ^nsurg^re, and omni^
^a^ere qu^ gravamen nostrum re^piciant* a^ s^ nobi^ ^n nul^^ ten^rentur.
"It shall be lawful for all men in our Kingdom to rise up against us, and to
do all things that may be grievous to us, as if they were absolutely free from
any engagements to our person." These words seem to have bin contrived to be so
full and strong propter duplicitatem Regis, which was with too much reason
suspected. And it is not, as I suppose, the language of Slaves and Villains
begging something srom their Lord, but of noble and free men, who knew their
Lord was no more than what they made him, and had nothing but what they gave
him: nor the language of a Lord treating with such as enjoyed their libertys by
his favor, but with those whom he acknowledged to be the Judges of his
performing what had bin stipulated; and equals the agreements made between the
Kings and People of Arragon, which I cited before from the Relations of Antonio
Perez. This is as far as men can go; and the experience of all ages manifests,
that Princes performing their office, and observing these Stipulations, have
lived glorious, happy and beloved: and I can hardly find an example of any who
have notoriously broken these Oaths, and bin adjudg'd to have incurred the
Penaltys, who have not lived miserably, died shamefully, and left an abominable
memory to posterity.

"But, says our Author, Kings cannot be more obliged by voluntary Oaths than
other men, and may be relieved from unjust and unreasonable promises, if they
be induced by deceit, error, force or fear, or the performance be grievous."
Which is to say, that no Oath is of any obligation: for there is none that is
not voluntary or involuntary, and there never was any upon which some such
thing may not be pretended, which would be the same if such as Filmer had the
direction of their consciences who take the Oaths, and of those who are to
exact the performance. This would soon destroy all confidence between King and
People, and not only unhinge the best established Governments, but by a
detestable practice of annihilating the force of Oaths and most solemn
Contracts that can be made by men, overthrow all Societys that subsist by them.
I leave it to all reasonable men to judge how fit a work this would be for the
supreme Magistrate, who is advanced to the highest degree of human glory and
happiness, that he may preserve them; and how that Justice, for the obtaining
of which Governments are constituted, can be administered, if he who is to
exact it from others, dos in his own person utterly subvert it; and what they
deserve, who by such base prevarications would teach 'em to pervert and abolish
the most sacred of all Contracts. A worthy person of our Age was accustomed to
say that Contracts in writing were invented only to bind Villains, who having
no Law, Justice or Truth within themselves, would not keep their words, unless
such testimonys were given as might compel them. But if our Author's Doctrine
were received, no contract would be of more value than a Cobweb. Such as are
not absolutely of a profligate conscience, so far reverence the religion of an
Oath, to think that even those which are most unjustly and violently imposed,
ought to be observed; and Julius Caesar, who I think was not over-scrupulous,
when he was taken by Pirates, and set at liberty upon his word, caused the
Ransom he had promised to be paid to them. We see the like is practiced every
day by Prisoners taken in unjust as well as just Wars: And there is no honest
man that would not abhor a Person, who being taken by the Pirates of Algier
should not pay what he had promised for his Liberty. 'Twere in vain to say they
had no right of exacting, or that the performance was grievous; he must return
to the chains, or pay. And tho the People of Artois, Alsatia, or Flanders, do
perhaps with reason think the King of France has no right to impose Oaths of
Allegiance upon them, no man doubts, that if they choose rather to take those
Oaths, than to suffer what might ensue upon their refusal, they are as much
bound to be faithful to him as his ancient Subjects.

The like may be said of promises extorted by fraud; and no other example is
necessary to prove they are to be performed than that of Joshua made to the
Gibeonites. They were an accursed Nation, which he was commanded to destroy:
They came to him with lies, and by deceit induced him to make a League with
them, which he ought not to have done; but being made, it was to be performed,
and on that account he did not only spare but defend them, and the action was
approved by God. When Saul by a preposterous zeal violated that League, the
Anger of God for that breach of faith could no otherwise be appeased than by
the death of seven of his Children. This case is so full, so precise, and of
such undoubted authority, that I shall not trouble my self with any other. But
if we believe our man of good morals, voluntary Oaths and Promises are of no
more value than those gained by force or deceit, that is to say, none are of
any. For voluntary signifying nothing but free, all human Acts are either free
or not free, that is, from the will of the person, or some impulse from
without. If therefore there be no force in those that are free, nor in those
that are not free, there is none in any.

No better use can be made of any pretension of error, or that the performance
was grievous; for no man ought to be grieved at the performance of his
Contract. David assures us, that a good man performs his agreement tho he lose
by it; and the Lord Chancellor Egerton told a Gentleman, who desired relief
against his own Deed, upon an Allegation that he knew not what he did when he
signed it, that he did not sit to relieve fools.

But tho voluntary Promises or Oaths, when, to use the Lawyers language, there
is not a valuable consideration, were of no obligation; or that men brought by
force, fear or error, into such Contracts as are grievous in the performance,
might be relieved; this would not at all reach the cases of Princes, in the
Contracts made between them and their Subjects, and confirmed by their Oaths,
there being no color of force or fraud, fear or error for them to alledg; nor
any thing to be pretended that can be grievous to perform, otherwise than as it
may be grievous to an ill man not to do the mischiefs he had conceived.

Nations according to their own will frame the Laws by which they resolve to be
governed; and if they do it not wisely, the damage i only to themselves. But
it is hard to find an example of any People that did by force oblige a man to
take upon him the Government of them. Gideon was indeed much pressed by the
Israelites to be their ^^ing; and the Army of Germanicus in a Mutiny more
fiercely urged him to be Emperor; but both desisted when their Offers were
refused. If our Kings have bin more modest, and our Ancestors more pertinacious
in compelling them to accept the Crowns they offered, I shall upon proof of the
matter change my opinion. But till that do appear, I may be pardoned if I think
there was no such thing. William the Norman was not by force brought into
England, but came voluntarily, and desired to be King: The Nobility, Clergy,
and Commons proposed the Conditions upon which they would receive him. These
conditions were to govern according to their ancient Laws, especially those
that had bin granted, or rather collected in the time of the famous King
Edward. Here was neither force nor fraud; i^ he had disliked the terms, he
might have retired as freely as he came. But he did like them; and tho he was
not perhaps so modest, to say with the Addit. Mat. Par.
brave Saxon King Osfa, Ad Libertatis vestrae tuitionem, non meis meriti^, sed
solaliberalitate vestra unanimiter me convocast^s, he accepted the C^own upon
the Conditions offered, and swore upon the Evangelists to observe them. Not
much valuing this, he pretended to govern according to (...) own will; but
finding the People would not endure it, he renewed his Oath upon the same
Evangelists, and the Relics of S. Alban, which he needed not to have done,
but might have departed to his Duchy of Normandy if he had not liked the
conditions, or thought fit to observe them. It Is probable he examined the
contents of Edward's Laws before he Bonas and approbatas antiqu^s Regni Leges,
quas sancti and pii Reges ejus antecessores, and maxim Edvardus statuit,
in^iolabiliter observare.
swore to them, and could not imagine, that a free Nation which never had any
other Kings than such as had bin chosen by themselves for the preservation of
their Liberty, and from whose liberality the best of their Kings acknowledged
the Crowns they wore, did intend to give up their Persons, Libertys and Estates
to him, who was a stranger, most especially when they would not receive him
till he had sworn to the same Laws by which the others had reigned, of which
one was (as appears by the act of the Conventus Pananglicus) that Reges a
Sacerdotibus and senioribus Populi eligantur, The Kings should be elected by
the Clergy and Elders of the People. By these means he was advanced to the
Crown, to which he could have no title, unless they had the right of conferring
it upon him. Here was therefore no force, deceit or error; and whatsoever
equity there might be to relieve one that had bin forced, frighted or
circumvented, it was nothing to this case. We do not find that William the 2 d,
or Henry, were forced to be Kings; no Sword was put to their Throats; and for
any thing we know, the English Nation was not then so contemptible but men
might have bin found in the world, who would willingly have accepted the Crown,
and even their elder Brother Robert would not have refused: but the Nobility
and Commons trusting to their Oaths and Promises, thought fit to prefer them
before him; and when he endeavored to impose himself upon the Nation by force,
they so severely punished him, that no better proof can be required to show
they were accustomed to have no other Kings than such as they approved. And
this was one of the Customs that all their Kings swore to maintain, it being as
ancient, just, and well approved as any other.

Having already proved, that all the Kings we have had since that time, have
come in upon the same title; that the Saxon Laws to which all have sworn,
continue to be of force amongst us, and that the words pronounced four times on
the four sides of the Scaffold by the Archbishop, Will ye have this Man to
reign? do testify it; I may spare the pains of a repetition, and justly
conclude, That if there was neither force nor fraud, fear nor error, to be
pretended by the first, there could be none in those that followed.

But the observation of this Oath may be grievous. If I received money the last
year upon Bond, Promise, or sale of a Manor or Farm, can it be thought
grievous to me to be compelled to repay, or make over the Land according to my
agreement? Or if I did not seal the Bond till I had the money, must not I
perform the condition, or at the least restore what I had received? If it be
grievous to any King to preserve the Libertys, Lives, and Estates of his
Subjects, and to govern according to their Laws, let him resign the Crown, and
the People to whom the Oath was made, will probably release him. Others may
possibly be found who will not think it grievous: or if none will accept a
Crown unless they may do what they please, the People must bear the misfortune
of being obliged to govern themselves, or to institute some other sort of
Magistracy that will be satisfied with a less exorbitant Power. Perhaps they
may succeed as well as some others have done, who without being brought to that
necessity, have voluntarily cast themselves into the misery of living without
the majestic splendour of a Monarch: or if that fail, they may as their last
refuge, surrender up themselves to Slavery. When that is done, we will
acknowledge that whatsoever we have is derived from the favor of our Master. But
no such thing yet appearing amongst us, we may be pardoned if we think we are
Freemen governed by our own Laws, and that no man has a Power over us, which
is not given and regulated by them; nor that any thing but a new Law made by
our selves, can exempt our Kings from the obligation of performing their Oaths
taken, to govern according to the old, in the true sense of the words, as they
are understood in our Language by those who give them, and conducing to the
ends for which they are given, which can be no other than to defend us from all
manner of arbitrary Power, and to fix a rule to which we are to conform our
Actions, and from which, according to our deserts, we may expect reward or
punishment. And those who by prevarications, cavils or equivocations, endeavor
to dissolve these Obligations, do either maliciously betray the cause of Kings,
by representing them to the world as men who prefer the satisfaction of their
irregular Appetites before the performance of their duty, and trample under
foot the most sacred bonds of human Society; or from the grossest ignorance do
not see, that by teaching Nations how little they can rely upon the Oaths of
their Princes, they instruct them as little to observe their own; and that not
only because men are generally inclined to follow the examples of those in
power, but from a most certain conclusion, that he who breaks his part of a
Contract cannot without the utmost impudence and folly expect the performance
of the other; nothing being more known amongst men, than that all Contracts are
of such mutual obligation, that he who fails of his part discharges the other.
If this be so between man and man, it must needs be so between one and many
millions of men: If he were free, because he says he is, every man must be free
also when he pleases; if a private man who receives no benefit, or perhaps
prejudice from a Contract, be obliged to perform the conditions, much more are
Kings who receive the greatest advantages the world can give. As they are not
by themselves nor for themselves, so they are not different in specie from
other men: they are born, live and die as we all do. The same Law of Truth and
Justice is given to all by God and Nature; and perhaps I may say the
performance of it is most rigorously exacted from the greatest of men. The
liberty of Perjury cannot be a privilege annexed to Crowns; and it is absurd to
think that the most venerable Authority that can be conferred upon a man, is
increased by a liberty to commit, or impunity in committing such crimes as are
the greatest aggravations of infamy to the basest villains in the world.

SECT. XVIII. The next in blood to deceased Kings cannot generally be said to
be Kings till they are crowned.
IT IS hereupon usually objected, that Kings do not come in by Contract nor by
Oath, but are Kings by, or according to proximity of Blood, before they are
crowned. Tho this be a bold Proposition, I will not say it is universally false.
It Is possible that in some places the rule of Succession may be set down so
precisely, that in some cases every man may be able to see and know the sense,
as well as the Person designed to be the Successor: but before I acknowledge it
to be universally true, I must desire to know what this rule of Succession is,
and from whence it draws its original.

I think I may be excused if I make these scruples, because I find the thing in
dispute to be variously adjudg'd in several places, and have observed five
different manners of disposing Crowns esteemed Hereditary, besides an infinite
number of collateral Controversys arising from them, of which we have diverse
examples; and if there be one universal rule appointed, one of these only can
be right, and all the others must be vicious. The first gives the inheritance
to the eldest Male of the eldest legitimate Line, as in France, according to
that which they call the Salique Law. The second, to the eldest legitimate Male
of the reigning Family, as anciently in Spain, according to which the Brother
of the deceased King has bin often, if not always preferred before the Son, if
he were elder, as may appear by the dispute between Corbis and Orsua, cited
before from Titus Livius; and in the same Country during the reign of the
Goths, the eldest Male succeeded, whether Legitimate or Illegitimate. The
fourth receives Females or their Descendents, without any other condition
distinguishing them from Males, except that the younger Brother is preferred
before the elder Sister, but the daughter of the elder Brother is preferred
before the Son of the younger. The fifth gives the Inheritance to Females under
a condition, as in Sweden, where they inherit, unless they marry out of the
Country without the consent of the Estates; according to which rule Charles
Gustavus was chosen, as any Stranger might have bin, tho Son to a Sister of
Gustavus Adolphus, who by marrying a German Prince had forfeited her right. And
by the same act of Estates, by which her eldest Son was chosen, and the Crown
entailed upon the Heirs of his Body, her second Son the Prince Adolphus was
wholly excluded.

Till these questions are decided by a Judge of such undoubted Authority, that
all men may safely submit, it is hard for any man who really seeks the
satisfaction of his Conscience, to know whether the Law of God and Nature (tho
he should believe there is one general Law) do justify the Customs of the
ancient -- Medis levibusque Sabaeis
Imperat hic sexus, Reginarumque sub armis
Barbaries pars magna jacet. Lucan.

Medes and Sabeans, mentioned by the Poet, who admitted Females, or those of
France which totally exclude them as unfit to reign over men, and utterly
unable to perform the duty of a supreme Magistrate, as we see they are every
where excluded from the exercise of all other Offices in the Commonwealth. If
it be said that we ought to follow the Customs of our own Country, I answer,
that those of our own Country deserve to be observed, because they are of our
own Country: But they are no more to be called the Laws of God and Nature than
those of France or Germany; and tho I do not believe that any general Law is
appointed, I wish I were sure that our Customs in this point were not more
repugnant to the light of Nature, and prejudicial to our selves, than those of
some other Nations. But if I should be so much an Englishman, to think the
will of God to have bin more particularly revealed to our Ancestors, than to
any other Nation, and that all of them ought to learn from us; yet it would be
difficult to decide many questions that may arise. For tho the Parliament in
the 36 th of Henry the sixth, made an Act in favor of Richard Duke of York,
descended from a Daughter of Mortimer, who married the Daughter of the Duke of
Clarence, elder Brother to John of Gaunt, they rather asserted their own power
of giving the Crown to whom they pleased, than determined the question. For if
they had believed that the Crown had belonged to him by a general and eternal
Law, they must immediately have rejected Henry as a Usurper, and put Richard
into the possession of his Right, which they did not. And tho they did
something like to this in the cases of Maud the Empress in relation to King
Stephen, and her Son Henry the 2 d; and of Henry the 7 th in relation to the
house of York, both before he had married a Daughter of it, and after her
death; they did the contrary in the cases of William the first and second,
Henry the 1 st, Stephen, John, Richard the 3 d, Henry the 7 th, Mary,
Elizabeth, and others. So that, for any thing I can yet find, it is equally
difficult to discover the true sense of the Law of Nature that should be a
guide to my Conscience, whether I so far submit to the Laws of my Country, to
think that England alone has produced men that rightly understand it, or examine
the Laws and Practices of other Nations.

Whilst this remains undecided, it is impossible for me to know to whom I owe
the obedience that is exacted from me. If I were a Frenchman, I could not tell
whether I owed allegiance to the King of Spain, Duke of Lorrain, Duke of Savoy,
or many others descended from Daughters of the House of Valois, one of whom
ought to inherit, if the Inheritance belongs to Females; or to the house of
Bourbon, whose only title is founded upon the exclusion of them. The like
Controversys will be in all places; and he that would put Mankind upon such
inquirys, goes about to subvert all the Governments of the World, and arms
every man to the destruction of his neighbor.

We ought to be informed when this right began: If we had the Genealogy of
every man from Noah, and the Crowns of every Nation had since his time
continued in one Line, we were only to inquire into how many Kingdoms he
appointed the World to be divided, and how well the division we see at this day
agrees with the allotment made by him. But Mankind having for many ages lain
under such a vast confusion, that no man pretends to know his own original,
except some Jews, and the Princes of the house of Austria, we cannot so easily
arrive at the end of our work; and the Scriptures making no other mention of
this part of the world, than what may induce us to think it was given to the
Sons of Japhet, we have nothing that can lead us to guess how it was to be
subdivided, nor to whom the several parcels were given: So that the difficultys
are absolutely inextricable; and tho it were true, that some one man had a
right to every parcel that is known to us, it could be of no use; for that
Right must necessarily perish which no man can prove, nor indeed claim. But as
all natural Rights by Inheritance must be by Descent, this Descent not being
proved, there can be no natural Right; and all Rights being either natural,
created or acquired, this Right to Crowns not being natural, must be created or
acquired, or none at all.

There being no general Law common to all Nations, creating a Right to Crowns
(as has bin proved by the several methods used by several Nations in the
disposal of them, according to which all those that we know are enjoyed) we
must seek the Right concerning which we dispute, from the particular
Constitutions of every Nation, or we shall be able to find none.

Acquired Rights are obtained, as men say, either by fair means or by foul,
that is, by force or by consent: such as are gained by force, may be recovered
by force; and the extent of those that are enjoyed by consent, can only be
known by the reasons for which, or the conditions upon which that consent was
obtained, that is to say, by the Laws of every People. According to these Laws
it cannot be said that there is a King in every Nation before he is crowned.
John Sobietski now reigning in Poland, had no relation in blood to the former
Kings, nor any title till he was chosen. The last King of Sweden acknowledged
he had none, but was freely elected; and the Crown being conferred upon him and
the Heirs of his Body, if the present King dies without Issue, the right of
electing a Successor returns undoubtedly to the Estates of the Country. The
Crown of Denmark was Elective till it was made Hereditary by an Act of the
General Diet held at Copenhagen in the year 1660; and it is impossible that a
Right should otherwise accrue to a younger Brother of the house of Holstein,
which is derived from a younger Brother of the Counts of Oldenburgh. The Roman
Empire having passed through the hands of many Persons of different Nations, no
way relating to each other in blood, was by Constantine transferred to
Constantinople; and after many Revolutions coming to Theodosius, by birth a
Spaniard, was divided between his two Sons Arcadius and Honorius. From thence
passing to such as could gain most credit with the Soldiers, the Western Empire
being brought almost to nothing, was restored by Charles the Great of France;
and continuing for some time in his descendents, came to the Germans; who
having created several Emperors of the Houses of Suevia, Saxony, Bavaria and
others, as they pleased, about three hundred years past chose Rodolphus of
Austria: and tho since that time they have not had any Emperor who was not of
that Family; yet such as were chosen had nothing to recommend them, but the
merits of their Ancestors, their own personal Virtues, or such political
considerations as might arise from the power of their hereditary Countries,
which being joined with those of the Empire, might enable 'em to make the
better defense against the Turks. But in this Line also they have had little
regard to inheritance according to blood; for the elder branch of the Family is
that which reigns in Spain; and the Empire continues in the descendents of
Ferdinand younger Brother to Charles the fifth, tho so unfix'd even to this
time, that the present Emperor Leopold was in great danger of being rejected.

If it be said that these are elective Kingdoms, and our Author speaks of such
as are hereditary; I answer, that if what he says be true, there can be no
Elective Kingdom, and every Nation has a natural Lord to whom obedience is due.
But if some are Elective, all might have bin so if they had pleased, unless it
can be proved, that God created some under a necessity of subjection, and left
to others the enjoyment of their liberty. If this be so, the Nations born under
that necessity may be said to have a natural Lord, who has all the power in
himself, before he is crowned, or any part conferred on him by the consent of
the people; but it cannot extend to others. And he who pretends a right over
any Nation upon that account, stands obliged to show when and how that Nation
came to be discriminated by God from others, and deprived of that liberty which
he in goodness had granted to the rest of mankind. I confess I think there is
no such Right, and need no better proof than the various ways of disposing
Inheritances in several Countries, which not being naturally or universally
better or worse one than another, cannot spring from any other root, than the
consent of the several Nations where they are in force, and their opinions that
such methods were best for them. But if God has made a discrimination of
people, he that would thereupon ground a Title to the dominion of any one, must
prove that Nation to be under the curse of Slavery, which for any thing I know,
was only denounced against Cham: and it is as hard to determine whether the sense
of it be temporal, spiritual, or both, as to tell precisely what Nations by
being descended from him, fall under the Penaltys threatened.

If these therefore be either entirely false, or impossible to be proved true,
there is no discrimination, or not known to us; and every People has a right of
disposing of their Government, as well as the Polanders, Danes, Swedes,
Germans, and such as are or were under the Roman Empire. And if any Nation has
a natural Lord before he be admitted by their consent, it must be by a peculiar
act of their own; as the Crown of France by an act of that Nation, which they
call the Salique Law, is made hereditary to Males in a direct Line, or the
nearest to the direct; and others in other places are otherwise disposed.

I might rest here with full assurance that no Disciple of Filmer can prove
this of any people in the world, nor give so much as the shadow of a reason to
persuade us there is any such thing in any Nation, or at least in those where
we are concerned; and presume little regard will be had to what he has said,
since he cannot prove of any that which he so boldly affirms of all. But
because good men ought to have no other object than Truth, which in matters of
this importance can never be made too evident, I will venture to go farther,
and assert, That as the various ways by which several Nations dispose of the
succession to their respective Crowns, show they were subject to no other Law
than their own, which they might have made different, by the same right they
made it to be what it is, even those who have the greatest veneration for the
reigning Familys, and the highest regard for proximity of blood, have always
preferred the safety of the Commonwealth before the concernments of any Person
or Family, and have laid aside the nearest in blood, not only when they were
found to be notoriously vicious and wicked, but when they have thought it more
convenient to take others: And to prove this I intend to make use of no other
Examples than those I find in the Historys of Spain, France and England.

Whilst the Goths governed Spain, not above four persons in the space of three
hundred years were the immediate successors of their Fathers, but the Brother,
Cousin German, or some other man of the Familys of the Balthei or Amalthei was
preferred before the Children of the deceased King: and if it be said, this was
according to the Law of that Kingdom, I answer, that it was therefore in the
power of that Nation to make Laws for themselves, and consequently others have
the same right. One of their Kings called Wamba was deposed and made a Monk
after he had Saavedra Coron. Goth.
reigned well many years; but falling into a swound, and his friends thinking
him past recovery, cut off his hair, and put a Monk's Frock upon him, that,
according to the superstition of those times, he might die in it; and the
cutting off the hair being a most disgraceful thing amongst Mar. Hist. l. 6.
the Goths, they would not restore him to his Authority. Suintila another of
their Kings being deprived of the Crown for his ill Government, his Children
and Brothers were excluded, and Sisinandus crowned in his Saavedra Coron. Goth.
room.

This Kingdom being not long after overthrown by the Moors, a new one arose
from its ashes in the person of Don Pelayo first King of the Asturia's, which
increasing by degrees at last came to comprehend all Spain, and so continues to
this day: But not troubling my self with all the deviations from the common
rule in the collateral Lines of Navarr, Arragon and Portugal, I find that by
fifteen several Instances in that one series of Kings in the Asturia's and Leon
(who afterward came to be Kings of Castille) it is fully proved, that what
respect soever they showed to the next in blood, who by the Law were to
succeed, they preferred some other person, as often as the supreme Law of taking
care that the Nation might receive no detriment, persuaded them to it.

Don Pelayo enjoyed for his life the Kingdom conferred upon him by the
Spaniards, who with him retired into the Mountains to defend themselves against
the Moors, and was succeeded by his Son Favila. But tho Favila left many Sons
when he died, Alphonso sirnam'd the Chaste was advanced to the Crown, and they
all laid aside. Fruela Son to Alphonso the Catholic, was for his cruelty
deposed, put to death, and his Sons excluded. Aurelio his Cousin German
succeeded him; and at his death Silo, who Mariana l. 13.
married his Wife's Sister, was preferred before the Males of the Blood Royal.
Alphonso, sirnam'd El Casto, was first violently dispossessed of the Crown by a
Bastard of the Royal Family; but he being dead, the Nobility and People
thinking Alphonso more fit to be a Monk than a King, gave the Crown to Bermudo
called El Diacono; but Bermudo after several years resigning the Kingdom, they
conceived a better opinion of Alphonso, and made him King. Alphonso dying
without issue, Don Ramiro Son to Bermudo was preferred before the Nephews of
Alphonso. Don Ordonno, fourth from Ramiro, le^t four legitimate Sons; but they
being young, the Estates laid them aside, and made his Brother Fruela King.
Fruela had many Children, but the same Estates gave the Crown to Alphonso the
Fourth, who was his Nephew. Alphonso turning Monk, recommended his Son Ordonno
to the Estates of the Kingdom; but they refused him, and made his Brother
Ramiro King. Ordonno third Son to Ramiro dying, left a Son called Bermudo; but
the Estates took his Brother Sancho, and advanced him to the throne. Henry the
First being accidentally killed in his youth, left only two Sisters, Blanch
married to Lewis Son to Philip August King of France, and Berenguela married to
Alphonso King of Leon. The Estates made Ferdinand, Son of Berenguela the
youngest Sister, Marian. l. 1^. c. 7.
King, excluding Blanch, with her Husband and Children for being Strangers, and
Berenguela her self, because they thought not fit that her Husband should have
any part in the Government. Alphonso El Savio seems to have bin a very good
Prince; but applying himself more to the study of Astrology than to affairs of
Government (his eldest Son Ferdinand de la Cerda dying, and leaving his Sons
Alphonso and Ferdinand very young) the Nobility, Clergy and People deposed him,
excluded his Granchildren, and gave the Crown to Don Sancho his younger Son,
sirnam'd El Bravo, thinking him more fit to command them against the Moors,
than an old Astrologer, or a Child. Alphonso and Sancho being dead, Alphonso el
Desheredado laid claim to the Crown, but it was given to Ferdinand the Fourth,
and Alphonso with his descendents the Dukes de Medina Celi remain excluded to
this day. Peter sirnam'd the Cruel was twice driven out of the Kingdom, and at
last killed by Bertrand de Guesclin Constable of France, or Henry Count of
Trastamara his Bastard-Brother, who was made King without any regard to the
Daughters of Peter, or Marian. l. 24.
to the House of La Cerda. Henry the Fourth left a Daughter called Joan, whom he
declared his Heir; but the Estates gave the Kingdom to Isabel his Sister, and
crowned her with Ferdinand of Arragon her Husband. Joan Daughter to this
Ferdinand and Isabel falling mad, the Estates committed the care of the
Governnent to her Father Ferdinand, and after his death to her Son.

But the French have taught us, that when a King dies, his next Heir is really
King before he take his Oath, or be crowned. From them we learn that Le mort
saisit le vif. And yet I know no History that proves more plainly than theirs,
that there neither is nor can be in any man, a right to the Government of a
People, which dos not receive its being, manner and measure from the Law of the
Country; which I hope to justify by four Reasons.

1. When a King of Pharamond's Race died, the Kingdom was divided into as many
parcels as he had Sons; which could not have bin, if one certain Heir had bin
assigned by nature, for he ought to have had the whole: and if the Kingdom
might be divided, they who inhabited the several parcels, could not know to
whom they owed obedience, till the division was made, unless he who was to be
King of Paris, Metz, Soissons or Orleans, had worn the Name of his Kingdom upon
his forehead. But in truth, if there might be a division, the Doctrine is false,
and there was no Lord of the whole. This wound will not be healed, by saying,
The Father appointed the division, and that by the Law of nature every man may
dispose of his own as he thinks fit; for we shall soon prove that the Kingdom
of France neither was, nor is disposable as a Patrimony or Chattel. Besides, if
that Act of Kings had bin then grounded upon the Law of nature, they might do
the like at this day. But the Law, by which such Divisions were made, having
bin abrogated by the Assembly Hist. de Fr. en la Vie de Hugues Capet.
of Estates in the time of Hugh Capet, and never practiced since, it follows
that they were grounded upon a temporary Law, and not upon the Law of Nature
which is eternal. If this were not so, the pretended certainty could not be;
for no man could know to whom the last King had bequeathed the whole Kingdom,
or parcels of it, till the Will were opened; and that must be done before such
Witnesses as may deserve credit in a matter of this importance, and are able to
judge whether the Bequest be rightly made; for otherwise no man could know,
whether the Kingdom was to have one Lord or many, nor who he or they were to
be; which intermission must necessarily subvert their Polity, and this Doctrine.
But the truth is, the most Monarchical men among them are so far from
acknowledging any such right to be in the King, of alienating, bequeathing or
dividing the Kingdom, that they do not allow him the right of making a Will;
and that of the last King Lewis the 13 th touching the Regency during the
minority of his Son was of no effect. Mem. du Duc. de la Rochefocault.


2. This matter was made more clear under the second race. If a Lord had bin
assigned to them by nature, he must have bin of the Royal Family: But Pepin had
no other Title to the Crown, except the merits of his Father, and his own,
approved by the Nobility and People who made him King. He had three sons, the
eldest was made King of Italy, and dying before him left a Son called Bernard
Heir of that Kingdom. Paul. Aemil. Hist. Franc*
The Estates of France divided what remained between Charles the Great and
Carloman, The last of these dying in a few years, left many Sons, but the
Nobility made Charles King of all France, and he dispossessed Bernard of the
Kingdom of Italy inherited from his Father: so that he also was not King of the
whole, before the expulsion of Bernard the Son of his elder Brother; nor of
Aquitain, which by inheritance should have belonged to the Children of his
younger Brother, any otherwise than by the will of the Estates. Lewis the
Debonair succeeded upon the same title, was deposed and put into a Monastery by
his three Sons Lothair, Pepin and Lewis, whom he had by his first Wife. But tho
these left many Sons, the Kingdom came to Charles the Bald. The Nobility and
People disliking the eldest Son of Charles, gave the Kingdom to Lewis le Begue,
who had a legitimate Son called Charles le Simple; but his two Bastards, Lewis
and Carloman, were made Kings. Carloman had a Son called Lewis le faineant; he
was made King, but afterward deposed for his vicious Life. Charles le Gross
succeeded him, but for his ill Government was also deposed; and Odo, who was a
stranger to the Royal Blood, was made King. The same Nobility that had made
five Kings since Lewis le Begue, now made Charles le Simple King, who according
to his name was entrap'd at Peronne by Ralph Duke of Burgundy, and forced to
resign his Crown, leaving only a Son called Lewis, who fled into England. Ralph
being dead, they took Lewis sirnam'd Outremer, and placed him in the Throne: he
had two Sons, Lothair and Charles. Lothair succeeded him, and died without
Issue. Charles had as fair a title as could be by Birth, and the Estates
confessed it; but their Ambassadors told him, that he having by an unworthy Life
rendered himself unworthy of the Crown, they, whose principal care was to have
a good Prince at the head of them, had chosen Hugh Capet; and the Crown
continues in his race to this day, tho not altogether without interruption.
Robert Son to Hugh Capet succeeded him. He left two Sons Robert and Henry; but
Henry the younger Son appearing to the Estates of the Kingdom to be more fit to
reign than his elder Brother, they made him King, Robert and his descendents
continuing Dukes of Burgundy only for about ten Generations; at which time his
Issue Male failing, that Duchy returned to the Crown during the Life of King
John, who gave it to his second Son Philip for an Apannage still depending upon
the Crown. The same Province of Burgundy was by the Treaty of Madrid granted to
the Emperor Charles the sisth by Francis the first: but the People refused to
be alienated, and the Estates of the Kingdom approved their refusal. By the
same Authority Charles the 6 th was removed from the Government, when he
appeared to be mad; and other examples of a like nature may be alleged. From
which we may safely conclude, that if the death of one King dos really invest
the next Heir with the Right and Power, or that he who is so invested, be
subject to no Law but his own Will, all matters relating to that Kingdom must
have bin horribly confused during the reigns of twenty two Kings of Pharamond's
race; they can have had no rightful King from the death of Chilperic to King
John: and the Succession since that time is very liable to be questioned, if
not utterly overthrown by the house of Austria, who by the Counts of Hapsburg
derive their Descent from Pharamond, and by the house of Lorrain claiming from
Charles, who was excluded by Capet: All which is most absurd, and they who
pretend it, bring as much confusion into their own Laws, and upon the Polity of
their own Nation, as shame and guilt upon the memory of their Ancestors, who by
the most extreme injustice have rejected their natural Lord, or dispossessed
those who had bin in the most solemn manner placed in the Government, and to
whom they had generally sworn Allegiance.

3. If the next Heir be actually King, seized of the power by the death of his
Predecessor, so that there is no intermission; then all the Solemnitys and
religious Ceremonys used at the Coronations of their Kings, with the Oaths
given and taken, are the most profane abuses of sacred things in contempt of
God and Man that can be imagined, most especially if the Act be (as our Author
calls it) voluntary, and the King receiving nothing by it, be bound to keep it
no longer than he pleases. The Prince who is to be sworn, might spare the pains
of watching all night in the Church, fasting, praying, confessing,
communicating, and swearing, that he will to the utmost of his power defend the
Clergy, maintain the union of the Church, obviate all excess, rapine, extortion
and iniquity; take care that in all judgments Justice may be observed, with
Equity and Mercy, etc. or of invoking the assistance of the Holy Ghost for the
better performance of his Oath; and without ceremony tell the Nobility and
People, that he would do what he thought fit. 'Twere to as little purpose for
the Archbishop of Rheims to take the trouble of saying Mass, delivering to him
the Crown, Scepter, and other ensigns of Royalty, explaining what is signified
by them, anointing him with the Oil which they say was delivered by an Angel to
St. Remigius, blessing him, and praying to God to bless him if he rightly
performed his Oath to God and the People, and denouncing the contrary in case
of failure on his part, if these things conferred nothing upon him but what he
had before, and were of no obligation to him. Such ludifications of the most
sacred things are too odious and impious to be imputed to Nations that have any
virtue, or profess Christianity. This cannot fall upon the French and
Spaniards, who had certainly a great zeal to Religion, whatever it was; and
were so eminent sor moral Virtues as to be a reproach to us, who live in an Age
of more Knowledge. But their meaning is so well declared by their most solemn
Acts, that none but those who are wilfully ignorant can mistake. One of the
Councils held at Toledo, declared by the Clergy, Nobility, and (...) T^l^t.
others assisting, That no man should be placed in the Royal Seat till he had
sworn to preserve the Church, etc. Another held in the same place, signified
(...) T^l^t. 4.
to Sisinandus, who was then newly crowned, That if he, or any of his Successors
should, contrary to their Oaths, and the Laws of their Country, proudly and
cruelly presume to exercise Domination over them, he should be excommunicated,
and separated from Christ and them to eternal judgment. The French Laws, and
their best Writers asserting the same things, are confirmed by perpetual
practice. Henry of Navarre, tho certainly according to their Rules, and in
their esteem a most accomplished Prince, (...).
was by two General Assemblys of the Estates held at Blois, deprived of the
Succession for being a Protestant; and notwithstanding the greatness of his
Reputation, Valor, Victorys, and Affability, could never be admitted, till he
had made himself capable of the ceremonys of his Coronation, by conforming to
the Religion which by the Oath he was to defend. Nay this present King, tho
haughty enough by nature, and elevated by many successes, has acknowledged, as
he says, with joy, that he can do nothing contrary to Law, and calls it a happy
impotence; in pursuance of which he has annul'd many Acts of his Father and
Grandfather, alienating the demeasnes of the Crown, as things contrary to Law,
and not within their power.

These things being confirmed by all the good Authors of that Nation, Filmer
finds only the worst to be fit for his turn; and neither minding Law nor
History, takes his Maxims from a vile flattering discourse of Bellay,
calculated for the personal Interest of Henry the fourth then King of Navarr,
in which he says, That the Heir apparent, tho furious, mad, Apol. Cathol.
a fool, vicious, and in all respects abominably wicked, must be admitted to
the Crown. But Bellay was so far from attaining the ends designed by his Book,
that by such Doctrins, which filled all men with horror, he brought great
prejudice to his Master, and procured little favor from Henry, who desired
rather to recommend himself to his People as the best man they could set up,
than to impose a necessity upon 'em of taking him if he had bin the worst. But
our Author, not contented with what this Sycophant says, in relation to such
Princes as are placed in the Government by a Law establishing the Succession by
inheritance, with an impudence peculiar to himself, asserts the same right to
be in any man, who by any means gets into Power; and imposes the same necessity
of obedience upon the Subject where there is no Law, as Bellay dos by virtue of
one that is established.

4. In the last place: As Bellay acknowledges that the right belongs to Princes
only where it is established by Law, I deny that there is, was, or ever can be
any such. No People is known to have bin so mad or wicked, as by their own
consent, for their own good, and for the obtaining of Justice, to give the
power to Beasts, under whom it could never be obtained: or if we could believe
that any had bin guilty of an act so full of folly, turpitude and wickedness,
it could not have the force of a Law, and could never be put in execution; for
tho the rules, by which the proximity should be judged, be never so precise, it
will still be doubted whose case suits best with them. Tho the Law in some
places gives private Inheritances to the next Heir, and in others makes
allotments according to several proportions, no one knows to whom, or how far
the benefit shall accrue to any man, till it be adjudg'd by a Power to which
the partys must submit. Contests will in the like manner arise concerning
successions to Crowns, how exactly soever they be disposed by Law: For tho
every one will say that the next ought to succeed, yet no man knows who is the
next; which is too much verified by the bloody decisions of such disputes in
many parts of the world: and he that says the next in blood is actually King,
makes all questions thereupon arising impossible to be otherwise determined
than by the Sword; the pretender to the right being placed above the judgment
of man, and the Subjects (for any thing I know) obliged to believe, serve and
obey him, if he says he has it. For otherwise, if either every man in
particular, or all together have a right of judging his title, it can be of no
value till it be adjudg'd.

I confess that the Law of France, by the utter exclusion of Females and their
descendents, dos obviate many dangerous and inextricable difficultys; but
others remain which are sufficient to subvert all the Polity of that Kingdom,
if there be not a power of judging them; and there can be none if it be true
that Le mort saisit le vif. Not to trouble my self with feigned cases, that of
Legitimation alone will suffice. It Is not enough to say that the Children born
under marriage are to be reputed legitimate; for not only several Children born
of Joan Daughter to the King of Portugal, Wife to Henry the Fourth of Castille,
during the time of their Marriage, were utterly rejected as begotten in
Adultery, but also her Daughter Joan, whom the King during his life, and at the
hour of his death acknowledged to have bin begotten by him; and the only Title
that Isabel, who was married to Ferdinand of Arragon, had to the Crown of
Spain, was derived from their rejection. It would be tedious, and might give
offense to many great Persons, if I should relate all the dubious cases, that
have bin, or still remain in the World, touching matters of this nature: but
the Lawyers of all Nations will testify, that hardly any one point comes before
them, which affords a greater number of difficult Cases, than that of
Marriages, and the Legitimation of Children upon them; and Nations must be
involved in the most inextricable difficultys, if there be not a power
somewhere to decide them; which cannot be, if there be no intermission, and
that the next in blood (that is, he who says he is the next) be immediately
invested with the right and power. But surely no people has bin so careless of
their most important Concernments, to leave them in such uncertainty, and
simply to depend upon the humor of a man, or the faith of women, who besides
their other Frailtys, have bin often accused of supposititious Births: and men's
passions are known to be so violent in relation to Women they love or hate,
that none can safely be trusted with those Judgments. The virtue of the best
would be exposed to a temptation, that flesh and blood can hardly resist; and
such as are less perfect would follow no other rule than the blind impulse of
the passion that for the present reigns in them. There must therefore be a judge
of such disputes as may in these cases arise in every Kingdom; and tho it is not
my business to determine who is that judge in all places, yet I may justly say,
that in England it is the Parliament. If no inferior Authority could debar
Ignotus Son to the Lady Rosse, born under the Protection, from the inheritance
of a private Family, none can certainly assume a power of disposing of the
Crown upon any occasion. No Authority but that of the Parliament could
legitimate the Children of Catherine Swinford, with a proviso, not to extend to
the inheritance of the Crown. Others might say, if they were lawfully begotten,
they ought to inherit every thing, and nothing if they were not: But the
Parliament knew how to limit a particular favor, and prevent it from extending
to a public mischief. Henry the Eighth took an expeditious way of obviating
part of the Controversys that might arise from the multitude of his Wives, by
cutting off the heads of some, as soon as he was weary of them, or had a mind
to take another; but having bin hindered from dealing in the same manner with
Catherine by the greatness of her birth and kindred, he left such as the
Parliament only could resolve. And no less power would ever have thought of
making Mary and Elizabeth capable of the succession, when, according to
ordinary rules, one of 'em must have bin a Bastard; and it had bin absurd to
say, that both of 'em were immediately upon the death of their Predecessors
possessed of the Crown, if an Act of Parliament had not conferred the right upon
them, which they could not have by birth. But the Kings and Princes of England
have not bin of a temper different from those of other Nations: and many
Examples may be brought of the like occasions of dispute happening every where;
and the like will probably be for ever; which must necessarily introduce the
most mischievous confusions, and expose the Titles which (as is pretended) are
to be esteemed most sacred, to be overthrown by violence and fraud, if there be
not in all places a Power of deciding the Controversys that arise from the
uncertainty of Titles, according to the respective Laws of every Nation, upon
which they are grounded: No man can be thought to have a just Title, till it be
so adjudg'd by that power: This judgment is the first step to the Throne: The
Oath taken by the King obliges him to observe the Laws of his Country; and that
concerning the Succession being one of the principal, he is obliged to keep
that part as well as any other.

SECT. XIX. The greatest Enemy of a just Magistrate is he who endeavors to
invalidate the Contract between him and the People, or to corrupt their Manners.
IT IS not only from Religion, but from the Law of Nature, that we learn the
necessity of standing to the agreements we make; and he who departs from the
principle written in the hearts of men Pactis standum, seems to degenerate into
a beast. Such as had virtue, tho without true religion, could tell us (as a
brave and excellent Grecian did) that it was not necessary for him to live, but
it was necessary to preserve his Heart from deceit, and his Tongue from
falsehood. The Roman Satyrist carrys the same Notion to a great height, and
affirms, that -- Phalaris licet imperet ut sis
F^lsus, and admoto dictet perjuria Tauro,
Summum creed nesas animam praferre pudori. Juvena^*

tho the worst of Tyrants should command a man to be false and perjured, and
back his injunction with the utmost of Torments, he ought to prefer his
integrity before his life. And tho Filmer may be excused if he often mistake in
matters of Theology; yet his Inclinations to Rome, which he prefers before
Geneva, might have led him to the Principles in which the honest Romans lived,
if he had not observed that such Principles as make men honest and generous do
also make them lovers of Liberty, and constant in the defense of their Country:
which savouring too much of a Republican Spirit, he prefers the morals of that
City, since they are become more refined by the pious and charitable Jesuits,
before those that were remarkable in them, as long as they retained any shadow
of their ancient Integrity, which admitted of no equivocations and detested
prevarications; by that means preserving innocence in the hearts of private men
for their inward contentment, and in civil Societys for the public good; which
if once extinguished, Mankind must necessarily fall into the condition Hobbes
rightly calls Bellum omnium contra omnes, wherein no man can promise to himself
any other Wise, Children or Goods, than he can procure by his own Sword.

Some may perhaps think that the endeavors of our Author to introduce such
accursed Principles as tend to the ruin of Mankind, proceed from his ignorance.
But tho he appears to have had a great measure of that quality, I fear the evil
proceeds from a deeper root; and that he attempts to promote the interests of
ill Magistrates, who make it their business to destroy all good principles in
the People, with as much industry as the good endeavor to preserve them where
they are, and teach them where they are wanting. Reason and Experience instruct
us, that every man acts according to the end he proposes to himself. The good
Magistrate seeks the good of the People committed to his care, that he may
perform the end of his Institution: and knowing that chiefly to consist in
Justice and Virtue, he endeavors to plant and propagate them; and by doing
this he procures his own good, as well as that of the Public. He knows there
is no Safety where there is no Strength, no Strength without Union, no Union
without Justice; no Justice where Faith and Truth, in accomplishing public and
private Contracts, is wanting. This he perpetually inculcates, and thinks it a
great part of his duty, by precept and example, to educate the Youth in a love
of Virtue and Truth, that they may be seasoned with them, and filled with an
abhorrence of Vice and Falsehood, before they attain that Age which is exposed
to the most violent temptations, and in which they may by their crimes bring
the greatest mischiefs upon the public. He would do all this, tho it were to
his own prejudice. But as good Actions always carry a reward with them, these
contribute in a high measure to his advantage. By preferring the interest of
the People before his own, he gains their affection, and all that is in their
power comes with it; whilst he unites them to one another, he unites all to
himself: In leading them to virtue, he increases their strength, and by that
means provides for his own safety, glory and power.

On the other side, such as seek different ends must take different ways. When
a Magistrate fancys he is not made for the People, but the People for him; that
he dos not govern for them, but for himself; and that the People live only to
increase his glory, or to furnish matter for his pleasures, he dos not inquire
what he may do for them, but what he may draw from them. By this means he sets
up an interest of profit, pleasure or pomp in himself, repugnant to the good of
the public for which he is made to be what he is. These contrary ends
certainly divide the Nation into partys; and whilst every one endeavors to
advance that to which he is addicted, occasions of hatred for injurys every day
done, or thought to be done and received, must necessarily arise. This creates
a most fierce and irreconcilable enmity, because the occasions are frequent,
important and universal, and the causes thought to be most just. The People
think it the greatest of all crimes, to convert that power to their hurt, which
was instituted for their good; and that the injustice is aggravated by perjury
and ingratitude, which comprehend all manner of ill; and the Magistrate gives
the name of Sedition or Rebellion to whatsoever they do for the preservation of
themselves and their own Rights. When men's Spirits are thus prepared, a small
matter sets them on fire; but if no accident happen to blow them into a flame,
the course of Justice is certainly interrupted, the public affairs are
neglected; and when any occasion whether foreign or domestic arises, in which
the Magistrate stands in need of the Peoples assistance, they, whose affections
are alienated, not only show an unwillingness to serve him with their Persons
and Estates, but fear that by delivering him from his distress they strengthen
their enemy, and enable him to oppress them: and he fancying his will to be
unjustly opposed, or his due more unjustly denied, is filled with a dislike of
what he sees, and a fear of worse for the future. Whilst he endeavors to ease
himself of the one, and to provide against the other, he usually increases the
evils of both, and jealousys are on both sides multiplied. Every man knows that
the Governed are in a great measure under the power of the Governor; but as no
man, or number of men, is willingly subject to those who seek their ruin, such
as fall into so great a misfortune, continue no longer under it than force,
fear, or necessity may be able to oblige them. But as such a necessity can
hardly lie longer upon a great People, than till the evil be fully discovered
and comprehended, and their Virtue, Strength and Power be united to expel it;
the ill Magistrate looks upon all things that may conduce to that end, as so
many preparatives to his ruin; and by the help of those who are of his party,
will endeavor to prevent that Union, and diminish that Strength, Virtue, Power
and Courage, which he knows to be bent against him. And as truth, faithful
dealing, due performance of Contracts, and integrity of Manners, are bonds of
Union, and helps to good, he will always by tricks, artifices, cavils, and all
means possible endeavor to establish falsehood and dishonesty; whilst other
Emissarys and instruments of Iniquity, by corrupting the Youth, and seducing
such as can be brought to leudness and debauchery, bring the People to such a
pass, that they may neither care nor dare to vindicate their Rights, and that
those who would do it, may so far suspect each other, as not to confer upon,
much less to join in any action tending to the public Deliverance.

This distinguishes the good from the bad Magistrate, the faithful from the
unfaithful; and those who adhere to either, living in the same principle, must
walk in the same ways. They who uphold the rightful power of a just Magistracy,
encourage Virtue and Justice, and teach men what they ought to do, suffer, or
expect from others; they fix them upon principles of Honesty, and generally
advance every thing that tends to the increase of the valor, strength,
greatness and happiness of the Nation, creating a good Union among them, and
bringing every man to an exact understanding of his own and the public Rights.
On the other side, he that would introduce an ill Magistrate; make one evil who
was good, or preserve him in the exercise of injustice when he is corrupted,
must always open the way for him by vitiating the People, corrupting their
Manners, destroying the validity of Oaths and Contracts, teaching such
evasions, equivocations and frauds, as are inconsistent with the thoughts that
become men of virtue and courage; and overthrowing the confidence they ought to
have in each other, make it impossible for them to unite among themselves. The
like Arts must be used with the Magistrate: He cannot be for their turn, till
he is persuaded to believe he has no dependence upon, and ows no duty to the
People; that he is of himself, and not by their Institution; that no man ought
to inquire into, nor be judge of his actions; that all obedience is due to him,
whether he be good or bad, wise or foolish, a father or an enemy to his
Country. This being calculated for his personal interest, he must pursue the
same designs, or his Kingdom is divided within it self, and cannot subsist. By
this means those who flatter his humor, come to be accounted his Friends, and
the only men that are thought worthy of great Trusts, whilst such as are of
another mind are exposed to all persecution. These are always such as excel in
Virtue, Wisdom, and greatness of Spirit: they have Eyes, and they will always
see the way they go; and leaving fools to be guided by implicit Faith, will
distinguish between good and evil, and choose that which is best; they will judge
of men by their actions, and by them discovering whose Servant every man is,
know whether he is to be obeyed or not. Those who are ignorant of all good,
careless, or enemies to it, take a more compendious way: their slavish, vicious
and base natures inclining them to seek only private and present advantages,
they easily slide into a blind dependence upon one who has Wealth and Power;
and desiring only to know his will, care not what injustice they do, if they
may be rewarded. They worship what they find in the Temple, tho it be the
vilest of Idols, and always like that best which is worst, because it agrees
with their inclinations and principles. When a party comes to be erected on
such a foundation, debauchery, leudness and dishonesty are the true badges of
it. Such as wear them are cherished; but the principal marks of favor are
reserved for those who are the most industrious in mischief, either by seducing
the People with the allurements of sensual Pleasures, or corrupting their
Understandings by false and slavish Doctrins. By this means a man who calls
himself a Philosopher or a Divine, is often more useful than a great number of
Tapsters, Cooks, Buffoons, Players, Fiddlers, Whores or Bauds. These are the
Devil's Ministers of a lower Order; they seduce single Persons, and such as
fall into their snares are for the most part men of the simpler sort: but the
principal supporters of his Kingdom, are they, who by false Doctrins poison the
springs of Religion and Virtue, and by preaching or writing (if their falsehood
and wickedness were not detected) would extinguish all principles of common
honesty, and bring whole Nations to be best satisfied with themselves, when
their actions are most abominable. And as the means must always be suitable to
the end proposed, the Governments that are to be established or supported by
such ways must needs be the worst of all, and comprehend all manner of evil.

SECT. XX. Unjust Commands are not to be obeyed; and no man is obliged to
suffer for not obeying such as are against Law.
IN the next place our Author gravely proposes a question, Whether it be a sin
to disobey the King, if he command any thing contrary to Law? and as gravely
determins, that not only in human Laws, but even in Divine, a thing may be
commanded contrary to Law, and yet obedience to such a Command is necessary.
The sanctifying of the Sabbath is a divine Law, yet if a Master command his
Servant not to go to Church upon a Sabbath Day, the best Divines teach us, the
Servant must obey, etc. It is not sit to ty the Master to acquaint the Servant
with his secret Counsel. Tho he frequently contradicts in one line what he says
in another, this whole Clause is uniform and suitable to the main design of his
Book. He sets up the authority of Man in opposition to the command of God,
gives it the preference, and says, the best Divines instruct us so to do. St.
Paul then must have bin one of the worst, for he knew that the Powers under
which he lived, had under the severest penaltys forbidden the publication of
the Gospel; and yet he says, Woe to me if I preach it not. St. Peter was no
better than he, for he tells us, That it is better to obey God than Man: and
they could not speak otherwise, unless they had forgotten the words of their
Master, who told them, They should not fear them that could only kill the Body,
but him who could kill and cast into Hell. And if I must not fear him that can
only kill the Body, not only the reason, but all excuse for obeying him is
taken away.

Chap. 14*
To prove what he says, he cites a pertinent Example from St. Luke, and very
logically concludes, that because Christ approved the hypocrisy of the
Pharisees, (who generally adhered to the external and circumstantial part of
the Law, neglecting the essential, and taking upon themselves to be the
interpreters of that which they did not understand) the Law of God is not to be
obeyed: and as strongly proves, that because Christ showed them that the same
Law, which by their own confession permitted them to pull an Ass out of a pit
on the Sabbath Day, could not but give a liberty of healing the sick, therefore
the commands of Kings are to be obeyed, tho they should be contrary to human
and divine Laws. But if perverseness had not blinded him, he might have seen,
that this very Text is wholly against his purpose; for the Magistratical Power
was on the side of the Pharisees, otherwise they would not have sought an
occasion to ensnare him; and that power having perverted the Law of God by
false glosses, and a superinduction of human Traditions, prohibited the most
necessary acts of Charity to be done on the Sabbathday, which Christ reproved,
and restored the sick man to his health in their sight.

But I could wish our Author had told us the names of those Divines, who, he
says, are the best, and who pretend to teach us these fine things. I know some
who are thought good, that are of a contrary opinion, and say, that God having
required that Day to be set apart for his Service and Worship, man cannot
dispense with the Obligation, unless he can abrogate the Law of God. Perhaps,
for want of other Arguments to prove the contrary, I may be told, that this
savours too much of Puritanism and Calvinism. But I shall take the reproach,
till some better Patrons than Laud and his creatures may be found for the other
opinion. By the advice and instigation of these men, from about the year 1630,
to 1640, sports and revelings, which ended for the most part in drunkenness and
leudness, were not only permitted on that day, but enjoined. And tho this did
advance human Authority in derogation to the Divine, to a degree that may
please such as are of our Author's mind, yet others resolving rather to obey
the Laws of God than the Commands of Men, could not be brought to pass the
Lord's day in that manner. Since that time no man except Filmer and Heylin have
bin so wicked to conceive, or so impudent to assert such brutal absurditys. But
leaving the farther consideration of the original of this abuse, I desire to
know, whether the Authority given to Masters to command things contrary to the
Law of God, be peculiar in relation to the Sabbath, or to a few other points,
or ought generally to extend to all God's Laws; and whether he who may command
his Servant to act contrary to the Law of God, have not a right in himself of
doing the same. If peculiar, some Authority or Precept must be produced, by
which it may appear that God has slighted his Ordinance concerning that Day,
and suffered it to be contemned, whilst he exacts obedience to all others. If
we have a liberty left to us of slighting others also, more or less in number,
we ought to know how many, what they are, and how it comes to pass, that some
are of obligation and others not. If the Empire of the world is not only
divided between God and Caesar, but every man also who can give five pounds a
year to a Servant, has so great a part in it, that in some cases his commands
are to be obeyed preferably to those of God, it were fit to know the limits of
each Kingdom, lest we happen preposterously to obey man when we ought to obey
God, or God when we are to follow the commands of men. If it be general, the
Law of God is of no effect, and we may safely put an end to all thoughts and
discourses of Religion: the word of God is nothing to us; we are not to inquire
what he has commanded, but what pleases our Master, how insolent, foolish, vile
or wicked soever he may be. The Apostles and Prophets who died for preferring
the commands of God before those of men, fell like fools, and perished in their
sins. But if every particular man that has a servant, can exempt him from the
commands of God, he may also exempt himself, and the Laws of God are at once
abrogated throout the world.

It Is a folly to say there is a passive, as well as an active Obedience, and
that he who will not do what his Master commands ought to suffer the punishment
he inflicts: for if the Master has a right of commanding, there is a duty
incumbent on the servant of obeying. He that suffers for not doing that which
he ought to do, draws upon himself both the guilt and the punishment. But no
one can be obliged to suffer for that which he ought not to do, because he who
pretends to command, has not so far an Authority. However, our question is,
whether the Servant should forbear to do that which God commands, rather than
whether the Master should put away or beat him if he do not: for if the Servant
ought to obey his Master rather than God, as our Author says the best Divines
assert, he sins in disobeying, and that guilt cannot be expiated by his
suffering. If it be thought I carry this point to an undue extremity, the
limits ought to be demonstrated, by which it may appear that I exceed them, tho
the nature of the case cannot be altered: for if the Law of God may not be
abrogated by the commands of men, a Servant cannot be exempted from keeping the
Sabbath according to the Ordinance of God, at the will of his Master. But if a
power be given to man at his pleasure to annul the Laws of God, the Apostles
ought not to have preached, when they were forbidden by the Powers to which
they were subject: The tortures and deaths they suffered for not obeying that
command were in their own wrong, and their blood was upon their own heads.

His second instance concerning Wars, in which he says the Subject is not to
examine whether they are just or unjust, but must obey, is weak and frivolous,
and very often false; whereas consequences can rightly be drawn from such
things only as are certainly and universally true. Tho God may be merciful to a
Soldier, who by the wickedness of a Magistrate whom he honestly trusts, is made
a Minister of injustice, it is nothing to this case. For if our Author say true,
that the word of a King can justify him in going against the command of God, he
must do what is commanded tho he think it evil: The Christian Soldiers under
the Pagan Emperors were obliged to destroy their Brethren, and the best men in
the world for being so: Such as now live under the Turk have the same
obligation upon them of defending their Master, and slaughtering those he
reputes his Enemies for adhering to Christianity: And the King of France may
when he pleases, arm one part of his Protestant Subjects to the destruction of
the other; which is a godly doctrine, and worthy our Author's invention.

But if this be so, I know not how the Israelites can be said to have sinned in
following the examples of Jeroboam, Omri, Ahab, or other wicked Kings: they
could not have sinned in obeying, if it had bin a sin to disobey their
commands; and God would not have punished them so severely, if they had not
sinned. It Is impertinent to say they were obliged to serve their Kings in
unjust Wars, but not to serve Idols; for tho God be jealous of his glory, yet
he forbids Rapine and Murder as well as Idolatry. If there be a Law that
forbids the Subject to examine the commands tending to the one, it cannot but
enjoin obedience to the other. The same Authority which justifys Murder, takes
away the guilt of Idolatry; and the Wretches, both Judges and Witnesses, who
put Naboth to death, could as little alledg ignorance, as those that worshipped
Jeroboam's Calves; the same light of Nature by which they should have known,
that a ridiculous Image was not to be adored as God, instructing them also,
that an innocent man ought not under pretense of Law to be murdered by perjury.

SECT. XXI. It cannot be for the good of the People that the Magistrate have a
power above the Law: and he is not a Magistrate who has not his power by Law.
THAT we may not be displeased, or think it dangerous and slavish to depend
upon the will of a man, which perhaps may be irregular or extravagant in one
who is subject to no Law, our Author very dexterously removes the scruples by
telling us,

1. That the Prerogative of the King to be above the Law, is only for the good
of them that are under the Law, and to preserve their Libertys.

2. That there can be no Laws without a supreme Power to command or make them:
In Aristocracys the Noblemen are above the Law; in Democracys the People: By
the like reason in a Monarchy, the King must of necessity be above the Law.
There can be no Sovereign Majesty in him that is under the Law: that which
gives the very being to a King, is the power to give Laws. Without this Power
he is but an equivocal King. It skills not how he comes by this Power, whether
by Election, Donation, Succession, or any other means. I am contented in some
degree to follow our Author, and to acknowledge that the King neither has nor
can have any Prerogative which is not for the good of the People, and the
preservation of their Libertys. This therefore is the foundation of
Magistratical Power, and the only way of discerning whether the Prerogative of
making Laws, of being above Laws, or any other he may pretend, be justly due to
him or not: and if it be doubted who is the fittest judge to determine that
question, common sense will inform us, that if the Magistrate receive his Power
by election or donation, they who elect, or give him that Power, best know
whether the good they sought be performed or not; if by succession, they who
instituted the Succession: if otherwise, that is, by fraud or violence, the
point is decided, for he has no right at all, and none can be created by those
means. This might be said, tho all Princes were of ripe age, sober, wise, just
and good; for even the best are subject to mistakes and passions, and therefore
unfit to be judges of their own concernments, in which they may by various
means be misguided: but it would be extreme madness to attribute the same to
Children, Fools, or Madmen, who are not able to judge of the least things
concerning themselves or others; but most especially to those, who coming in by
usurpation, declare their contempt of all human and divine Laws, and are enemies
to the People they oppress. None therefore can be judges of such cases but the
People, for whom and by whom the Constitutions are made; or their
Representatives and Delegats, to whom they give the power of doing it.

But nothing can be more absurd than to say, that one man has an absolute power
above Law to govern according to his will, for the Peoples good, and the
preservation of their Liberty: For no Liberty can subsist where there is such a
Power; and we have no other way of distinguishing between free Nations and such
as are not so, than that the free are governed by their own Laws and Magistrates
according to their own mind, and that the others either have willingly
subjected themselves, or are by force brought under the power of one or more
men, to be ruled according to his or their pleasure. The same distinction holds
in relation to particular persons. He is a free man who lives as best pleases
himself, under Laws made by his own consent; and the name of slave can belong
to no man, unless to him who is either born in the house of a Master, bought,
taken, subdued, or willingly gives his ear to be nailed to the post, and
subjects himself to the will of another. Thus were the Grecians said to be free
in opposition to the Medes and Persians, as Artabanus acknowledged in his
Discourse to Themistocles. In the same manner the Italians, Germans and
Spaniards were distinguished from the Eastern Nations. who for the most part
were under the power of Tyrants. Rome was said to have recovered liberty by the
expulsion of the Tarquins; or, as Tacitus expresses it, Libertatem and
Consulatum L. Brutus instituit. An. l. 1.
Lucius Brutus established Liberty and the Consulat together, as if before that
time they had never enjoyed any; and Julius Caesar is said to have overthrown
the liberty of that People. But if Filmer deserve credit, the Romans were free
under Tarquin, enslaved when he was driven way, and his Prerogative
extinguished, that was so necessarily required for the defense of their
Liberty; and were never restored to it, till Caesar assumed all the Power to
himself. By the same rule the Switzers, Grisons, Venetians, Hollanders, and
some other Nations are now Slaves; and Tuscany, the Kingdom of Naples, the
Ecclesiastical State, with such as live under a more gentle Master on the other
side of the Water, I mean the Turk, are free Nations. Nay the Florentins, who
complain of Slavery under the House of Medices, were made free by the power of
a Spanish Army who set up a Prerogative in that gentle Family, which for their
good has destroyed all that could justly be called so in that Country, and
almost wholly dispeopl'd it. I, who esteem my self free, because I depend upon
the will of no man, and hope to die in the liberty I inherit from my Ancestors,
am a slave; and the Moors or Turks, who may be beaten and killed whenever it
pleases their insolent Masters, are Freemen. But surely the world is not so
much mistaken in the signification of words and things. The weight of Chains,
number of Stripes, hardness of labor, and other effects of a Master's cruelty,
may make one servitude more miserable than another: but he is a slave who
serves the best and gentlest man in the world, as well as he who serves the
worst; and he dos serve him if he must obey his commands, and depends upon his
will. For this reason the Poet ingeniously flattering a good Emperor, said,
that Liberty was not more desirable, than to serve a gentle Master; but still
acknowledged that it was a service, distinct from, and contrary to Liberty: and
it had not bin a handsome complement, unless the evil of servitude were so
extreme, that nothing but the virtue and goodness of the Master could any way
compensate or alleviate it. Now tho it should be granted that he had spoken
more like to a Philosopher than a Poet; that we might take his words in the
strictest sense, and think it possible to find such Conveniences in a
subjection to the will of a good and wise Master, as may balance the loss of
Liberty, it would be nothing to the question; because that Liberty is thereby
acknowledged to be destroyed by the Prerogative, which is only instituted to
preserve it. If it were true, that no liberty were to be preferred before the
service of a good Master, it could be of no use to the perishing world, which
Filmer and his Disciples would by such arguments bring into a subjection to
children, fools, mad or vicious men. These are not cases feigned upon a distant
imaginary possibility, but so frequently found amongst men, that there are few
examples of the contrary. And as it is folly to suppose that Princes will always
be wise, just and good, when we know that few have bin able alone to bear the
weight of a Government, or to resist the temptations to ill, that accompany an
unlimited power, it would be madness to presume they will for the future be
free from infirmitys and vices. And if they be not, the Nations under them will
not be in such a condition of servitude to a good Master as the Poet compares
to Liberty, but in a miserable and shameful subjection to the will of those who
know not how to govern themselves, or to do good to others. Tho Moses, Joshua
and Samuel had bin able to bear the weight of an unrestrained Power: tho David
and Solomon had never abused that which they had; what effect could this have
upon a general Proposition? Where are the Familys that always produce such as
they were? When did God promise to assist all those who should attain to the
Sovereign Power, as he did them whom he chose for the works he designed? Or
what testimony can Filmer give us, that he has bin present with all those who
have hitherto reigned in the world? But if we know that no such thing either
is, or has bin; and can find no promise to assure us, nor reason to hope that
it ever will be, it is as foolish to found the hopes of preserving a People upon
that which never was, or is so likely to fail, nay rather which in a short time
most certainly will fail, as to root up Vines and Figtrees in expectation of
gathering grapes and figs from thistles and briars. This would be no less than
to extinguish the light of common sense, to neglect the means that God has
given us to provide for our security, and to impute to him a disposition of
things utterly inconsistent with his Wisdom and Goodness. If he has not
therefore ordered that thorns and thistles should produce figs and grapes, nor
that the most important works in the world, which are not without the utmost
difficulty, if at all, to be performed by the best and wisest of men, should be
put into the hands of the weakest, most foolish and worst, he cannot have
ordained that such men, women or children as happen to be born in reigning
Familys, or get the power into their hands by fraud, treachery or murder (as
very many have done) should have a right of disposing all things according to
their will. And if men cannot be guilty of so great an absurdity to trust the
weakest and worst with a Power which usually subverts the Wisdom and Virtue of
the best; or to expect such effects of Virtue and Wisdom from those who come by
chance, as can hardly, if at all, be hoped from the most excellent; our
Author's Proposition can neither be grounded upon the Ordinance of God, nor the
Institution of men. Nay, if any such thing had bin established by our first
Parents in their simplicity, the utter impossibility of attaining what they
expected from it, must wholly have abrogated the Establishment: Or rather, it
had bin void from the beginning, because it was not Sanctio recta, jubens
honesta, prohibens ^ontra^ia. C^er.
a just Sanction, commanding things good, and forbidding the contrary, but a
foolish and perverse Sanction, setting up the unruly appetites of one person to
the subversion of all that is good in the world, by making the wisdom of the
aged and experienced to depend upon the will of Women, Children and Fools; by
sending the strong and the brave to seek protection from the most weak and
cowardly, and subjecting the most virtuous and best of men to be destroyed by
the most wicked and vicious. These being the effects of that unlimited
prerogative, which our Author says was only instituted for the good and defense
of the people, it must necessarily fall to the ground, unless slavery, misery,
infamy, destruction and desolation tend to the preservation of Liberty, and are
to be preferred before strength, glory, plenty, security and happiness. The
state of the Roman Empire after the Usurpation of Caesar will set this matter in
the clearest light; but having done it already in the former parts of this
work, I content my self to refer to those places. And tho the Calamitys they
suffered were a little allayed and moderated by the Virtues of Antoninus and M.
Aurelius, with one or two more, yet we have no example of the continuance of
them in a family; nor of any Nation great or small that has bin under an
absolute Power, which dos not too plainly manifest that no man or succession of
men is to be trusted with it.

But says our Author, there can be no Law where there is not a supreme Power;
and from thence very strongly concludes it must be in the King; for otherwise
there can be no Sovereign Majesty in him, and he is but an equivocal King. This
might have bin of some force, if Governments were established, and Laws made
only to advance that Sovereign Majesty; but nothing at all to the purpose, if
(as he confesses) the power which he has be given for the good of the People,
and for the defense of every private man's Life, Liberty, Lands and Goods: for
that which is instituted, cannot be abrogated for want of that which was never
intended in the institution. If the public Safety be provided, Liberty and
Propriety secured, Justice administered, Virtue encouraged, Vice suppressed, and
the true interest of the Nation advanced, the ends of Government are
accomplished; and the highest must be contented with such a proportion of Glory
and Majesty as is consistent with the public; since the Magistracy is not
instituted, nor any person placed in it for the increase of his Majesty, but
for the preservation of the whole People, and the defense of the Liberty, Life
and Estate of every private man, as our Author himself is forced to acknowledge.

But what is this Sovereign Majesty, so inseparable from Royalty, that one
cannot subsist without the other? Caligula placed it in a power of Omnia mihi
in omnes licere. Sueton.
doing what he pleased to all men: Nimrod, Nabuchodonosor and others, with an
impious and barbarous insolence, boasted of the greatness of their power. They
thought it a glorious Privilege to kill or spare whom they pleased. But such
Kings as by God's permission might have bin set up over his people, were to
have nothing of this. They were not to multiply Gold, Silver, Wives or Horses;
they were not to govern by Deuteronomy. 17.
their own will, but according to the Law; from which they might not recede, nor
raise their Hearts above their brethren. Here were Kings without that unlimited
Power, which makes up the Sovereign Majesty, that Filmer affirms to be so
essential to Kings, that without it they are only equivocal; which proving
nothing but the incurable perverseness of his judgment, the malice of his heart
or malignity of his fate, always to oppose reason and truth, we are to esteem
those to be Kings who are described to be so by the Scriptures, and to give
another name to those who endeavor to advance their own glory, contrary to the
precept of God and the interest of mankind.

But unless the light of reason had bin extinguished in him, he might have
seen, that tho no Law could be made without a supreme Power, that Supremacy may
be in a Body consisting of many men, and several orders of men. If it be true,
which perhaps may be doubted, that there have bin in the world simple
Monarchys, Aristocracys or Democracys legally established, it is certain that
the most part of the Governments of the world (and I think all that are or have
bin good) were mixed. Part of the Power has bin conferred upon the King, or the
Magistrate that represented him, and part upon the Senate and People, as has bin
proved in relation to the Governments of the Hebrews, Spartans, Romans,
Venetians, Germans, and all those who live under that which is usually called
the Gothic Polity. If the single Person participating of this divided Power
dislike either the Name he bears, or the Authority he has, he may renounce it;
but no reason can be from thence drawn to the prejudice of Nations, who give so
much as they think consistent with their own good, and reserve the rest to
themselves, or to such other Officers as they please to establish.

No man will deny that several Nations have had a right of giving power to
Consuls, Dictators, Archons, Suffetes, Dukes and other Magistrates, in such
proportions as seemed most conducing to their own good; and there must be a
right in every Nation of allotting to Kings so much as they please, as well as
to the others, unless there be a charm in the word King, or in the Letters that
compose it. But this cannot be; for there is no similitude between King, Rex,
and Basileus: they must therefore have a right of regulating the Power of
Kings, as well as that of Consuls or Dictators; and it had not bin more
ridiculous in Fabius, Scipio, Camillus or Cincinnatus, to assert an absolute
power in himself, under pretense of advancing his Sovereign Majesty against the
Law, than for any King to do the like. But as all Nations give what form they
please to their Government, they are also judges of the name to be imposed upon
each man who is to have a part in the power: and it is as lawful for us to call
him King, who has a limited Authority amongst us, as for the Medes or Arabs to
give the same name to one who is more absolute. If this be not admitted, we are
content to speak improperly, but utterly deny that when we give the name, we
give any thing more than we please; and had rather his Majesty should change
his name than to renounce our own Rights and Libertys which he is to preserve,
and which we have received from God and Nature.

But that the folly and wickedness of our Author may not be capable of any
farther aggravation, he says, That it skills not how he come by the power.
Violence therefore or fraud, treachery or murder, are as good as Election,
Donation, or legal Succession. It Is in vain to examine the Laws of God or Man,
or the rights of nature; whether Children do inherit the Dignitys and
Magistracys of their Fathers, as patrimonial Lands and Goods; whether regard
ought to be had to the fitness of the Person; whether all should go to one, or
be divided amongst them; or by what rule we may know who is the right Heir to
the Succession, and consequently what we are in conscience obliged to do. Our
Author tells us in short, it matters not how he that has the power comes by it.

It has bin hitherto thought, that to kill a King (especially a good King) was
a most abominable action. They who did it, were thought to be incited by the
worst of passions that can enter into the hearts of men; and the severest
punishments have bin invented to deter them from such attempts, or to avenge
their death upon those who should accomplish it. But if our Author may be
credited, it must be the most commendable and glorious act that can be
performed by man: for besides the outward advantages that men so earnestly
desire, he that dos it, is presently invested with the Sovereign Majesty, and
at the same time becomes God's Vicegerent, and the father of his Country,
possessed of that Government, which in exclusion to all other forms is only
favored by the Laws of God and Nature. The only inconvenience is, that all
depends upon success, and he that is to be the Minister of God, and father of
his Country if he succeed, is the worst of all villains if he fail; and at the
best may be deprived of all by the same means he employed to gain it. Tho a
Prince should have the wisdom and virtues of Moses, the valor of Joshua, David
and the Maccabees, with the gentleness and integrity of Samuel, the most
foolish, vicious, base and detestable man in the world that kills him, and
seizes the power, becomes his Heir, and father of the People that he governed;
it skills not how he did it, whether in open battle or secret treachery, in the
field or in the bed, by poison or by the sword: The vilest slave in Israel had
become the Lord's anointed, if he could have killed David or Solomon, and found
villains to place him in the Throne. If this be right, the world has to this
day lived in darkness, and the actions which have bin thought to be the most
detestable, are the most commendable and glorious. But not troubling my self at
present to decide this question, I leave it to Kings to consider how much they
are beholden to Filmer and his disciples, who set such a price upon their
heads, as would render it hard to preserve their Lives one day, if the Doctrins
were received, which they endeavor to infuse into the Minds of the People; and
concluding this point, only say, that we in England know no other King than he
who is so by Law, nor any power in that King except that which he has by Law:
And tho the Roman Empire was held by the power of the Sword; and Vlpian a
corrupt Lawyer undertakes to fay, that the Prince is not obliged by the Laws;
yet Theodosius consest, that it was the glory of a good Emperor to acknowledge
himself bound by them.

SECT. XXII. The rigor of the Law is to be tempered by men of known integrity
and judgment, and not by the Prince who may be ignorant or vicious.
OUR Author's next shift is to place the King above the Law, that he may
mitigate the rigor of it, without which, he says, the case of the Subject would
be desperately miserable. But this cure would prove worse than the disease.
Such pious fathers of the People as Caligula, Nero or Domitian, were not like
to mitigate the rigor; nor such as inherit Crowns in their infancy (as the
present Kings of Spain, France and Sweden) so well to understand the meaning of
it as to decide extraordinary cases. The wisdom of Nations has provided more
assured helps; and none could have bin so brutish and negligent of the public
Concernments, to suffer the Succession to fall to women, children, etc. if they
had not reserved a power in themselves to prefer others before the nearest in
blood, if reason require; and prescribed such rules as might preserve the
public from ruin, notwithstanding their infirmitys and vices. These helps
provided by our Laws, are principally by grand and petit Jurys, who are not
only Judges of matters of fact, as whether a man be killed, but whether he be
killed criminally. These Men are upon their Oaths, and may be indicted of
Perjury if they prevaricate: The Judges are present not only to be a check upon
them, but to explain such points of the Law as may seem difficult. And tho
these Judges may be said in some sense to be chosen by the King, he is not
understood to do it otherwise than by the advice of his Council, who cannot
perform their duty, unless they propose such as in their consciences they think
most worthy of the Office, and most capable of performing the duty rightly; nor
he accomplish the Oath of his Coronation, unless he admit those, who upon
deliberation seem to be the best. The Judges being thus chosen, are so far from
depending upon the will of the King, that they swear faithfully to serve the
People as well as the King, and to do justice to 18 Edw. ^. cap. 1.
every man according to the Law of the Land, notwithstanding any Writs, Letters
or Commands received from him; and in default thereof they are to forfeit their
bodies, lands and goods, as in cases of Treason. These Laws have bin so often,
and so severely executed, that it concerns all Judges well to consider them;
and the Cases of Tresilian, Empson, Dudley, and others show, that neither the
King's preceding command nor subsequent pardon could preserve them from the
punishment they deserved. All men knew that what they did was agreeable to the
King's pleasure, for Tresilian advanced the Prerogative of Edward the 2 d, and
Empson brought great Treasures into the Coffers of Henry the 7 th. Nevertheless
they were charged with Treason, for subverting the Laws of the Land, and
executed as Traitors. Tho England ought never to forget the happy Reign of Q.
Elizabeth, yet it must be acknowledged that she as well as others had her
failings. She was full of love to the People, just in her nature, sincere in
her intentions; but could not so perfectly discover the snares that were laid
for her, or resist the importunity of the Persons she most trusted, as not
sometimes to be brought to attempt things against Law. She and her Counselors
pressed the Judges very hard to obey the Patent under her Great Seal, in the case
of Cavendish: Anderson's Rep. p. 155.
but they answered, That both she and they had taken an Oath to keep the Law,
and if they should obey her commands, the Law would not warrant them, etc. And
besides the offense against God, their Country, and the Commonwealth, they
alleged the example of Empson and Dudley, whereby, they said, they were
detered from obeying her illegal Commands. They who had sworn to keep the Law
notwithstanding the King's Writs, knew that the Law depended not upon his will:
and the same Oath that obliged them not to regard any command they should
receive from him, showed that they were not to expect indemnity by it; and not
only that the King had neither the power of making, altering, mitigating or
interpreting the Law, but that he was not at all to be heard, in general or
particular matters, otherwise than as he speaks in the common course of
Justice, by the Courts legally established, which say the same thing, whether
he be young or old, ignorant or wise, wicked or good. And nothing dos better
evidence the wisdom and care of our Ancestors, in framing the Laws and
Government we live under, than that the People did not suffer extremitys by the
vices or infirmitys of Kings, till an Age more full of malice than those in
which they lived, had found tricks to pervert the rule, and frustrate their
honest intentions. It was not safe for the Kings to violate their Oaths by an
undue interposition of their Authority; but the Ministers who served them in
those violations, have seldom escaped punishment. This is to be understood when
the deviations from Justice are extreme and mischievous, for something must
always be allowed to human frailty: The best have their defects, and none could
stand if a too exact scrutiny were made of all their actions. Edward the third,
about the twentieth year of his Reign, acknowledged his own in Parliament, and
as well for the ease of his Conscience, as the satisfaction of his People,
promoted an Act, Commanding all Judges to do Justice, notwithstanding any
Writs, Letters or Commands from himself; and forbidding those that belonged to
the King, Queen and Prince, to intermeddle in those matters. But if the best
and wisest of our Princes, in the strength and maturity of their years, had
their failings, and every act proceeding from them that tended to the
interruption of Justice was a failing, how can it be said that the King in his
personal capacity, directly or indirectly, may enter into the discussion of
these matters, much less to determine them according to his will?

But, says our Author, the Law is no better than a Tyrant; general Pardons at
the Coronation and in Parliament, are but the bounty of the Prerogative, etc.
There may be hard cases: and citing some perverted pieces from Aristotle's
Ethics and Politics, adds, That when something falls out besides the general
rule, then it is fit that what the Lawmaker has omitted, or where he has erred
by speaking generally, it should be corrected and supplied, as if the Lawmaker
were present that ordained it. The Governor, whether he be one man or more,
ought to be Lord of these things, whereof it was impossible that the Law should
speak exactly. These things are in part true; but our Author makes use of them
as the Devil dos of Scripture, to subvert the truth. There may be something of
rigor in the Law, that in some cases may be mitigated; and the Law it self (in
relation to England) dos so far acknowledge it, as to refer much to the
consciences of Jurys, and those who are appointed to assist them; and the most
difficult Cases are referred to the Parliament as the only judges that are able
to determine them. Thus the Statute of 35 Edw. III. enumerating the crimes then
declared to be Treason, leaves to future Parliaments to judge what other facts
equivalent to them may deserve the same punishment: and it is a general rule in
the Law, which the Judges are sworn to observe, that difficult Cases should be
reserved till the Parliament meet, who are only able to decide them: and if
there be any inconvenience in this, it is because they do not meet so frequently
as the Law requires, or by sinister means are interrupted in their sitting. But
nothing can be more absurd than to say, that because the King dos not call
Parliaments as the Law and his Oath requires, that power should accrue to him,
which the Law and the consent of the Nation has placed in them.

There is also such a thing in the Law as a general or particular Pardon, and
the King may in some degree be entrusted with the power of giving it,
especially for such crimes as merely relate to himself, as every man may remit
the injurys done to himself; but the confession of Edward the third, That the
Oath of the Crown had not bin kept by reason of 14 Edw. 3. 15.
the grant of Pardons contrary to Statutes, and a new Act made, that all such
Charters of Pardon from henceforth granted against the Oath of the Crown and
the said Statutes, should be held for none, demonstrates that this power was
not in himself, but granted by the Nation, and to be executed according to such
rules as the Law prescribed, and the Parliament approved.

Moreover, there have bin many, and sometimes bloody contests for the Crown,
upon which the Nation was almost equally divided; and it being difficult for
them to know, or even for us who have all the partys before us, to judge which
was the better side, it was understood that he who came to be crowned by the
consent of the People, was acceptable to all: and the question being
determined, it was no way fit that he should have a liberty to make use of the
public Authority then in his hands, to revenge such personal injurys as he
had, or might suppose to have received, which might raise new, and perhaps more
dangerous troubles, if the Authors of them were still kept in fear of being
prosecuted; and nothing could be more unreasonable than that he should employ
his power to the destruction of those who had consented to make him King. This
made it a matter of course for a King, as soon as he was crowned, to issue out
a general Pardon, which was no more than to declare, that being now what he was
not before, he had no enemy upon any former account. For this reason Lewis the
twelfth of France, when he was incited to revenge himself against those, who in
the reign of his Predecessor Charles the eighth had caused him to be imprisoned
with great danger of his life, made this answer, That the King of France did
not care to revenge the injurys done to the Duke of Orleans: and the last King
of Sweden seemed no otherwise to remember who had opposed the Queen's
Abdication and his Election, than by conferring honors upon them; because he
knew they were the best men of the Nation, and such as would be his friends
when they should see how he would govern, in which he was not deceived. But
lest all those who might come to the Crown of England, should not have the same
prudence and generosity, the Kings were obliged by a Custom of no less force
than a Law, immediately to put an end to all disputes, and the inconveniences
that might arise from them. This did not proceed from the bounty of the
Prerogative (which I think is nonsense, for tho he that enjoys the Prerogative
may have bounty, the Prerogative can have none) but from common sense, from the
King's obligation, and the care of his own safety; and could have no other
effect in Law, than what related to his person, as appears by the forementioned
Statute.

Pardons granted by Act of Parliament are of another nature: For as the King
who has no other power than by Law, can no otherwise dispense with the crimes
committed against the Laws, than the Law dos enable him; the Parliament that
has the power of making Laws, may entirely abolish the crimes, and
unquestionably remit the punishment as they please.

Tho some words of Aristotle's Ethics are without any coherence shuffled
together by our Author, with others taken out of his Politics, I do not much
except against them. No Law made by man can be perfect, and there must be in
every Nation a power of correcting such defects as in time may arise or be
discovered. This power can never be so rightly placed as in the same Hand that
has the right of making Laws, whether in one person or in many. If Filmer
therefore can tell us of a place, where one man, woman or child, however he or
she be qualified, has the power of making Laws, I will acknowledge that not only
the hard Cases, but as many others as he pleases, are referred to his or her
judgment, and that they may give it, whether they have any understanding of
what they do or not, whether they be drunk or sober, in their senses or stark
mad. But as I know no such place, and should not be much concerned for the
sufferings of a People that might bring such misery upon themselves, as must
accompany an absolute dependence upon the unruly will of such a creature, I may
leave him to seek it, and rest in a perfect assurance that he dos not speak of
England, which acknowledges no other Law than its own; and instead of receiving
any from Kings, dos to this day obey none, but such as have bin made by our
Ancestors, or our selves, and never admitted any King that did not swear to
observe them. And if Aristotle deserve credit, the power of altering,
mitigating, explaining or correcting the Laws of England, is only in the
Parliament, because none but the Parliament can make them.

SECT. XXIII. Aristotle proves, that no man is to be entrusted with an absolute
Power, by showing that no one knows how to execute it, but such a man as is not
to be found.
OUR Author having falsely cited and perverted the sense of Aristotle, now
brings him in saying, That a perfect Kingdom is that wherein the King rules all
according to his own Will. But tho I have read his books of Government with
some attention, I can find no such thing in them, unless the word which
signifies mere or absolute may be justly translated into perfect: which is so
far from Aristotle's meaning, that he distinguishes the absolute or despotical
Kingdoms from the Legitimate; and commending the latter, gives no better name
than that of barbarous to the first, which he says can agree only with the
nature of such Nations as are base and stupid, little differing from Beasts;
and having no skill to govern, or courage to defend themselves, must resign all
to the will of one that will take care of them. Yet even this cannot be done,
unless he that should take that care be wholly exempted from the vices which
oblige the others to stand in need of it: for otherwise it is no better than if
a Sheep should undertake to govern Sheep, or a Hog to command Swine; Aristotle
plainly saying, That as men are by nature equal, if it were Polit. l. 2. c. 1.
possible all should be Magistrates. But that being repugnant to the nature of
Government, he finds no other way of solving the difficulty, than by obeying
and commanding alternately; that they may do by turns that which they cannot do
all together, and to which no one man has more right than another, because they
are all by nature equal. This might be composed by a more compendious way, if,
according to our Author's doctrine, Possession could give a Right. But Aristotle
speaking like a Philosopher, and not like a public Enemy to Mankind, examins
what is just, reasonable and beneficial to men; that is, what ought to be done,
and which being done, is to be accounted just, and therefore to be supported by
good men. But as Quod ab initio injustum est, nullum potest habere juris
effectum. Grot. de jur. bell. and pac. l. 3.
that which is unjust in the beginning, can never have the effect of Justice;
and it being manifestly unjust for one or a few men to assume a power over
those who by nature are equal to them, no such power can be just or beneficial
to mankind; nor fit to be upheld by good men, if it be unjust and prejudicial.
In the opinion of Aristotle, this natural equality continues till virtue makes
the distinction; which must be either simply complete and perfect in it self,
so that he who is endu'd with it, is a God among men, or relatively, as far as
concerns civil Society, and the ends for which it is constituted, that is,
defense, and the obtaining of Justice. This requires a mind unbiased by
passion, full of goodness and wisdom, firm against all the temptations to ill,
that may arise from desire or fear; tending to all manner of good, through a
perfect knowledge and affection to it; and this to such a degree, that he or
they have more of these virtues and excellencys than all the rest of the
Society, tho computed together. Where such a man is found, he is by nature a
Ibid. l. 3.
King, and it is best for the Nation where he is that he govern. If a few men,
tho equal and alike among themselves, have the same advantages above the rest
of the People, Nature for the same reason seems to establish an Aristocracy in
that place; and the power is more safely committed to them, than left in the
hands of the multitude. But if this excellency of virtue dos not appear in one,
nor in a few men, the right and power is by nature equally lodged in all; and
to assume or appropriate that power to one, or a few men, is unnatural and
tyrannical, which in Aristotle's language comprehends all that is detestable
and abominable.

If any man should think Aristotle a trifler, for speaking of such a man as can
never be found, I answer, that he went as ^ar as his way could be warranted by
reason or nature, and was obliged to stop there by the defect of his Subject.
He could not say that the Government os one was simply good, when he knew so
many qualifications were required in the person to make it so; nor that it is
good for a Nation to be under the power of a sool, a coward, or a villain,
because it is good to be under a man of admirable wisdom, valor, industry and
goodness; or that the Government of one should be continued in such as by
chance succeed in a Family, because it was given to the first who had all the
virtues required, tho all the reasons for which the power was given fail in the
Successor; much less could he say that any Government was good, which was not
good for those whose good only it was constituted to promote.

Moreover, by showing who only is fit to be a Monarch, or may be made such,
without violating the Laws of Nature and Justice, he shows who cannot be one:
and he who says that no such man is to be found, as according to the opinion of
Aristotle can be a Monarch, dos most ridiculously alledg his Authority in favor
of Monarchs, or the power which some amongst us would attribute to them. If any
thing therefore may be concluded from his words, it is this, That since no power
ought to be admitted which is not just; that none can be just which is not
good, profitable to the People, and conducing to the ends for which it is
constituted; that no man can know how to direct the power to those ends, can
deserve, or administer it, unless he dos so far excel all those that are under
him in wisdom, justice, valor and goodness, as to possess more of those virtues
than all of them: I say, if no such man or succession of men be found, no such
power is to be granted to any man, or succession of men. But if such power be
granted, the Laws of nature and reason are overthrown, and the ends for which
Societys are constituted, utterly perverted, which necessarily implys an
annihilation of the Grant. And if a Grant so made by those who have a right of
setting up a Government amongst themselves, do perish through its own natural
iniquity and perversity, I leave it to any man, whose understanding and manners
are not so entirely corrupted as those of our Author, to determine what name
ought to be given to that person, who not excelling all others in Civil and
Moral Virtues, in the proportion required by Aristotle, dos usurp a power over
a Nation, and what obedience the People owe to such a one. But if his opinion
deserve our regard, the King by having those virtues is Omnium Optimus, and the
best guide to the People, Ad summum bonum secundum virtutem. Arist. Pol.
to lead them to happiness by the ways of virtue. And he who assumes the same
power, without the qualifications required, is Tyrannus omnium pessimus,
leading the People to all manner of ill, and in consequence to destruction.

SECT. XXIV. The Power of Augustus Caesar was not given, but usurped.
OUR Author's next instance is ingeniously taken from the Romans, Who, he says,
tho they were a People greedy of Liberty, freed Augustus from the necessity of
Laws. If it be true, as he affirms, that such a Prerogative is instituted only
for the preservation of Liberty, they who are most greedy of it, ought to be
most forward in establishing that which defends it best. But if the weight laid
upon the words greedy of Liberty, etc. render his memory and judgment liable to
censure, the unpardonable prevarication of citing any act done by the Romans in
the time of Augustus, as done freely, shows him to be a man of no faith. Omnium
jura in se traxerat, says Tacitus of Augustus; nothing was conferred upon him,
he took all to himself; there could be nothing of right in that which was
wholly usurped, and neither the People or the Senate could do any thing freely,
whilst they were under the power of a mad corrupted Soldiery, who first
betrayed, and then subdued them. The greatest part of the Senate had fallen at
the battle of Pharsalia, others had bin gleaned up in several places, the rest
destroyed by the Proscriptions; and that which then retained the name of a
Senate, was made up chiefly of those who had bin his Ministers, in bringing the
most miserable slavery upon their own Country. The Roman Liberty, and that
bravery of spirit by which it had bin maintained, was not only abolished, but
almost forgotten. All consideration of Law and Right was trampled under foot;
and none could dispute with him, who by the power of the sword had seized the
Authority both of the Senate and People. Nothing was so extravagant, that might
not be extorted by the insolent violence of a Conqueror, who had thirty
mercenary Legions to execute his Commands. The uncorrupted part of the People
that had escaped the sword of Julius, had either perished with Hirtius and
Pansa, Brutus and Cassius, or bin destroyed by the detestable Triumvirate.
Those that remained could lose nothing by a verbal resignation of their
Liberty, which they had neither strength nor courage to defend. The Magistracys
were possessed by the Creatures of the Tyrant; and the People were composed of
such as were either born under slavery, and accustomed to obey, or remained
under the terror of those Arms that had consumed the Assertors of their
Liberty. Our Author standing in need of some Roman Example, was obliged to seek
it in an age, when the Laws were subverted, Virtue extinguished, Injustice
placed in the Throne, and such as would not be of the same spirit, exposed to
the utmost cruelty. This was the time when the Sovereign Majesty shined in
glory; and they who had raised it above the Law, made it also the object of
their Religion, by adoring the Statues of their Oppressor. The corruption of
this Court spread it self over the best part of the World; and reduced the
Empire to that irrecoverable weakness in which it languish'd and perished. This
is the state of things that pleases Filmer, and those that are like him, who
for the introduction of the same among us, recommend such an elevation of the
Sovereign Majesty, as is most contrary to the Laws of God and Men, abhorred by
all generous Nations, and most especially by our Ancestors, who thought nothing
too dear to be hazarded in the defense of themselves and us from it.

SECT. XXV. The Regal Power was not the first in this Nation; nor necessarily
to be continued, tho it had bin the first.
TRUTH being uniform in it self, those who desire to propagate it for the good
of Mankind, lay the foundations of their reasonings in such Principles, as are
either evident to common sense, or easily proved: but Cheats and Impostors
delighting in obscurity, suppose things that are dubious and false, and think
to build one falsehood upon another; and our Author can find no better way to
persuade us, that all our Privileges and Laws are from the King, than by
saying, That the first Power was the Kingly Power, which was both in this and
all other Nations in the world, long before any Laws or any other kind of
Government was thought of; from whence we must necessarily infer, that the
common Law, or common Customs of this Land were originally the Laws and
Commands of the King. But denying both these points, I affirm,

1. That there was a power to make Kings before there was any King.

2. Tho Kings had bin the first created Magistrates in all places (as perhaps
they were in some it dos not follow) that they must continue for ever, or that
Laws are from them.

To the first; I think no man will deny, that there was a People at Babylon,
before Nimrod was King of that place. This People had a Power; for no number of
men can be without it: Nay this People had a power of making Nimrod King, or he
could never have bin King. He could not be King by succession, for the
Scripture shows him to have bin the first. He was not King by the right of
Father, for he was not their Father, Chush, Cham, with his elder Brothers and
Father Noah being still living; and, which is worst of all, were not Kings: for
if they who lived in Nimrod's time, or before him, neither were Kings, nor had
Kings, he that ought to have bin King over all by the right of nature (if there
had bin any such thing in nature) was not King. Those who immediately succeeded
him, and must have inherited his right, if he had any, did not inherit or
pretend to it: and therefore he that shall now claim a right from nature as
Father of a People, must ground it upon something more certain than Noah's
right of reigning over his Children, or it can have no strength in it.

Moreover, the Nations who in and before the time of Nimrod had no Kings, had
Power, or else they could have performed no Act, nor constituted any other
Magistrate to this day, which is absurd. There was therefore a power in Nations
before there were Kings, or there could never have bin any; and Nimrod could
never have bin King, if the People of Babylon had not made him King, which they
could not have done if they had not had a power of making him so. It Is
ridiculous to say he made himself King, for tho he might be strong and valiant,
he could not be stronger than a multitude of men. That which forces must be
stronger than that which is forced; and if it be true, according to the ancient
saying, that Hercules himself is not sufficient to encounter two, it is sure
more impossible for one man to force a multitude, for that must be stronger
than he. If he came in by persuasion, they who were persuaded, were persuaded
to consent that he should be King. That Consent therefore made him King. But,
Qui dat esse, dat modum esse: They who made him King, made him such a King as
best pleased themselves. He had therefore nothing but what was given: his
greatness and power must be from the multitude who gave it: and their Laws and
Libertys could not be from him; but their Libertys were naturally inherent in
themselves, and their Laws were the product of them.

There was a People that made Romulus King. He did not make or beget that
People, nor, for any thing we know, one man of them. He could not come in by
inheritance, for he was a Bastard, the Son of an unknown man; and when he died,
the right that had bin conferred upon him reverted to the People, who, according
to that right, chose Numa, Hostilius, Martius, Tarquinius Priscas, and Servius,
all Stranges to his blood, and without any other right than what was bestowed
upon them: and Tarquinius Superbus, who invaded the Throne Sinc jussu populi.
T. Live. l. 1.
without the command of the People, was ejected, and the Government of Kings
abolished by the same power that had created it.

We know not certainly by what Law Moses, and the Judges created by the advice
of Jethro, governed the Israelites; but may probably conjecture it to have bin
by that Law which God had written in the hearts of mankind; and the People
submitted to the judgment of good and wise men, tho they were under no coercive
Power. But it is certain they had a Law and a regular Magistracy under which
they lived, four hundred years before they had a King, for Saul was the first.
This Law was not therefore from the King, nor by the King; but the King was
chosen and made by the People, according to the liberty they had by the Law,
tho they did not rightly follow the rules therein prescribed, and by that means
brought destruction upon themselves.

The Country in which we live lay long concealed under obscure barbarity, and
we know nothing of the first Inhabitants, but what is involved in fables that
leave us still in the dark. Julius Caesar is the first who speaks distinctly of
our affairs, and gives us no reason to believe there was any Monarchy then
established amongst us. Cassivellaunus was occasionally chosen by the Nations
that were most exposed to the violence Caes. Comment. l. 5.
of the Romans, for the management of those wars against them. By others we hear
of Boadicia, Arviragus, Galgacus, and many more set up afterward when need
required; but we find no footsteps of a regular Succession either by
inheritance or election. And as they had then no Kings, or any other general
Magistrate, that can be said to be equivalent to a King, they might have had
none at all unless they had thought fit. Tacitus mentions a sort of Kings, used
by the Romans to keep Inter instrumenta servitutis reges habu^re. C. Tacit.
Nations in servitude to them: and tho it were true that there had bin such a
man as Lucius, and he one of this sort, he is to be accounted only as a Roman
Magistrate, and signifys no more to our dispute, than if he had bin called
Proconsul, Praetor, or by any other name. However there was no series of them:
that which was temporary and occasional, depended upon the will of those, who
thinking there was occasion, created such a Magistrate, and omitted to do so,
when the occasion ceased, or was thought to cease; and might have had none at
all, if they had so pleased. The Magistracy therefore was from them, and
depenedd upon their will.

We have already mentioned the Historys of the Saxons, Danes and Normans, from
which Nations, together with the Britans, we are descended: and finding that
they were severe Assertors of their Libertys, acknowledged no human Laws but
their own, received no Kings but such as swore to observe them, and deposed
those who did not well perform their Oaths and Duty, it is evident that their
Kings were made by the People according to the Law; and that the Law, by which
they became what they were, could not be from themselves. Our Ancestors were so
fully convinced that in the creation of Kings they exercised their own right,
and were only to consider what was good for themselves, that without regard to
the memory of those who had gone before, they were accustomed to take such as
seemed most like, wisely, justly and gently to perform their office; refused
those that were suspected of pride, cruelty, or any other vice that might bring
prejudice upon the Public, what title soever they pretended; and removed such
as had bin placed in the Throne, if they did not answer the opinion conceived
of their virtue; which I take to be a manner of proceeding that agrees better
with the quality of Masters, making Laws and Magistrates for themselves, than of
Slaves receiving such as were imposed upon them.

2. To the second. Tho it should be granted, that all Nations had at the first
bin governed by Kings, it were nothing to the question; for no man or number of
Men was ever obliged to continue in the errors of his Predecessors. The
Authority of Custom as well as of Law (I mean in relation to the Power that
made it to be) consists only in its rectitude: And the same reason which may
have induced one or more Nations to create Kings, when they knew no other form
of Government, may not only induce them to set up another, if that be found
inconvenient to them, but proves that they may as justly do so, as remove a man
who performs not what was expected from him. If there had bin a Rule given by
God, and written in the minds of men by nature, it must have bin from the
beginning, universal and perpetual; or at least must have bin observed by the
wisest and best instructed Nations: which not being in any measure (as I have
proved already) there can be no reason, why a polite People should not
relinquish the errors committed by their Ancestors in the time of their
barbarism and ignorance, and why they should not do it in matters of
Government, as well as in any other thing relating to life. Men are subject to
errors, and it is the work of the best and wisest to discover and amend such as
their Ancestors may have committed, or to add perfection to those things which
by them have bin well invented. This is so certain, that whatsoever we enjoy
beyond the misery in which our barbarous Ancestors lived, is due only to the
liberty of correcting what was amiss in their practice, or inventing that which
they did not know: and I doubt whether it be more brutish to say we are obliged
to continue in the Idolatry of the Druids, with all the miserys and follys that
accompany the most savage barbarity; or to confess, that tho we have a right to
depart from these, yet we are for ever bound to continue the Government they
had established, whatever inconveniences might attend it. Tertullian disputing
with the Pagans, who objected the novelty of the Christian Religion, troubled
not himself with refuting that error; Nullum tempu^, ^ulla praescriptio
occurrit vericuti. Tertul. Id antiquius quod verius. Ibid.
but proving Christianity to be good and true, he thought he had sufficiently
proved it to be ancient. A wise Architect may show his skill, and deserve
commendation for building a poor house of vile materials, when he can procure
no better; but he no way ought to hinder others from erecting more glorious
Fabrics if they are furnished with the means required. Besides, such is the
imperfection of all human Constitutions, that they are subject to perpetual
fluctuation, which never permits them to continue long in the same condition:
Corruptions slide in insensibly; and the best Orders are sometimes subverted by
malice and violence: so that he who only regards what was done in such an age,
often takes the corruption of the State for the institution, follows the worst
example, thinks that to be the first that is the most ancient he knows; and if
a brave People seeing the original defects of their Government, or the
corruption into which it may be fallen, do either correct and reform what may
be amended, or abolish that which was evil in the institution, or so perverted,
that it cannot be restored to integrity, these men impute it to sedition, and
blame those actions, which of all that can be performed by men are the most
glorious. We are not therefore so much to inquire after that which is most
ancient, as that which is best, and most conducing to the good ends to which it
was directed. As Governments were instituted for the obtaining of Justice, and
(as our Author says) the preservation of Liberty, we are not to seek what
Government was the first, but what best provides for the obtaining of Justice,
and the preservation of Liberty. For whatsoever the Institution be, and how
long soever it may have lasted, it is void, if it thwarts, or dos not provide
for the end of its establishment. If such a Law or Custom therefore as is not
good in it self, had in the beginning prevailed in all parts of the world
(which in relation to absolute or any kind of Monarchy is not true) it ought to
be abolished; and if any man should show himself wiser than others by proposing
a Law or Government, more beneficial to mankind than any that had bin formerly
known, providing better for Justice and Liberty than all others had done, he
would merit the highest veneration. If any man ask, who shall be Judge of that
rectitude or pravity which either authorizes or destroys a Law? I answer, that
as this consists not in formalitys and nicetys, but in evident and substantial
truths, there is no need of any other Tribunal than that of common sense, and
the light of nature, ^o determine the matter: and he that travels through France,
Italy, Turkey, Germany and Switzerland, without consulting Bartolus or Baldus,
will easily understand whether the Countries that are under the Kings of France
and Spain, the Pope and the Great Turk, or such as are under the care of a
well-regulated Magistracy, do best enjoy the benefits of Justice and Liberty.
It Is as easily determined whether the Grecians when Athens and Thebes
flourished were more free than the Medes; whether Justice was better
administered by Agathocles, Dionysius and Phalaris, than by the legal Kings and
regular Magistrates of Sparta; or whether more care was taken that Justice and
Liberty might be preserved by Tiberius, Caligula, Claudius, Nero and Vitellius,
than by the Senate and People of Rome whilst the Laws were more powerful than
the commands of men. The like may be said of particular Laws, as those of
Nabuchodonosor and Caligula, for worshipping their Statues; our Acts of
Parliament against Heretics and Lollards, with the Statutes and Orders of the
Inquisition which is called the Holy Office. And if that only be a Law which is
Sanctio recta, jubens honesta, prohibens contraria, the meanest understanding,
if free from passion, may certainly know that such as these cannot be Laws, by
what Authority soever they were enacted; and that the use of them, and others
like to them, ought to be abolished for their turpitude and iniquity. Infinite
examples of the like nature might be alleged, as well concerning divine as
human things. And if there be any Laws which are evil, there cannot be an
incontestable rectitude in all; and if not in all, it concerns us to examine
where it is to be found. Laws and Constitutions ought to be weighed; and whilst
all due reverence is paid to such as are good, every Nation may not only retain
in it self a power of changing or abolishing all such as are not so, but ought
to exercise that Power according to the best of their understanding; and in the
place of what was either at first mistaken, or afterward corrupted, to
constitute that which is most conducing to the establishment of Justice and
Liberty.

But such is the condition of mankind, that nothing can be so perfectly framed
as not to give some testimony of human imbecility, and frequently to stand in
need of reparations and amendments. Many things are unknown to the wisest, and
the best men can never wholly divest themselves of passions and affections. By
this means the best and wisest are sometimes led into Error, and stand in need
of Successors like to themselves, who may find remedys for the faults they have
committed; and nothing can or ought to be permanent but that which is perfect.
No natural body was ever so well tempered and organized, as not to be subject
to diseases, wounds or other accidents, and to need medicines and other
occasional helps as well as nourishment and exercise: and he who under the name
of Innovation would deprive Nations of the like, dos, as much as lies in him,
condemn them all to perish by the defects of their own foundations. Discors. di
Macchiav. l. 2.
Some men observing this, have proposed a necessity of reducing every State once
in an age or two, to the integrity of its first principle: but they ought to
have examined, whether that principle be good or evil, or so good that nothing
can be added to it, which none ever was; and this being so, those who would
admit of no change would render Errors perpetual, and depriving Mankind of the
benefits of Wisdom, Industry, Experience, and the right use of Reason, oblige
all to continue in the miserable barbarity of their Ancestors, which suits
better with the nature of a Wolf than that of a Man.

Those who are of better understanding, weigh all things, and often find reason
to abrogate that which their fathers, according to the measure of the knowledge
they had, or the state of things among them, had rightly instituted, or to
restore that which they had abrogated; and there can be no greater mark of a
most brutish stupidity, than for men to continue in an evil way, because their
fathers had brought them into it. But if we ought not too strictly to adhere to
our own Constitutions, those of other Nations are less to be regarded by us;
for the Laws that may be good for one People are not for all, and that which
agrees with the manners of one Age, is utterly abhorrent from those of another.
It were absurd to think of restoring the Laws of Lycurgus to the present
inhabitants of Peloponnesus, who are accustomed to the most abject slavery. It
may easily be imagined, how the Romans, Sabins and Latins, now under the
tyranny of the Pope, would relish such a discipline as flourished among them
after the expulsion of the Tarquins; and it had bin no less preposterous to
give a liberty to the Parthians of governing themselves, or for them to assume
it, than to impose an absolute Monarch upon the German Nation. Hist. l. 2.
Titus Livius having observed this, says, that if a popular Government had bin
set up in Rome immediately upon the building of the City; and if that fierce
people, which was composed of unruly shepherds, herdsmen, fugitive slaves, and
out law'd persons, who could not suffer the Government under which they
wereborn, had come to be incited by turbulent Orators, they would have brought
all into confusion: whereas that boisterous humor being gradually tempered by
discipline under Romulus, or taught to vent its fury against foreign enemies, and
softened by the peaceable reign of Numa, a new Race grew up, which being all of
one blood, contracted a love to their Country, and became capable of Liberty,
which the madness of their last King, and the leudness of his Son, gave them
occasion to resume. If this was commendable in them, it must be so in other
Nations. If the Germans might preserve their Liberty, as well as the Parthians
submit themselves to absolute Monarchy; it is as lawful for the descendents of
those Germans to continue in it, as for the Eastern Nations to be slaves. If
one Nation may justly choose the Government that seems best to them, and
continue or alter it according to the changes of times and things, the same
right must belong to others. The great variety of Laws that are or have bin in
the world, proceeds from this; and nothing can better show the wisdom and
virtue, or the vices and folly of Nations, than the use they make of this
right: they have bin glorious or infamous, powerful or despicable, happy or
miserable, as they have well or ill executed it.

If it be said that the Law given by God to the Hebrews, proceeding from his
wisdom and goodness, must needs be perfect and obligatory to all Nations: I
answer, that there is a simple and a relative perfection; the first is only in
God, the other in the things he has created. He saw that they were good; which
can signify no more than that Genesis 1.
they were good in their kind, and suited to the end for which he designed them.
For if the perfection were absolute, there could be no difference between an
Angel and a Worm; and nothing could be subject to change or death, for that is
imperfection. This relative perfection is seen also by his Law given to mankind
in the persons of Adam and Noah. It was good in the kind, fit for those times,
but could never have bin enlarged or altered, if the perfection had bin simple;
and no better evidence can be given to show that it was not so, than that God
did afterward give one much more full and explicit to his People. This Law
also was peculiarly applicable to that People and Season; for if it had bin
otherwise, the Apostles would have obliged Christians to the entire observation
of it, as well as to abstain from idolatry, fornication and blood. But if all
this be not so, then their judicial Law, and the form of their Commonwealth
must be received by all; no human Law can be of any value; we are all Brethren,
no man has a prerogative above another; Lands must be equally divided amongst
all; Inheritances cannot be alienated for above fifty years; no man can be
raised above the rest unless he be called by God, and enabled by his Spirit to
conduct the People: When this man dies, he that has the same Spirit must
succeed, as Joshua did to Moses, and his Children can have no title to his
Office: when such a man appears, a Sanhedrim of seventy men chosen out of the
whole People, are to judge such causes as relate to themselves, whilst those of
greater extent and importance are referred to the General Assemblys. Here is no
mention of a King, and consequently, if we must take this Law for our pattern,
we cannot have one: If the point be driven to the utmost, and the precept of
Deuteronomy, where God permitted them to have a King, if they thought fit, when
they came into the promised Land, be understood to extend to all Nations, every
one of them must have the same liberty of taking their own time, choosing him in
their own way, dividing the Kingdom, having no King, and setting up other
Governors when they please, as before the Election of Saul, and after the
return from the Captivity: and even when they have a King, he must be such a
one as is described in the same Chapter, who no more resembles the Sovereign
Majesty that our Author adores, and agrees as little with his Maxims, as a
Tribun of the Roman People.

We may therefore conclude, that if we are to follow the Law of Moses, we must
take it with all the appendages; a King can be no more, and no otherwise than
he makes him: for whatever we read of the Kings they had, were extreme
deviations from it. No Nation can make any Law, and our Lawyers burning their
Books may betake themselves to the study of the Pentateuch, in which tho some
of them may be well versed, yet probably the profit arising from thence will
not be very great.

But if we are not obliged to live in a conformity to the Law of Moses, every
People may frame Laws for themselves, and we cannot be denied the right that is
common to all. Our Laws were not sent from Heaven, but made by our Ancestors
according to the light they had, and their present occasions. We inherit the
same right from them; and, as we may without vanity say that we know a little
more than they did, if we find our selves prejudiced by any Law that they made,
we may repeal it. The safety of the People was their supreme Law, and is so to
us: neither can we be thought less fit to judge what conduces to that end, than
they were. If they in any Age had bin persuaded to put themselves under the
power, or, in our Author's phrase, under the sovereign Majesty of a child, a
fool, a mad or desperately wicked person, and had annexed the right conferred
upon him to such as should succeed, it had not bin a just and right Sanction;
and having none of the qualitys essentially belonging to a Law, could not have
the effect of a Law. It cannot be for the good of a People to be governed by
one, who by nature ought to be governed, or by age or accident is rendered
unable to govern himself. The public interests, and the concernments of
private men in their lands, goods, libertys and lives (for the preservation of
which, our Author says, the regal Prerogative is only constituted) cannot be
preserved by one who is transported by his own passions or follys, a slave to
his lusts and vices; or, which is sometimes worse, governed by the vilest of
men and women who flatter him in them, and push him on to do such things as
even they would abhor, if they were in his place. The turpitude and impious
madness of such an act must necessarily make it void, by overthrowing the ends
for which it was made, since that justice which was sought cannot be obtained,
nor the evils that were feared prevented; and they for whose good it was
intended, must necessarily have a right of abolishing it. This might be
sufficient for us, tho our Ancestors had enslaved themselves. But, God be
thanked, we are not put to that trouble: We have no reason to believe we are
descended from such fools and beasts, as would willingly cast themselves and us
into such an excess of misery and shame, or that they were so tame and cowardly
to be subjected by force or fear. We know the value they set upon their
Libertys, and the courage with which they defended them: and we can have no
better example to encourage us, never to suffer them to be violated or
diminished.

SECT. XXVI. Tho the King may be entrusted with the power of choosing Judges,
yet that by which they act is from the Law.
I Confess that no Law can be so perfect, to provide exactly for every case
that may fall out, so as to leave nothing to the discretion of the Judges, who
in some measure are to interpret them: But that Laws or Customs are ever few,
or that the paucity is the reason that they cannot give special rules, or that
Judges do resort to those Principles or Common Law Axioms, whereupon former
Judgments in cases something alike have bin given by former Judges, who all
receive their Authority from the King in his right to give Sentence, I utterly
deny; and affirm,

1. That in many places, and particularly in England, the Laws are so many,
that the number of them has introduced an uncertainty and confusion, which is
both dangerous and troublesome; and the infinite variety of adjudg'd cases
thwarting and contradicting each other, has rendered these difficultys
inextricable. Tacitus imputes a great part of the miserys suffered by the
Romans in his time to this abuse, and tells us, that Et in corruptissima
Republica plurimae Leges.
the Laws grew to be innumerable in the worst and most corrupt state of things,
and that Justice was overthrown by them. By the same means in France, Italy,
and other places, where the Civil Law is rendered municipal, Judgments are in a
manner arbitrary; and tho the intention of our Laws be just and good, they are
so numerous, and the volumes of our Statutes with the Interpretations and
adjudg'd Cases so vast, that hardly any thing is so clear and fixed, but men of
wit and learning may find what will serve for a pretense to justify almost any
judgment they have a mind to give. Whereas the Laws of Moses, as to the
Judicial part, being short and few, Judgments were easy and certain; and in
Switzerland, Sweden, and some parts of Denmark, the whole Volume that contains
them may be read in few hours, and by that means no injustice can be done which
is not immediately made evident.

2. Axioms are not rightly grounded upon judged Cases, but Cases are to be
judged according to Axioms: the certain is not proved by the uncertain, but the
uncertain by the certain; and every thing is to be esteemed uncertain till it
be proved to be certain. Axioms in Law are, as in Mathematics, evident to
common sense; and nothing is to be taken for an Axiom, that is not so. Euclid
dos not prove his Axioms by his Propositions, but his Propositions, which are
abstruse, by such Axioms as are evident to all. The Axioms of our Law do not
receive their Authority from Coke and Hales, but Coke and Hales deserve praise
for giving judgment according to such as are undeniably true.

3. The Judges reeeive their Commissions from the King; and perhaps it may be
said, that the Custom of naming them is grounded upon a right with which he is
entrusted; but their power is from the Law, as that of the King also is. For he
who has none originally in himself, can give none unless it be first conferred
upon him. I know not how he can well perform his Oath to govern according to
Law, unless he execute the power with which he is entrusted, in naming those
men to be Judges, whom in his conscience, and by the advice of his Council, he
thinks the best and ablest to perform that Office: But both he and they are to
learn their duty from that Law, by which they are, and which allots to every
one his proper work. As the Law intends that men should be made Judges for
their integrity and knowledge in the Law, and that it ought not to be imagined
that the King will break his trust by choosing such as are not so, till the
violation be evident, nothing is more reasonable than to intend that the Judges
so qualified should instruct the King in matters of Law. But that he who may be
a child, over-ag'd, or otherwise ignorant and incapable, should instruct the
Judges, is equally absurd, as for a blind man to be a guide to those who have
the best eyes; and so abhorrent from the meaning of the Law, that the Judges
(as I said before) are sworn to do justice according to the Laws, without any
regard to the King's words, letters or commands. If they are therefore to act
according to a set rule, from which they may not depart what command soever
they receive, they do not act by a power from him, but by one that is above
both. This is commonly confessed; and tho some Judges have bin found in several
ages, who in hopes of reward and preferment have made little account of their
Oath, yet the success that many of them have had, may reasonably deter others
from following their example: and if there are not more instances in this kind,
no better reason can be given, than that Jure igitur plectimur; nisi enim
multorum impunita feeler^ tulissemus, nunquam ad unum tanta pervenisset
licentia. Cicero.
Nations do frequently fail, by being too remiss in asserting their own rights
or punishing offenders, and hardly ever err on the severer side.

4. Judgments are variously given in several States and Kingdoms, but he who
would find one where they lie in the breast of the King, must go at least as
far as Morocco. Nay, the Ambassador who was lately here from that place, denied
that they were absolutely in him. However it is certain that in England,
according to the Great Charter, Jud^^ia ^iunt per pares. Mag. Chart.
Judgments are passed by equals: no man can be imprisoned, disseiz'd of his
Freehold, deprived of Life or Limb, Ni^ per judicium parium suorum. Ibid.
unless by the sentence of his Peers. The Kings of Judah did Judicabant and
judicabantur. Maimonid.
judge and were judged; and the Judgments they gave were in and with the
Sanhedrin. In England the Kings do not judge, but are judged: and Bracton says,
In justitia recipienda rex cuilibet ex plebe aqualis est.
That in receiving justice the King is equal to another man; which could not
be, if judgments were given by him, and he were exempted from the judgment of
all by that Law, which has put all judgments into the hands of the People. This
power is executed by them in grand or petty Jurys, and the Judges are
assistants to them in explaining the difficult points of the Law, in which it is
presumed they should be learned. The strength of every judgment consists in the
verdict of these Jurys, which the Judges do not give, but pronounce or declare:
and the same Law that makes good a verdict given contrary to the advice or
direction of the Judges, exposes them to the utmost penaltys, if upon their own
heads, or a command from the King, they should presume to give a Sentence,
without or contrary to a Verdict; and no pretensions to a power of interpreting
the Law can exempt them if they break it. The power also with which the Judges
are entrusted, is but of a moderate extent, and to be executed bona side.
Prevarications are capital, as they proved to Tresilian, Empson, Dudley, and
many others. Nay even in special Verdicts, the Judges are only assistants to
the Jurys who find it specially, and the Verdict is from them; tho the Judges
having heard the point argued, declare the sense of the Law thereupon.
Wherefore if I should grant that the King might personally assist in judgments,
his work could only be to prevent frauds, and by the advice of the Judges to
see that the Laws be duly executed, or perhaps to inspect their behavior. If
he has more than this, it must be by virtue of his politic capacity, in which
he is understood to be always present in the principal Courts, where Justice is
always done whether he who wears the Crown be young or old, wise or ignorant,
good or bad, or whether he like or dislike what is done.

Moreover, as Governments are instituted for the obtaining of Justice, and the
King is in a great measure entrusted with the power of executing it, it is
probable that the Law would have required his presence in the distribution, if
there had bin but one Court; that at the same time he could be present in more
than one; that it were certain he would be guilty of no miscarriages; that all
miscarriages were to be punished in him as well as in the Judges; or that it
were certain he should always be a man of such wisdom, industry, experience and
integrity, as to be an assistance to, and a watch over those who are appointed
for the administration of Justice. But there being many Courts sitting at the
same time of equal Authority, in several places far distant from each other; it
being impossible for the King to be present in all; there being no manner of
assurance that the same or greater miscarriages may not be committed in his
presence than in his absence, by himself than others; no opportunity of
punishing every delict in him, without bringing the Nation into such disorder,
as may be of more prejudice to the public than an injury done to a private
man; the Law which intends to obviate offenses, or to punish such as cannot be
obviated, has directed, that those men should be chosen who are most knowing in
it, imposes an Oath upon them, not to be diverted from the due course of
justice by fear or favor, hopes or reward, particularly by any command from the
King; and appoints the severest punishments for them if they prove false to God
and their Country.

If any man think that the words cited from Bracton by our Author upon the
question, Quis primo and principaliter possit and debeat judicare, etc.
Sciendum est quod Rex and non alius, si solus ad haec sufficere possit; cum ad
hoc per virtutem Sacramenti teneatur, are contrary to what I have said, I
desire the context may be considered, that his opinion may be truly understood,
tho the words taken simply and nakedly may be enough for my purpose. For it is
ridiculous to infer that the King has a right of doing any thing, upon a
supposition that it is impossible for him to do it. He therefore who says the
King cannot do it, says it must be done by others, or not at all. But having
already proved that the King, merely as King, has none of the qualitys required
for judging all or any cases, and that many Kings have all the defects of age
and person that render men most unable and unfit to give any Sentence; we may
conclude, without contradicting Bracton, that no King as King has a power of
judging, because some of them are utterly unable and unfit to do it; and if any
one has such a power, it must be conferred upon him by those who think him able
and fit to perform that work. When Filmer finds such a man, we must inquire
into the extent of that power which is given to him; but this would be nothing
to his general proposition, for he himself would hardly have inferred, that
because a power of judging in some cases was conferred upon one Prince on
account of his fitness and ability, therefore all of 'em, however unfit and
unable, have a power of deciding all cases. Besides, if he believe Bracton,
this power of judging is not inherent in the King, but incumbent upon him by
virtue of his Oath, which our Author endeavors to enervate and annul. But as
that Oath is grounded upon the Law, and the Law cannot presume impossibilitys
and absurditys, it cannot intend, and the Oath cannot require, that a man
should do that which he is unable and unfit to do. Many Kings are unfit to judge
causes, the Law cannot therefore intend they should do it. The Context also
shows, that this imagination of the King's judging all causes, if he could, is
merely chimerical: for Bracton says in the same Chapter, that the power of the
King is the Power of the Law; that is, that he has no power but by the Law. And
the Law that aims at justice, cannot make it to depend upon the uncertain humor
of a Child, a Woman, or a foolish Man; for by that means it would destroy it
self. The Law cannot therefore give any such power, and the King cannot have it.

If it be said that all Kings are not so; that some are of mature age, wise,
just and good; or that the question is not what is good for the Subject, but
what is glorious to the King, and that he must not lose his right tho the
People perish; I answer, first, that whatsoever belongs to Kings as Kings,
belongs to all Kings: this Power of judging cannot belong to all for the
Reasons abovementioned: it cannot therefore belong to any as King, nor without
madness be granted to any, till he has given testimony of such Wisdom,
Experience, Diligence and Goodness, as is required for so great a work. It
imports not what his Ancestors were; Virtues are not entailed; and it were less
improper for the Heirs of Hales and Harvey, to pretend that the Clients and
Patients of their Ancestors should depend upon their advice in matters of Law
and Physic, than for the Heirs of a great and wise Prince to pretend to Powers
given on account of virtue, if they have not the same talents for the
performance of the works required.

Common sense declares, that Governments are instituted, and Judicatures
erected for the obtaining of justice. The Kings Bench was not established that
the Chief Justice should have a great Office, but that the oppressed should be
relieved, and right done. The Honor and Profit he receives, comes in as it were
by accident, as the rewards of his service, if he rightly perform his duty: but
he may as well pretend he is there for his own sake, as the King. God did not
set up Moses or Joshua, that they might glory in having six hundred thousand
men under their command, but that they might lead the People into the Land they
were to possess: that is, they were not for themselves, but for the People; and
the glory they acquired was by rightly performing the end of their institution.
Even our Author is obliged to confess this, when he says, that the King's
Prerogative is instituted for the good of those that are under it. It Is
therefore for them that he enjoys it, and it can no otherwise subsist than in
concurrence with that end. He also yields that the safety of the People is the
supreme Law. The right therefore that the King has must be conformable and
subordinate to it. If any one therefore set up an interest in himself that is
not so, he breaks this supreme Law; he dos not live and reign for his People
but for himself, and by departing from the end of his institution destroys it:
and if Aristotle (to whom our Author seems to have a great deference) deserves
credit, such a one ceases to be a King, and becomes a Tyrant; he who ought to
have bin the best of men is turned into the worst; and he who is recommended to
us under the name of a Father, becomes a public Enemy to the People. The
question therefore is not, what is good for the King, but what is good for the
People, and he can have no right repugnant to them.

Bracton is not more gentle. The King, says he, is obliged by his Oath, to the
utmost of his power, to preserve the Church, and the Christian World in peace;
to hinder rapine, and all manner of iniquity; to cause justice and mercy to be
observed: He has no power but from the Law: that only is to be taken for Law,
quod recte fuerit definitum: he is therefore to cause justice to be done
according to that rule, and not to pervert it for his own pleasure, profit or
glory. He may choose Judges also, not such as will be subservient to his will,
but Viros sapientes, timentes Deum, in quibus est Bract. l. 3. c. 10.
veritas eloquiorum, and qui oderunt avaritiam. Which proves that Kings and
their Officers do not possess their places for themselves, but for the People,
and must be such as are fit and able to perform the dutys they undertake. The
mischievous fury of those who assume a power above their abilitys, is well
represented by the known fable of Phaeton: they think they desire fine things
for themselves when they seek their own ruin. In conformity to this the same
Bracton says, that Si quis minus sapiens and indoctus, sedem judicandi and
honestatem judicandi sibi praesumserit, exalto corruit, etc. and perinde ^rit
ac si gladium poneret in manu furentis. Ibid.
If any man who is unskilful assume the seat of justice, he falls as from a
Precipice, etc. and it is the same thing as if a sword be put into the hand of a
mad man; which cannot but affect the King as well as those who are chosen by
him. If he neglect the functions of his Office, he dos unjustly, and becomes
the Vicegerent of the Devil; for he is the Minister of him whose works he dos.
This is Bracton's opinion: but desiring to be a more gentle Interpreter of the
Law, I only wish that Princes would consider the end of their institution;
endeavor to perform it; measure their own abilitys; content themselves with
that power which the Laws allow, and abhor those Wretches who by flattery and
lies endeavor to work upon their frailest Passions, by which means they draw
upon 'em that hatred of the People, which frequently brings them to destruction.

Tho Vlpian's words, Princeps legibus non tenetur, be granted to have bin true
in fact, with relation to the Roman Empire, in the time when he lived; yet they
can conclude nothing against us. The Liberty of Rome had bin overthrown long
before by the power of the Sword, and the Law rendered subservient to the will
of the Usurpers. They were not Englishmen, but Romans, who lost the Battles of
Pharsalia and Philippi: The Carcases of their Senators, not ours, were exposed
to the Wolves and Vulturs: Pompeius, Scipio, Lentulus, Afranius, Petreius,
Cato, Cassius and Brutus were defenders of the Roman, not the English Liberty;
and that of their Country, not ours, could only be lost by their defeat. Those
who were destroyed by the Proscriptions, left Rome, not England to be enslaved.
If the best had gained the victory, it could have bin no advantage to us, and
their overthrow can be no prejudice. Every Nation is to take care of their own
Laws; and whether any one has had the Wisdom, Virtue, Fortune and Power to
defend them or not, concerns only themselves. The Examples of great and good
men acting freely deserve consideration, but they only perish by the ill
success of their designs; and whatsoever is afterward done by their subdued
Posterity ought to have no other effect upon the rest of the world, than to
admonish them so to join in the defense of their Libertys, as never to be
brought under the necessity of acting by the command of one, to the prejudice
of themselves and their Country. If the Roman greatness persuade us to put an
extraordinary value upon what passed among them, we ought rather to examine what
they did, said, or thought when they enjoyed that Liberty which was the Mother
and Nurse of their Virtue, than what they suffered, or were forced to say, when
fallen under that Slavery which produced all manner of corruption, and made
them the most base and miserable People of the world.

For what concerns us, the Actions of our Ancestors resemble those of the
ancient rather than the later Romans: tho our Government be not the same with
theirs in form, yet it is in principle; and if we are not degenerated, we shall
rather desire to imitate the Romans in the time of their virtue, glory, power
and felicity, than what they were in that of their slavery, vice, shame and
misery. In the best times, when the Laws were more powerful than the commands
of men, fraud was accounted a crime so detestable as not to be imputed to any
but Slaves; and he who had sought a power above the Law under color of
interpreting it, would have bin exposed to scorn, or greater punishments, if
any can be greater than the just scorn of the best men. And as neither the
Romans, nor any people of the world, have better defended their libertys than
the English Nation when any attempt has bin made to oppress them by force, they
ought to be no less careful to preserve them from the more dangerous efforts of
fraud and falsehood.

Our Ancestors were certainly in a low condition in the time of William the
First: Many of their best men had perished in the Civil Wars or with Harold:
their valor was great, but rough, and void of skill: The Normans by frequent
Expeditions into France, Italy and Spain, had added subtilty to the boisterous
violence of their native climate: William had engaged his Faith, but broke it,
and turned the power with which he was entrusted to the ruin of those that had
trusted him. He destroyed many worthy men, carried others into Normandy, and
thought himself Master of all. He was crafty, bold, and elated with Victory;
but the resolution of a brave People was invincible. When their Laws and
Libertys were in danger, they resolved to die or to defend them, and made him
see he could no otherwise preserve his Crown and Life than by the performance
of his Oath, and accomplishing the ends of his Election. They neither took him
to be the giver or interpreter of their Laws, and would not suffer him to
violate those of their Ancestors. In this way they always continued; and tho
perhaps they might want skill to fall upon the surest and easiest means of
restraining the lusts of Princes, yet they maintained their rights so well,
that the wisest Princes seldom invaded them; and the success of those who were
so foolish to attempt it was such, as may justly deter others from following
their unprosperous Examples. We have had no King since William the First more
hardy than Henry the 8 th, and yet he so entirely acknowledged the power of
making, changing and repealing Laws to be in the Parliament, as never to
attempt any extraordinary thing otherwise than by their Authority. It was not
he, but the Parliament, that dissolved the Abbys: He did not take their Lands
to himself, but received what the Parliament thought fit to give him: He did
not reject the Supremacy of the Pope, nor assume any other power in spiritual
matters, than the Parliament conferred upon him. The intricacys of his
Marriages, and the legitimation of his Children were settled by the same Power:
At least one of his Daughters could not inherit the Crown upon any other Title;
they who gave him a power to dispose of the Crown by will, might have given it
to his Groom; and he was too haughty to ask it from them, if he had it in
himself, which he must have had, if the Laws and Judicatures had bin in his
hand.

This is farther evidenced by what passed in the Tower between Sir Thomas Moor
and Rich the King's Solicitor, who asking, If it would not be Herberts 's Hen.
8 th.
treason to oppose Richard Rich, if the Parliament should make him King, Moor
said that was Casus levis; for the Parliament could make and depose Kings as
they thought fit; and then (as more conducing to his own case) asked Rich if
the Parliament should enact that God should not be God, whether such as did not
submit should be esteemed Traitors? It Is evident that a man of the acuteness
and learning of Sir Tho. Moor would not have made use of such an Argument to
avoid the necessity of obeying what the Parliament had ordained, by showing his
Case to be of a nature far above the power of man, unless it had bin confessed by
all men that the Parliament could do whatsoever lay within the reach of human
power. This may be enough to prove that the King cannot have a power over the
Law; and if he has it not, the power of interpreting Law is absurdly attributed
to him, since it is founded upon a supposition that he can make them, which is
false.

SECT. XXVII. Magna Charta was not the Original, but a Declaration of the
English Libertys. The King's Power is not restrained, but created by that and
other Laws; and the Nation that made them can only correct the defects of them.
I Agree with our Author that Magna Charta was not made to restrain the
absolute Authority; for no such thing was in being or pretended (the folly of
such visions seeming to have bin reserved to complete the misfortune and
ignominy of our age) but it was to assert the native and original Libertys of
our Nation by the confession of the King then being, that neither he nor his
Successors should any way encroach upon them: and it cannot be said that the
power of Kings is diminished by that or any other Law; for as they are Kings
only by Law, the Law may confer power upon one in particular, or upon him and
his Successors, but can take nothing from them, because they have nothing
except what is given to them. But as that which the Law gives, is given by
those who make the Law, they only are capable of judging, whether he to whom
they gave it, do well or ill employ that power, and consequently are only fit
to correct the defects that may be found in it. Therefore tho I should confess
that faults may be found in many Statutes, and that the whole body of them is
greatly defective, it will not follow that the compendious way of referring all
to the will of the King should be taken. But what defects soever may be in our
Law, the disease is not so great to require extreme remedys, and we may hope
for a cheaper cure. Our Law may possibly have given away too much from the
People, and provided only insufficient defenses of our Libertys against the
encroachments of bad Princes; but none who are not in judgment and honesty like
to our Author, can propose for a remedy to the evils that proceed from the
error of giving too much, the resignation of all the rest to them. And whatever
he says, it is evident that he knows this to be true, tho when he denis that the
power of King can be restrained by Acts of Parliament, he endeavors to take
advantage of such clauses as were either fraudulently inserted by the King's
Officers, who till the days of Henry the Fifth for the most part had the
penning of the public Acts, or through negligence did not fully explain the
intentions of the Legislators; which would be to no purpose if all were put
into the hands of the King by a general Law from God, that no human power could
diminish or enlarge; and as his last shift would obliquely put all into the
power of the King, by giving him a right of interpreting the Law, and judging
such cases as are not clearly decided; which would be equally impertinent, if
he had openly and plainly a right of determining all things according to his
will.

But what defect soever may be in any Statutes, no great inconveniencys could
probably ensue, if that for annual Parliaments was observed, as of right it
ought to be. Nothing is more unlikely, than that a great Assembly of eminent
and chosen men should make a Law evidently destructive to their own designs;
and no mischief that might emerge upon the discovery of a mistake, could be so
extreme that the cure might not be deferred till the meeting of the Parliament,
or at least forty days (in which time the King may call one) if that which the
Law has fixed seem to be too long. If he fails of this, he performs not his
trust; and he that would reward such a breach of it with a vast and
uncontrolable power, may be justly thought equal in madness to our Author, who
by forbidding us to examine the titles of Kings, and enjoining an entire
veneration of the power, by what means soever obtained, encourages the worst of
men to murder the best of Princes, with an assurance that if they prosper they
shall enjoy all the honors and advantages that this World can afford.

Princes are not much more beholden to him for the haughty language he puts
into their mouths, it having bin observed that the worst are always most ready
to use it; and their extravagances having bin often chastis'd by Law,
sufficiently proves, that their power is not derived from a higher original
than the Law of their own Countries.

If it were true, that the answer sometimes given by Kings to Bills presented
for their Assent, did, as our Author says, amount to a denial, it could only
show that they have a negative voice upon that which is agreed by the
Parliament, and is far from a power of acting by themselves, being only a check
upon the other parts of the Government. But indeed it is no more than an
elusion; and he that dos by art obliquely elude, confesses he has not a right
absolutely to refuse. It Is natural to Kings, especially to the worst, to scrue
up their Authority to the height; and nothing can more evidently prove the
defect of it, than the necessity of having recourse to such pitiful evasions,
when they are unwilling to do that which is required. But if I should grant
that the words import a denial, and that (notwithstanding those of the
Coronation Oath, Quas vulgus elegerit) they might deny; no more could be
inferred from thence, than that they are entrusted with a power equal in that
point, to that of either House, and cannot be supreme in our Author's sense,
unless there were in the same State at the same time three distinct supreme and
absolute Powers, which is absurd.

His cases relating to the proceedings of the Star Chamber and Council Table,
do only prove that some Kings have incroach'd upon the rights of the Nation,
and bin suffered till their excesses growing to be extreme, they turned to the
ruin of the Ministers that advised them, and sometimes of the Kings themselves.
But the Jurisdiction of the Council having bin regulated by the Statute of 17
Car. 1. and the Star Chamber more lately abolished, they are nothing to our
dispute.

Such as our Author usually impute to Treason and Rebellion the changes that
upon these occasions have ensued; but all impartial men do not only justify
them, but acknowledge that all the Crowns of Europe are at this day enjoyed by
no other title than such Acts solemnly performed by the respective Nations, who
either disliking the Person that pretended to the Crown (tho next in blood) or
the Government of the present Possessor, have thought fit to prefer another
Person or Family. They also say, as that no Government can be so perfect but
some defect may be originally in it, or afterward introduced, none can subsist
unless they be from time to time reduced to their first integrity, by such an
exertion of the power of those for whose sake they were instituted, as may
plainly show them to be subject to no power under Heaven, but may do whatever
appears to be for their own good. And as the safety of all Nations consists in
rightly placing and measuring this Power, such have bin found always to prosper
who have given it to those from whom Usurpations were least to be feared, who
have bin least subject to be awed, cheated or corrupted; and who having the
greatest interest in the Nation, were most concerned to preserve its power,
liberty and welfare. This is the greatest trust that can be reposed in men.
This power was by the Spartans given to the Ephori and the Senate of twenty
eight; in Venine to that which they call Concilio de Pregadi; in Germany,
Spain, France, Swedeland, Denmark, Poland, Hungary, Bohemia, Scotland, England,
and generally all the Nations that have lived under the Gothic Polity, it has
bin in their General Assemblys, under the names of Diets, Cortez, Parliaments,
Senats, and the like. But in what hands soever it is, the power of making,
abrogating, changing, correcting and intepreting Laws, has bin in the same;
Kings have bin rejected or deposed; the Succession of the Crown settled,
regulated or changed: and I defy any man to show me one King amongst all the
Nations abovementioned, that has any right to the Crown he wears, unless such
acts are good.

If this power be not well placed, or rightly proportioned to that which is
given to other Magistrates, the State must necessarily fall into great
disorders, or the must violent and dangerous means must be frequently used to
preserve their Liberty. Sparta and Venice have rarely bin put to that trouble,
because the Senats were so much above the Kings and Dukes in power, that they
could without difficulty bring them to reason. The Gothic Kings in Spain never
ventured to dispute with the Nobility; and Witza and Rodrigo exposed the
Kingdom as a prey to the Moors, rather by weakening it through the neglect of
Military discipline, joined to their own ignorance and cowardice, and by evil
example bringing the youth to resemble them in leudness and baseness, than by
establishing in themselves a power above the Law. But in England our Ancestors,
who seem to have had some such thing in their eye, as balancing the powers, by
a fatal mistake placed usually so much in the hands of the King, that
whenever he happened to be bad, his extravagances could not be represt
without great danger. And as this has in several ages cost the Nation a vast
proportion of generous blood, so it is the cause of our present difficultys, and
threatens us with more, but can never deprive usof the rights we inherit from
our fathers.

SECT. XXVIII. The English Nation has always bin governed by it self, or its
Representatives.
HAVING proved that the People of England have never acknowledged any other
human Law than their own, and that our Parliaments having the power of making
and abrogating Laws, they only can interpret them and decide hard cases, it
plainly appears there can be no truth in our Author's assertion, That the King
is the Author, Corrector and Moderator of both Statute and Common Law: and
nothing can be more frivolous than what he adds, that neither of them can be a
diminution of that natural power which Kings have over their People as fathers;
in as much as the differences between paternal and monarchical Power (as he
asserts it) are vast and irreconcilable in principle and practice, as I have
proved at large in the former parts of this Work.

But lest we should be too proud of the honor he is pleased to do to our
Parliaments by making use of their Authority, he says, We are first to remember
that till the Conquest (which name for the glory of our Nation he gives to the
coming in of the Normans) there could be no Parliament assembled of the General
States, because we cannot learn that until those days it was entirely united in
one. Secondly he doubts, Whether the Parliament in the time of the Saxons were
composed of the Nobility and Clergy, or whether the Commons were also called;
but concludes, there could be no Knights of any Shires, because there were no
Shires. Thirdly, That Henry the First caused the Commons first to assemble
Knights and Burgesses of their own choosing; and would make this to be an Act of
grace and favor from that King: but adds, that it had bin more for the honor of
Parliaments, if a King whose title to the Crown had bin better, had bin the
Author of the form of it.

In answer to the first, I do not think my self obliged to insist upon the name
or form of the Parliament; for the Authority of a Magistracy proceeds not from
the number of years that it has continued, but the rectitude of the
Institution, and the Authority of those that instituted it. The power of Saul,
David and Jeroboam was the same with that which belonged to the last Kings of
Israel and Judah. The Authority of the Roman Consuls, Dictators, Pretors and
Tribuns, was the same as soon as it was established; was as legal and just as
that of the Kings of Denmark, which is said to have continued above three
thousand years. For as time can make nothing lawful or just, that is not so of
it self (tho men are unwilling to change that which has pleased their
Ancestors, unless they discover great inconveniences in it) that which a People
dos rightly establish for their own good, is of as much force the first day, as
continuance can ever give to it: and therefore in matters of the greatest
importance, wise and good men do not so much inquire what has bin, as what is
good and ought to be; for that which of it self is evil, by continuance is made
worse, and upon the first opportunity is justly to be abolished. But if that
Liberty in which God created man, can receive any strength from continuance,
and the rights of Englishmen can be rendered more unquestionable by
prescription, I say that the Nations whose rights we inherit, have ever enjoyed
the Libertys we claim, and always exercised them in governing themselves
popularly, or by such Representatives as have bin instituted by themselves,
from the time they were first known in the World.

The Britans and Saxons lay so long hid in the obscurity that accompanys
barbarism, that it is in vain to seek what was done by either in any Writers
more ancient than Caesar and Tacitus. The first describes the Britans to have
bin a fierce People zealous for Liberty, and so obstinately valiant in the
defense of it, that tho they wanted skill, and were overpowered by the Romans,
their Country could no otherwise be subdued, than by the slaughter of all the
Inhabitants able to bear arms. He calls them a free People, in as much as they
were not like the Gauls, governed by Laws made by the great Men, but by the
People. In his time they chose Cassivellaunus, and afterward Caractatus,
Arviragus, Galgacus, and others to command them in their wars, but they
retained the Government in themselves. That no force might be put upon them,
they met armed in their general Assemblys; and tho the smaller matters were
left to the determination of the Chief men chosen by themselves for that
purpose, they reserved the most important (amongst which the choosing of those
men was one) to themselves. When the Romans had brought them low, Inter
instrumenta servitutis reges habuere. C. Tacit.
they set up certain Kings to govern such as were within their Territorys: but
those who defended themselves by the natural strength of their situation, or
retired into the North, or the Islands, were still governed by their own
Customs, and were never acquainted with domestic or foreign slavery* The
Saxons, from whom we chiefly derive our Original and Manners, were no less
lovers of Liberty, and better understood the ways of defending it. They were
certainly the most powerful and valiant People of Germany; and what the Germans
performed under Ariovistus, Arminius and Maroboduus, shows both their force and
their temper. If ever fear entered into the heart of Caesar, it seems to have
bin when he was to deal with Ariovistus. The advantages that the brave
Germanicus obtained against Arminius, were at least thought equal to the
greatest Victorys that had bin gained by any Roman Captain; because these
Nations fought not for riches, or any instruments of Luxury or Pleasure, which
they despised, but for Liberty. This was the Principle in which they lived, as
appears by their words and actions; so that Arminius, when his brother Flavius,
who served the Romans, boasted of the increase of his pay, and the marks of
honor he had received, in scorn called them the Vilis servi^ii pramia. Tacit.
rewards of the vilest servitude: but when he himself endeavored to usurp a
power over the Liberty of his Country which he had so bravely defended, he was
killed by those he would have oppressed. Tacitus farther describing the nature of
the Germans, shows that the Romans had run greater hazards from them than from
the Samnites, Carthaginians and Parthians, and attributes their Bravery to the
Quippe gravior est Arsacis regno Germanorum Libertas.
Liberty they enjoyed; for they are, says he, neither Exe^pti oneribus and
collationibus, and tantum in usum pra^liorum seposi^i, velut tela and arma
bellis reservantur.
exhausted by Tributes, nor vexed by Publicans: and lest this Liberty should be
violated, De minoribus principes consultant, de majoribus omnes. C. Tac. de
mor. Germ.
the chief men consult about things of lesser moment; but the most important
matters are determined by all. Whoever would know the opinion of that wise
Author concerning the German Liberty, may read his excellent Treatise of their
Manners and Customs; but I presume this may be enough to prove that they lived
free under such Magistrates as they chose, regulated by such Laws as they made,
and retained the principal powers of the Government in their general or
particular Councils. Their Kings and Princes had no other power than what was
conferred upon them by these Ut turbae placuit considunt armati, silentium per
^acerdotes, quibus tum coercendi jus est, imperatur. Mox Rex vel Princeps prout
aetas cuique, prout nobilitas, prout decus bellorum, prout facundia est,
audiuntur, autoritate suadendi, magis quam jubendi potestate. Si displi^uit
sententia* fremitu a^pernantur; si placuit, frameas concutiunt, etc. Ibid.
Assemblys, who having all in themselves could receive nothing from them who had
nothing to give.

It Is as easily proved that the Saxons or Angli, from whom we descend, were
eminent among those, whose power, virtue, and love to Liberty the
abovementioned Historian so highly extols, in as much as besides what he says
in general of the Saxons, he names the Angli; describes their habitation near
the Elb, and their religious worship of the Goddess Erthum, or the Earth,
celebrated in an Island lying in the mouth of that River, thought to be
Heyligland; in resemblance of which a small one lying over against Berwick, is
called Holy Island. If they were free in their own Country, they must have bin
so when they came hither. The manner of their coming shows they were more
likely to impose, than submit to slavery; and if they had not the name of
Parliament, it was because they did not speak French; or, not being yet joined
with the Normans, they had not thought fit to put their Affairs into that
method: but having the root of Power and Liberty in themselves, they could not
but have a right of establishing the one in such a form as best pleased them,
for the preservation of the other.

This being, as I suppose, undeniable, it imports not whether the Assemblys in
which the Supreme Power of each Nation did reside, were frequent or rare;
composed of many or few Persons, sitting altogether in one place, or in more;
what name they had; or whether every Free man did meet and vote in his own
person, or a few were delegated by many. For they who have a Right inherent in
themselves, may resign it to others; and they who can give a Power to others,
may exercise it themselves, unless they recede from it by their own act; for it
is only matter of convenience, of which they alone can be the Judges, because
it is for themselves only that they judge. If this were not so, it would be very
prejudicial to Kings: for it is certain that Cassivellaunus, Caractatus,
Arviragus, Galgacus, Hengist, Horsa, and others amongst the Britans and Saxons,
what name soever may have bin abusively given to them, were only temporary
Magistrates chosen upon occasion of present Wars; but we know of no time in
which the Britans had not their Great Council to determine their most important
Affairs: and the Saxons in their own Country had their Councils, where all were
present, and in which Tacitus assures us they dispatched their greatest
Business. These were the same with the Micklegemots which they afterward held
here, and might have bin called by the same name, if Tacitus had spoken Dutch.

If a People therefore have not a power to create at any time a Magistracy
which they had not before, none could be created at all, for no Magistracy is
eternal: And if for the validity of the Constitution it be necessary, that the
beginning must be unknown, or that no other could have bin before it, the
Monarchy amongst us cannot be established upon any right; for tho our Ancestors
had their Councils and Magistrates, as well here as in Germany, they had no
Monarchs. This appears plainly by the testimony of Caesar and Tacitus; and our
later Historys show, that as soon as the Saxons came into this Country, they
had their Micklegemots, which were general Assemblys of the Noble and Free men,
who had in themselves the Power of the Nation: and tho when they increased in
numbers, they erected seven Kingdoms, yet every one retained the same usage
within it self. These Assemblys were evidently the same in power with our
Parliaments; and tho they differed in name or form, it matters not, for they
who could act in the one, could not but have a power of instituting the other;
that is, the same People that could meet together in their own Persons, and
according to their own pleasure order all matters relating to themselves,
whilst three or four Countys only were under one Government, and their numbers
were not so great, or their habitation so far distant, that they might not meet
altogether without inconvenience, with the same Right might depute others to
represent them, when being joined in one, no place was capable of receiving so
great a multitude, and that the Frontiers would have bin exposed to the danger
of foreign Invasions, if any such thing had bin practiced.

But if the Authority of Parliaments, for many Ages representing the whole
Nation, were less to be valued (as our Author insinuates) because they could
not represent the whole, when it was not joined in one Body, that of Kings must
come to nothing; for there could be no one King over all, when the Nation was
divided into seven distinct Governments: And it is most absurd to think that the
Nation, which had seven Great Councils, or Micklegemots, at the same time they
had seven Kingdoms, could not as well unite the seven Councils as the seven
Kingdoms into one. It Is to as little purpose to say, that the Nation did not
unite it self, but the several parcels came to be inherited by one; for that
one could inherit no more from the others than what they had; and the seven
being only Magistrates set up by the Micklegemots, etc. the one must be also.
And it is neither reasonable to imagine, nor possible to prove, that a fierce
Nation, jealous of Liberty, and who had obstinately defended it in Germany
against all Invaders, should conquer this Country to enslave themselves, and
purchase nothing by their Valor but that Servitude which they abhorred; or be
less free when they were united into one State, than they had bin when they
were divided into seven; and least of all, that one man could first subdue his
own People, and then all the rest, when by endeavoring to subdue his own, he
had broken the Trust reposed in him, and lost the Right conferred upon him, and
without them had not power to subdue any. But as it is my fate almost ever to
dissent from our Author, I affirm, That the variety of Government, which is
observed to have bin amongst the Saxons, who in some Ages were divided, in
others united; sometimes under Captains, at other times under Kings; sometimes
meeting personally in the Micklegemots, sometimes by their Delegats in the
Wittenagemots, dos evidently testify, that they ordered all things according to
their own pleasure; which being the utmost Act of Liberty, it remained
inviolable under all those changes, as we have already proved by the Examples
of Offa, Ina, Alfred, Canutus, Edward, and other particular, as well as
universal Kings: And we may be sure those of the Norman Race can have no more
power, since they came in by the same way, and swore to govern by the same Laws.

2. I am no way concerned in our Author's doubt, Whether Parliaments did in
those days consist of Nobility and Clergy; or, Whether the Commons were also
called. For if it were true, as he asserts, that according to the eternal Law
of God and Nature, there can be no Government in the World but that of an
absolute Monarch, whose Sovereign Majesty can be diminished by no Law or
Custom, there could be Parliaments, or other Magistracys, that did not derive
their Power and Being from his Will. But having proved that the Saxons had
their General Councils and Assemblys when they had no Kings; that by them Kings
were made, and the greatest Affairs determined, whether they had Kings or not;
it can be of no importance, whether in one or more Ages the Commons had a part
in the Government, or not. For the same Power that instituted a Parliament
without them, might, when they thought fit, receive them into it: or rather, if
they who had the Government in their hands, did, for reasons known to
themselves, recede from the exercise of it, they might resume it when they
pleased.

Nevertheless it may be worth our pains to inquire what our Author means by
Nobility. If such, as at this day by means of Patents obtained for money, or by
favor, without any regard to Merit in the Persons or their Ancestors, are
called Dukes, Marquesses, etc. I give him leave to impute as late and base an
Original to them as he pleases, without fearing that the Rights of our Nation
can thereby be impaired; and am content, that if the King do not think fit to
support the Dignity of his own Creatures, they may fall. But if by Noblemen we
are to understand such as have bin ennobl'd by the virtues of their Ancestors,
manifested in Services done to their Country, I say, that all Nations, amongst
whom Virtue has bin esteemed, have had a great regard to them and their
Posterity: and tho Kings, when they were made, have bin entrusted by the
Saxons, and other Nations, with a Power of ennobling those who by Services
rendered to their Country might deserve that Honor, yet the Body of the
Nobility was more ancient than such; for it had bin equally impossible to take
Reges ex nobilitate, duces ex virtute sumere.

Sublimato eo coepit lues omnium scelerum crescere: s^viebat scurrilis
nequitia, odium veritatis, etc. ut vas omnium scelerum solus videretur
Vortigernus; and quod maxim Regiae honestati contrarium est, Nobiles
deprimens, and moribus and sanguine ignobiles extollens, Deo and hominibus
e^^icitur odiosus. Mat. Westminster. An. 446.


Kings (according to Tacitus) out of the Nobility, if there had bin no
Nobility, as to take Captains for their Virtue, if there had bin no Virtue.
Princes could not without breach of Trust confer Honors upon those that did not
deserve them; which is so true, that this practice was objected as the greatest
crime against Vortigern, the last and the worst of the British Kings: and tho
he might pretend (according to such cavils as are usually in our time) that the
judgment of those matters was referred to him; yet the World judged of his
Crimes, and when he had rendered himself odious to God and Men by them, he
perished in them, and brought destruction upon his Country that had suffered
them too long.

As among the Turks, and most of the Eastern Tyrannys, there is no Nobility,
and no man has any considerable advantage above the common People, unless by
the immediate favor of the Prince; so in all the legal Kingdoms of the North,
the strength of the Government has always bin placed in the Nobility; and no
better defense has bin found against the encroachments of ill Kings, than by
setting up an Order of Men, who by holding large Territorys, and having great
numbers of Tenants and Dependents, might be able to restrain the exorbitances,
that either the Kings or the Commons might run into. For this end Spain,
Germany, France, Poland, Denmark, Sweden, Scotland and England, were almost
wholly divided into Lordships under several names, by which every particular
Possessor owed Allegiance (that is, such an Obedience as the Law requires) to
the King, and he reciprocally swore to perform that which the same Law exacted
from him.

When these Nations were converted to the Christian Religion, they had a great
veneration for the Clergy; and not doubting that the Men whom they esteemed
holy, would be just, thought their Libertys could not be better secured, than
by joining those who had the direction of their Consciences, to the Noblemen
who had the command of their Forces. This succeeded so well (in relation to the
defense of the public Rights) that in all the forementioned States, the
Bishops, Abbots, etc. were no less zealous or bold in defending the public
Liberty, than the best and greatest of the Lords: And if it were true, that
things being thus established, the Commons did neither personally, nor by their
Representatives, enter into the General Assemblys, it could be of no advantage
to Kings; for such a Power as is abovementioned, is equally inconsistent with
the absolute Sovereignty of Kings, if placed in the Nobility and Clergy, as if
the Commons had a part. If the King has all, no other Man, nor number of Men
can have any. If the Nobility and Clergy have the power, the Commons may have
their share also. But I affirm, that those whom we now call Commons, have
always had a part in the Government, and their place in the Councils that
managed it; for if there was a distinction, it must have bin by Patent, Birth,
or Tenure.

As for Patents, we know they began long after the coming of the Normans; and
those that now have them cannot pretend to any advantage on account of Birth or
Tenure, beyond many of those who have them not. Nay, besides the several
Branches of the Familys that now enjoy the most ancient Honors, which
consequently are as noble as they, and some of them of the elder Houses, we
know many that are now called Commoners, who in antiquity and eminency are no
way inferior to the chief of the titular Nobility: and nothing can be more
absurd, than to give a Prerogative of Birth to Cr-v-n, T-ft-n, H-de, B-nn-t,
Osb-rn, and others, before the Cliftons, Hampdens, Courtneys, Pelhams, St.
John's, Baintons, Wilbrahams, Hungerfords, and many others. And if the Tenures
of their Estates be considered, they have the same, and as ancient as any of
those who go under the names of Duke, or Marquess. I forbear to mention the
sordid ways of attaining to Titles in our days; but whoever will take the pains
to examine them, shall find that they rather defile than ennoble the possessors.
And whereas Men are truly ennobl'd only by Virtue, and respect is due to such
as are descended from those who have bravely served their Country, because it
is presumed (till they show the contrary) that they will resemble their
Ancestors, these modern Courtiers, by their Names and Titles, frequently oblige
us to call to mind such things as are not to be mentioned without blushing.
Whatever the ancient Noblemen of England were, we are sure they were not such
as these. And tho it should be confessed that no others than Dukes, Marquesses,
Earls, Viscounts, and Barons, had their places in the Councils mentioned by
Caesar and Tacitus, or in the great Assemblys of the Saxons, it could be of no
advantage to such as are now called by those names. They were the titles of
Offices conferred upon those, who did and could best conduct the People in time
of War; give Counsel to the King; administer Justice, and perform other public
dutys; but were never made hereditary except by abuse; much less were they sold
for money, or given as recompenses of the vilest services. If the ancient Order
be totally inverted, and the ends of its Institution perverted, they who from
thence pretend to be distinguished from other men, must build their Claim upon
something very different from Antiquity.

This being sufficient (if I mistake not) to make it appear, That the ancient
Councils of our Nation did not consist of such as we now call Noblemen, it may
be worth our pains to examine of what sort of men they did consist: And tho I
cannot much rely upon the credit of Camden, which he has forfeited by a great
number of untruths, I will begin with him, because he is cited by our Author.
If we will believe him, Quod Saxones olim Wittenagemot, Parliamentum and
Pananglicum recte dici possit, summamque and ^acrosanctam habet autoritatem in
legibus ferendis, antiquandis, conformandis, interpretandis, and in omnibus
quae ad Reipublicae salutem spectant. Brit. fol. 63.
That which the Saxons called Wittenagemot, we may justly name Parliament,
which has the supreme and most sacred Authority of making, abrogating and
interpreting Laws, and generally of all things relating to the safety of the
Commonwealth. This Wittenagemot was, according to William of Malmsbury,
Generalis Senatus and populi Conventus. Malms.
The general meeting of the Senate and People; and Sir Harry Spelman calls it,
Commune Concilium tam Cleri quam Populi. Spelm.
The General Council of the Clergy and People. In the Assembly at Calcuth it
was decreed by the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Dukes, Senators, and the
People of the Land (Populo terrae) that the Ut Reges a Sacerdotibus and
senioribus Populi eligantur.
Kings should be elected by the Priests and Elders of the People. By these
Offa, Ina, and others, were made Kings; and Alfred in his Will acknowledged his
Quam Dens and Principes cum senioribus Populi misericorditer and benign
dederunt.
Crown from them. Edgar was elected by all the People, and not long after
deposed by them, and again restored in a Coram omni multitudine populi Anglorum.
General Assembly. These things being sometimes said to be done by the assent of
the Barons of the Kingdom, Camden says, That under the name of the Nomine
Baronagii omnes quodam modo regni ord^nes continentur. Camd.
Baronage, all the Orders of the Kingdom are in a manner comprehended; and it
cannot be otherwise understood, if we consider that those called Noblemen, or
the Nobility of England, are often by the Historians said to be (infinita
multitudo) an infinite multitude.

If any man ask how the Nobility came to be so numerous; I answer, That the
Northern Nations, who were perpetually in Arms, put a high esteem upon Military
Valor; sought by conquest to acquire better Countries than their own; valued
themselves according to the numbers of men they could bring into the field; and
to distinguish them from Villains, called those Noblemen, who nobly defended
and enlarged their Dominions by War; and for a reward of their Services, in the
division of Lands gained by conquest, they distributed to them Freeholds, under
the obligation of continuing the same Service to their Country. This appears by
the name of Knights Service, a Knight being no more than a Soldier, and a
Knight's Fee no more than was sufficient to maintain one. It Is plain, that
Knighthood was always esteemed Nobility; so that no man, of what quality
soever, thought a Knight inferior to him, and those of the highest birth could
not act as Noblemen till they were knighted. Among the Goths in Spain, the
cutting off the Hair (which being long was the mark of Knighthood) was
accounted a degrading, and looked upon to be so great a mark of Infamy, that he
who had suffered it, could never bear any honor or office in the Commonwealth;
and there was no dignity so high, but every Knight was capable of it. There was
no distinction of men above it, and even to this day Baron, or Varon, in their
Language, signifys no more than Vir in Latin, which is not properly given to
any man unless he be free. The like was in France till the coming in of the
third race of Kings, in which time the 12 Peers (of whom 6 only were Laymen)
were raised to a higher dignity, and the Commands annexed made hereditary; but
the honor of Knighthood was thereby no way diminished. Tho there were Dukes,
Earls, Marquesses and Barons in the time of Froissart, yet he usually calls
them Knights: And Philip de Commines, speaking of the most eminent men of his
time, calls them good, wise or valiant Knights. Even to this day the name of
Gentleman comprehends all that is raised above the common people: Henry the
Fourth usually called himself the first Gentleman in France; and it is an
ordinary phrase among them, when they speak of a Gentleman of good Birth, to
say, Il est noble comme le Roy, He is as noble as the King. In their General
Assembly of Estates, The Chamber of the Noblesse, which is one of Three, is
composed of the Deputys sent by the Gentry of every Province; and in the
inquiry made about the Year 1668 concerning Nobility, no notice was taken of
such as had assumed the Titles of Earl, Marquess, Viscount, or Baron, but only
of those who called themselves Gentlemen; and if they could prove that name to
belong to them, they were left to use the other Titles as they pleased. When
Duels were in fashion (as all know they were lately) no man except the Princes
of the Blood, and Marechals of France, could with honor refuse a Challenge from
any Gentleman: The first, because it was thought unfit, that he who might be
King, should fight with a Subject to the danger of the Commonwealth, which
might by that means be deprived of its Head: The others being by their Office
Commanders of the Nobility, and Judges of all the Controversys relating to
Honor that happen amongst them, cannot reasonably be brought into private
Contests with any. In Denmark Nobleman and Gentleman is the same thing, and
till the year 1660, they had the principal part of the Government in their
hands. When Charles Gustavus, King of Sweden, invaded Poland in the year 1655,
it is said, that there were above three hundred thousand Gentlemen in Arms to
resist him. This is the Nobility of that Country, Kings are chosen by them:
Every one of them will say, as in France, He is noble as the King. The last
King was a private man among them, not thought to have had more than four
hundred pounds a year. He who now reigns was not at all above him in birth or
estate, till he had raised himself by great services done for his Country in
many wars; and there was not one Gentleman in the Nation who might not have bin
chosen as well as he, if it had pleased the Assembly that did it.

This being the Nobility of the Northern Nations, and the true Baronage of
England, it is no wonder that they were called Nobiles, the most eminent among
them Magnates, Principes, Proceres; and so numerous that they were esteemed to
be Multitudo infinita. One place was hardly able to contain them; and the
inconveniences of calling them all together appeared to be so great, that in
time they chose rather to meet by Representatives, than every one in his own
person. The power therefore remaining in them, it matters not what method they
observed in the execution. They who had the substance in their hands, might
give it what form they pleased. Our Author sufficiently manifests his
ignorance, in saying there could be no Knights of the Shires in the time of the
Saxons, because there were no Shires; for the very word is Saxon, and we find
the names of Barkshire, Wiltshire, Devonshire, Dorsetshire, and others most
frequently in the writings of those times; and Dukes, Earls, Thanes or
Aldermen, appointed to command the Forces, and look to the distribution of
Justice in them. Seldom cites Ingulphus for saying, that Seldom 's Tit. of
Honor, p. 2. c. 5.
Alfred was the first that changed the Provinces, etc. into Countys: but
refutes him, and proves that the distinction of the Land into Shires or Countys
(for Shire signified no more than the share or part committed to the care of
the Earl or Comes) was far more ancient. Whether the first divisions by the
Saxons were greater or lesser than the Shires or Countys now are, is nothing to
the question: they who made them to be as they were, could have made them
greater or lesser as they pleased. And whether they did immediately, or some
ages after that distinction, cease to come to their great Assemblys, and rather
choose to send their Deputys; or whether such Deputys were chosen by Countys,
Citys and Boroughs, as in our days, or in any other manner, can be of no
advantage or prejudice to the Cause that I maintain. If the power of the
Nation, when it was divided into seven Kingdoms, or united under one, did
reside in the Micklegemots or Wittenagemots; if these consisted of the Nobility
and People, who were sometimes so numerous that no one place could well contain
them; and if the preference given to the chief among them, was on account of
the Offices they executed, either in relation to war or justice, which no man
can deny, I have as much as serves for my purpose. It Is indifferent to me,
whether they were called Earls, Dukes, Aldermen, Herotoghs or Thanes; for it is
certain that the titular Nobility now in mode amongst us has no resemblance to
this ancient Nobility of England. The novelty therefore is on the other side,
and that of the worst sort; because by giving the name of Noblemen (which
anciently belonged to such as had the greatest interests in Nations, and were
the supporters of their Liberty) to Court-creatures, who often have none, and
either acquire their Honors by money, or are preferred for servile and sometimes
impure services rendered to the Person that reigns, or else for mischiefs done
to their Country, the Constitution has bin wholly inverted, and the trust
reposed in the Kings (who in some measure had the disposal of Offices and
Honors) misemploy'd. This is farther aggravated by appropriating the name of
Noblemen solely to them; whereas the Nation having bin anciently divided only
into Freemen or Noblemen (who were the same) and Villains; the first were, as
Tacitus says of their Ancestors the Germans, Exempti oneribus and
collationibus, and tantum in usum praliorum repositi, v^luti tela and arma
^^llis reservantur. Corn. Tacit. de morib. Germ.
exempted from burdens and contributions, and reserved like arms for the uses
of war; whilst the others were little better than slaves, appointed to
cultivate the Lands, or to other servile Offices. And I leave any reasonable
man to judge, whether the latter condition be that of those we now call
Commoners. Nevertheless, he that will believe the title of Noblemen still to
belong to those only who are so by Patent, may guess how well our wars would be
managed if they were left solely to such as are so by that title. If this be
approved, his Majesty may do well with his hundred and fifty Noblemen, eminent
in valor and military experience as they are known to be, to make such wars as
may fall upon him, and leave the despised Commons under the name of Villains,
to provide for themselves if the success do not answer his expectations. But if
the Commons are as free as the Nobles, many of them in birth equal to the
Patentees, in Estate superior to most of them; and that it is not only expected
they should assist him in wars with their Persons and Purses, but acknowledged
by all, that the strength and virtue of the Nation is in them it must be
confessed that they are true Noblemen of England, and that all the privileges
anciently enjoyed by such, must necessarily belong to them, since they perform
the Offices to which they were annexed. This shows how the Nobility were justly
said to be almost infinite in number, so that no one place was able to contain
them. The Saxon Armies that came over into this Country to a wholesome and
generative climat, might well increase in four or five ages to those vast
numbers, as the Franks, Goths and others had done in Spain, France, Italy, and
other parts: and when they were grown so numerous, they found themselves
necessarily obliged to put the power into the hands of Representatives chosen
by themselves, which they had before exercised in their own persons. But these
two ways differing rather in form than essentially, the one tending to
Democracy, the other to Aristocracy, they are equally opposite to the absolute
dominion of one man reigning for himself, and governing the Nation as his
Patrimony; and equally assert the rights of the People to put the Government
into such a form as best pleases themselves. This was suitable to what they had
practiced in their own Country; De minoribus consultant Principes, de majoribus
omnes. Nay, even Tacit. de mor* Germ.
these smaller matters cannot be said properly to relate to the King; for he is
but one, and the word Principes is in the plural number, and can only signify
such principal men, as the same Author says were chosen by the General
Assemblys to do justice, etc. and to each of them one hundred Comites joined,
not only to give advice, but authority to their actions.

The word Omnes spoken by a Roman, must likewise be understood as it was used
by them, and imports all the Citizens, or such as made up the body of the
Commonwealth. If he had spoken of Rome or Athens whilst they remained free, he
must have used the same word (because all those of whom the City consisted had
votes) how great soever the number of slaves or strangers might have bin. The
Spartans are rightly said to have gained, lost and recovered the Lordship or
Principality of Greece. They were all Lords in relation to their Helots; and so
were the Dorians in relation to that sort of men, which under several names
they kept, as the Saxons did their Villains, for the performance of the Offices
which they thought too mean for those who were ennobl'd by Liberty, and the use
of Arms, by which the Commonwealth was defended and enlarged. Tho the Romans
scorned to give the title of Lord to those who had usurped a power over their
Lives and Fortunes; yet every one of them was a Lord in relation to his own
Servants, and altogether are often called Romanos rerum Dominos. Virg.
Lords of the world: the like is seen almost every where. The Government of
Venice having continued for many ages in the same Familys, has ennobl'd them
all. No phrase is more common in Switzerland, than the Lords of Bern, or the
Lords of Zurich and other places, tho perhaps there is not a man amongst them
who pretends to be a Gentleman, according to the modern sense put upon that
word. The States of the United Provinces are called High and Mighty Lords, and
the same title is given to each of them in particular. Nay, the word Here,
which signifys Lord both in high and low Dutch, is as common as Monsieur in
France, Signor in Italy, or Sennor in Spain; and is given to every one who is
not of a sordid condition, but especially to Soldiers: and tho a common Soldier
be now a much meaner thing than it was anciently, no man speaking to a company
of Soldiers in Italian, uses any other style than Signori Soldati; and the like
is done in other Languages. It Is not therefore to be thought strange, if the
Saxons, who in their own Country had scorned any other employment than that of
the Sword, should think themselves farther ennobl'd, when by their Arms they
had acquired a great and rich Country, and driven out or subdued the former
inhabitants. They might well distinguish themselves from the Villains they
brought with them, or the Britans they had enslaved. They might well be called
Magnates, Proceres regni, Nobiles, Angliae Nobilitas, Barons; and the
Assemblys of them justly called Concilium Regni Generale, Vniversitas totius
Angliae Nobilium, Vniversitas Baronagii, according to the variety of times and
other occurrences. We have such footsteps remaining of the name of Baron, as
plainly show the signification of it. The Barons of London and the Cinq Ports
are known to be only the Freemen of those places. In the petty Court*Barons,
every man who may be of a Jury is a Baron. These are Noblemen; for there are
noble Nations as well as noble men in Nations. The Mammalukes accounted
themselves to be all noble, tho born slaves; and when they had ennobl'd
themselves by the use of Arms, they looked upon the noblest of the Egyptians as
their slaves. Tertullian writing, not to some eminent men, but to the whole
People of Carthage, calls them Antiquitate Nobiles, Nobilitate felices. Such
were the Saxons, ennobl'd by a perpetual application to those exercises that
belong to Noblemen, and an abhorrence to any thing that is vile and sordid.

Lest this should seem far fetched, to those who please themselves with
cavilling, they are to know, that the same General Councils are expressed by
other Authors in other words. They are called Commune Concilium Episcoporum,
Procerum, Comitum and omnium Sapientum, Seniorum and Populorum totius regni.
Bed. Eccl. Hist.
The General Council of the Bishops, Noblemen, Counts, all the wise men,
Elders, and People of the whole Kingdom, in the time of Ina. In that Edward the
elder, Magnum Concilium Episcoporum, Abbatum, Fidelium, Procerum and Populorum.
The Great Council of the Bishops, Abbots, Noblemen and People. William of
Malmsbury calls them, Senatum generalem and populi conventum.
The General Senate and Assembly of the People. Sometimes they are in short
called Clergy and People; but all express the same power, neither received
from, nor li^itable by Kings, who are always said to be chosen or made, and
sometimes deposed by them. William the Norman found, and left the Nation in
this condition: Henry the second, John and Henry the third, who had nothing but
what was conferred upon them by the same Clergy and People, did so too. Magna
Charta could give nothing to the People, who in themselves had all; and only
reduced into a small Volume the Rights which the Nation was resolved to
maintain; brought the King to confess, they were perpetually inherent, and time
out of mind enjoyed, and to swear that he would no way violate them; if he did,
he was ipso facto excommunicated; and being thereby declared to be an execrable
perjured Person, they knew how to deal with him. This Act has bin confirmed by
thirty Parliaments; and the proceedings with Kings, who have violated their
Oaths, as well before as after the time of Henry the third, which have bin
already mentioned, are sufficient to show, that England has always bin governed
by it self, and never acknowledged any other Lord than such as they thought fit
to set up.

SECT. XXIX. The King was never Master of the Soil.
THOSE who without regard to truth, resolve to insist upon such points as they
think may serve their designs, when they find it cannot be denied that the
powers before mentioned have bin exercised by the English and other Nations,
say, that they were the concessions of Kings, who being masters of the Soil,
might bestow parcels upon some Persons with such conditions as they pleased,
retaining to themselves the supreme dominion of the whole: and having already,
as they think, made them the Fountains of Honor, they proceed to make them also
the Fountains of Property; and for proof of this alledg, that all Lands, tho
held of mean Lords, do by their Tenures at last result upon the King, as the
Head from whom they are enjoyed. This might be of force if it were true: but
matters of the highest importance requiring a most evident proof, we are to
examine, First, if it be possible; and in the next place, if it be true.

1. For the first; No man can give what he has not. Whoever therefore will
pretend that the King has bestowed this propriety, must prove that he had it in
himself. I confess, that the Kings of Spain and Portugal obtained from the Pope
grants of the Territorys they possessed in the West-Indys; and this might be of
some strength, if the Pope as Vicar of Christ had an absolute dominion over the
whole earth; but if that fail, the whole falls to the ground, and he is
ridiculously liberal of that which no way belongs to him. My business is not to
dispute that point; but before it can have any influence upon our Affairs, our
Kings are to prove, that they are Lords of England upon the same Title, or some
other equivalent to it. When that is done, we shall know upon whom they have a
dependence, and may at leisure consider, whether we ought to acknowledge and
submit to such a Power, or give reasons for our resusal. But there being no
such thing in our present case, their property must be grounded upon something
else, or we may justly conclude they have none.

In order to this it is hardly worth the pains to search into the obscure
remains of the British Historys: For when the Romans deserted our Island, they
did not confer the right they had (whether more or less) upon any man, but left
the enjoyment of it to the poor remainders of the Nation, and their own
established Colonys, who were grown to be one People with the Natives. The
Saxons came under the conduct of Hengist and Horsa, who seem to have bin sturdy
Pirates; but did not (that I can learn) bear any Characters in their persons of
the so much admired Sovereign Majesty, that should give them an absolute
dominion or propriety, either in their own Country, or any other they should
set their feet upon. They came with about a hundred men; and choosing rather
Mat. West. Flor. Hist.
to serve Vortigern, than to depend upon what they could get by rapine at Sea,
lived upon a small proportion of Land by him allotted to them. Tho this seems
to be but a slender encouragement, yet it was enough to invite many others to
follow their Example and Fortune; so that their number increasing, the County
of Kent was given to them, under the obligation of serving the Britans in their
Wars. Not long after, Lands in Northumberland were bestowed upon another
company of them with the same condition. This was all the Title they had to
what they enjoyed, till they treacherously killed four hundred and sixty, or,
as William of Ibid.
Malmsbury says, three hundred principal men of the Nobility, and made
Vortigern Prisoner, who had bin so much their Benefactor, that he seems never
to have deserved well but from them, and to have incensed the Britans by the
favor he showed them, as much as by the worst of his Vices. And certainly
actions of this kind, composed of falsehood and cruelty, can never create a
right, in the opinion of any better men than Filmer and his Disciples, who
think that the power only is to be regarded, and not the means by which it is
obtained. But tho it should be granted that a right had bin thus acquired, it
must accrue to the Nation, not to Hengist and Horsa. If such an acquisition be
called a Conquest, the benefit must belong to those that conquered. This was
not the work of two men; and those who had bin free at home, can never be
thought to have left their own Country, to fight as slaves for the glory and
profit of two men in another. It cannot be said that their wants compelled them,
for their Leaders suffered the same, and could not be relieved but by their
assistance; and whether their enterprise was good or bad, just or unjust, it
was the same to all: No one man could have any right peculiar to himself,
unless they who gained it, did confer it upon him: and it is no way probable,
that they who in their own Country had kept their Princes within very narrow
limits, as has bin proved, should resign themselves, and all they had, as soon
as they came hither. But we have already shown that they always continued most
obstinate defenders of their Liberty, and the Government to which they had bin
accustomed; that they managed it by themselves, and acknowledged no other Laws
than their own. Nay, if they had made such a resignation of their Right, as was
necessary to create one in their Leaders, it would be enough to overthrow the
proposition; for it is not then the Leader that gives to the People, but the
People to the Leader. If the people had not a right to give what they did give,
none was conferred upon the receiver: if they had a right, he that should
pretend to derive a benefit from thence, must prove the grant, that the nature
and intention of it may appear.

2. To the second: If it be said that Records testify all Grants to have bin
originally from the King; I answer, That tho it were confessed, (which I
absolutely deny, and affirm that our Rights and Libertys are innate, inherent,
and enjoyed time out of mind before we had Kings) it could be nothing to the
question, which is concerning Reason and Justice; and if they are wanting, the
defect can never be supplied by any matter of fact, tho never so clearly
proved. Or if a Right be pretended to be grounded upon a matter of fact, the
thing to be proved is, that the people did really confer such a right upon the
first, or some other Kings: And if no such thing do appear, the proceedings of
one or more Kings as if they had it, can be of no value. But in the present
case, no such grant is pretended to have bin made, either to the first, or to
any of the following Kings; the Right they had not, their Successors could not
inherit, and consequently cannot have it, or at most no better title to it than
that of Usurpation.

But as they who inquire for truth ought not to deny or conceal any thing, I
may grant that Manors, etc. were enjoyed by tenure from Kings; but that will
no way prejudice the cause I defend, nor signify more than that the Countries
which the Saxons had acquired, were to be divided among them; and to avoid the
quarrels that might arise, if every man took upon him to seize what he could, a
certain method of making the distribution was necessarily to be fixed; and it
was fit, that every man should have something in his own hands to justify his
Title to what he possessed, according to which controversys should be determined.
This must be testified by some body, and no man could be so fit, or of so much
credit as he who was chief among them; and this is no more than is usual in all
the Societys of the World. The Mayor of every Corporation, the Speaker or Clerk
of the House of Peers or House of Commons, the first President of every
Parliament, or Presidial in France; the Consul, Burgermaster, Advoyer or
Bailiff in every free Town of Holland, Germany or Switzerland, sign the public
Acts that pass in those places. The Dukes of Venice and Genoa do the like, tho
they have no other power than what is conferred upon them, and of themselves can
do little or nothing. The Grants of our Kings are of the same nature, tho the
words mero motu nostro seem to imply the contrary; for Kings speak always in
the plural number, to show that they do not act for themselves, but for the
Societys over which they are placed; and all the veneration that is, or can be
given to their Acts, dos not exalt them, but those from whom their Authority is
derived, and for whom they are to execute. The Tyrants of the East, and other
Barbarians, whose power is most absolute, speak in the single number, as
appears by the decrees of Nabuchodonosor, Cyrus, Darius and Ahasuerus recited
in Scripture, with others that we hear of daily from those parts: but
wheresoever there is any thing of civility or regularity in Government, the
Prince uses the plural, to show that he acts in a public capacity. From hence,
says Grotius, the rights of Kings to send Ambassadors, make Leagues, etc. do
arise: the confederacys made by them do not terminate with their lives, because
they are not for themselves; they speak not in their own Persons, but as
representing their People; and Rex regno exutus, jus legandi amittit. Grot. de
Jur. Bell.
a King who is deprived of his Kingdom loses the right of sending Ambassadors,
because he can no longer speak for those, who by their own consent, or by a
foreign force, are cut off from him. The question is not whether such a one be
justly or unjustly deprived (for that concerns only those who do it or suffer
it) but whether he can oblige the People; and it is ridiculous for any Nation to
treat with a man that cannot perform what shall be agreed, or for him to
stipulate that which can oblige, and will be made good only by himself.

But tho much may be left to the discretion of Kings in the distribution of
Lands and the like, yet it no way diminishes the right of the People, nor
confers any upon them otherwise to dispose of what belongs to the public, than
may tend to the common good, and the accomplishment of those ends for which
they are entrusted. Nay, if it were true, that a conquered Country did belong
to the Crown, the King could not dispose of it, because it is annexed to the
Office, add not alienable by the Person. This is not only found in regular
mixed Monarchys (as in Sweden, where the Grants made by the last Kings have bin
lately rescinded by the General Assembly of Estates, as contrary to Law) but
even in the most absolute, as in France, where the present King, who has
stretched his power to the utmost, has lately acknowledged that he cannot do
it; and according to the known maxim of the State, that the demeasnes of the
Crown, which are designed for the defraying of public Charges, cannot be
alienated, all the Grants made within the last fifteen years have bin annul'd;
even those who had bought Lands of the Crown have bin called to account, and
the Sums given being compared with the profits received, and a moderate
interest allowed to the purchasers, so much of the principal as remained due to
them has bin repaid, and the Lands resumed.

SECT. XXX. Henry the First was King of England by as good a Title as any of
his Predecessors or Successors.
HAVING made it appear, as I suppose, that the ancient Nobility of England was
composed of such men as had bin ennobl'd by bearing Arms in the defense or
enlargement of the Commonwealth; that the Dukes, Earls, etc. were those who
commanded them; that they and their dependents received Lands for such
services, under an obligation of continuing to render the like, and according
to their several degrees and proportions, to provide and maintain Horses, Arms
and Men for the same uses; it cannot be denied that they were such Gentlemen
and Lords of Manors, as we now call Commoners, together with the Freeholders,
and such as in war were found most able to be their Leaders. Of these the
Micklegemots, Wittenagemots, and other public Assemblys did consist; and
nothing can be more absurd than to assign the names and rights of Duke, Earl
and Vicount, which were names of Offices, to those who have not the Offices,
and are no way fit for them. If our Author therefore had said, that such as
these, who had always composed the great Councils of our Nation, had in favor
of Henry the First, bestowed the Crown upon him, as they had done upon his
Father and Brother, I should agree with him: but it is the utmost extravagance
to say, that he who had neither title nor possession, should give the power to
those who had always bin in the possession of it, and exercised it in giving to
him whatsoever he had. But I most wonder he should so far forget himself, to
call this Henry a Usurper, and detract from the validity of his Acts, because
he had no title; whereas there neither is, was, or can be a Usurper if there be
any truth in his Doctrine: for he plainly tells us, we are only to look to the
power, and not at all to the means and ways by which it is obtained; and making
no difference between a King and a Tyrant, enjoins an equal submission to the
commands of both. If this were only a slip of his Pen, and he did really take
this Henry to be a Usurper, because he had not a good title, I should desire to
know the marks by which a lawful King is distinguished from an Usurper, and in
what a just Title dos consist. If he place it in an hereditary Succession, we
ought to be informed, whether this right must be deduced from one universal
Lord of Mankind, or from a particular Lord of every People: If from the
universal Lord, the same descent that gives him a right to the dominion of any
one Country, enslaves the whole world to him; if from the particular Lord of
one place, proof must be given how he came to be so: for if there was a defect
in the first, it can never be repaired, and the possession is no more than a
continued Usurpation. But having already proved the absurdity of any pretense
to either, I shall forbear the repetition, and only say, that if the course of
Succession may never be justly interrupted, the Family of Meroveus could not
have had any right to the Crown of France; Pepin was a Usurper, if it must for
ever have continued in the descendents of Meroveus, and Hugh Capet could have
no title, if the Race of Pepin might not be dispossessed. I leave our Author to
dispute this point with the King of France; and when he has so far convinced
him thathe is a Usurper, as to persuade him to resign his Crown to the House of
Austria claiming from Pharamond, or to that of Lorrain as descended from Pepin,
I can give him half a dozen more knots which will not be with less difficulty
untied, and which instead of establishing the Titles of such Kings as are known
to us, will overthrow them all, unless a Right be given to Usurpation, or the
consent of a People do confer it.

But if there be such a thing as a Usurper, and a Rule by which men may judge of
Usurpation, it is not only lawful but necessary to examine the Titles of such as
go under the name of Kings, that we may know whether they are truly so or not,
lest through ignorance we chance to give the Veneration and Obedience that is due
to a King, to one who is not a King, and deny it to him, who by an
uninterruptible Line of Descent is our natural Lord; and thereby prefer the
worst of men and our most bitter enemy before the Person we ought to look upon
as our Father: and if this prove dangerous to one or more Kings, it is our
Author's fault, not mine.

If there be no Usurper, nor Rule of distinguishing him from a lawful Prince,
Filmer is the worst of all triflers and impostors, who grounds his Arguments in
the most serious matters upon what he esteems to be false; but the truth is, he
seems to have set himself against humanity and common sense, as much as against
Law and Virtue: and if he who so frequently contradicts himself, can be said to
mean any thing, he would authorize rapine and murder, and persuade us to
account those to be rightful Kings, who by treachery and other unjust means
overthrow the right of Descent which he pretends to esteem sacred, as well as
the Libertys of Nations, which by better Judges are thought to be so; and gives
the odious name of Usurpation to the Advancement of one who is made King by the
consent of a willing People.

But if Henry the First were a Usurper, I desire to know whether the same name
belongs to all our Kings, or which of them deserves a better; that we may
understand whose acts ought to be reputed legal, and to whose Descent we owe
veneration, or whether we are wholly exempted from all: for I cannot see a
possibility of fixing the guilt of Usurpation upon Henry the First, without
involving many, if not all our Kings in the same.

If his Title was not good because his Brother Robert was still living, that of
Rufus is by the same reason overthrown; and William their Father being a
bastard could have none. This fundamental defect could never be repaired: sor
the Successors could inherit no more than the right of the first, which was
nothing. Stephen could deduce no Title either from Norman or Saxon; whatsoever
Henry the Second pretended, must be from his Mother Maud, and any other might
have bin preser'd before her as well as he. If her Title was from the Normans,
it must be void, since they had none, and the story of Edgar Atheling is too
impertinent to deserve mention. But however, it could be of no advantage to
her; for David King of Scotland, Brother to her Mother from whom only her Title
could be derived, was then alive with his Son Henry, who dying not long after,
left three Sons and three Daughters, whose posterity being distributed into
many Familys of Scotland, remains to this day; and if proximity of blood is to
be considered, ought always to have bin preferred before her and her
Descendents, unless there be a Law that gives the preference to Daughters
before Sons. What right soever Henry the Second had, it must necessarily have
perished with him, all his Children having bin begotten in manifest Adultery on
Eleanor of Gascony, during the life of Lewis King of France her first Husband:
and nothing could be alleged to color the business, but a Dispensation from
the Pope directly against the Law of God, and the words of our Savior, who
says, That a Wife cannot be put away unless for Adultery, and he that marrys
her that is put away commits Adultery. The pollution of this spring is not to
be cured; but tho it should pass unregarded, no one part of the Succession
since that time has remained entire. John was preferred before Arthur his elder
Brother's Son: Edward the Third was made King by the deposition of his Father:
Henry the Fourth by that of Richard the Second. If the House of Mortimer or
York had the right, Henry the 4 th, 5 th, and 6 th were not Kings, and all who
claim under them have no Title. However, Richard the Third could have none; for
the Children of his elder Brother the Duke of Clarence were then living. The
Children of Edward the Fourth may be suspected of Bastardy; and tho it may have
bin otherwise, yet that matter is not so clear as things of such importance
ought to be, and the consequence may reach very far. But tho that scruple were
removed, it is certain that Henry the Seventh was not King in the right of his
Wife Elizabeth, for he reigned before and after her; and for his other Titles,
we Mem. de Commin.
may believe Philip de Commines, who says, He had neither cross nor pile. If
Henry the Eighth had a right in himself, or from his Mother, he should have
reigned immediately after her death, which he never pretended, nor to succeed
till his Father was dead, thereby acknowledging he had no right but from him,
unless the Parliament and People can give it. The like may be said of his
Children. Mary could have no Title if she was a Bastard, begotten in Incest;
but if her Mother's Marriage was good and she legitimate, Elizabeth could have
none.

Yet all these were lawful Kings and Queens; their Acts continue in force to
this day to all intents and purposes: the Parliament and People made them to be
so, when they had no other Title. The Parliament and People therefore have the
power of making Kings: Those who are so made are not Usurpers: We have had none
but such for more than seven hundred years. They were therefore lawful Kings,
or this Nation has had none in all that time; and if our Author like this
conclusion, the account from whence it is drawn may without difficulty be
carried as high as our English Historys do reach.

This being built upon the steady Foundation of Law, History and Reason, is not
to be removed by any Man's opinion; especially by one accompanied with such
circumstances as Sir Walter Raleigh was in during the last years of his life:
And there is something of baseness, as well as prevarication, in turning the
words of an eminent Person, reduced to great difficultys, to a sense no way
agreeing with his former Actions or Writings, and no less tending to impair his
Reputation than to deceive others. Our Author is highly guilty of both, in
citing Sir Walter Raleigh to invalidate the Great Charter of our Libertys, as
begun by Usurpation, and showed to the world by Rebellion; whereas no such
thing, nor any thing like it in word or principle, can be found in the Works
that deserve to go under his Name. The Dialogue in question, with some other
small Pieces published after his death, deserve to be esteemed spurious: Or if,
from a desire of Life, when he knew his Head lay under the Ax, he was brought
to say things no way agreeing with what he had formerly professed, they ought
rather to be buried in oblivion, than produced to blemish his Memory. But that
the public Cause may not suffer by his fault, it is convenient the World should
be informed, that tho he was a well-qualify'd Gentleman, yet his Morals were no
way exact, as appears by his dealings with the brave Earl of Essex. And he was
so well assisted in his History of the World, that an ordinary man with the
same helps might have performed the same things. Neither ought it to be
accounted strange, if that which he writ by himself had the tincture of another
Spirit, when he was deprived of that assistance, tho his Life had not depended
upon the will of the Prince; and he had never said, That See Si^ W. Raleigh's
Epistle to King James.
the bond of Subjects to their Kings should always be wrought out of Iron, and
those of Kings to their Subjects out of Cobwebs.

SECT. XXXI. Free Nations have a right of meeting, when and where they please,
unless they deprive themselves of it.
A Perverted Judgment always leads men into a wrong way, and persuades them to
believe that those things favor their cause, that utterly overthrow it. For a
proof of this, I desire our Author's words may be considered. In the former
Parliaments, says he, instituted and continued since Henry the First his time,
is not to be found the usage of any natural Liberty of the People: For all
those Libertys that are claimed in Parliament, are Libertys of Grace from the
King, and not the Libertys of Nature to the People: For if the Liberty were
natural, it would give power to the multitude to assemble themselves, when and
where they pleased, to bestow the Sovereignty, and by pactions to limit and
direct the exercise of it. And I say that Nations being naturally free, may
meet, when and where they please; may dispose of the Sovereignty, and may
direct or limit the exercise of it, unless by their own Act they have deprived
themselves of that Right: and there could never have bin a lawful Assembly of
any People in the World, if they had not had that Power in themselves. It was
proved in the preceding Section, that all our Kings having no Title, were no
more than what the Nobility and People made them to be; that they could have no
Power but what was given to them, and could confer none except what they had
received. If they can therefore call Parliaments, the power of calling them
must have bin given to them, and could not be given by any who had it not in
themselves. The Israelites met together, and chose Ehud, Gideon, Sampson,
Jephtha, and others, to be their Leaders, whom they judged fit to deliver them
from their Enemies. By the same right they assembled at Mispeth to make War
against the Tribe of Benjamin, when Justice was denied to be done against those
who had villanously abused the Levite's Concubine. In the like manner they
would have made Gideon King, but he refused. In the same place they met, and
chose Saul to be their King. He being dead, the men of Judah assembled
themselves, and anointed David: not long after, all the Tribes met at Hebron,
made a Contract with him, and received him as their King. In the same manner,
tho by worse Counsel, they made Absalom King. And the like was attempted in
favor of Sheba the Son of Bichri, tho they then had a King chosen by
themselves. When they found themselves oppressed by the Tributes that had bin
laid upon them by Solomon, they met at Shechem; and being displeased with
Rehoboam's answer to their complaints, ten of the Tribes made Jeroboam King.
Jehu, and all the other Kings of Israel, whether good or bad, had no other
Title than was conferred upon them by the prevailing part of the People; which
could not have given them any, unless they had met together; nor meet together
without the consent, and against the will of those that reigned, unless the
Power had bin in themselves.

Where Governments are more exactly regulated, the Power of judging when it is
fit to call the Senate or People together, is referred to one or more Magistrates;
as in Rome to the Consuls or Tribuns, in Athens to the Archons, and in Thebes
to the Beotarches: but none of them could have these Powers, unless they had
bin given by those who advanced them to the Magistracys to which they were
annexed; nor could they have bin so annexed, if those who created them had not
had the right in themselves. If they Officers neglected their duty of calling
such Assemblys when the public Affairs required, the People met by their own
Authority, and punished the Person, or abrogated the Magistracy, as appears in
the case of the Decemviri, and many others that might be alleged, if the thing
were not so plain as to need no further proof. The reason of this is, that they
who institute a Magistracy, best know whether the end of the Institution be
rightly pursued or not: And all just Magistracys being the same in essence, tho
differing in form, the same right must perpetually belong to those who put the
Sovereign Power into the hands of one, a few, or many men, which is what our
Author calls the Disposal of the Sovereignty. Thus the Romans did when they
created Kings, Consuls, Military Tribuns, Dictators, or Decemviri: and it had
bin most ridiculous to say, that those Officers gave authority to the People to
meet and choose them; for they who are chosen are the Creatures of those who
choose, and are nothing more than others till they are chosen. The last King of
Sweden, Charles Gustavus, told a Gentleman who was Ambassador there, That the
Swedes having made him King, when he was poor and had nothing in the World, he
had but one work to do, which was so to reign, that they might never repent the
good opinion they had conceived of him. They might therefore meet, and did meet
to conser the Sovereignty upon him, or he could never have had it: For tho the
Kingdom be hereditary to Males or Females, and his Mother was Sister to the
Great Gustavus; yet having married a stranger without the consent of the
Estates, she performed not the Condition upon which Women are admitted to the
Succession; and thereby falling from her Right, he pretended not to any. The
Act of his Election declares he had none, and gives the Crown to him and the
Heirs of his Body, with this farther Declaration, that the benefit of his
Election should no way extend to his Brother Prince Adolphus; and it is confessed
by all the Swedish Nation, that if the King now reigning should die without
Children, the Estates would proceed to a new Election.

It Is rightly observed by our Author, that if the People might meet and give
the Sovereign Power, they might also direct and limit it; for they did meet in
this and other Countries, they did confer the Sovereign Power, they did limit
and direct the exercise; and the Laws of each People show in what manner and
measure it is every where done. This is as certain in relation to Kings, as any
other Magistrates. The Commission of the Roman Dictators was, to take care Ne
quid detrimenti Respublica accipiat. T. Live.
that the Commonwealth might receive no detriment. The same was sometimes given
to the Consuls: King Offa's Confession, that he was made King In vestrae
Libertatis tuitionem. Mat. Par.
to preserve the public Liberty, expresses the same thing: And Charles
Gustavus, who said he had no other work, than to govern in such a manner, that
they who had made him King might not repent, showed there was a Rule which he
stood obliged to follow, and an end which he was to procure, that he might
merit and preserve their good opinion. This power of conferring the Sovereignty
was exercised in France by those who made Meroveus King, in the prejudice of
the two Grandchildren of Pharamond, Sons to Clodion; by those who excluded his
Race, and gave the Crown to Pepin; by those who deposed Lewis le Debonair, and
Charles le Gross; by those who brought in five Kings, that were either Bastards
or Strangers, between him and Charles le Simple; by those who rejected his
Race, and advanced Hugh Capet; by those who made Henry the First King, to the
prejudice of Robert his elder Brother, and continued the Crown in the Race of
Henry for ten Generations, whilst the Descendents of Robert were only Dukes of
Burgundy. The like was done in Castille and Arragon, by frequently preferring
the younger before the elder Brother; the Descendents of Females before those
of the Male-line in the same degree; the more remote in Blood before the
nearest; and sometimes Bastards before the legitimate Issue. The same was done
in England in relation to every King, since the coming in of the Normans, as I
showed in the last Section, and other places of this Work.

That they who gave the Sovereignty, might also circumscribe and direct it, is
manifest by the several ways of providing for the Succession instituted by
several Nations. Some are merely elective, as the Empire of Germany and the
Kingdom of Poland to this day; the Kingdom of Denmark till the year 1660; that
of Sweden till the time of Gustavus Ericson, who delivered that Nation from the
oppression of Christern II. the cruel King of the Danes. In others the Election
was confined to one or more Familys, as the Kingdom of the Goths in Spain to
the Balthei and Amalthei. In some, the eldest Man of the reigning Family was
preferred before the nearest, as in Scotland before the time of Kennethus. In
other places the nearest in Blood is preferred before the elder if more remote.
In some, no regard is had to Females, or their Descendents, as in France and
Turkey: in others, they or their Descendents are admitted, either simply as well
as Males; or under a condition of marrying in the Country, or with the consent
of the Estates, as in Sweden. And no other reason can be given for this almost
infinite variety of Constitutions, than that they who made them would have it
so; which could not be, if God and Nature had appointed one General Rule for
all Nations. For in that case, the Kingdom of France must be elective, as well
as that of Poland and the Empire; or the Empire and Poland hereditary, as that
of France: Daughters must succeed in France, as well as in England, or be
excluded in England as in France; and he that would establish one as the
Ordinance of God and Nature, must of necessity overthrow all the rest.

A farther exercise of the natural Liberty of Nations is discovered in the De
jur. bell. and pac.
several Limitations put upon the Sovereign Power. Some Kings, says Grotius,
have the Summum Imperium summo modo; others, modo non summo: and amongst those
that are under Limitations, the degrees as to more or less, are almost
infinite, as I have proved already by the example of Arragon, ancient Germany,
the Saxon Kings, the Normans, the Kings of Castille, the present Empire, with
diverse others. And I may safely say, that the ancient Government of France was
much of the same nature to the time of Charles the 7 th, and Lewis the 11 th:
but the work of emancipating themselves, as they call it, begun by them, is now
brought to perfection in a boundless elevation of the King's Greatness and
Riches, to the unspeakable misery of the People.

'Twere a folly to think this Variety proceeds from the Concessions of Kings,
who naturally delight in Power, and hate that which crosses their Will. It
might with more reason be imagined, that the Roman Consuls, who were brought up
in liberty, who had contracted a love to their Country, and were contented to
live upon an equal foot with their fellow Citizens, should confine the Power of
their Magistracy to a year; or that the Dukes of Venice should be graciously
pleased to give power to the Council of Ten to punish them capitally if they
transgrest the Laws, than that Kings should put such Fetters upon their Power,
which they so much abhor; or that they would suffer them, if they could be
easily broken. If any one of them should prove so moderate, like Trajan, to
command the Prefect of the Pretorian Guard to use the Sword for him if he
governed well, and against him if he did not, it would soon be rescinded by his
Successor; the Law which has no other strength than the act of one man, may be
annul'd by another. So that nothing dos more certainly prove, that the Laws
made in several Countries to restrain the Power of Kings, and variously to
dispose of the Succession, are not from them, than the frequent examples of
their fury, who have exposed themselves to the greatest dangers, and brought
infinite miserys upon the People, through the desire of breaking them. It must
therefore be concluded, that Nations have power of meeting together, and of
conferring, limiting, and directing the Sovereignty; or all must be grounded
upon most manifest Injustice and Usurpation.

No man can have a power over a Nation otherwise than de jure, or de facto. He
who pretends to have a power de jure, must prove that it is originally inherent
in him or his predecessor from whom he inherits; or that it was justly acquired
by him. The vanity of any pretense to an original Right appears sufficiently, I
hope, from the proofs already given, that the first Fathers of Mankind had it
not; or if they had, no man could now inherit the same, there being no man able
to make good the Genealogy that should give him a right to the Succession.
Besides, the facility we have of proving the beginnings of all the Familys that
reign among us, makes it as absurd for any of them to pretend a perpetual right
to Dominion, as for any Citizen of London, whose Parents and Birth we know, to
say he is the very man Noah, who lived in the time of the Flood, and is now
four or five thousand years old.

If the power were conferred on him or his Predecessors, it is what we ask; for
the Collation can be of no value, unless made by those who had a right to do
it; and the original Right by Descent failing, no one can have any over a Free
People but themselves, or those to whom they have given it.

If Acquisition be pretended, it is the same thing; for there can be no right to
that which is acquired, unless the right of invading be proved; and that being
done, nothing can be acquired except what belonged to the Person that was
invaded, and that only by him who had the right of invading. No man ever did or
could conquer a Nation by his own strength; no man therefore could ever acquire
a personal right over any; and if it was conferred upon him by those who made
the Conquest with him, they were the People that did it. He can no more be said
to have the Right originally in and from himself, than a Magistrate of Rome or
Athens immediately after his Creation; and having no other at the beginning, he
can have none to eternity; for the Nature of it must refer to the Original, and
cannot be changed by time.

Whatsoever therefore proceeds not from the consent of the People, must be de
facto only, that is void of all right; and it is impossible there should not be
a right of destroying that which is grounded upon none; and by the same rule
that one man enjoys what he gained by violence, another may take it from him.
Cyrus overthrew the Assyrians and Babylonians, Alexander the Medes and
Persians; and if they had no right of making war upon those Nations, the
Nations could not but have a right of recovering all that had bin unjustly
taken from them, and avenging the evils they had suffered. If the cause of the
war was originally just, and not corrupted by an intemperate use of the
victory, the conquered People was perhaps obliged to be quiet; but the
conquering Armies that conferred upon their Generals what they had taken from
their Enemies, might as justly expect an account of what they had given, and
that it should be employed according to the intention of the givers, as the
People of any City might do from their regularly created Magistrates; because it
was as impossible for Cyrus, Alexander or Caesar, to gain a power over the Armies
they led, without their consent, as for Pericles, Valerius, or any other
disarmed Citizen to gain more power in their respective Citys, than was
voluntarily conferred upon them. And I know no other difference between Kingdoms
so constituted by conquering Armies, and such as are established in the most
orderly manner, than that the first usually incline more to War, the latter to
Justice and Peace. But there have not bin wanting many of the first sort
(especially the Nations coming from the North) who were no less exact in
ordaining that which tended to the preservation of Liberty, nor less severe in
seeing it punctually performed, than the most regular Commonwealths that ever
were in the World. And it can with no more reason be pretended, that the Goths
received their Privileges from Alan or Theodoric, the Francs from Pharamond or
Meroveus, and the English from Ina or Ethelred, than that the Liberty of Athens
was the gift of Themistocles or Pericles, that the Empire of Rome proceeded
from the liberality of Brutus or Valerius, and that the Commonwealth of Venice
at this day subsists by the favor of the Contarini or Moresini: which must
reduce us to matter of Right, since that of Fact void of Right can signify
nothing.

SECT. XXXII. The Powers of Kings are so various according to the Constitutions
of several States, that no Consequence can be drawn to the prejudice or
advantage of any one, merely from the Name.
IN opposition to what is above said, some alledg the name of King, as if there
were a charm in the word; and our Author seems to put more weight upon it, than
in the Reasons he brings to support his Cause. But that we may see there is no
efficacy in it, and that it conveys no other right than what particular Nations
may annex to it, we are to consider,

1. That the most absolute Princes that are or have bin in the World, never had
the name of King: whereas it has bin frequently given to those whose powers
have bin very much restrained. The Cesars were never called Kings, till the
sixth Age of Christianity: the Califs and Sultan of Egypt and Babylon, the
Great Turk, the Cham of Tartary, or the Great Mogol never took that name, nor
any other of the same signification. The Czar of Moscovy has it not, tho he is
as absolute a Monarch, and his People as miserable slaves as any in the World.
On the other side, the chief Magistrates of Rome and Athens for some time, those
of Sparta, Arragon, Sweden, Denmark and England, who could do nothing but by
Law, have bin called Kings. This may be enough to show, that a Name being no
way essential, what Title soever is given to the Chief Magistrate, he can have
no other power than the Laws and Customs of his Country do give, or the People
confer upon him.

2. The names of Magistrates are often changed, tho the power continue to be the
same; and the powers are sometimes altered tho the name remain. When Octavius
Caesar by the force of a mad corrupted Soldiery had overthrown all Law and
Right, he took no other Title in relation to Military Affairs than that of
Imperator, which in the time of Liberty was by the Armies often given to Pretors
and Consuls: In Civil matters he was, as he pretended, (...) unitia potestate
contentus. C. ^^^it.
content with the power of Tribun; and the like was observed in his Successor,
who to new invented Usurpations, gave old and approved names. On the other
side, those Titles which have bin rendered odious and execrable by the violent
exercise of an absolute Power, are sometimes made popular by moderate
limitations; as in Germany, where, tho the Monarchy seem to be as well tempered
as any, the Princes retain the same names of Imperator, Caesar and Augustus, as
those had done, who by the excess of their rage and fury had desolated and
corrupted the best part of the World.

Sometimes the name is changed, tho the power in all respects continue
Sa^vedra. M^r^^na. (...).
the same. The Lords of Castille had for many Ages no other Title than that of
Count; and when the Nobility and People thought good, they changed it to that
of King, without any addition to the power.

The Sovereign Magistrate in Poland was called Duke till within the last two
hundred years, when they gave the title of King to one of the Jagellan Family;
which title has continued to this day, tho without any change in the nature of
the Magistracy. And I presume, no wise man will think, that if the Venetians
should give the name of King to their Duke, it could confer any other power
upon him than he has already, unless more should be conferred by the Authority
of the Great Council.

3. The same names which in some places denote the Supreme Magistracy, in
others are subordinate or merely titular. In England, France and Spain, Dukes
and Earls are Subjects: in Germany the Electors and some Princes who are called
by those names, are little less than Sovereigns; and the Dukes of Savoy,
Tuscany, Moscovy and others, acknowledge no Superior, as well as those of Poland
and Castille had none, when they went under those titles. The same may be said
of Kings. Some are subject to a foreign power, as diverse of them were subject
to the Persian and Babylonian Monarchs, who for that reason were called the
Kings of Kings. Some also are tributarys; and when the Spaniards first landed
in America, the great Kings of Mexico and Peru had many others under them.
Threescore and ten Kings gathered up meat under the Table of Adonibezek. The
Romans had many Kings depending upon them. Herod and those of his Race were of
this number; and the dispute between him and his Sons Aristobulus and
Alexander, was to be determined by them; neither durst he decide the matter
till it was referred to him. But a right of Appeal did still remain, as appears
by the case of St. Paul when Agrippa was King. The Kings of Mauritania from the
time of Massinissa, were under the like dependence: Jugurtha went to Rome to
justify himself for the death of Micipsa: Juba was commanded by the Roman
Magistrates, Scipio, Petreius and Afranius; another Juba was made King of the
same Country by Augustus, and Tiridates of Armenia by Nero; and infinite
examples of this nature may be alleged. Moreover, their powers are variously
regulated, according to the variety of tempers in Nations and Ages. Some have
restrained the powers that by experience were found to be exorbitant; others
have dissolved the bonds that were laid upon them: and Laws relating to the
Institution, Abrogation, Enlargement or Restriction of the Regal Power, would
be utterly insignificant if this could not be done. But such Laws are of no
effect in any other Country than where they are made. The lives of the Spartans
did not depend upon the will of Agesilaus or Leonidas, because Nabuchodonosor
could kill or save whom he pleased: and tho the King of Marocco may stab his
Subjects, throw them to the Lions, or hang them upon tenterhooks; yet a King of
Poland would probably be called to a severe account, if he should unjustly kill
a single man.

SECT. XXXIII. The Liberty of a People is the Gift of God and Nature.
IF any man ask how Nations come to have the power of doing these things, I
answer, That Liberty being only an exemption from the dominion of another, the
question ought not to be, how a Nation can come to be free, but how a man comes
to have a dominion over it; for till the right of Dominion be proved and
justified, Liberty subsists as arising from the Nature and Being of a man.
Tertullian speaking of the Emperors says, Ab eo Imperium a quo spiritus; and we
taking man in his first condition may justly say, ab eo Libertas a quo
spiritus; for no man can owe more than he has received. The Creature having
nothing, and being nothing but what the Creator makes him, must owe all to him,
and nothing to any one from whom he has received nothing. Man therefore must be
naturally free, unless he be created by another power than we have yet heard
of. The obedience due to Parents arises from hence, in that they are the
instruments of our Generation; and we are instructed by the light of Reason,
that we ought to make great returns to those from whom under God we have
received all. When they die we are their Heirs, we enjoy the same rights, and
devolve the same to our Posterity. God only, who confers this right upon us,
can deprive us of it: and we can no way understand he dos so, unless he had so
declared by express Revelation, or had set some distinguishing marks of
Dominion and Subjection upon men; and, as an ingenious Person not long since
said, caused some to be born with Crowns on their heads, and all others with
Saddles upon their backs. This Liberty therefore must continue, till it be
either forfeited or willingly resigned. The forfeiture is hardly comprehensible
in a multitude that is not entered into any Society; for as they are all equal,
and Par in parem non habet imperium.
equals can have no right over each other, no man can forfeit any thing to one
who can justly demand nothing, unless it may be by a personal injury, which is
nothing to this case; because where there is no Society, one man is not bound
by the actions of another. All cannot join in the same Act, because they are
joined in none; or if they should, no man could recover, much less transmit the
forfeiture; and not being transmitted, it perishes as if it had never bin, and
no man can claim any thing from it.

'Twill be no less difficult to bring resignation to be subservient to our
Author's purpose; for men could not resign their Liberty, unless they naturally
had it in themselves. Resignation is a public declaration of their assent to
be governed by the Person to whom they resign; that is, they do by that Act
constitute him to be their Governor. This necessarily puts us upon the inquiry,
Why they do resign, how they will be governed, and proves the Governor to be
their creature; and the right of disposing the Government must be in them, or
they who receive it can have none. This is so evident to common sense, that it
were impertinent to ask who made Carthage, Athens, Rome or Venice to be free
Citys. Their Charters were not from men, but from God and Nature. When a number
of Phenicians had found a Port on the Coast of Africa, they might perhaps agree
with the Inhabitants for a parcel of Ground, but they brought their Liberty
with them. When a company of Latins, Sabins and Tuscans met together upon the
Banks of the Tiber, and chose rather to build a City for themselves, than to
live in such as were adjacent, they carried their Liberty in their own Breasts,
and had Hands and Swords to defend it. This was their Charter; and Romulus
could confer no more upon them, than Dido upon the Carthaginians. When a
multitude of barbarous Nations infested Italy, and no protection could be
expected from the corrupted and perishing Empire, such as agreed to seek a
place of refuge in the scattered Islands of the Adriatic Gulf, had no need of
any man's Authority to ratify the Institution of their Government. They who
were the formal part of the City, and had built the material, could not but
have a right of governing as they pleased, since if they did amiss, the hurt
was only to themselves. It Is probable enough that some of the Roman Emperors,
as Lords of the Soil, might have pretended to a Dominion over them, if there
had bin any color for it: but nothing of that kind appearing in thirteen
hundred years, we are not like to hear of any such cavils. It Is agreed by
Mankind, that subjection and protection are relative; and that he who cannot
protect those that are under him, in vain pretends to a Dominion over them. The
only ends for which Governments are constituted, and obedience rendered to
them, are the obtaining of Justice and Protection; and they who cannot provide
for both, give the People a right of taking such ways as best please
themselves, in order to their own safety.

The matter is yet more clear in relation to those who never were in any
Society, as at the beginning, or renovation of the World after the Flood; or
who upon the dissolution of the Societys to which they did once belong, or by
some other accident, have bin obliged to seek new habitations. Such were those
who went from Babylon upon the confusion of Tongues, those who escaped from
Troy when it was burnt by the Grecians; almost all the Nations of Europe, with
many of Asia and Africa, upon the dissolution of the Roman Empire. To which may
be added a multitude of Northern Nations, who, when they had increased to such
numbers that their Countries could no longer nourish them, or because they
wanted skill to improve their Lands, were sent out to provide for themselves,
and having done so, did erect many Kingdoms and States, either by themselves,
or in union and coalition with the ancient Inhabitants.

It Is in vain to say, that wheresoever they came, the Land did belong to some
body, and that they who came to dwell there must be subject to the Laws of
those who were Lords of the Soil, for that is not always true in fact. Some
come into desert Countries that have no Lord, others into such as are thinly
peopled, by men who knowing not how to improve their Land, do either grant part
of it upon easy terms to the new comers, or grow into a union with them in the
enjoyment of the whole; and Historys furnish us with infinite examples of this
nature.

If we will look into our own original, without troubling our selves with the
senseless storys of Samothes the Son of Japhet, and his Magicians, or the Giants
begotten by Spirits upon the thirty Daughters of Danaus, sent from Phenicia in
a Boat without Sails, Oars or Rudder, we shall find that when the Romans
abandoned this Island, the Inhabitants were left to a full liberty of providing
for themselves: and whether we deduce our Original from them or the Saxons, or
from both, our Ancestors were perfectly free; and the Normans having inherited
the same Right when they came to be one Nation with the former, we cannot but
continue so still, unless we have enslaved our selves.

Nothing is more contrary to reason than to imagine this. When the fierce
barbarity of the Saxons came to be softened by a more gentle Climat, the Arts
and Religion they learnt, taught them to reform their Manners, and better
enabled them to frame Laws for the preservation of their Liberty, but no way
dimish'd their love to it: and tho the Normans might desire to get the Laads of
those who had joined with Harold, and of others into their hands; yet when they
were settled in the Country, and by marriages united to the ancient
Inhabitants, they became true Englishmen, and no less lovers of Liberty, and
resolute defenders of it, than the Saxons had bin. There was then neither
conquering Norman nor conquered Saxon, but a great and brave People composed of
both, united in blood and interest in the defense of their common Rights, which
they so well maintained, that no Prince since that time has too violently
encroach'd upon them, who, as the reward of his folly, has not lived miserably,
and died shamefully.

Such actions of our Ancestors do not, as I suppose, savor much of the
submission which patrimonial slaves do usually render to the will of their
Lord. On the contrary, whatsoever they did was by a power inherent in
themselves to defend that Liberty in which they were born. All their Kings were
created upon the same condition, and for the same ends. Alfred acknowledged he
found and left them perfectly free; and the confession of Offa, that they had
not made him King for his own merits, but for the defense of their Liberty,
comprehends all that were before and after him. They well knew how great the
honor was, to be made Head of a great People, and rigorously exacted the
performance of the ends for which such a one was elevated, severely punishing
those who basely and wickedly betrayed the Trust reposed in them, and violated
all that is most sacred among men; which could not have bin unless they were
naturally free, for the Liberty that has no being cannot be defended.

SECT. XXXIV. No Veneration paid, or Honor conferred upon a just and lawful
Magistrate, can diminish the Liberty of a Nation.
SOME have supposed, that tho the People be naturally free, and Magistrates
created by them, they do by such Creations deprive themselves of that natural
Liberty; and that the names of King, Sovereign Lord, and Dread Sovereign, being
no way consistent with Liberty, they who give such Titles do renounce it. Our
Author carrys this very far, and lays great weight upon the submissive Language
used by the People, when they humbly crave that his Majesty would be pleased to
grant their accustomed freedom of speech, and access to his Person; and give
the name of Supplications and Petitions to the Addresses made to him: Whereas
he answers in the haughty Language of Le Roy le veut, Le Roy s'avisera, and the
like. But they who talk at this rate, show, that they neither understand the
nature of Magistracy, nor the practice of Nations. Those who have lived in the
highest exercise of their Liberty, and have bin most tenacious of it, have
thought no Honor too great for such Magistrates as were eminent in the defense
of their Rights, and set up for that end. The name of Dread Sovereign might
justly have bin given to a Roman Dictator, or Consul, for they had the
Sovereign Authority in their hands, and power sufficient for its execution.
Whilst their Magistracy continued, they were a terror to the same men, whose
Axes and Rods had bin a terror to them the year or month before, and might be
so again the next. The Romans thought they could not be guilty of excess in
carrying the power and veneration due to their Dictator to the highest: And
Livy tells us, that his Edictum Dictatoris pro numine observatum. Hist. l. 8.
Edicts were esteemed sacred. I have already shown that this haughty People,
who might have commanded, condescended to join with their Tribuns in a Petition
to the Dictator Papirius, for the Life of Quintus Fabius, who had fought a
Battle in his absence, and without his order, tho he had gained a great and
memorable Victory. The same Fabius, when Consul, was commended by his Father Q.
Fabius Maximus, for obliging him by his Lictors to dismount from his Horse, and
to pay him the same respect that was due from others. The Tribuns of the
People, who were instituted for the preservation of Liberty, were also esteemed
sacred and inviolable, as appears by that phrase, Sacrosancta Tribunorum
potestas, so common in their ancient Writers. No man, I presume, thinks any
Monarchy more limited, or more clearly derived from a delegated Power, than
that of the German Emperors; and yet Sacra Caesarea Majestas is the public
style. Nay, the Hollanders at this day call their Burgermasters, tho they see
them selling Herring or Tar, High and Mighty Lords, as soon as they are
advanced to be of the 36, 42 or 48 Magistrates of a small Town. It Is no wonder
therefore, if a great Nation should think it conducing to their own glory, to
give magnificent Titles, and use submissive language to that one man, whom they
set up to be their Head; most especially, if we consider that they came from a
Country where such Titles and Languages were principally invented.

Among the Romans and Grecians we hear nothing of Majesty, Highness, Serenity
and Excellence appropriated to a single Person, but receive them from Germany
and other Northern Countries. We find Majestas Populi Romani, and Majestas
Imperii, in their best Authors; but no man speaking to Julius or Augustus, or
even to the vaniest of their Successors, ever used those empty Titles, nor took
upon themselves the name of Servants, as we do to every fellow we meet in the
Streets. When such ways of speaking are once introduced, they must needs swell
to a more than ordinary height in all transactions with Princes. Most of them
naturally delight in vanity, and Courtiers never speak more truth than when
they most extol their Masters, and assume to themselves the names that best
express the most abject slavery. These being brought into mode, like all ill
Customs, increase by use; and then no man can omit them without bringing that
danger and hatred upon himself, which few will undergo, except for something
that is evidently of great importance. Matters of ceremony and title at the
first seem not to be so; and being for some time neglected, they acquire such
strength as not to be easily removed. From private Usage they pass into public
Acts; and those Flatterers who gave a beginning to them, proposing them in
public Councils, where too many of that sort have always insinuated
themselves, gain credit enough to make them pass. This work was farther
advanced by the Church of Rome, according to their custom of favoring that
most, which is most vain and corrupt; and it has bin usual with the Popes and
their adherents, liberally to gratify Princes for Services rendered to the
Church, with Titles that tended only to the prejudice of the people. These
poisonous Plants having taken root, grew up so fast, that the Titles, which,
within the space of a hundred years, were thought sufficient for the Kings and
Queens of England, have of late bin given to Monk and his honorable Duchess.
New phrases have bin invented to please Princes, or the sense of the old
perverted, as has happened to that of Le Roy s' avisera: And that which was no
more than a liberty to consult with the Lords upon a Bill presented by the
Commons, is by some men now taken sor a Right inherent in the King of denying
such Bills as may be offered to him by the Lords and Commons; tho the
Coronation Oath obliges him to hold, keep and defend the just Laws and Customs,
quas vulgus elegerit. And if a stop be not put to this exorbitant abuse, the
words still remaining in Acts of Parliament, which show that their Acts are our
Laws, may perhaps be also abolished.

But tho this should come to pass, by the slackness of the Lords and Commons,
it could neither create a new Right in the King, nor diminish that of the
People: But it might give a better color to those who are Enemies to their
Country, to render the Power of the Crown arbitrary, than any thing that is yet
among us.

SECT. XXXV. The Authority given by our Law to the Acts performed by a King de
facto, detract nothing from the Peoples right of creating whom they please.
THEY who have more regard to the prevailing Power than to Right, and lay great
weight upon the Statute of Henry the seventh, which authorizes the Acts of a
King de facto, seem not to consider, that thereby they destroy all the
pretended right of Inheritance; that he only is King de facto, who is received
by the People; and that this reception could neither be of any value in it
felf, nor be made valid by a Statute, unless the People, and their
Representatives who make the Statute, had in themselves the power of receiving,
authorizing and creating whom they please. For he is not King de facto who
calls himself so, as Perkin or Simnel, but he who by the consent of the Nation
is possessed of the Regal Power. If there were such a thing in nature, as a
natural Lord over every Country, and that the right must go by descent, it
would be impossible for any other man to acquire it, or for the people to
confer it upon him, and to give the Authority to the Acts of one, who neither
is nor can be a King, which belongs only to him who has the right inherent in
himself, and inseparable from him. Neither can it be denied, that the same
power which gives the validity to such Acts as are performed by one who is not
a King, that belongs to those of a true King, may also make him King; for the
essence of a King consists in the validity of his Acts. And it is equally absurd
for one to pretend to be a King, whose Acts as King are not valid, as that his
own can be valid, if those of another are; for then the same indivisible Right
which our Author, and those of his principles assert to be inseparable from the
Person, would be at the same time exercised and enjoyed by two distinct and
contrary Powers.

Moreover, it may be observed, that this Statute was made after frequent and
bloody Wars concerning Titles to the Crown; and whether the cause were good or
bad, those who were overcome, were not only subject to be killed in the field,
but afterward to be prosecuted as Traitors under the color of Law. He who
gained the Victory, was always set up to be King by those of his party; and he
never failed to proceed against his Enemies as Rebels. This introduced a horrid
series of the most destructive mischiefs. The Fortune of War varied often; and
I think it may be said, that there were few, if any, great Familys in England,
that were not either destroyed, or at least so far shaken, as to lose their
Chiefs, and many considerable branches of them: And experience taught, that
instead of gaining any advantage to the Public in point of Government, he for
whom they fought seldom proved better than his Enemy. They saw that the like
might again happen, tho the title of the reigning King should be as clear as
descent of blood could make it. This brought things into an uneasy posture; and
it is not strange, that both the Nobility and Commonalty should be weary of it.
No Law could prevent the dangers of battle; for he that had followers, and
would venture himself, might bring them to such a decision, as was only in the
hand of God. But thinking no more could justly be required to the full
performance of their Duty to the King, than to expose themselves to the hazard
of battle for him; and not being answerable for the success, they would not
have that Law which they endeavored to support, turned to their destruction by
their Enemies, who might come to be the interpreters of it. But as they could be
exempted from this danger only by their own Laws, which could authorize the
Acts of a King without a Title, and justify them for acting under him; it is
evident that the power of the Law was in their hands, and that the acts of the
person who enjoyed the Crown, were of no value in themselves. The Law had bin
impertinent, if it could have bin done without Law; and the Intervention of the
Parliament useless, if the Kings de facto could have given authority to their
own Acts. But if the Parliament could make that to have the effect of Law,
which was not Law, and exempt those that acted according to it from the
penaltys of the Law, and give the same force to the Acts of one who is not King
as of one who is, they cannot but have a power of making him to be King, who is
not so; that is to say, all depends entirely upon their Authority.

Besides, he is not King who assumes the title to himself, or is set up by a
corrupt party; but he who according to the usages required in the case is made
King. If these are wanting, he is neither de facto nor de jure, but Tyrannus
sine Titulo. Nevertheless, this very man, if he comes to be received by the
People, and placed in the Throne, he is thereby made King de facto. His Acts
are valid in Law; the same service is due to him as to any other: they who
render it are in the same manner protected by the Law; that is to say, he is
truly King. If our Author therefore do allow such to be Kings, he must confess
that power to be good which makes them so, when they have no right in
themselves. If he deny it, he must not only deny that there is any such thing
as a King de facto, which the Statute acknowledges, but that we ever had any
King in England; for we never had any other than such, as I have proved before.

By the same means he will so unravel all the Law, that no man shall know what
he has, or what he ought to do or avoid; and will find no remedy for this,
unless he allow, that Laws made without Kings are as good as those made with
them, which returns to my purpose: for they who have the power of making Laws,
may by Law make a King as well as any other Magistrate. And indeed the
intention of this Statute could be no other than to secure men's Persons and
Possessions, and so far to declare the power of giving and taking away the
Crown to be in the Parliament, as to remove all disputes concerning Titles, and
to make him to be a Legal King, whom they acknowledge to be King.

SECT. XXXVI. The general revolt of a Nation cannot be called a Rebellion.
AS Impostors seldom make lies to pass in the world, without putting false
names upon things, such as our Author endeavor to persuade the People they
ought not to defend their Libertys, by giving the name of Rebellion to the most
just and honorable actions that have bin performed fer the preservation of
them; and to aggravate the matter, tell us that Rebellion is like the sin of
Witchcraft. But those who seek after truth, will easily find, that there can be
no such thing in the world as the rebellion of a Nation against its own
Magistrates, and that Rebellion is not always evil. That this may appear, it
will not be amiss to consider the word, as well as the thing commonly
understood by it, as it is used in an evil sense.

The word is taken from the Latin rebellare, which signifys no more than to
renew a war. When a Town or Province had bin subdued by the Romans, and brought
under their dominion, if they violated their Faith after the settlement of
Peace, and invaded their Masters who had spared them, they were said to rebel.
But it had bin more absurd to apply that word to the People that rose against
the Decemviri, Kings or other Magistrates, than to the Parthians or any of those
Nations who had no dependence upon them; for all the circumstances that should
make a Rebellion were wanting, the word implying a superiority in them against
whom it is, as well as the breach of an established Peace. But tho every
private man singly taken be subject to the commands of the Magistrate, the
whole body of the People is not so; for he is by and for the People, and the
People is neither by nor for him. The obedience due to him from private men is
grounded upon, and measured by the General Law; and that Law regarding the
welfare of the People, cannot set up the interest of one or a few men against
the public. The whole body therefore of a Nation cannot be tied to any other
obedience than is consistent with the common good, according to their own
judgment: and having never bin subdued or brought to terms of peace with their
Magistrates, they cannot be said to revolt or rebel against them, to whom they
owe no more than seems good to themselves, and who are nothing of or by
themselves, more than other men.

Again, the thing signified by rebellion is not always evil; for tho every
subdued Nation must acknowledge a superiority in those who have subdued them,
and rebellion dos imply a breach of the peace, yet that superiority is not
infinite; the peace may be broken upon just grounds, and it may be neither a
crime nor infamy to do it. The Privernates had bin more than once subdued by
the Romans, and had as often rebel'd. Their ^. L^v. l. 8.
City was at last taken by Plautius the Consul, after their Leader Virtuvius and
great numbers of their Senate and People had bin killed: Being reduced to a low
condition, they sent Ambassadors to Rome to desire peace; where when a Senator
asked them what punishment they deserved, one of them answered, The same which
they deserve who think themselves worthy of Liberty. The Consul then demanded,
what kind of Peace might be expected from them, if the punishment should be
remitted: The Ambassador answered, Si bonam dederitis, fidam and perpetuam; si
malam, haud diuturnam. Live.
If the terms you give be good, the Peace will be observed by us faithfully and
perpetually; if bad, it will soon be broken. And tho some were offended with
the ferocity of the answer, yet the best part of the Senate approved it as Viri
and liberi vocem auditam. Ibid.
worthy of a man and a freeman; and confessing that no Man or Nation would
continue under an uneasy condition longer than they were compelled by force,
said, Eos demum, qui nihil praeterquam de liberate cogitant, dignos esse, qui
Romani fiant. Ibid.
They only were fit to be made Romans, who thought nothing valuable but
Liberty. Upon which they were all made Citizens of Rome, and obtained
whatsoever they had desired.

I know not how this matter can be carried to a greater height; for if it were
possible, that a People resisting oppression, and vindicating their own
Liberty, could commit a crime, and incur either guilt or infamy, the
Privernates did, who had bin often subdued, and often pardoned; but even in the
judgment of their Conquerors whom they had offended, the resolution they
professed of standing to no agreement imposed upon them by necessity, was
accounted the highest testimony of such a Virtue as rendered them worthy to be
admitted into a Society and equality with themselves, who were the most brave
and virtuous people of the world.

But if the patience of a conquered People may have limits, and they who will
not bear oppression from those who had spared their Lives, may deserve praise
and reward from their conquerors, it would be madness to think, that any Nation
can be obliged to bear whatsoever their own Magistrates think fit to do against
them. This may seem strange to those who talk so much of conquests made by
Kings; Immunitys, Libertys and Privileges granted to Nations; Oaths of
Allegiance taken, and wonderful benefits conferred upon them. But having already
said as much as is needful concerning Conquests, and that the Magistrate who
has nothing except what is given to him, can only dispense out of the public
Stock such Franchises and Privileges as he has received for the reward of
Services done to the Country, and encouragement of Virtue, I shall at present
keep my self to the two last points.

Allegiance signifys no more (as the words ad legem declare) than such an
obedience as the Law requires. But as the Law can require nothing from the
whole People, who are masters of it, Allegiance can only relate to particulars,
and not to the whole Nation. No Oath can bind any other than those who take it,
and that only in the true sense and meaning of it: but single men only take
this Oath, and therefore single men are only obliged to keep it: the body of a
People neither dos, nor can perform any such act: Agreements and Contracts have
bin made; as the Tribe of Judah, and the rest of Israel afterward, made a
Covenant with David, upon which they made him King; but no wise man can think,
that the Nation did thereby make themselves the Creature of their own Creature.

The sense also of an Oath ought to be considered. No man can by an Oath be
obliged to any thing beyond, or contrary to the true meaning of it; private men
who swear obedience ad Legem, swear no obedience extra or contra Legem:
whatsoever they promise or swear, can detract nothing from the public Liberty,
which the Law principally intends to preserve. Tho many of them may be obliged
in their several Stations and Capacitys to render peculiar services to a
Prince, the People continue as sree as the internal thoughts of a man, and
cannot but have a right to preserve their Liberty, or avenge the violation.

If matters are well examined, perhaps not many Magistrates can pretend to much
upon the title of merit, most especially if they or their progenitors have
continued long in Office. The conveniences annexed to the exercise of the
Sovereign power, may be thought sufficient to pay such scores as they grow due,
even to the best: and as things of that nature are handled, I think it will
hardly be found, that all Princes can pretend to an irresistible power upon the
account of beneficence to their People. When the family of Medices came to be
masters of Tuscany, that Country was without dispute, in men, money and arms,
one of the most flourishing Provinces in the World, as appears by Macchiavel's
account, and the relation of what happened between Charles the eighth and the
Magistrates of Florence, which I have mentioned already from Guicciardin. Now
whoever shall consider the strength of that Country in those days, together
with what it might have bin in the space of a hundred and forty years, in which
they have had no war, nor any other plague, than the extortion, fraud, rapin
and cruelty of their Princes, and compare it with their present desolate,
wretched and contemptible condition, may, if he please, think that much
veneration is due to the Princes that govern them, but will never make any man
believe that their Title can be grounded upon beneficenee. The like may be said
of the Duke of Savoy, who pretending (upon I know not what account) that every
Peasant in the Duchy ought to pay him two Crowns every half year, did in 1662
subtly find out, that in every year there were thirteen halves; so that a
poor man who had nothing but what he gained by hard labor, was through his
fatherly Care and Beneficence, forced to pay six and twenty Crowns to his Royal
Highness, to be employed in his discreet and virtuous pleasures at Turin.

The condition of the seventeen Provinces of the Netherlands (and even of Spain
it self) when they fell to the house of Austria, was of the same nature: and I
will confess as much as can be required, if any other marks of their Government
do remain, than such as are manifest evidences of their Pride, Avarice, Luxury
and Cruelty.

France in outward appearance makes a better show; but nothing in this world is
more miserable, than that people under the fatherly care of their triumphant
Monarch. The best of their condition is, like Asses and Mastiff dogs, to work
and fight, to be oppressed and killed for him; and those among them who have any
understanding well know, that their industry, courage, and good success, is not
only unprofitable, but destructive to them; and that by increasing the power of
their Master, they add weight to their own Chains. And if any Prince, or
succession of Princes, have made a more modest use of their Power, or more
faithfully discharged the trust reposed in them, it must be imputed peculiarly
to them, as a testimony of their personal Virtue, and can have no effect upon
others.

The Rights therefore of Kings are not grounded upon Conquest; the Libertys of
Nations do not arise from the Grants of their Princes; the Oath of Allegiance
binds no private man to more than the Law directs, and has no influence upon
the whole Body of every Nation: Many Princes are known to their Subjects only
by the injurys, losses and mischiefs brought upon them; such as are good and
just, ought to be rewarded for their personal Virtue, but can confer no right
upon those who no way resemble them; and whoever pretends to that merit, must
prove it by his Actions: Rebellion being nothing but a renewed War, can never
be against a Government that was not established by War, and of it self is
neither good nor evil, more than any other War; but is just or unjust according
to the cause or manner of it. Besides, that Rebellion which by Samuel is
compared to Witchcraft, is not of private men, or a People against 1 Samuel 15.
23.
the Prince, but of the Prince against God: The Israelites are often said to
have rebel'd against the Law, Word, or Command of God; but tho they frequently
opposed their Kings, I do not find Rebellion imputed to them on that account,
nor any ill character put upon such actions. We are told also of some Kings who
had bin subdued, and afterward rebel'd against Chedorlaomer and other Kings;
but their cause is not blamed, and we have some reason to believe it good,
because Abraham took part with those who had rebel'd. However it can be of no
prejudice to the cause I defend: for tho it were true, that those subdued Kings
could not justly rise against the person who had subdued them; or that
generally no King being once vanquished, could have a right of Rebellion
against his Conqueror, it could have no relation to the actions of a People
vindicating their own Laws and Libertys against a Prince who violates them; for
that War which never was, can never be renewed. And if it be true in any case,
that hands and swords are given to men, that they only may be slaves who have
no courage, it must be when Liberty is overthrown by those, who of all men
ought with the utmost industry and vigor to have defended it.

That this should be known, is not only necessary for the safety of Nations,
but advantageous to such Kings as are wise and good. They who know the frailty
of human Nature, will always distrust their own; and desiring only to do what
they ought, will be glad to be restrained from that which they ought not to do.
Being taught by reason and experience, that Nations delight in the Peace and
Justice of a good Government, they will never fear a general Insurrection,
whilst they take care it be rightly administered; and finding themselves by
this means to be safe, will never be unwilling, that their Children or
Successors should be obliged to tread in the same steps.

If it be said that this may sometimes cause disorders, I acknowledge it; but no
human condition being perfect, such a one is to be chosen, which carrys with it
the most tolerable inconveniences: And it being much better than the
irregularitys and excesses of a Prince should be restrained or suppressed, than
that whole Nations should perish by them, those Constitutions that make the
best provision against the greatest evils, are most to be commended. If
Governments were instituted to gratify the lusts of one man, those could not be
good that set limits to them; but all reasonable men confessing that they are
instituted for the good of Nations, they only can deserve praise, who above all
things endeavor to procure it, and appoint means proportioned to that end. The
great variety of Governments which we see in the World, is nothing but the
effect of this care; and all Nations have bin, and are more ^or less happy, as
they or their Ancecestors have had vigor of Spirit, integrity of Manners, and
wisdom to invent and establish such Orders, as have better or worse provided
for this common Good, which was sought by all. But as no Rule can be so exact,
to make provision against all contestations; and all disputes about Right do
naturally end in force when Justice is denied (ill men never willingly
submitting to any decision that is contrary to their passions and interests)
the best Constitutions are of no value, if there be not a Power to support
them. This Power first exerts it self in the execution of Justice by the
ordinary Officers; but no Nation having bin so happy, as not sometimes to
produce such Princes as Edward and Richard the Seconds, and such Ministers as
Gaveston, Spencer, and Tresilian, the ordinary Officers of Justice often want
the will, and always the power to restrain them. So that the Rights and
Libertys of a Nation must be utterly subverted and abolished, if the power of
the whole may not be employed to assert them, or punish the violation of them.
But as it is the fundamental Right of every Nation to be governed by such Laws,
in such Manner, and by such Persons as they think most conducing to their own
good, they cannot be accountable to any but themselves for what they do in that
most important affair.

SECT. XXXVII. The English Government was not ill constituted, the defects more
lately observed proceeding from the change of manners, and corruption of the
times.
I Am not ignorant that many honest and good men acknowledging these Rights,
and the care of our Ancestors to preserve them, think they wanted wisdom
rightly to proportionate the means to the end. It Is not enough, say they, for
the General of an Army to desire Victory; he only can deserve praise, who has
skill, industry, and courage to take the best measures of obtaining it. Neither
is it enough for wise Legislators to preserve Liberty, and to erect such a
Government as may stand for a time; but to set such clear Rules to those who
are to put it in execution, that every man may know when they transgress; and
appoint such means for restraining or punishing them, as may be used speedily,
surely, and effectually, without danger to the Public. Sparta being thus
constituted, we hardly find that, for more than eight hundred years, any King
presumed to pass the limits prescribed by the Law. If any Roman Consul grew
insolent, he might be reduced to order without blood, or danger to the Public;
and no Dictator ever usurped a power over Liberty till the time of Sylla, when
all things in the City were so changed, that the ancient foundations were
become too narrow. In Venice the power of the Duke is so circumscribed, that in
1300 years, no one except Falerio and Tiepoli, has dared to attempt any thing
against the Laws: and they were immediately suppressed with little commotion in
the City. On the other side, our Law is so ambiguous, perplexed and intricate,
that it is hard to know when it is broken. In all the public contests we have
had, men of good judgment and integrity have followed both partys. The means of
transgressing and procuring Partisans to make good by force the most notorious
violations of Liberty, have bin so easy, that no Prince who has endeavored it,
ever failed to get great numbers of followers, and to do infinite mischiefs
before he could be removed. The Nation has bin brought to sight against those
they had made to be what they were, upon the unequal terms of hazarding all
against nothing. If they had success, they gained no more than what was their
own before, and which the Law ought to have secured: whereas it is evident, that
if at any one time the contrary had happened, the Nation had bin utterly
enslaved; and no victory was ever gained without the loss of much noble and
innocent blood.

To this I answer, that no right judgment can be given of human things, without
a particular regard to the time in which they passed. We esteem Scipio,
Hannibal, Pyrrhus, Alexander, Epimanondas and Caesar, to have bin admirable
Commanders in War, because they had in a most eminent degree all the qualitys
that could make them so, and knew best how to employ the Arms then in use
according to the discipline of their times; and yet no man doubts, that if the
most skilful of them could be raised from the Grave, restored to the utmost
vigor of mind and body, set at the head of the best Armies he ever commanded,
and placed upon the Frontiers of France or Flanders, he would not know how to
advance or retreat, nor by what means to take any of the places in those parts,
as they are now fortified and defended; but would most certainly be beaten by
any insignificant fellow with a small number of men, furnished with such Arms
as are now in use, and following the methods now practiced. Nay, the manner of
marching, encamping, besieging, attacking, defending and fighting, is so much
altered within the last threescore years, that no man observing the discipline
that was then thought to be the best, could possibly defend himself against
that which has bin since found out, tho the terms are still the same. And if it
be considered that political matters are subject to the same mutations (as
certainly they are) it will be sufficient to excuse our Ancestors, who suting
their Government to the Ages in which they lived, could neither foresee the
changes that might happen in future Generations, nor appoint remedys for the
mischiefs they did not foresee.

They knew that the Kings of several Nations had bin kept within the limits of
the Law, by the virtue and power of a great and brave Nobility; and that no
other way of supporting a mixed Monarchy had ever bin known in the World, than
by putting the balance into the hands of those who had the greatest interests
in Nations, and who by Birth and Estate enjoyed greater advantages than Kings
could confer upon them for rewards of betraying their Country. They knew that
when the Nobility was so great as not easily to be numbered, the little that
was left to the King's disposal, was not sufficient to corrupt many; and if
some might fall under the temptation, those who continued in their integrity,
would easily be able to chastise them for deserting the public Cause, and by
that means deter Kings from endeavoring to seduce them from their duty. Whilst
things continued in this posture, Kings might safely be trusted (with the
advice of their Council) to confer the commands of the Militia in Towns and
Provinces upon the most eminent men in them: And whilst those Kings were
exercised in almost perpetual Wars, and placed their glory in the greatness of
the Actions they achieved by the power and valor of their People, it was their
interest always to choose such as seemed best to deserve that honor. It was not
to be imagined that through the weakness of some, and the malice of others, those
Dignitys should by degrees be turned into empty Titles, and become the rewards
of the greatest crimes, and the vilest services; or that the noblest of their
Descendents for want of them, should be brought under the name of Commoners,
and deprived of all privileges except such as were common to them with their
Grooms. Such a stupendous change being in process of time insensibly
introduced, the foundations of that Government which they had established, were
removed, and the superstructure overthrown. The balance by which it subsisted
was broken; and it is as impossible to restore it, as for most of those who at
this day go under the name of Noblemen, to perform the dutys required from the
ancient Nobility of England. And tho there were a charm in the name, and those
who have it should be immediately filled with a spirit like to that which
animated our Ancestors, and endeavor to deserve the Honors they possess, by
such Services to the Country as they ought to have performed before they had
them, they would not be able to accomplish it. They have neither the Interest
nor the Estates required for so great a work. Those who have Estates at a rack
Rent, have no dependents. Their Tenants, when they have paid what is agreed,
owe them nothing; and knowing they shall be turned out of their Tenements, as
soon as any other will give a little more, they look upon their Lords as men
who receive more from them than they confer upon them. This dependence being
lost, the Lords have only more money to spend or lay up than others, but no
command of men; and can therefore neither protect the weak, nor curb the
insolent. By this means all things have bin brought into the hands of the King
and the Commoners, and there is nothing left to cement them, and to maintain
the union. The perpetual jarrings we hear every day; the division of the Nation
into such factions as threaten us with ruin, and all the disorders that we see
or fear, are the effects of this rupture. These things are not to be imputed to
our original Constitutions, but to those who have subverted them: And if they
who by corrupting, changing, enervating and annihilating the Nobility, which
was the principal support of the ancient regular Monarchy, have driven those
who are truly Noblemen into the same interest and name with the Commons, and by
that means increased a party which never was, and I think never can be united
to the Court, they are to answer for the Consequences; and if they perish,
their destruction is from themselves.

The inconveniences therefore proceed not from the Institution, but from the
Innovation. The Law was plain, but it has bin industriously rendered perplex:
They who were to have upheld it are overthrown. That which might have bin
easily performed when the People was armed, and had a great, strong, virtuous
and powerful Nobility to lead them, is made difficult, now they are disarmed,
and that Nobility abolished. Our Ancestors may evidently appear, not only to
have intended well, but to have taken a right course to accomplish what they
intended. This had effect as long as the cause continued; and the only fault
that can be ascribed to that which they established is, that it has not proved
to be perpetual; which is no more than may be justly said of the best human
Constitutions that ever have bin in the world. If we will be just to our
Ancestors, it will become us in our time rather to pursue what we know they
intended, and by new Constitutions to repair the breaches made upon the old,
than to accuse them of the defects that will for ever attend the Actions of
men. Taking our Affairs at the worst, we shall soon find, that if we have the
same spirit they had, we may easily restore our Nation to its ancient Liberty,
Dignity and Happiness; and if we do not, the fault is owing to our selves, and
not to any want of virtue and wisdom in them.

SECT. XXXVIII. The power of calling and dissolving Parliaments is not simply
in the King. The variety of Customs in choosing Parliament men, and the Errors a
People may commit, neither prove that Kings are or ought to be Absolute.
THE original of Magistratical Power, the intention of our Ancestors in its
creation, and the ways prescribed for the direction and limitation of it may, I
presume, sufficiently appear by what has bin said. But because our Author,
taking hold of every twig, pretends, That Kings may call and dissolve
Parliaments at their pleasure, and from thence infers the Power to be wholly in
them; alleges the various Customs in several parts of this Nation used in the
Elections of Parliament men, to procced from the King's will; and because a
People may commit Errors, thinks all Power ought to be put into the hands of
the King:

I answer, 1. That the Power of calling and dissolving Parliaments is not
simply in Kings. They may call Parliaments, if there be occasion, at times when
the Law dos not exact it; they are placed as Sentinels, and ought diligently to
observe the motions of the Enemy, and give notice of his approach: But if the
Sentinel falls asleep, neglects his duty, or maliciously endeavors to betray
the City, those who are concerned may make use of all other means to know their
danger, and to preserve themselves. The ignorance, incapacity, negligence or
luxury of a King, is a great calamity to a Nation, and his malice is worse, but
not an irreparable ruin. Remedys may be, and often have bin found against the
worst of their Vices. The last French Kings of the Races of Meroveus and Pepin
brought many mischiefs upon the Kingdom, but the destruction was prevented.
Edward and Richard the Seconds of England were not unlike them, and we know by
what means the Nation was preserved. The question was not who had the Right, or
who ought to call Parliaments, but how the Commonwealth might be saved from
ruin. The Consuls, or other chief Magistrates in Rome, had certainly a right of
assembling and dismissing the Senate: But when Hannibal was at the Gates, or any
other imminent danger threatened them with destruction; if that Magistrate had
bin drunk, mad, or gained by the Enemy, no wise man can think that formalitys
were to have bin observed. In such cases every Man is a Magistrate; and he who
best knows the danger, and the means of preventing it, has a right of calling
the Senate or People to an Assembly. The People would, and certainly ought to
follow him, as they did Brutus and Valerius against Tarquin, or Horatius and
Valerius against the Decemviri; and whoever should do otherwise, might for
sottishness be compared to the Courtiers of the two last Kings of Spain. The
first of these, by name Philip the Third, being indisposed in cold weather, a
Braziero of Coals was brought into his Chamber, and placed so near to him, that
he was cruelly scorched. A Nobleman then present said to one who stood by him,
The King burns; the other answered, it was true, but the Page whose Office it
was to bring and remove the Braziero, was not there; and before he could be
found, his Majesty's Legs and Face were so burnt, that it caused an Erysipelas,
of which he died. Philip the Fourth escaped not much better, who being
surpised as he was hunting by a violent storm of Rain and Hail, and no man
presuming to lend the King a Cloak, he was so wet before the Officer could be
found who carried his own, that he took a cold, which cast him into a dangerous
Fever. If Kings like the consequences of such a Regularity, they may cause it
to be observed in their own Familys; but Nations looking in the first place to
their own safety, would be guilty of the most extreme stupidity, if they should
suffer themselves to be ruined for adhering to such Ceremonys.

This is said upon a supposition, that the whole power of calling and
dissolving Parliaments is by the Law placed in the King: but I utterly deny
that it is so; and to prove it, shall give the following Reasons.

(1.) That the King can have no such Power, unless it be given to him, for
every man is originally free; and the same power that makes him King, gives him
all that belongs to his being King. It Is not therefore an inherent, but a
delegated Power; and whoever receives it, is accountable to those that gave it;
for, as our Author is forced to confess, they who give Authority by Commission,
do always retain more than they grant.

(2.) The Law for annual Parliaments expressly declares it not to be in the
King's power, as to the point of their meeting, nor consequently their
continuance. For they meet to no purpose if they may not continue to do the
work for which they meet: and it were absurd to give them a power of meeting,
if they might not continue till it be done: For, as Grotius says, Qui dat
finem, dat media ad finem necessaria. The only reason why Parliaments do meet,
is to provide for the public good; and they by Law ought to meet for that end.
They ought not therefore to be dissolved, till it be accomplished. For this
reason the opinion given by Tresilian, that Kings might dissolve Parliaments at
their pleasure, was adjudg'd to be a principal part of his Treason.

(3.) We have already proved, that Saxons, Danes, Normans, etc. who had no
Title to the Crown, were made Kings by Micklegemots, Wittenagemots, and
Parliaments; that is, either by the whole People, or their Representatives:
Others have bin by the same Authority restrained, brought to order, or deposed.
But as it is impossible that such as were not Kings, and had no title to be
Kings, could by virtue of a kingly Power call Parliaments, when they had none;
and absurd to think that such as were in the Throne, who had not governed
according to Law, would suffer themselves to be restrained, imprisoned, or
deposed by Parliaments, called and sitting by themselves, and still depending
upon their will to be or not to be: It Is certain that Parliaments have in
themselves a Power of sitting and acting for the public Good.

2. To the second. The various customs used in Elections are nothing to this
question. In the Countys, which make up the Body of the Nation, all Freeholders
have their Votes: these are properly Cives, Members of the Commonwealth, in
distinction from those who are only Incolae, or Inhabitants, Villains, and such
as being under their Parents, are not yet sui juris. These in the beginning of
the Saxons reign in England, composed the Micklegemots; and when they grew to
be fo numerous that one place could not contain them, or so far dispersed, that
without trouble and danger they could not leave their habitations, they deputed
such as should represent them. When the Nation came to be more polished, to
inhabit Citys and Towns, and to set up several Arts and Trades; those who
exercised them were thought to be as useful to the Commonwealth, as the
Freeholders in the Country, and to deserve the same Privileges. But it not
being reasonable that every one should in this case do what he pleased, it was
thought fit that the King with his Council (which always consisted of the
Proceres and Magnates Regni) should judge what numbers of men, and what places
deserved to be made Corporations or Bodies Politic, and to enjoy those
Privileges; by which he did not confer upon them any thing that was his, but
according to the trust reposed in him, did dispense out of the public Stock
parcels of what he had received from the whole Nation: And whether this was to
be enjoyed by all the Inhabitants, as in Westminster; by the Common Hall, as in
London; or by the Mayor, Aldermen, Jurats and Corporation, as in other places,
it is the same thing: for in all these cases the King dos only distribute, not
give, and under the same condition that he might call Parliaments, that is, for
the public good. This indeed increases the Honor of the person entrusted, and
adds weight to the obligation incumbent upon him; but can never change the
nature of the thing, so as to make that an inherent, which is only a delegated
Power. And as Parliaments, when occasion required, have bin assembled, have
refus*d to be dissolved till their work was finished, have severely punished
those who went about to persuade Kings, that such matters depended absolutely
upon their will, and made Laws to the contrary: it is not to be imagined, that
they would not also have interposed their Authority in matters of Charters, if
it had bin observed that any King had notoriously abused the trust reposed in
him, and turned the Power to his private advantage, with which he was entrusted
for the public good.

That which renders this most plain and safe, is, that men chosen in this
manner to serve in Parliament, do not act by themselves, but in conjunction
with others who are sent thither by prescription; nor by a Power derived from
Kings, but from those that choose them. If it be true therefore that those who
delegate Powers, do always retain to themselves more than they give, they who
send these men, do not give them an absolute power of doing whatsoever they
please, but retain to themselves more than they confer upon their Deputys: They
must therefore be accountable to their Principals, contrary to what our Author
asserts. This continues in force, tho he knows not, that any Knights and
Burgesses have ever bin questioned by those that sent them; for it cannot be
concluded they ought not, or may not be questioned, because none have bin
questioned. But in truth they are frequently questioned: The People do
perpetually judge of the behavior of their Deputys. Whenever any of them has
the misfortune not to satisfy the major part of those that chose him, he is
sure to be rejected with disgrace the next time he shall desire to be chosen.
This is not only a sufficient punishment for such faults, as he who is but one
of five hundred may probably commit, but as much as the greatest and freest
People of the World did ever inflict upon their Commanders that brought the
greatest losses upon them. Appius Claudius, Pomponius, and Terentius Varro,
survived the greatest defeats that ever the Romans suffered; and tho they had
caused them by their folly and perverseness, were never punished. Yet I think no
man doubts that the Romans had as much right over their own Officers, as the
Athenians and Carthaginians, who frequently put them to death. They thought the
mind of a Commander would be too much distracted, if at the same time he should
stand in fear both of the Enemy and his own Countrymen: And as they always
endeavored to choose the best men, they would lay no other necessity upon them
of performing their duty, than what was suggested by their own virtue and love
to their Country. It Is not therefore to be thought strange, if the people of
England have followed the most generous and most prosperous Examples. Besides,
if any thing has bin defective in their usual proceedings with their Delegats,
the inconvenience has bin repaired by the modesty of the best and wisest of
them that were chosen. Many in all Ages, and sometimes the whole body of the
Commons have refused to give their opinion in some cases, till they had
consulted with those that sent them: The House have bin often adjourned to give
them time to do it; and if this were done more frequently, or that the Towns,
Citys and Countys, had on some occasions given instructions to their Deputys,
matters would probably have gone better in Parliament than they have often done.

3. The question is not, whether the Parliament be impeccable or infallible,
but whether an Assembly of Nobility, with a House of Commons composed of those
who are best esteemed by their Neighbors in all the Towns and Countys of
England, are more or less subject to error or corruption, than such a man,
woman or child as happens to be next in blood to the last King. Many men do
usually see more than one; and Prove. 11. 14.
if we may believe the wisest King, In the multitude of Counselors there is
safety. Such as are of mature Age, good Experience, and approved reputation for
Virtue and Wisdom, will probably judge better than children or fools. Men are
thought to be more fit for War than women; and those who are bred up in
Discipline, to understand it better than those who never knew any thing of it.
If some Countys or Citys fail to choose such men as are eminently capable, all
will hardly be so mistaken as to choose those who have no more of Wisdom or
Virtue, than is usually entailed upon Familys. But Filmer at a venture admires
the profound Wisdom of the King; tho besides such as we have known, Historys
give us too many proofs, that all those who have bin possessed of Crowns, have
not excelled that way. He speaks of Kings in general, and makes no difference
between Solomon and his foolish Son. He distinguishes not our Edward the first
from Edward the second; Edward the third from Richard the second; or Henry the
fifth from Henry the sixth. And because all of them were Kings, all of them, if
he deserves credit, must needs have bin endowed with profound Wisdom. David was
wise as an Angel of God; therefore the present Kings of France, Spain and
Sweden, must have bin so also, when they were but five years old: Joan of
Castille could not be mad, nor the two Joans of Naples infamous Strumpets, or
all his Arguments fall to the ground. For tho Solomon's Wisdom surpast that of
all the people, yet men could not rely equally upon that of Rehoboam, unless it
had bin equal. And if they are all equal in Wisdom when they come to be equally
Kings, Perses of Macedon was as great a Captain as Philip or Alexander;
Commodus and Heliogabalus were as wise and virtuous as Marcus Aurelius and
Antoninus Pius: Nay, Christina of Sweden in her infancy was as fit to command
an Army as her valiant Father. If this be most absurd and false, there can be
neither reason nor sense in proposing, as our Author dos, that the Power should
be in the King, because the Parliament is not infallible. It is, says he, for
the Head to correct, and not to expect the consent of the Members or Partys
peccant to be Judges in their own cases; nor is it needful to confine the King,
etc. Besides that this is directly contrary to his own fundamental Maxim, that
no man must be the Judge of his own case, in as much as this would put the Power
into the King's hands, to decide the Controversys between himself and the
people, in which his own Passions, private Interest, and the corrupt Counsels
of ill Ministers, will always lead him out of the way of Justice, the
inconveniences that may arise from a possibility that the Parliament or People
is not infallible, will be turned to the most certain and destructive
mischiefs; as must have fallen out in Spain, if, upon a supposition that the
Estates of Castille might err, the correction of such Errors had bin left to
the profound Wisdom and exquisit Judgment of Joan their Queen and Head, who was
stark mad. And the like may be said of many other Princes, who through natural or
accidental infirmitys, want of age, or dotage, have bin utterly unable to judge
of any thing.

The matter will not be much mended, tho I pass from Idiots and Lunaticks, to
such as know well enough how to clothe and feed themselves, and to perform the
ordinary functions of life; and yet have bin as incapable of giving a right
judgment concerning the weighty matters of Government, as the weakest of
Children, or the most furious of Madmen. Good manners forbid me to enumerate
the examples of this kind, which Europe has produced even in this Age: But I
should commit a greater fault, if I did in silence pass over the extravagances
of those, who being most weak in judgment, and irregular in their appetites,
have bin most impatient of any restraint upon their will. The brave Gustavus
Adolphus, and his Nephew Carolus Gustavus, who was not inferior to him in
Valor, Wisdom, and love to his people, were content with the Power that the
Laws of their Country gave to them: But Frederick the fourth of Denmark never
rested till he had overthrown the Liberty of that Nation. Casimir by attempting
the like in Poland, lost almost half that Kingdom; and flying from the other,
left all to be ravaged by Swedes, Tartars, and Cosacks. The present Emperor,
who passed his time in setting Songs in Music with a wretched Italian Eunuch,
when he ought to have bin at the Head of a brave Army, raised to oppose the
Turks in the year 1664, and which under good conduct might have overthrown the
Ottoman Empire, as soon as he was delivered from the fear of that Enemy, fell
upon his own Subjects with such cruelty, that they are now forced to fly to the
Turks for protection; the Protestants especially, who find their condition more
tolerable under those professed Enemies to Christianity, than to be exposed to the
pride, avarice, perfidiousness and violence of the Jesuits by whom he is
governed. And the qualitys of the King of Portugal are so well known, together
with the condition to which he would have brought his Kingdom if he had not bin
sent to the Tercera's, that I need not speak particularly of him.

If Kings therefore, by virtue of their Office, are constituted Judges over the
body of their People, because the People, or Parliaments representing them, are
not infallible; those Kings who are children, fools, disabled by age, or
madmen, are so also; women have the same right where they are admitted to the
succession; those men who, tho of ripe age and not superannuated, nor directly
fools or madmen, yet absolutely incapable of judging important Affairs, or by
their passions, interests, vices, or the malice and wickedness of their
Ministers, Servants and Favorites, are set to oppress and ruin the people,
enjoy the same privilege: than which nothing can be imagined more absurd and
abominable, nor more directly tending to the corruption and destruction of the
Nations under them, for whose good and safety our Author confesses they have
their power.

SECT. XXXIX. Those Kings only are heads of the People, who are good, wise, and
seek to advance no Interest but that of the Public.
THE worst of men seldom arrive to such a degree of impudence, as plainly to
propose the most mischievous follys and enormitys. They who are enemies to
Virtue, and fear not God, are afraid of men, and dare not offer such things as
the world will not bear, lest by that means they should overthrow their own
designs. All poison must be disguised, and no man can be persuaded to eat
Arsenic, unless it be covered with something that appears to be harmless.
Creusa would have abhorred Medea's present, if the pestilent venom had not bin
hidden by the exterior luster of Gold and Gems. The Garment that destroyed
Hercules appeared beautiful; and Eve had neither eaten of the forbidden Tree,
nor given the Fruit to her Husband, if it had not seemed to be good and
pleasant, and she had not bin induced to believe that by eating it they should
both be as Gods. The Servants of the Devil have always followed the same
method: their malice is carried on by fraud, and they have seldom destroyed
any, but such as they had first deceived. Truth can never conduce to mischief,
and is best discovered by plain words; but nothing is more usual with ill men
than to cover their mischievous designs with figurative phrases. It would be
too ridiculous to say in plain terms, that all Kings without distinction are
better able to judge of all matters than any or all their people; they must
therefore be called the Head, that thereby they may be invested with all the
preeminences which in a natural body belong to that part; and men must be made
to believe the analogy between the natural and political body to be perfect.
But the matter must be better examined before this mortal poison seems fit to
be swallowed.

The word Head is figuratively used both in Scripture and profane Authors in
several senses, in relation to places or persons, and always implys something
of real or seeming preeminence in point of honor or jurisdiction. Thus Damascus
is said to be the head of Syria; Samaria of Ephraim, and Ephraim of the ten
Tribes: that is, Ephraim was the chief 1 Chronicles. 5.
Tribe; Samaria was the chief City of Ephraim, and Damascus of Syria: tho it be
certain that Ephraim had no jurisdiction over the other Tribes, nor Samaria
over the other Citys of Ephraim, but every one according to the Law had an
equal power within it self, or the Territorys belonging to it; and no
privileges were granted to one above another, except to Jerusalem, in the
matter of Religion, because the Temple was placed there.

The words Head, Prince, principal Man, or Captain, seem also to be equivocal;
and in this sense the same men are called Heads of the Tribes, Princes in the
houses of their Fathers: and it is said, that two hundred Heads of the Tribe of
Reuben were carried away captive by Tiglath Pilezer, and proportionably in the
other Tribes; which were a strange thing, if the word did imply that supreme,
absolute and infinite Power that our Author attributes to it: and no man of
less understanding than he, can comprehend how there should be two hundred or
more sovereign unlimited Powers in one Tribe, most especially when it is certain
that one series of Kings had for many Ages reigned over that Tribe and nine
more; and that every one of those Tribes, as well as the particular Citys, even
from their first entrance into the promised Land, had a full jurisdiction
within it self. When the Gileadites came to Jephtha, he suspected them, and
asked whether indeed they intended to make him Judge. 12.
their Head? they answered, if he would lead them against the Ammonites, he
should be their Head. In the like sense when Jul. Caesar in despair would have
killed himself, one of his Soldiers dissuaded him from that design, by telling
him, Cum tot ab hac anima populorum vita salusque
Pendeat, and tantus caput hoc sibi fecerit orbis,
Savitia est voluisse mori. Lucan.

That the safety of so many Nations that had made him their Head, depending
upon his life, it would be cruelty in him to take such a resolution. But for
all that, when this Head was taken off, the Body did still subsist: upon which
I observe many fundamental differences between the relation of this figurative
Head (even when the word is rightly applied) and that of the natural Head to
their respective Bodies.

The figurative Heads may be many, the natural but one.

The People make or create the figurative Head; the natural is from it self, or
connate with the Body.

The natural Body cannot change or subsist without the natural Head; but a
People may change and subsist very well without the artificial. Nay, if it had
bin true, that the World had chosen Caesar, as it was not, (for he was chosen
only by a factious mercenory Army, and the soundest part so far opposed that
Election, that they brought him to think of killing himself) there could have
bin no truth in this flattering assertion, That the safety of the whole
depended upon his Life: for the World could not only subsist without him, but
without any such Head, as it had done before he by the help of his corrupted
Soldiery had usurped the Power; which also shows that a civil Head may be a
matter of convenience, but not of necessity. Many Nations have had none; and if
the expression be so far stretched, as to make it extend to the annual or
temporary Magistrates set up by the Athenians, Carthaginians, Romans, and other
ancient Commonwealths, or to those at this day in Venice, Holland, Switzerland,
and other places, it must be confessed that the People who made, deposed,
abrogated, or abolished both the Magistrates and Magistracys, had the power of
framing, directing and removing their Heads, which our Author will say is most
absurd. Yet they did it without any prejudice to themselves, and very often
much to their advantage.

In mentioning these vast and essential differences between the natural and
political Head, I no way intend to exclude others that may be of equal weight;
but as all figurative expressions have their strength only from similitude,
there can be little or none in this, which differs in so many important points,
and can therefore be of no effect.

However, Right proceeds from identity, and not from similitude. The right of a
man over me is by being my Father, and not by being like my Father. If I had a
Brother so perfectly resembling me as to deceive our Parents, which has
sometimes happened to Twins, it could give him no right to any thing that is
mine. If the power therefore of correcting the partys peccant, which our Author
attributes to Kings, be grounded upon the name of Head, and a resemblance
between the Heads of the Body politic and Body natural; if this resemblance be
found to be exceedingly imperfect, uncertain, or perhaps no way relating to the
matter in question; or tho it did, and were absolutely perfect, could confer no
right; the allegation of it is impertinent and absurd.

This being cleared, it is time to examine what the Office of the Head is in a
natural Body, that we may learn from thence why that name is sometimes given to
those who are eminent in political Bodies, and to whom it dos belong.

Some men account the Head to be so absolutely the seat of all the Senses, as
to derive even that of feeling, which is exercised in every part, from the
Brain: but I think it is not doubted that all the rest have both their seat and
function in the Head; and whatsoever is useful or hurtful to a man, is by them
represented to the understanding; as Aristotle says, Nihil est in intellectu,
quod non sit prius in sensu. This is properly the part of every Magistrate: He
is the Sentinel of the Public, and is to represent what he discovers
beneficial or hurtful to the Society; which Office belongs not only to the
supreme, but proportionably to the subordinate. In this sense were the chief
men among the Israelites called Heads 1 Chronicles. 7. 40.
of their Fathers house, choice and mighty men of valor, chief of the Princes.
And in the following Chapter mention is made of nine hundred and fifty
Benjamites, chief men in the House of their Fathers. These men exercised a
charitable care over such as were inferior to them in power and valor, without
any shadow of sovereignty, or possibility that there could be so many
Sovereigns: and such as were under their care are said to be their Brethren;
which is not a word of majesty and domination, but of dearness and equality.
The name therefore of Head may be given to a Sovereign, but it implys nothing
of sovereignty; and must be exercised with charity, which always terminates in
the good of others. The Head cannot correct or chastise; the proper work of
that part is only to indicate, and he who takes upon him to do more, is not the
Head. A natural body is homogeneous, and cannot subsist if it be not so. We
cannot take one part of a Horse, another of a Bear, and put upon them the head
of a Lion; for it would be a Monster, that would have neither action nor life.
The Head must be of the same nature with the other Members, or it cannot
subsist. But the Lord or Master differs in specie from his Servants and Slaves,
he is not therefore properly their Head.

Besides, the Head cannot have a subsistence without the Body, nor any interest
contrary to that of the Body; and it is impossible for any thing to be good for
the Head, that is hurtful to the Body. A Prince therefore, or Magistrate, who
sets up an interest in himself distinct from, or repugnant to that of the
people, renounces the title or quality of their Head. Indeed Moses was the Head
of the Israelites; for when God threatened to destroy that People, and promised
to make him a great Nation, he waved the particular advantages offered to
himself, interceded for them, and procured their pardon. Yet he was not able to
bear the weight of the Government alone, but desired that some might be
appointed to assist him. Gideon was the Head of the same people, but he would
not reign himself, nor suffer his Sons to reign over them. Samuel was also
their Head; he took nothing from any man, defrauded none, took bribes from no
man, oppressed none: God and the People were his witnesses: He blamed them for
their Rebellion against God in asking a King, but was no way concerned for
himself or his Family. David likewise had a right to that Title; for he desired
that God would spare the People, and turn the effect of his anger against
himself, and the house of his Father. But Rehoboam was not their Head; for tho
he acknowledged that his Father had laid a heavy yoke upon them, yet he told
them he would add to the weight; and that if his Father had chastis'd them with
Whips, he would chastise them with Scorpions. The Head is no burden to the
Body, and can lay none upon it; the Head cannot chastise any member; and he who
dos so, be it more or less, cannot be the Head. Jeroboam was not the Head of
the revolting Tribes; for the Head takes care of the Members, and provides for
the safety of the whole: But he through fear that the people, going to Jerusalem
to worship, should return to the house of David, by setting up Idols to secure
his own interests, drew guilt and destruction upon them. Tho it should be
granted that Augustus by a gentle use of his power, had in a manner expiated
the detestable Villanys committed in the acquisition, and had truly deserved to
be called the Head of the Romans; yet that title could no way belong to
Caligula, Claudius, Nero or Vitellius, who neither had the qualitys required in
the Head, nor the understanding or will to perform the office. Nay, if I should
carry the matter farther, and acknowledge that Brutus, Cincinnatus, Fabius,
Camillus, and others, who, in the time of their annual or shorter Magistracys,
had by their vigilance, virtue, and care to preserve the City in safety, and to
provide for the public good, performed the office of the Head, and might
deserve the name; I might justly deny it to the greatest Princes that have bin
in the world, who having their power for life, and leaving it to descend to
their children, have wanted the Virtues required for the performance of their
duty: And I should less fear to be guilty of an absurdity in saying, that a
Nation might every year change its Head, than that he can be the Head, who
cares not for the Members, nor understands the things that conduce to their
good, most especially if he sets up an Interest in himself against them. It
cannot be said that these are imaginary cases, and that no Prince dos these
things; for the proof is too easy, and the examples too numerous. Caligula
could not have wished the Romans but one Head, that he might cut it off at
once, if he had bin that Head, and had advanced no Interest contrary to that of
the Members. Nero had not burnt the City of Rome, if his concernments had bin
inseparably united to those of the people. He who caused above three hundred
thousand of his innocent unarmed Subjects to be murdered, and filled his whole
Kingdom with fire and blood, did set up a personal Interest repugnant to that
of the Nation; and no better testimony can be required to show that he did so,
than a Letter written by his Son, to take off the penalty due to one of the
chief Ministers of those crueltys, for this reason, that what he had done, was
by the command and for the service of his Royal Father. King John did not
pursue the advantage of his people, when he endeavored to subject them to the
Pope or the Moors. And whatever Prince seeks assistance from foreign Powers, or
makes Leagues with any stranger or enemy for his own advantage against his
people, however secret the Treaty may be, declares himself not to be the Head,
but an enemy to them. The Head cannot stand in need of an exterior help against
the Body, nor subsist when divided from it. He therefore that courts such an
assistance, divides himself from the Body; and if he dos subsist, it must be by
a lise he has in himself, distinct from that of the Body, which the Head cannot
have.

But besides these enormitys, that testify the most wicked rage and fury in the
highest degree, there is another practice, which no man that knows the world
can deny to be common with Princes, and incompatible with the nature of a Head.
The Head cannot desire to draw all the nourishment of the Body to it self, nor
more than a due proportion. If the rest of the parts are sick, weak or cold,
the Head suffers equally with them; and if they perish, must perish also. Let
this be compared with the actions of many Princes we know, and we shall soon
see which of them are Heads of their people. If the Gold brought from the Indys
has bin equally distributed by the Kings of Spain to the body of that Nation, I
consent they may be called the Heads. If the Kings of France assume no more of
the Riches of that great Kingdom than their due proportion, let them also wear
that honorable name. But if the naked backs and empty bellys of their
miserable Subjects evince the contrary, it can by no means belong to them. If
those great Nations wast and languish; if nothing be so common in the best
Provinces belonging to them, as misery, famine, and all the effects of the most
outrageous oppression, whilst their Princes and Favorites possess such
treasures as the most wanton prodigality cannot exhaust; if that which is
gained by the sweat of so many millions of men, be torn out of the mouths of
their starving Wives and Children, to foment the vices of those luxurious
Courts, or reward the Ministers of their lusts, the nourishment is not
distributed equally to all the parts of the Body; the economy of the whole is
overthrown, and they who do these things, cannot be the Heads, nor parts of the
Body, but something distinct from and repugnant to it. It Is not therefore he
who is found in, or advanced to the place of the Head, who is truly the Head:
It Is not he who ought, but he who dos perform the office of the Head, that
deserves the name and privileges belonging to the Head. If our Author therefore
will persuade us that any King is Head of his People, he must do it by
Arguments peculiarly relating to him, since those in general are found to be
false. If he say that the King as King may direct or correct the people, and
that the power of determining all controversys must be referred to him, because
they may be mistaken, he must show that the King is infallible; for unless he
dos so, the wound is not cured. This also must be by some other way, than by
saying he is their Head; for such Powers belong not to the office of the Head,
and we see that all Kings do not deserve that Name: Many of them want both
understanding and will to perform the functions of the Head; and many act
directly contrary in the whole course of their Government. If any therefore
among them have merited the glorious name of Heads of Nations, it must have bin
by their personal Virtues, by a vigilant care of the good of their People, by
an inseparable conjunction of interests with them, by an ardent love to every
member of the Society, by a moderation of spirit affecting no undue
Superiority, or assuming any singular advantage which they are not willing to
communicate to every part of the political Body. He who finds this merit in
himself, will scorn all the advantages that can be drawn from misapplied names:
He that knows such honor to be peculiarly due to him for being the best of
Kings, will never glory in that which may be common to him with the worst. Nay,
whoever pretends by such general discourses as these of our Author, to advance
the particular Interests of any one King, dos either know he is of no merit,
and that nothing can be said for him which will not as well agree with the
worst of men; or cares not what he says so he may do mischief; and is well
enough contented, that he who is set up by such Maxims as a public plague, may
fall in the ruin he brings upon the people.

SECT. XL. Good Laws prescribe easy and safe Remedys against the Evils
proceeding from the vices or infirmitys of the Magistrate; and when they fail,
they must be supplied.
THOSE who desire to advance the power of the Magistrate above the Law, would
persuade us, that the difficultys and dangers of inquiring into his actions, or
opposing his will when employed in violence and injustice, are so great, that
the remedy is always worse than the disease; and that it is better to suffer all
the evils that may proceed from his infirmitys and vices, than to hazard the
consequences of displeasing him. But on the contrary, I think and hope to prove,

1. That in well*constituted Governments, the remedys against ill Magistrates
are easy and safe.

2. That it is good, as well for the Magistrate as the People, so to constitute
the Government, that the Remedys may be easy and safe.

3. That how dangerous and difficult soever they may be through the defects of the
first Constitution, they must be tried.

To the first: It Is most evident that in well-regulated Governments these
Remedys have bin found to be easy and safe. The Kings of Sparta were not
suffered in the least to deviate from the rule of the Law: And Theopompus one
of those Kings, in whose time the Ephori were created, and the regal Power much
restrained, doubted not to affirm, that it was by Plutarch.
that means become more lasting and more secure. Pausanias had not the name of
King, but commanded in the War against Xerxes with more than regal Power;
nevertheless being grown insolent, he was without any trouble to that State
banished and afterward put to death. Leonidas Father of Cleomenes, was in the
like manner banished. The second Agis was most unjustly put to death by the
Ephori, for he was a brave and a good Prince; but there was neither danger nor
difficulty in the action. Many of the Roman Magistrates, after the expulsion of
the Kings, seem to have bin desirous to extend their Power beyond the bounds of
the Law; and perhaps some others as well as the Decemviri, may have designed an
absolute Tyranny; but the first were restrained, and the others without much
difficulty suppressed. Nay, even the Kings were so well kept in order, that no
man ever pretended to the Crown unless he were chosen, nor made any other use
of his Power than the Law permitted, except the last Tarquin, who by his
insolence, avarice and cruelty, brought ruin upon himself and his family. I
have already mentioned one or two Dukes of Venice who were not less ambitious,
but their crimes returned upon their own heads, and they perished without any
other danger to the State than what had passed before their Treasons were
discovered. Infinite examples of the like nature may be alleged; and if
matters have not at all times, and in all places, succeeded in the same manner,
it has bin because the same courses were not every where taken; for all things
do so far follow their causes, that being ordered in the same manner, they will
always produce the same effects.

2. To the second: Such a regulation of the magistratical Power is not at all
grievous to a good Magistrate. He who never desires to do any thing but what he
ought, cannot desire a Power of doing what he ought not, nor be troubled to
find he cannot do that which he would not do if he could. This inability is
also advantageous to those who are evil or unwise; that since they cannot
govern themselves, a Law may be imposed upon them, lest by following their own
irregular will, they bring destruction upon themselves, their familys and
people, as many have done. If Apollo in the Fable had not bin too indulgent to
Phaeton, in granting his ill conceived request, the furious Youth had not
brought a necessity upon Jupiter, either of destroying him, or suffering the
world to be destroyed by him.

Besides, good and wise men know the weight of Sovereign Power, and misdoubt
their own strength. Sacred and human Historys furnish us with many examples of
those who have feared the luster of a Crown. Men that find in themselves no
delight in doing mischief, know not what thoughts may insinuate into their
minds, when raised too much above their Sphere. They who were able to bear
adversity, have bin precipitated into ruin by prosperity. When the Prophet told
Hazael the Villanys he would commit, he answered, Is thy Servant a dog, that I
should do these things? but yet he did them. I know not where to find an
example of a man more excellently qualified than Alexander of Macedon; but he
sell under the weight of his own fortune, and grew to exceed those in vice,
whom he had conquered by his virtue. The nature of man can hardly suffer such
violent changes without being disordered by them; and every one ought to enter
into a just diffidence of himself, and fear the temptations that have destroyed
so many. If any man be so happily born, so carefully educated, so established
in virtue, that no storm can shake him, nor any poison corrupt him, yet he will
consider he is mortal; and knowing no more than Solomon, whether his Son shall
be a wise man or a fool, he will always fear to take upon him a power, which
must prove a most pestilent evil both to the person that has it, and to those
that are under it, as soon as it shall fall into the hands of one, who either
knows not how to use it, or may be easily drawn to abuse it. Supreme Magistrates
always walk in obscure and slippery places: but when they are advanced so high,
that no one is near enough to support, direct or restrain them, their fall is
inevitable and mortal. And those Nations that have wanted the prudence rightly
to balance the powers of their Magistrates, were frequently obliged to have
recourse to the most violent remedys, and with much difficulty, danger and
blood, to punish the crimes which they might have prevented. On the other side,
such as have bin more wise in the constitution of their Governments, have
always had regard to the frailty of human nature, and the corruption reigning
in the hearts of men; and being less liberal of the power over their lives and
libertys, have reserved to themselves so much as might keep their Magistrates
within the limits of the Law, and oblige them to perform the ends of their
Institution. And as the Law which denounces severe penaltys for crimes, is
indeed merciful both to ill men, who are by that means deter*d from committing
them; and to the good, who otherwise would be destroyed; so those Nations that
have kept the reins in their hands, have by the same act provided as well for
the safety of their Princes as for their own. They who know the Law is well
defended, seldom attempt to subvert it: they are not easily tempted to run into
excesses, when such bounds are set, as may not safely be transgrest; and whilst
they are by these means rendered more moderate in the exercise of their Power,
the People are exempted from the odious necessity of suffering all manner of
indignitys and miserys from their Princes, or by their destruction to prevent
or avenge them.

3. To the third: If these Rules have not bin well observed in the first
constitution, or from the changes of times, corruption of manners, insensible
encroachments, or violent usurpations of Princes, have bin rendered
ineffectual, and the People exposed to all the calamitys that may be brought
upon them by the weakness, vices and malice of the Prince, or those who govern
him, I confess the remedys are more difficult and dangerous: but even in those
cases they must be tried. Nothing can be feared that is worse than what is
suffered, or must in a short time fall upon those who are in this condition.
They who are already fallen into all that is odious, shameful and miserable,
cannot justly fear. When things are brought to such a pass, the boldest
counsels are the most safe; and if those must Moriendum victis, moriendum
deditis: id solum interest, an inter cruciatus and ludibria, an per virtutem
expiremus. C. Tacit. Quod si nocentes innocentesque idem exitus maneat,
acrioris viri est merit^ perire. Ibid.
perish who lie still, and they can but perish who are most active, the choice
is easily made. Let the danger be never so great, there is a possibility of
safety, whilst men have life, hands, arms, and courage to use them; but that
People must certainly perish, who tamely suffer themselves to be oppressed,
either by the injustice, cruelty and malice of an ill Magistrate, or by those
who prevail upon the vices and infirmitys of weak Princes. It Is in vain to say,
that this may give occasion to men of raising tumults or civil war; for tho
these are evils, yet they are not the greatest of evils. Civil War in
Macchiavel's account is a Disease, but Tyranny is the Death of a State. Gentle
ways are first to be used, and it is best if the work can be done by them; but
it must not be left undone if they fail. It Is good to use supplications,
advices and remonstrances; but those who have no regard to Justice, and will
not hearken to Counsel, must be constrained. It Is folly to deal otherwise with
a man who will not be guided by Reason, and a Magistrate who despises the Law:
or rather to think him a man, who rejects the essential principle of a man; or
to account him a Magistrate who overthrows the Law by which he is a Magistrate.
This is the last result; but those Nations must come to it, which cannot
otherwise be preserved. Nero's madness was not to be cured, nor the mischievous
effects of it any otherwise to be suppressed than by his death. He who had spared
such a Monster when it was in his power to remove him, had brought destruction
upon the whole Empire; and by a foolish clemency made himself the Author of his
future villanys. This would have bin yet more clear, if the World had then bin
in such a temper as to be capable of an entire liberty. But the ancient
foundations had bin overthrown, and nothing better could be built upon the new,
than something that might in part resist that torrent of iniquity, which had
overflowed the best part of the World, and give Mankind a little time to breath
under a less barbarous Master. Yet all the best men did join in the work that
was then to be done, tho they knew it would prove but imperfect. The Sacred
History is not without examples of this kind: When Ahab had subverted the Law,
set up false Witnesses and corrupt Judges to destroy the innocent, killed the
Prophets, and established Idolatry, his house must then be cut off, and his
blood be licked up by dogs. When matters are brought to this pass, the decision
is easy. The question is only, Whether the punishment of crimes shall fall upon
one or a few Persons who are guilty of them, or upon a whole Nation that is
innocent. If the Father may not die for the Son, nor the Son for the Father, but
every one must bear the penalty of his own crimes, it would be most absurd to
punish the People for the guilt of Princes. When the Earl of Morton was sent
Ambassador to Q. Elizabeth by the Estates of Scotland, to justify their
proceedings against Mary their Queen, whom they had obliged to renounce the
Government; he alleged amongst other things the murder of her Husband plainly
proved against her; asserted the ancient Right and Custom of that Kingdom, of
Animadvertendi in reges.
examining the actions of their Kings; by which means, he said, many had bin
Morte, vinculis and exilio puniti. Bu^^an. (...) S^^t. l. 20. Qui tot reges
regno exuerunt, exilio damnarunt, carceribus coerc^erunt, supplicio denique
affe^erunt, nec unquam tamen de acerbitate legis m^nuenda mentio est facta,
etc. Ibid. Faci^e apparet regnum miu^ a^iud esse, quam mutuam inter regem and
populum stipulationem. Non de i^l^rum ^an^^on^m genere, quae mutationibus
temporum sunt obnoxi^* sed in primo generis human^ exo^tu. and mutuo pr^p^
omnium gentium consensu ^^mpr^^atae, and uni cum rerum natura infragiles and
sempiternae perennen^. I^id.
punished with death, imprisonment and exile; confirmed their actions by the
examples of other Nations; and upon the whole matter concluded, that if she was
still permitted to live, it was not on account of her innocence, or any
exemption from the penaltys of the Law, but from the mercy and clemency of the
People, who contenting themselves with a resignation of her Right and Power to
her Son, had spared her. This Discourse, which is set down at large by the
Historian cited on the Margin, being of such strength in it self as never to
have bin any otherwise answered than by railing, and no way disapproved by
Queen Elizabeth or her Council to whom it was made, either upon a general
account of the pretensions of Princes to be exempted from the penaltys of the
Law, or any pretext that they had particularly misapplied them in relation to
their Queen; I may justly say, that when Nations fall under such Princes as are
either utterly incapable of making a right use of their Power, or do
maliciously abuse that Authority with which they are entrusted, those Nations
stand obliged, by the duty they owe to themselves and their posterity, to use
the best of their endeavors to remove the evil, whatever danger or difficultys
they may meet with in the performance. Pontius the Samnite said as truly as
bravely to his Countrymen, That Justa piaque sunt arma, quibus necessaria, and
necessaria, quib^^ n^lla n^i in armis spes est salut^s. T. (...) lib. 8.
those Arms were just and pious that were necessary, and necessary when there
was no hope of safety by any other way. This is the voice of Mankind, and is
disliked only by those Princes, who fear the deserved punishments that may fall
upon them; or by their Servants and Flatterers, who being for the most part the
authors of their crimes, think they shall be involved in their ruin.

SECT. XLI. The People for whom and by whom the Magistrate is created, can only
judge whether he rightly perform his Office or not.
IT IS commonly said, that no man ought to be the Judge of his own case; and our
Author lays much weight upon it as a fundamental Maxim, tho according to his
ordinary inconstancy he overthrows it in the case of Kings, where it ought to
take place if in any; for it often falls out that no men are less capable of
forming a right judgment than they. Their passions and interests are most
powerful to disturb or pervert them. No men are so liable to be diverted from
Justice by the flatterys of corrupt Servants. They never act as Kings, except
for those by whom and for whom they are created; and acting for others, the
account of their actions cannot depend upon their own will. Nevertheless I am
not afraid to say, that naturally and properly a man is the judge of his own
concernments. No one is or can be deprived of this privilege, unless by his own
consent, and for the good of that Society into which he enters. This Right
therefore must necessarily belong to every man in all cases, except only such
as relate to the good of the Community, for whose sake he has divested himself
of it. If I find my self afflicted with hunger, thirst, weariness, cold, heat,
or sickness, it is a folly to tell me, I ought not to seek meat, drink, rest,
shelter, refreshment, or physic, because I must not be the judge of my own
case. The like may be said in relation to my house, land, or estate; I may do
what I please with them, if I bring no damage upon others. But I must not set
fire to my house, by which my Neighbor's house may be burnt. I may not erect
Forts upon my own Lands, or deliver them to a foreign Enemy, who may by that
means infest my Country. I may not cut the Banks of the Sea, or those of a
River, lest my Neighbor's Ground be overflown, because the Society into which
I am incorporated, would by such means receive prejudice. My Land is not simply
my own, but upon condition that I shall not thereby bring damage upon the
Public, by which I am protected in the peaceable enjoyment and innocent use of
what I possess. But this Society leaves me a liberty to take Servants, and put
them away at my pleasure. No man is to direct me, of what quality or number
they shall be, or can tell me whether I am well or ill served by them. Nay, the
State takes no other cognizance of what passes between me and them, than to
oblige me to perform the contracts I make, and not to do that to them which the
Law forbids: that is to say, the Power to which I have submitted my self,
exercises that jurisdiction over me, which was established by my consent, and
under which I enjoy all the benefits of Life, which are of more advantage to me
than my Liberty could have bin, if I had retained it wholly in my self. The
nature also and measure of this submission must be determined by the reasons
that induced me to it. The Society in which I live cannot subsist unless by
rule; the equality in which men are born is so perfect, that no man will suffer
his natural Liberty to be abridg'd, except others do the like: I cannot
reasonably expect to be defended from wrong, unless I oblige my sel^ to do
none; or to suffer the punishment prescribed by the Law, if I perform not my
engagement. But without prejudice to the Society into which I enter, I may and
do retain to my self the Liberty of doing what I pleasein all things relating
peculiarly to my self, or in which I am to seek my own convenience.

Now if a private man is not subject to the judgment of any other, than those
to whom he submits himself for his own safety and convenience; and
notwithstanding that submission, still retains to himself the right of ordering
according to his own will all things merely relating to himself, and of doing
what he pleases in that which he dos for his own sake; the same right must more
certainly belong to whole Nations. When a controversy happens between Caius and
Seius in a matter of Right, neither of them may determine the cause, but it must
be referred to a Judge superior to both; not because it is not fit that a man
should be judge of his own case, but because they have both an equal Right, and
neither of them ows any subjection to the other. But if there be a contest
between Me and my Servant concerning my Service, I only am to decide it: He
must serve me in my own way, or be gone if I think fit, tho he serves me never
so well; and I do him no wrong in putting him away, if either I intend to keep
no Servant, or find that another will please me better. I cannot therefore
stand in need of a Judge, unless the contest be with one who lives upon an equal
foot with me. No man can be my Judge, unless he be my Superior; and he cannot be
my Superior, who is not so by my consent, nor to any other purpose than I
consent to. This cannot be the case of a Nation, which can have no equal within
it self. Controversys may arise with other Nations, the decision of which may
be left to Judges chosen by mutual agreement; but this relates not to our
Question. A Nation, and most especially one that is powerful, cannot recede
from its own Right; as a private man from the knowledge of his own weakness and
inability to defend himself, must come under the protection of a greater Power
than his own. The strength of a Nation is not in the Magistrate, but the
strength of a Magistrate is in the Nation. The wisdom, industry and valor of a
Prince may add to the glory and greatness of a Nation, but the foundation and
substance will always be in it self. If the Magistrate and People were upon
equal terms, as Caius and Seius, receiving equal and mutual advantages from
each other, no man could be judge of their differences, but such as they should
set up for that end. This has bin done by many Nations. The ancient Germans
referred the decision of the most difficult matters to their Priests: the Gauls
and Britans to the Druides: the Mahometans for some Ages to the Califs of
Babylon: the Saxons in England, when they had embraced the Christian Religion,
to their Clergy. Whilst all Europe lay under the Popish Superstition, the
decision of such matters was frequently assumed by the Pope; men often
submitted to his judgment, and the Princes that resisted were for the most part
excommunicated, deposed, and destroyed. All this was done for the same reasons.
These men were accounted holy and inspired, and the Sentence pronounced by them
was usually reverenced as the Judgment of God, who was thought to direct them;
and all those who refused to submit, were esteemed execrable. But no man, or
number of men, as I think, at the institution of a Magistrate, did ever say, If
any difference happen between you or your Successors and us, it be shall
determined by your self or by them, whether they be men, women, children, mad,
foolish, or vicious. Nay, if any such thing had bin, the folly, turpitude and
madness of such a sanction or stipulation must necessarily have destroyed it.
But if no such thing was ever known, or could have no effect if it had bin in
any place, it is most absurd to impose it upon all. The People therefore cannot
be deprived of their natural rights upon a frivolous pretense to that which
never was and never can be. They who create Magistracys, and give to them such
name, form and power as they think fit, do only know, whether the end for which
they were created, be performed or not. They who give a being to the power
which had none, can only judge whether it be employed to their welfare, or
turned to their ruin. They do not set up one or a few men, that they and their
posterity may live in splendour and greatness, but that Justice may be
administered, Virtue established, and provision made for the public safety. No
wise man will think this can be done, if those who set themselves to overthrow
the Law, are to be their own Judges. If Caligula, Nero, Vitellius, Domitian, or
Heliogabalus, had bin subject to no other judgment, they would have completed
the destruction of the Empire. If the disputes between Durstus, Evenus the
third, Dardannus, and other Kings of Scotland, with the Nobility and People,
might have bin determined by themselves, they had escaped the punishments they
suffered, and ruined the Nation as they designed. Other methods were taken;
they perished by their madness; better Princes were brought into their places,
and their Successors were by their example admonished to avoid the ways that
had proved fatal to them. If Edward the second of England with Gaveston and the
Spencers, Richard the second with Tresilian and Vere, had bin permitted to be
the Judges of their own cases, they who had murdered the best of the Nobility
would have pursued their designs to the destruction of such as remained, the
enslaving of the Nation, the subversion of the Constitution, and the
establishment of a mere Tyranny in the place of a mixed Monarchy. But our
Ancestors took better measures: They who had felt the smart of the vices and
follys of their Princes, knew what remedys were most fit to be applied, as well
as the best time of applying them. They found the effects of extreme corruption
in Government to be so desperately pernicious, that Nations must necessarily
perish, unless it be corrected, and the State reduced to its first principle,
or altered. Which being the case, it was as easy for them to judge, whether the
Governor who had introduced that corruption should be brought to order, or
removed if he would not be reclaimed; or whether he should be suffered to ruin
them and their posterity; as it is for me to judge, whether I should put away my
Servant, if I knew he intended to poison or murder me, and had a certain
facility of accomplishing his design; or whether I should continue him in my
service till he had performed it. Nay, the matter is so much the more plain on
the side of the Nation, as the disproportion of merit between a whole people,
and one or a few men entrusted with the power of governing them, is greater
than between a private man and his servant. This is so fully confirmed by the
general consent of mankind, that we know no Government that has not frequently
either bin altered in form, or reduced to its original purity, by changing the
familys or persons who abused the power with which they had bin entrusted.
Those who have wanted Wisdom and Virtue rightly and seasonably to perform this,
have bin soon destroyed; like the Goths in Spain, who by omitting to curb the
Mariana.
fury of Witza and Rodrigo in time, became a prey to the Moors. Their Kingdom,
by this means destroyed, was never restored; and the remainder of that Nation,
joining with the Spaniards, whom they had kept in subjection for three or four
Ages, could not in less than eight hundred years, expel those enemies they might
have kept out, only by removing two base and vicious Kings. Such Nations as
have bin so corrupted, that when they have applied themselves to seek remedys
to the evils they suffered by wicked Magistrates, could not fall upon such as
were proportionable to the disease, have only vented their Passions in
destroying the immediate instruments of their oppression, or for a while
delayed their utter ruin. But the root still remaining, it soon produced the
same poisonous fruit, and either quite destroyed, or made them languish in
perpetual misery. The Roman Empire was the most eminent example of the first;
many of the monsters that had tyrannized over them were killed, but the
greatest advantage gained by their death, was a respite from ruin; and the
Government, which ought to have bin established by good Laws, depending only
upon the Virtue of one man, his Life proved to be no more than a lucid
interval, and at his death they relapsed into the depth of Infamy and Misery:
and in this condition they continued till that Empire was totally subverted.

All the Kingdoms of the Arabians, Medes, Persians, Moors, and others of the
East, are of the other sort. Common sense instructs them, that barbarous pride,
cruelty, and madness grown to extremity, cannot be born: but they have no other
way than to kill the Tyrant, and to do the like to his Successor if he falls
into the same crimes. Wanting that Wisdom and Valor which is required for the
institution of a good Government, they languish in perpetual slavery, and
propose to themselves nothing better than to live under a gentle Master, which
is but a precarious life, and little to be valued by men of bravery and spirit.
But those Nations that are more generous, who set a higher value upon Liberty,
and better understand the ways of preserving it, think it a small matter to
destroy a Tyrant, unless they can also destroy the Tyranny. They endeavor to
do the work thoroughly, either by changing the Government entirely, or reforming
it according to the first institution, and making such good Laws as may
preserve its integrity when reformed. This has bin so frequent in all the
Nations (both ancient and modern) with whose actions we are best acquainted, as
appears by the foregoing examples, and many others that might be alleged if
the case were not clear, that there is not one of them which will not furnish
us with many instances; and no one Magistracy now in being which dos not owe
its original to some Judgment of this nature. So that they must either derive
their right from such actions, or confess they have none at all, and leave the
Nations to their original Liberty of setting up those Magistracys which best
please themselves, without any restriction or obligation to regard one person
or family more than another.

SECT. XLII. The Person that wears the Crown cannot determine the Affairs which
the Law refers to the King.
OUR Author, with the rest of the vulgar, seems to have bin led into gross
errors by the form of Writs summoning persons to appear before the King. The
common style used in the trial of Delinquents; the name of the King's Witnesses
given to those who accuse them; the Verdicts brought in by Jurys, coram domino
Rege, and the prosecution made in the King's name, seem to have caused this.
And they who understand not these Phrases, render the Law a heap of the most
gross absurditys, and the King an Enemy to every one of his Subjects, when he
ought to be a Father to them all; since without any particular consideration or
examination of what any Witness deposes in a Court of Justice, tending to the
death, confiscation, or other punishment of any man, he is called the King's
Witness whether he speak the truth or a lie, and on that account favored. It Is
not necessary to alledg many instances in a case that is so plain; but it may
not be amiss to insert two or three of the most important reasons to prove my
assertion.

1. If the Law did intend that he or she who wears the Crown, should in his or
her person judge all causes, and determine the most difficult questions, it mnst
like our Author presume that they will always be of profound wisdom to
comprehend all of them, and of perfect integrity always to act according to
their understanding. Which is no less than to lay the foundation of the
Government upon a thing merely contingent, that either never was, or very often
fails, as is too much verified by experience, and the Historys of all Nations;
or else to refer the decision of all to those who through the infirmitys of age,
sex or person, are often incapable of judging the least, or subject to such
passions and vices as would divert them from Justice tho they did understand
it; both which seem to be almost equally preposterous.

2. The Law must also presume that the Prince is always present in all the
places where his name is used. The King of France is (as I have said already)
esteemed to be present Sur son lit de justice.
on the seat of Justice in all the Parliaments and sovereign Courts of the
Kingdom: and if his corporeal Presence were by that phrase to be understood, he
must be in all those distinct and far distant places at the same time; which
absurdity can hardly be paralleled, unless by the Popish opinion of
Transubstantiation. But indeed they are so far from being guilty of such
monstrous absurdity, that he cannot in person be present at any trial, and no
man can be judged if he be. This was plainly asserted to Lewis the 13 th (when
he would have bin at the Trial of the Duke of Candale) by the President de
Bellievre, who told him that as he could judge no man himself, so they could not
judge any if he were present: upon which he retired.

3. The Laws of most Kingdoms giving to Kings the Confiscation of Delinquents
estates, if they in their own persons might give judgment upon them, they would
be constituted both Judges and Partys; which, besides the forementioned
incapacitys to which Princes are as much subject as other men, would tempt them
by their own personal interest to subvert all manner of Justice.

This therefore not being the meaning of the Law, we are to inquire what it is;
and the thing is so plain that we cannot mistake, unless we do it wilfully.
Some name must be used in all manner of Transactions, and in matters of public
concernment none can be so fit as that of the principal Magistrate. Thus are
Leagues made, not only with Kings and Emperors, but with the Dukes of Venice
and Genoa, the Avoyer and Senate of a Canton in Switzerland, and the
Burgermaster of an Imperial Town in Germany, and the States General of the
United Provinces. But no man thinking, I presume, these Leagues would be of any
value, if they could only oblige the Persons whose names are used, it is plain
that they do not stipulate only for themselves; and that their stipulations
would be of no value if they were merely personal. And nothing can more
certainly prove they are not so, than that we certainly know, those Dukes,
Avoyers and Burgermasters can do nothing of themselves. The power of the
States General of the United Provinces is limited to the points mentioned in
the Act of Union made at Vtrecht. The Empire is not obliged by any stipulation
made by the Emperor without their consent. Nothing is more common than for one
King making a League with another, to exact a confirmation of their Agreement,
by the Parliaments, Diets or General De Jur. Bell. l. 3.
Estates; because, says Grotius, a Prince dos not stipulate for himself, but for
the People under his Government; and a King deprived of his Kingdom, loses the
right of sending an Ambassador. The Powers of Europe showed themselves to be of
this opinion in the case of Portugal. When Philip the second had gained the
possession, they treated with him concerning the affairs relating to that
Kingdom: Few regarded Don Antonio; and no man considered the Dukes of Savoy,
Parma or Braganza, who perhaps had the most plausible Titles: But when his
Grandson Philip the fourth had lost that Kingdom, and the People had set up the
Duke of Braganza, they all treated with him as King. And the English Court, tho
then in amity with Spain, and not a little influenced by a Spanish faction,
gave example to others, by treating with him and not with Spain touching
matters relating to that State. Nay, I have bin informed by those who well
understood the Affairs of that time, that the Lord Cottington advising the late
King not to receive any persons sent from the Duke of Braganza, Rebel to his
Ally the King of Spain, in the quality of Ambassadors; the King answered, that
he must look upon that person to be King of Portugal, who was acknowledged by
the Nation. And I am mistaken if his Majesty now reigning did not find all the
Princes and States of the world to be of the same mind, when he was out of his
Kingdom, and could oblige no man but himself and a few followers by any Treaty
he could make.

For the same reason the names of Kings are used in Treatys, when they are
either Children, or otherwise incapable of knowing what Alliances are fit to be
made or rejected; and yet such Treatys do equally oblige them, their Successors
and People, as if they were of mature age and fit for government, No man
therefore ought to think it strange, if the King's name be used in domestic
affairs, of which he neither ought nor can take any cognizance. In these cases
he is perpetually a Minor: he must suffer the Law to take its due course; and
the Judges, thonominated by him, are obliged by Oath not to have any regard to
his Letters or personal Commands. If a Man be su'd, he must appear; and a
Delinquent is to be tried coram rege, but no otherwise than secundum legem
terrae, according to the Law of the Land, not the King's personal will or
opinion. And the judgments given must be executed, whether they please him or
not, it being always understood that he can speak no otherwise than the Law
speaks, and is always present as far as the Law requires. For this reason a
noble Lord who was irregularly detained in prison in 1681, being by Habeas
Corpus brought to the Bar of the King's Bench, where he su'd to be released
upon bail; and an ignorant Judge telling him he must apply himself to the King,
he replied, that he came thither for that end; that the King might eat, drink,
or sleep where he pleased, but when he rendered Justice he was always in that
place. The King that renders Justice is indeed always there; he never sleeps;
he is subject to no infirmity; he never dies unless the Nation be extinguished,
or so dissipated as to have no Government. No Nation that has a sovereign Power
within it self, dos ever want this King. He was in Athens and Rome, as well as
at Babylon and Susa; and is as properly said to be now in Venice, Switzerland
or Holland, as in France, Morocco or Turkey. This is he to whom we all owe a
simple and unconditional obedience. This is he who never dos any wrong: It Is
before him we appear, when we demand Juice, or render an account of our
actions. All Jurys give their verdict in his sight: They are his Commands that
the Judges are bound and sworn to obey, when they are not at all to consider
such as they receive from the person that wears the Crown. 'Twas for Treason
against him that Tresilian, and others like to him in several ages were hanged.
They gratified the lusts of the visible Powers, but the invisible King would
not be mocked. He caused Justice to be executed upon Empson and Dudley. He was
injured when the perjured wretches, who gave that accursed Judgment in the case
of Shipmony, were suffered to escape the like punishment by means of the
ensuing troubles which they had chiefly raised. And I leave it to those who are
concerned, to consider how many in our days may expect vengeance for the like
crimes.

I should here conclude this point, if the power of granting a Noli proseq:
Cesset Processus, and Pardons which are said to be annexed to the person of the
King, were not taken for a proof that all proceedings at Law depend upon his
will. But whoever would from hence draw a general conclusion must first prove
his proposition to be universally true. If it be wholly false, no true
deduction can be made; and if it be true only in some cases, it is absurd to
draw from thence a general conclusion; and to erect a vast fabric upon a
narrow foundation is impossible. As to the general proposition, I utterly deny
it. The King cannot stop any Suit that I begin in my own name, or invalidate
any Judgment I obtain upon it: He cannot release a Debt of ten shillings due to
me, nor a Sentence for the like sum given upon an action of Battery, Assault,
Trespass, public Nuisance, or the like. He cannot pardon a man condemned upon
an Appeal, nor hinder the person injured from appealing. His power therefore is
not universal: if it be not universal, it cannot be inherent, but conferred upon
him, or entrusted by a superior Power that limits it.

These limits are fixed by the Law, the Law therefore is above him. His
proceedings must be regulated by the Law, and not the Law by his will. Besides,
the extent of those limits can only be known by the intention of the Law that
sets them; and are so visible, that none but such as are wilfully blind can
mistake. It cannot be imagined that the Law, which dos not give a power to the
King of pardoning a man that breaks my hedge, can intend he should have power to
pardon one who kills my father, breaks my house, robs me of my goods, abuses my
children and servants, wounds me, and brings me in danger of my life. Whatever
power he has in such cases, is founded upon a presumption, that he who has
sworn not to deny or delay justice to any man, will not break his Oath to
interrupt it. And farther, as he dos nothing but what he may rightly do, cum
magnatum and sapientum consilio; and that it is supposed, they will never advise
him to do any thing, but what ought to be done, in order to attain the great
ends of the Law, Justice, and the public safety: nevertheless lest this should
not be sufficient to keep things in their due order, or that the King should
forget his Oath, not to delay or deny justice to any man, his Counselors are
exposed to the severest punishments, if they advise him to do any thing
contrary to it, and the Law upon which it is grounded. So that the utmost
advantage the King can pretend to in this case, is no more than that of the
Norman, who said he had gained his cause, because it depended upon a point that
was to be decided by his Oath; that is to say, if he will betray the trust
reposed in him, and perjure himself, he may sometimes exempt a Villain from the
punishment he deserves, and take the guilt upon himself. I say sometimes; for
Appeals may be brought in some cases, and the Waterman who had bin pardoned by
his Majesty in the year 1680, for a murder he had committed, was condemned and
hanged at the Assizes upon an Appeal. Nay, in cases of Treason, which some men
think relate most particularly to the person of the King, he cannot always do
it. Gaveston, the two Spencers, Tresilian, Empson, Dudley, and others, have bin
executed as Traitors for things done by the King's command; and it is not
doubted they would have bin saved, if the King's power had extended so far. I
might add the cases of the Earls of Strafford and Danby; for tho the King sign
d a Warrant for the execution of the first, no man doubts he would have saved
him, if it had bin in his power. The other continues in prison notwithstanding
his pardon; and for any thing I know he may continue where he is, or come out
in a way that will not be to his satisfaction unless he be found innocent, or
something fall out more to his advantage than his Majesty's approbation of what
he has done. If therefore the King cannot interpose his authority to hinder the
course of the Law in contests between private men, nor remit the debts adjudg'd
to be due, or the damages given to the persons agriev'd, he can in his own
person have no other power in things of this nature, than in some degree to
mitigate the vindictive power of the Law; and this also is to be exercised no
other way than as he is entrusted. But if he acts even in this capacity by a
delegated power, and in few cases, he must act according to the ends for which
he is so entrusted, as the same Law says, Cum magnatum and sapientum consilio,
and is not therein to pursue his own will and interests: If his Oath farther
oblige him not to do it; and his Ministers are liable to punishment, if they
advise him otherwise: If in matters of Appeal he has no Power: and if his
pardons have bin of no value, when contrary to his Oath he has abused that with
which he is entrusted, to the patronizing of crimes, and exempting such
delinquents from punishment, as could not be pardoned without prejudice to the
Public: I may justly conclude, that the King, before whom every man is bound
to appear, who dos perpetually and impartially distribute Justice to the
Nation, is not the Man or Woman that wears the Crown; and that He or She cannot
determine those matters, which by the Law are referred to the King. Whether
therefore such matters are ordinary or extraordinary, the decision is and ought
to be placed where there is most wisdom and stability, and where passion and
private interest dos least prevail to the obstruction of Justice. This is the
only way to obviate that confusion and mischief, which our Author thinks it
would introduce. In cases of the first sort, this is done in England by Judges
and Jurys: In the other by the Parliament, which being the Representative Body
of the People, and the collected Wisdom of the Nation, is least subject to
error, most exempted from passion, and most free from corruption, their own
good both public and private depending upon the rectitude of their Sanctions.
They cannot do any thing that is ill without damage to themselves and their
posterity; which being all that can be done by human understanding, our Lives,
Libertys and Propertys are by our Laws directed to depend upon them.

SECT. XLIII. Proclamations are not Laws.
OUR Author, according to his usual method and integrity, lays great weight
upon Proclamations, as the significations of the King's pleasure, which in his
opinion is our only Law. But neither Law nor Reason openly directing, nor by
consequences insinuating, that such a Power should be put into an uncertain or
suspected hand, we may safely deny them to be Laws, or in any sense to have the
effect of Laws. Nay, they cannot be so much as Significations of his Will; for
as he is King, he can have no Will but as the Law directs. If he depart from
the Law, he is no longer King, and his Will is nothing to us. Proclamations, at
most, are but temporary, by the advice of Council, in pursuance of the Law. If
they be not so, the Subject is no way obliged to obey them, and the Counselors
are to be punished for them. These Laws are either immemorial Customs, or
Statutes. The first have their beginning and continuance from the universal
consent of the Nation. The latter receive their Authority and Force of Laws
from Parliaments, as is frequently expressed in the Preambles. These are under
God the best defense of our Lives, Libertys, and Estates: they proceed not from
the blind, corrupt, and fluctuating humor of a man, but from the mature
deliberation of the choicest Persons of the Nation, and such ^s have the
greatest interest in it. Our Ancestors have always relied upon these Laws; and
it is to be hoped we shall not be so abandoned by God, so deprived of courage
and common sense, to suffer our selves to be cheated of the Inheritance which
they have so frequently, so bravely, and so constantly defended. Tho Experience
has too well taught us, that Parliaments may have their failings, and that the
Vices, which are industriously spread among them, may be too prevalent; yet
they are the best helps we have, and we may much more reasonably depend upon
them, than upon those who propagate that corruption among them for which only
they can deserve to be suspected. We hope they will take care of our
concernments, since they are as other men so soon as a Session is ended, and
can do nothing to our prejudice that will not equally affect them and their
posterity; besides the guilt of betraying their Country, which can never be
washed off. If some should prove false to their trust, it is probable that
others would continue in their integrity: Or if the base arts, which are
usually practiced by those who endeavor to delude, corrupt, enslave and ruin
Nations, should happen to prevail upon the youngest and weakest, it may be
reasonably hoped, that the wisest will see the snares, and instruct their
Companions to avoid them. But if all things were so put into the hands of one
man, that his Proclamations were to be esteemed Laws, the Nation would be
exposed to ruin, as soon as it should chance to fall into an ill hand. It Is in
vain to say we have a good King, who will not make an ill use of his Power; for
even the best are subject to be deceived by Flatterers, and Crowned Heads are
almost ever encompast by them. The principal Art of a Courtier is to observe
his Master's Passions, and to attack him on that side where he seems to be most
weak. It would be a strange thing to find a man impregnable in every part; and
if he be not, it is impossible he should resist all the attempts that are made
upon him. If his Judgment comes to be prepossest, he and all that depend on him
are lost. Contradictions, tho never so just, are then unsafe, and no man will
venture upon them, but he who dares sacrifice himself for the public good. The
nature of man is frail, and stands in need of assistance. Virtuous actions that
are profitable to the Commonwealth, ought to be made, as far as it is possible,
safe, easy, and advantageous: and it is the utmost imprudence to tempt men to be
enemies to the Public, by suffering the most pernicious actions to be the means
of obtaining Honor and Favor, whilst no man can serve his Country, but with the
ruin of himself and his family.

However in this case the Question is not concerning a Person: the same
Counsels are to be followed when Moses or Samuel is in the Throne, as if
Caligula had invaded it. Laws ought to aim at perpetuity, but the Virtues of a
man die with him, and very often before him. Those who have deserved the highest
praises for wisdom and integrity, have frequently left the honors they enjoyed
to foolish and vicious Children. If Virtue may in any respect be said to
outlive the Person, it can only be when good men frame such Laws and
Constitutions as by favoring it preserve themselves. This has never bin done
otherwise, than by balancing the Powers in such a manner, that the corruption
which one or a few men might fall into, should not be suffered to spread the
contagion to the ruin of the whole. The long continuance of Lycurgus his Laws
is to be attributed to this: They restrained the lusts of Kings, and reduced
those to order who adventured to transgress them: Whereas the whole fabric
must have fallen to the ground in a short time, if the first that had a fancy
to be absolute, had bin able to effect his design. This has bin the fate of all
Governments that were made to depend upon the virtue of a man, which never
continues long in any family, and when that fails all is lost. The Nations
therefore that are so happy to have good Kings, ought to make a right use of
them, by establishing the good that may outlast their Lives. Those of them that
are good, will readily join in this work, and take care that their Successors
may be obliged in doing the like, to be equally beneficial to their own
Familys, and the People they govern. If the Rulers of Nations be restrained,
not only the People are by that means secured from the mischiefs of their vices
and follys, but they themselves are preserved from the greatest temptations to
ill, and the terrible effects of the vengeance that frequently ensues upon it.
An unlimited Prince might be justly compared to a weak ship exposed to a
violent storm, with a vast Sail and no Rudder. We have an eminent example of
this in the Book of Esther. Chap. 3.
A wicked Villain having filled the ears of a foolish King with false storys of
the Jews, he issues out a Proclamation for their utter extirpation; and not
long after being informed of the truth, he gave them leave by another
Proclamation to kill whom they pleased, which they executed upon seventy
thousand men. The Books of Ezra, Nehemiah and Daniel, manifestly discover the
like fluctuation in all the Counsels of Nabuchodonosor, Cyrus, Darius, and
Artaxerxes. When good men had credit with them, they favored the Israelites;
sent them back to their own Country; restored the sacred Vessels that had bin
taken away; gave them all things necessary for the rebuilding of the City, and
advanced the chief of them to the highest employments. But if they fell into
ill hands, three just men must be thrown into the burning Furnace for refusing
to worship an Idol; Daniel must be cast to the Lions; the holy City esteemed
rebellious, and those who endeavored to rebuild it, enemies to Kings. Such was
the state of things, when their Proclamations passed for Laws, and numbers of
flattering Slaves were ready to execute their Commands, without examining
whether they were just or unjust, good or bad. The life and death of the best
men, together with the very being of Nations, was exposed to chance, and they
were either preserved or destroyed according to the humor of that man who spoke
last to the King, or happened to have credit with him. If a frantic fancy come
into the head of a drunken whore, Persepolis must be burnt, and the hand of
Alexander is ready to execute her will. If a dancing wench please Herod, the
most venerable of all human Heads must be offered in a dish for a sacrifice to
the rage of her impure mother. The nature of man is so frail, that wheresoever
the word of a single Person has had the force of a Law, the innumerable
extravagances and mischiefs it has produced have bin so notorious, that all
Nations who are not stupid, slavish and brutish, have always abominated it, and
made it their principal care to find out remedys against it, by so dividing and
balancing the Powers of their Government, that one or a few men might not be
able to oppress and destroy those they ought to preserve and protect. This has
always bin as grateful to the best and wisest Princes, as necessary to the
weakest and worst, as I have proved already by the examples of Theopompus,
Moses, and others. These considerations have given beginning, growth and
continuance to all the mixed Governments that have bin in the World; and I may
justly say there never was a good one that was not mixed. If other proofs of
their rectitude were wanting, our Author's hatred would be enough to justify
them. He is so bitter an enemy to Mankind, as to be displeased with nothing but
that which tends to their good; and so perverse in his judgment, that we have
reason to believe that to be good which he most abhors. One would think he had
taken the model of the Government he proposes, from the monstrous Tyranny of
Ceylon, an Island in the East-Indys, where the King knows no other Law than his
own will. He kills, tears in pieces, empales, or throws to his Elephants
whomsoever he pleases: No man has any thing that he can call his own: He seldom
fails to destroy those who have bin employed in his domestic Service, or
public Offices; and few obtain the favor of being put to death and thrown to
the Dogs without torments. His Subjects approach him no otherwise, than on
their knees, licking the dust, and dare assume to themselves no other name than
that of Dogs, or limbs of Dogs. This is a true pattern of Filmer's
Patriarchical Monarch. His Majesty, I suppose, is sufficiently exalted; for he
dos whatever he pleases. The exercise of his power is as gentle as can
reasonably be expected from one who has all by the unquestionable right of
usurpation; and knows the People will no longer suffer him, and the Villains he
hires to be the instruments of his Cruelty, than they can be kept in such
ignorance, weakness and baseness, as neither to know how to provide for
themselves, or dare to resist him. We ought to esteem our selves happy, if the
like could be established among us; and are much obliged to our Author for so
kindly proposing an expedient that might terminate all our disputes. Let
Proclamations obtain the power of Laws, and the business is done. They may be
so ingeniously contriev'd, that the ancient Laws, which we and our Fathers have
highly valued, shall be abolished, or made a snare to all those that dare
remember they are Englishmen, and are guilty of the unpardonable crime of
loving their Country, or have the courage, conduct, and reputation required to
defend it. This is the sum of Filmer's Philosophy, and this is the Legacy he
has left to testify his affection to the Nation; which having for a long time
lain unregarded, has bin lately brought into the light again, as an
introduction of a Popish Successor, who is to be established, as we ought to
believe, for the security of the Protestant Religion, and our English Libertys.
Both will undoubtedly flourish under a Prince who is made to believe the
Kingdom is his Patrimony; that his Will is a Law, and that he has a Power which
none may resist. If any man doubt whether he will make a good use of it, he may
only examine the Historys of what others in the same circumstances have done in
all places where they have had power. The principles of that Religion are fo
full of meekness and charity; the Popes have always showed themselves so gentle
toward those who would not submit to their Authority; the Jesuits, who may be
accounted the Soul that give Life to the whole Body of that Faction, are so
well natured, faithful and exact in their Morals, so full of innocence, justice
and truth, that no violence is to be feared from such as are governed by them.
The fatherly care showed to the Protestants of France, by the five last Kings
of the House of Valois; the mercy of Philip the Second of Spain to his Pagan
Subjects in the West-Indys, and the more hated Protestants in the Netherlands;
the moderation of the Dukes of Savoy toward the Vaudois in the Marquisat of
Saluzzo and the Vallys of Piedmont; the gentleness and faith of the two Marys
Queens of England and Scotland; the kindness of the Papists to the Protestants
of Ireland in 1641; with what we have reason to believe they did and do still
intend, if they can accomplish the ends o^ their Conspiracy: In a word, the
sweetness and Apostolical meekness of the Inquisition, may sufficiently
convince us that nothing is to be seared where that Principle reigns. We may
suffer the word of such a Prince to be a Law, and the People to be made to
believe it ought to be so* when he is expected. Tho we should wave the Bill of
Exclusion, and not only admit him to reign as other Kings have done, but resign
the whole Power into his hands, it would neither bring inconvenience or danger
on the present King. He can with patience expect that nature should take her
course, and would neither anticipate nor secure his entrance into the
possession of the Power, by taking one day from the Life of his Brother. Tho
the Papists know that like a true Son of their Church, he would prefer the
advancement of their Religion before all other considerations; and that one
stab with a Dagger, or a dose of Poison, would put all under his feet, not one
man would be found among them to give it. The Assassins were Mahometans, not
Pupils of the honest Jesuits, nor ever employed by them. These things being
certain, all our concernments would be secure, if instead of the foolish
Statutes and antiquated Customs on which our Ancestors and we have hitherto
doted, we may be troubled with no Law but the King's will, and a Proclamation
may be taken for a sufficient declaretion of it. We shall by this means be
delivered from that Liberty with a mischief, in which our mistaken Nation seems
so much to delight. This phrase is so new, and so peculiar to our Author, that
it deserves to be written upon his Tomb. We have heard of Tyranny with a
mischief, Slavery and Bondage with a mischief; and they have bin denounced by
God against wicked and perverse Nations, as mischiefs comprehending all that is
most to be abhorred and dreaded in the world. But Filmer informs us that
Liberty, which all wise and good men have in all Ages esteemed to be the most
valuable and glorious privilege of Mankind, is a mischief. If he deserves
credit, Moses, Joshua, Gideon, Sampson, and Samuel, with others like them, were
enemies to their Country, in depriving the People of the advantages they enjoyed
under the paternal care of Pharaoh, Adonibezek, Eglon, Jabin, and other Kings
of the neighboring Nations, and restoring them to that Liberty with a mischief
which he had promised to them. The Israelites were happy under the power of
Tyrants, whose Proclamations were Laws; and they ought to have bin thankful to
God for that condition, and not for the deliverances he wrought by the hands of
his Servants. Subjection to the will of a man is happiness, Liberty is a
mischief. But this is so abominably wicked and detestable, that it can deserve
no answer.

SECT. XLIV. A People that is not free cannot substitute Delegats.
HOW full soever the Power of any Person or People may be, he or they are
obliged to give only so much to their Delegats, as seems convenient to
themselves, or conducing to the ends they desire to attain; but the Delegate
can have none except what is conferred upon him by his Principal. If therefore
the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses sent by the People of England to serve in
Parliament have a Power, it must be more perfectly and fully in those that send
them. But (as was proved in the last Section) Proclamations, and other
significations of the King's pleasure, are not Laws to us. They are to be
regulated by the Law, not the Law by them. They are to be considered only so
far as they are conformable to the Law from which they receive all the strength
that is in them, and can confer none upon it. We know no Laws but our own
Statutes, and those immemorial Customs established by the consent of the
Nation; which may be, and often are changed by us. The Legislative Power
therefore that is exercised by the Parliament, cannot be conferred by the Writ
of Summons, but must be essentially and radically in the People, from whom
their Delegates and Representatives have all that they have. But, says our
Author, They must only choose, and trust those whom they choose, to do what they
list; and that is as much Liberty as many of us deserve for our irregular
Elections of Burgesses. This is ingeniously concluded: I take what Servant I
please, and when I have taken him I must suffer him to do what he pleases. But
from whence should this necessity arise? Why may not I take one to be my Groom,
another to be my Cook, and keep them both to the Offices for which I took them?
What Law dos herein restrain my Right? And if I am free in my private capacity
to regulate my particular affairs according to my own discretion, and to allot
to each Servant his proper work, why have not I with my Associates the Freemen
of England the like liberty of directing and limiting the Powers of the
Servants we employ in our public Affairs? Our Author gives us reasons
proportionable to his judgment: This were liberty with a mischief; and that of
choosing only is as much as many of us deserve. I have already proved, that as
far as our Historys reach, we have had no Princes or Magistrates, but such as we
have made, and they have had no other Power than what we have conferred upon
them: They cannot be the judges of our Merit, who have no Power but what we
gave them, through an opinion they did or might deserve it: They may distribute in
parcels to particulars that with which they are entrusted in the gross. But
it is impossible the Public should depend absolutely upon those who are nothing
above other men, except what they are made to be, for, and by the Public. The
restrictions therefore of the Peoples Liberty must be from themselves, or there
can be none.

Nevertheless, I believe, that the Powers of every County, City and Borough of
England, are regulated by the general Law to which they have all consented, and
by which they are all made Members of one Political Body. This obliges them to
proceed with their Delegats in a manner different from that which is used in
the United Netherlands, or in Switzerland. Amongst these every Province, City
or Canton, making a distinct Body independent from any other, and exercising
the Sovereign Power within it self, looks upon the rest only as Allies, to whom
they are bound only by such Acts as they themselves have made; and when any new
thing not comprehended in them happens to arise, they oblige their Delegats to
give them an account of it, and retain the power of determining those matters
in themselves. It Is not so amongst us: Every County dos not make a distinct
Body, having in it self a Sovereign Power, but is a Member of that Great Body
which comprehends the whole Nation. It Is not therefore for Kent or Sussex,
Lewis or Mai^stone, but for the whole Nation, that the Members chosen in those
places are sent to serve in Parliament: and tho it be fit for them as Friends
and Neighbors (so far as may be) to hearken to the Opinions of the Electors for
the Information of their Judgments, and to the end that what they shall say may
be of more weight, when every one is known not to speak his own thoughts only,
but those of a great number of men; yet they are not strictly and properly
obliged to give account of their Actions to any, unless the whole Body of the
Nation for which they serve, and who are equally concerned in their
Resolutions, could be assembled. This being impracticable, the only punishment
to which they are subject if they betray their Trust, is scorn, infamy, hatred,
and an assurance of being rejected, when they shall again seek the same Honor.
And tho this may seem a small matter to those who fear to do ill only from a
sense of the pains inflicted; yet it is very terrible to men of ingenuous
spirits, as they are supposed to be who are accounted fit to be entrusted with
so great Powers. But why it should be called Liberty with a mischief if it were
otherwise; or how the liberty of particular Societys would be greater, if they
might do what they pleased, than whilst they send others to act for them, such
wise men only as Filmer can tell us. For as no man, or number of men, can give
a Power which he or they have not, the Achaians, Etolians, Latins, Samnites and
Tuscans, who transacted all things relating to their Associations by Delegates;
and the Athenians, Carthaginians and Romans, who kept the power of the State in
themselves, were all equally free. And in our days the United Provinces of the
Netherlands, the Switzers and Grisons, who are of the first sort, and the
Venetians, Genoeses, and Luccheses, who are of the other, are so also. All men
that have any degree of common sense, plainly see, that the Liberty of those
who act in their own persons, and of those who send Delegates, is perfectly the
same, and the exercise is, and can only be changed by their consent.

But whatever the Law or Custom of England be in this point, it cannot concern
our question. The general proposition concerning a Patriarchical Power cannot
be proved by a single example. If there be a general Power every where,
forbidding Nations to give instructions to their Delegates, they can do it no
where. If there be no such thing, every People may do it, unless they have
deprived themselves of their right, all being born under the same condition.
It Is to no purpose to say that the Nations before mentioned had not Kings, and
therefore might act as they did. For if the general Thesis be true, they must
have Kings; and if it be not, none are obliged to have them, unless they think
fit, and the Kings they make are their Creatures. But many of these Nations had
either Kings, or other Magistrates in power like to them. The Provinces of the
Netherlands had Dukes, Earls, or Marquesses: Genoa and Venice have Dukes. If
any on account of the narrowness of their Territorys have abstained from the
Name, it dos not alter the case; for our dispute is not concerning the Name,
but the Right. If that one Man, who is in the principal Magistracy of every
Nation, must be reputed the Father of that People, and has a Power which may
not be limited by any Law, it imports not what he is called. But if in small
Territorys he may be limited by Laws, he may be so also in the greatest. The
least of men is a man as well as a Giant: And those in the West-Indys who have
not above twenty or thirty Subjects able to bear Arms, are Kings as well as
Xerxes. Every Nation may divide it self into small parcels as some have done,
by the same Law they have restrained or abolished their Kings, joined to one
another, or taken their hazard of subsisting by themselves; acted by
delegation, or retaining the Power in their own persons; given finite or
indefinite Powers; reserved to themselves a power of punishing those who should
depart from their duty, or referred it to their General Assemblys. And that
Liberty, for which we contend as the Gift of God and Nature, remains equally to
all.

If men who delight in cavilling should say, that great Kingdoms are not to be
regulated by the Examples of small States, I desire to know when it was, that
God ordained great Nations should be Slaves, and deprived of all right to
dispose matters relating to their Government; whilst he left to such as had, or
should divide themselves into small parcels, a right of making such
Constitutions as were most convenient for them. When this is resolved, we ought
to be informed, what extent of Territory is required to deserve the name of a
great Kingdom. Spain and France are esteemed great, and yet the Deputys or
Procuradores of the Vida de Carlos 50 de Sandoval.
several parts of Castille did in the Cortez held at Madrid, in the beginning of
Charles the fifth's reign, excuse themselves from giving the supplys he
desired, because they had received no orders in that particular from the Towns
that sent them; and afterward receiving express orders not to do it, they gave
his Majesty a flat denial. The like was frequently done during the reigns of
that great Prince, and of his Son Philip the second. And generally those
Procuradores never granted any thing of importance to either of them, without
particular Orders from their Principals. The same way was taken in France, as
long as there were any General Assemblys of Estates; and if it dos not still
continue, it is because there are none. For no man who understood the Affairs of
that Kingdom, did ever deny, that the Deputys were obliged to follow the Orders
of those who sent them. And perhaps, if men would examine by what means they
came to be abolished, they might find, that the Cardinals de Richelieu and
Mazarin, with other Ministers who have accomplished that work, were acted by
some other principle than that of Justice, or the establishment of the Laws of
God and Nature. In the General Assembly of Estates held at Blois in the time of
Henry the third, Bodin then Hist. Thuan.
Deputy for the third Estate of Vermandois, by their particular Order, proposed
so many things as took up a great part of their time. Other Deputys alleged no
other reason for many things said and done by them, highly contrary to the
King's will, than that they were commanded so to do by their Superiors. These
General Assemblys being laid aside, the same custom is still used in the lesser
Assemblys of Estates in Languedoc and Britany. The Deputys cannot without the
infamy of betraying their Trust, and fear of punishment, recede from the Orders
given by their Principals; and yet we do not find that Liberty with a mischief
is much more predominant in France than amongst us. The same method is every
day practiced in the Diets of Germany. The Princes and great Lords, who have
their places in their own right, may do what they please; but the Deputys of
the Citys must follow such Orders as they receive. The Historys of Denmark,
Sweden, Poland and Bohemia, testify the same thing: and if this Liberty with a
mischief dos not still continue entire in all those places, it has bin
diminished by such means as suit better with the manners of Pirates, than the
Laws of God and Nature. If England therefore dos not still enjoy the same, we
must have bin deprived of it either by such unjustifiable means, or by our own
consent. But thanks be to God, we know no People who have a better right to
Liberty, or have better defended it than our own Nation. And if we do not
degenerate from the Virtue of our Ancestors, we may hope to transmit it entire
to our Posterity. We always may, and often do give Instructions to our
Delegates; but the less we fetter them, the more we manifest our own Rights:
for those who have only a limited Power, must limit that which they give; but
they that can give an unlimited Power must necessarily have it in themselves.
The great Treasurer Burleigh said, the Parliament could do any thing but turn a
Man into a Woman. Sir Thomas Moor, when Rich Solicitor to K. Henry the 8 th
asked him, if the Parliament might not make R. Rich King, said, that was casus
levis, taking it for granted that they might make or unmake whom they pleased.
The first part of this, which includes the other, is asserted by the Statute of
the 13 th of Q. Elizabeth, denouncing the most grievous punishments against all
such as should dare to contradict it. But if it be in the Parliament, it must
be in those who give to Parliament Men the powers by which they act; for before
they are chosen they have none, and can never have any if those that send them
had it not in themselves. They cannot receive it from the Magistrate, for that
power which he has is derived from the same spring. The power of making and
unmaking him cannot be from himself; for he that is not, can do nothing, and
when he is made can have no other power than is conferred upon him by those that
make him. Besides, he who departs from his duty desires to avoid the
punishment, the power therefore of punishing him is not from himself. It cannot
be from the House of Peers as it is constituted, for they act for themselves,
and are chosen by Kings: and it is absurd to think that Kings, who generally
abhor all restriction of their Power, should give that to others by which they
might be unmade. If one or more Princes relying upon their own Virtue and
Resolutions to do good, had given such a power against themselves, as Trajan
did, when he commanded the Prefect to use the Sword for him if he governed
well, and against him if he governed ill, it would soon have bin rescinded by
their Successors. If our Edward the first had made such a Law, his lewd Son
would have abolished it, before he would have suffered himself to be imprisoned
and deposed by it. He would never have acknowledged his unworthiness to reign,
if he had bin tied to no other Law than his own will, for he could not
transgress that; nor have owned the mercy of the Parliament in sparing his
Life, if they had acted only by a power which he had conferred upon them. This
Power must therefore be in those who act by a delegated Power, and none can
give it to their Delegates but they who have it in themselves. The most certain
testimony that can be given of their unlimited Power is, that they rely upon
the Wisdom and Fidelity of their Deputys, so as to lay no restrictions upon
them: they may do what they please, if they take care ne quid detrimenti
Respublica accipiat, that the Commonwealth receives no detriment. This is a
Commission fit to be granted by wise and good men, to those they choose through an
opinion that they are so also, and that they cannot bring any prejudice upon
the Nation, that will not fall upon themselves and their posterity. This is
also fit to be received by those, who seeking nothing but that which is just in
it self, and profitable to their Country, cannot foresee what will be proposed
when they are all met together; much less resolve how to vote till they hear
the reasons on both sides. The Electors must necessarily be in the same
ignorance; and that Law which should oblige them to give particular Orders to
their Knights and Burgesses in relation to every Vote, would make the decision
of the most important Affairs to depend upon the judgment of those who know
nothing of the matters in question, and by that means cast the Nation into the
utmost danger of the most inextricable confusion. This can never be the
intention of that Law which is Sanctio recta, and seeks only the good of those
that live under it. The foresight therefore of such a mischief can never impair
the Libertys of the Nation, but establish them.

SECT. XLV. The Legislative Power is always Arbitrary, and not to be trusted in
the hands of any who are not bound to obey the Laws they make.
IF it be objected that I am a defender of Arbitrary Powers, I confess I cannot
comprehend how any Society can be established or subsist without them; for the
establishment of Government is an arbitrary Act, wholly depending upon the will
of man. The particular Forms and Constitutions, the whole Series of the
Magistracy, together with the measure of Power given to every one, and the
Rules by which they are to exercise their Charge, are so also. Magna Charta,
which comprehends our ancient Laws, and all the subsequent Statutes, were not
sent from Heaven, but made according to the will of men. If no men could have a
Power of making Laws, none could ever have bin made; for all that are or have
bin in the World, except those given by God to the Israelites, were made by
them; that is, they have exercised an Arbitrary Power in making that to be Law
which was not, or annulling that which was. The various Laws and Governments,
that are or have bin in several Ages and Places, are the product of various
opinions in those who had the power of making them. This must necessarily be,
unless a general Rule be set to all; for the Judgments of men will vary if they
are left to their liberty, and the variety that is found among them, shows they
are subject to no Rule but that of their own Reason, by which they see what is
fit to be embraced or avoided, according to the several circumstances under
which they live. The Authority that judges of these circumstances is arbitrary,
and the Legislators show themselves to be more or less wise and good, as they
do rightly or not rightly exercise this Power. The difference therefore between
good and ill Governments is not, that those of one sort have an Arbitrary Power
which the others have not, for they all have it; but that those which are well
constituted, place this Power so as it may be beneficial to the People, and set
such Rules as are hardly to be transgrest; whilst those of the other sort fail
in one or both these points. Some also through want of courage, fortune, or
strength, may have bin oppressed by the violence of Strangers, or suffered a
corrupt Party to rise up within themselves, and by force or fraud to usurp a
Power of imposing what they pleased. Others being sottish, cowardly and base,
have so far erred in the Foundations, as to give up themselves to the will of
one or few men, who turning all to their own profit or pleasure, have bin just
in nothing but in using such a People like beasts. Some have placed weak
defenses against the lusts of those they have advanced to the highest places,
and given them opportunitys of arrogating more power to themselves than the Law
allows. Where any of these errors are committed, the Government may be easy for
a while, or at least tolerable, whilst it continues uncorrupted, but it cannot
be lasting. When the Law may be easily or safely overthrown, it will be
attempted. Whatever virtue may be in the first Magistrates, many years will not
pass before they come to be corrupted; and their Successors deflecting from
their integrity, will seize upon the ill-guarded prey. They will then not only
govern by will, but by that irregular will, which turns the Law, that was made
for the public good, to the private advantage of one or few men. It Is not my
intention to enumerate the several ways that have bin taken to effect this; or
to show what Governments have deflected from the right, and how far. But I
think I may justly say, that an Arbitrary Power was never well placed in any
men and their Successors, who were not obliged to obey the Laws they should
make. This was well understood by our Saxon Ancestors: They made Laws in their
Assemblys and Councils of the Nation; but all those who proposed or assented to
those Laws, as soon as the Assembly was dissolved, were comprehended under the
power of them as well as other men. They could do nothing to the prejudice of
the Nation, that would not be as hurtful to those who were present and their
posterity, as to those who by many accidents might be absent. The Normans
entered into, and continued in the same path. Our Parliaments at this day are
in the same condition. They may make prejudicial Wars, ignominious Treatys, and
unjust Laws: yet when the Session is ended, they must bear the burden as much
as others; and when they die, the teeth of their Children will be set an edg
with the sour Grapes they have eaten. But it is hard to delude or corrupt so
many: Men do not in matters of the highest importance yield to slight
temptations. No man serves the Devil for nothing: Small wages will not content
those who expose themselves to perpetual infamy, and the hatred of a Nation for
betraying their Country. Our Kings had not wherewithal to corrupt many till
these last twenty years, and the treachery of a few was not enough to pass a
Law. The union of many was not easily wrought, and there was nothing to tempt
them to endeavor it; for they could make little advantage during the Session,
and were to be lost in the mass of the People, and prejudiced by their own
Laws, as soon as it was ended. They could not in a short time reconcile their
various interests or passions, so as to combine together against the Public;
and the former Kings never went about it. We are beholden to H-de, Cl-ff-rd and
D-nby, for all that has bin done of that kind. They found a Parliament full of
lewd young men chosen by a furious People in spite to the Puritans, whose
severity had distasted them. The weakest of all Ministers had wit enough to
understand that such as these might be easily deluded, corrupted, or bribed.
Some were fond of their Seats in Parliament, and delighted to domineer over
their Neighbors by continuing in them: Others preferred the cajolerys of the
Court before the honor of performing their duty to the Country that employed
them. Some sought to relieve their ruined Fortunes, and were most forward to
give the King a vast Revenue, that from thence they might receive Pensions:
others were glad of a temporary Protection against their Creditors. Many knew
not what they did when they annul'd the Triennial Act, voted the Militia to be
in the King, gave him the Excise, Customs and Chimny-mony, made the Act for
Corporations, by which the greatest part of the Nation was brought under the
power of the worst men in it; drunk or sober passed the Five-mile Act, and that
for Uniformity in the Church. This emboldened the Court to think of making
Parliaments to be the instruments of our Slavery, which had in all Ages past
bin the firmest pillars of our Liberty. There might have bin perhaps a
possibility of preventing this pernicious mischief in the Constitution of our
Government. But our brave Antestors could never think their Posterity would
degenerate into such baseness to sell themselves and their Country: yet how
great soever the danger may be, it is less than to put all into the hands of one
Man and his Ministers: the hazard of being ruined by those who must perish with
us, is not so much to be feared, as by one who may enrich and strengthen
himself by our destruction. It Is better to depend upon those who are under a
possibility of being again corrupted, than upon one who applys himself to
corrupt them, because he cannot otherwise accomplish his designs. It were to be
wished that our security were more certain; but this being, under God, the best
Anchor we have, it deserves to be preserved with all care, till one of a more
unquestionable strength be framed by the consent of the Nation.

SECT. XLVI. The coercive power of the Law proceeds from the Authority of
Parliament.
HAVING proved that Proclamations are not Laws, and that the Legislative Power,
which is arbitrary, is trusted only in the hands of those who are bound to obey
the Laws that are made, it is not hard to discover what it is that gives the
power of Law to the Sanctions under which we live. Our Author tells us, That
all Statutes or Laws are made properly by the King alone, at the Rogation of
the People, as his Majesty King James of happy Memory affirms in his true Law
of Free Monarchy; and as Hooker teaches us, That Laws do not take their
constraining power from the quality of such as devise them, but from the power
that gives them the strength of Law. But if the Rogation of the People be
necessary, that cannot be a Law which proceeds not from their Rogation: the
power therefore is not alone in the King; for a most important part is confessed
to be in the People. And as none could be in them, if our Author's Proposition,
or the Principles upon which it is grounded, were true, the acknowledgment of
such a part to be in the People shows them to be false. For if the King had all
in himself, none could participate with him: if any do participate, he has not
all; and it is from that Law by which they do participate, that we are to know
what part is left to him. The preambles of most Acts of Parliament manifest
this by the words, Be it enacted by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and
Commons in Parliament assembled, and by Authority of the same. But King James,
says Filmer, in his Law of Free Monarchy affirms the contrary; and it may be
so, yet that is nothing to us. No man doubts that he desired it might be so in
England: but it dos not from thence appear that it is so. The Law of a Free
Monarchy is nothing to us; for that Monarchy is not free which is regulated by
a Law not to be broken without the guilt of Perjury, as he himself Speech in
Star Chamber, 1616.
confessed in relation to ours. As to the words cited from Hooker, I can find no
hurt in them. To draw up the form of a good Law, is a matter of invention and
jugdment, but it receives the force of a Law from the Power that enacts it. We
have no other reason for the payment of Excise or Customs, than that the
Parliament has granted those Revenues to the King to defray the public
Charges. Whatever therefore King James was pleased to say in his Books, or in
those written for him, we do not so much as know that the killing of a King is
Treason, or to be punished with death, otherwise than as it is enacted by
Parliament; and it was not always so: for in the time of Leg. Aethe^stani, fol.
^1.
Ethelstan, the Estimates of Lives were agreed in Parliament, and that of a
King valued at thirty thousand Thrymsae. And if that Law had not bin altered by
the Parliament, it must have bin in force at this day. It had bin in vain for a
King to say he would have it otherwise; for he is not created to make Laws, but
to govern according to such as are made, and sworn to assent to Quas vulgus
elegerit.
such as shall be proposed. He who thinks the Crown not worth accepting on
these conditions, may refuse it. The words Le Roy le veut, are only a pattern
of the French fashions, upon which some Kings have laid gress stress, and would
no doubt have bin glad to introduce Car tell est notre plaisir; but that may
prove a difficult matter. Nay in France it self, where that Style, and all the
ranting expressions that please the vainest of men are in mode, no Edict has
the power of a Law, till it be registered in Parliament. This is not a mere
ceremony, as some pretend, but all that is essential to a Law. Nothing has bin
more common than for those Parliaments to refuse Edicts sent to them by the
King. When John Chastel had, at the instigation of the Jesuits, stabbed Henry
the Fourth in the Mouth, and that Order had designed or executed many other
execrable crimes, they were banished out of the Kingdom by an Arrest of the
Parliament of Paris. Some other Parliaments registered the same; but those of
Toulouse and Bordeaux absolutely refused, and notwithstanding all the King
could do, the Jesuits continued at Tournon and many other places within their
Precincts, till the Arrest was revoked. These proceedings are so displeasing to
the Court, that the most violent ways have bin often used to abolish them.
About the year 1650, Seguier then Chancellor Mem. de L. R. F.
of France was sent with a great number of Soldiers to oblige the Parliament of
Paris to pass some Edicts upon which they had hesitated; but he was so far from
accomplishing his design, that the People rose against him, and he thought
himself happy that he escaped with his Life. If the Parliaments do not in all
parts of the Kingdom continue in the Liberty of approving or rejecting all
Edicts, the Law is not altered, but oppressed by the violence of the Sword: And
the Prince of Conde, who was principally employed to do that work, may, I
suppose, have had leisure to reflect on those Actions, and cannot but find
reason to conclude, that his excellent valor and conduct was used in a most
noble Exploit, equally beneficial to his Country and himself. However, those
who are skilled in the Laws of that Nation do still affirm, that all public
Acts which are not duly examined and registered, are void in themselves, and
can be of no force longer than the miserable People lies under the violence of
Oppression; which is all that could reasonably be said, if a Pirat had the same
power over them. But whether the French have willingly offered their ears to be
bored, or have bin subdued by force, it concerns us not. Our Libertys depend
not upon their will, virtue, or fortune: how wretched and shameful soever their
Slavery may be, the evil is only to themselves. We are to consider no human
Laws but our own; and if we have the spirit of our Ancestors we shall maintain
them, and die as free as they left us. Le Roy le veut, tho written in great
Letters, or pronounced in the most tragical manner, can signify no more than
that the King in performance of his Oath dos assent to such Laws as the Lords
and Commons have agreed. Without prejudice to themselves and their Libertys, a
People may suffer the King to advise with his Council upon what they propose.
Two eyes see more than one, and human judgment is subject to errors. Tho the
Parliament consists of the most eminent men of the Nation, yet when they intend
good, they may be mistaken. They may safely put a check upon themselves, that
they may farther consider the most important matters, and correct the errors
that may have bin committed, if the King's Council do discover them: but he can
speak only by the advice of his Council; and every man of them is with his head
to answer for the advice he gives. If the Parliament has not bin satisfied with
the reasons given against any Law that they offered, it has frequently passed;
and if they have bin satisfied, 'twas not the King, but they that laid it
aside. He that is of another opinion, may try whether Le Roy le veut can give
the force of a Law to any thing conceived by the King, his Council, or any
other than the Parliament. But if no wise man will affirm that he can do it, or
deny that by his Oath he is obliged to assent to those that come from them, he
can neither have the Legislative power in himself, nor any other part in it
than what is formal, and necessarily to be performed by him, as the Law
prescribes.

I know not what our Author means by saying, Le Roy le veut is the
interpretative phrase pronounced at the passing of every Act of Parliament: For
if there be difficulty in any of them, those words do no way remove it. But the
following part of the paragraph better deserves to be observed. It was, says
he, the ancient custom for a long time until the days of Henry the Fifth, for
the Kings when any Bill was brought to them that had passed both Houses, to
take and pick out what they liked not; and so much as they chose was enacted as
a Law: But the custom of the latter Kings has bin so gracious, as to allow
always of the entire Bill as it passed both Houses. He judiciously observes
when our Kings began to be gracious, and we to be free. That King (excepting
the persecution for Religion in his time, which is rather to be imputed to the
ignorance of that Age, than to any evil in his own nature) governed well; and
as all Princes who have bin virtuous and brave have always desired to preserve
their Subjects Liberty, which they knew to be the mother and nurse of their
Valor, fitting them for great and generous Enterprises, his care was to please
them, and to raise their Spirits. But about the same time, those detestable
Arts by which the mixed Monarchys in this part of the world have bin every
where terribly shaken, and in many places totally overthrown, began to be
practiced. Charles the Seventh of France, under pretense of carrying on a War
against him and his Son, took upon him to raise Money by his own Authority, and
we know how well that method has bin pursued. The mischievous sagacity of his
Son Lewis the 11 th, which is now called King-Craft, was wholly exerted in the
subversion of the Laws of France, and the Nobility that supported them. His
Successors, except only Lewis the 12 th, followed his example; and in other
Nations, Ferdinand of Arragon, James the Third of Scotland, and Henry the
Seventh of England, were thought to imitate him the most. Tho we have little
reason to commend all the Princes that preceded Henry the Fifth; yet I am
inclined to date the general impairing of our Government from the death of that
King, and his valiant Brothers. His weak Son became a prey to a furious French
Woman, who brought the Maxims of her own Country into ours, and advano'd the
worst of Villains to govern according to them. These measures were pursued by
Edward the 4 th, whose wants contracted by prodigality and debauchery, were to
be supplied by fraud and rapine. The ambition, cruelty and perfidiousness of
Richard the 3 d; the covetousness and malicious subtilty of Henry the 7 th; the
violent lust, rage and pride of Henry the 8 th, and the bigoted fury of Q.
Mary, instigated by the craft and malice of Spain, persuaded me to believe that
the English Liberty did not receive birth or growth from the favor and goodness
of their gracious Princes. But it seems all this is mistaken; Henry the 6 th
was wise, valiant, and no way guided by his Wife; Edward the fourth continent,
sober, and contented with what the Nation gave him; Richard the third mild,
gentle and faithful; Henry the 7 th sincere, and satisfied with his own; Henry
the 8 th humble, temperate and just; and Queen Mary a friend to our Country and
Religion. No less praises sure can be due to those who were so gracious to
recede from their own right of picking what they pleased out of our Laws, and
to leave them entirely to us as they passed both Houses. We are beholden to our
Author for the discovery of these mysterys: but tho he seems to have taken an
Oath like that of the Gypsys when they enter into that virtuous Society, never
to speak one word of truth, he is not so subtle in concealing his Lies. All
Kings were trusted with the publication of the Laws, but all Kings did not
falsify them. Such as were not wicked and vicious, or so weak as to be made
subservient to the malice of their Ministers and Flatterers, could never be
drawn into the guilt of so infamous a cheat, directly contrary to the Oath of
their Coronation. They swear to pass such Laws Quas vulgus elegerit.
as the People choose; but if we will believe our Author, they might have picked
out whatever they pleased, and falsely imposed upon the Nation, as a Law made by
the Lords and Commons, that which they had modeled according to their own will,
and made to be different from, or contrary to the intention of the Parliament.
The King's part in this fraud (of which he boasts) was little more than might
have bin done by the Speaker or his Clerks. They might have falsify'd an Act as
well as the King, tho they could not so well preserve themselves from
punishment. It Is no wonder if for a while no stop was put to such an abominable
Custom. 'Twas hard to think a King would be guilty of a fraud, that were
infamous in a Slave: But that proved to be a small security, when the worst of
Slaves came to govern them. Nevertheless it is probable they proceeded
cautiously: the first alterations were perhaps innocent, or, it may be, for the
best. But when they had once found out the way, they stuck at nothing that
seemed for their purpose. This was like the plague of Leprosy, that could not
be cured; the house infected was to be demolished; the poisonous plant must be
torn up by the root; the trust that had bin broken was to be abolished; they
who had perverted or frustrated the Law, were no longer to be suffered to make
the least alteration; and that brave Prince readily joined with his People to
extinguish the mischievous abuse that had bin introduced by some of his
worthless Predecessors. The worst and basest of them had continual disputes
with their Parliaments, and thought that whatever they could detract from the
Liberty of the Nation, would serve to advance their Prerogative. They delighted
in frauds, and would have no other Ministers but such as would be the
instruments of them. Since their Word could not be made to pass for a Law, they
indeavor'd to impose their own or their Servants inventions as Acts of
Parliament, upon the deluded people, and to make the best of them subservient
to their corrupt Ends and pernicious Counsels. This, if it had continued, might
have overthrown all our Rights, and deprived us of all that men can call good
in the world. But the Providence of God furnished our Ancestors with an
opportunity of providing against so great, so universal a mischief. They had a
wise and valiant Prince, who scorned to encroach upon the Libertys of his
Subjects, and abhorred the detestable Arts by which they had bin impaired. He
esteemed their courage, strength, and love, to be his greatest Advantage,
Riches and Glory. He aimed at the conquest of France, which was only to be
effected by the bravery of a free and well satisfied People. Slaves will always
be cowards, and enemies to their Master: By bringing his Subjects into that
condition, he must infallibly have ruined his own designs, and made them unfit
to fight either for him or themselves. He desired not only that his People
should be free during his time, but that his Successors should not be able by
oblique and fraudulent ways to enslave them. If it be a reproach to us that
Women have reigned over us, it is much more to the Princes that succeeded our
Henry, that none of them did so much imitate him in his Government as Queen
Elizabeth. She did not go about to mangle Acts of Parliament, and to pick out
what might serve her turn, but frequently passed forty of fifty in a Session,
without reading one of them. She knew that she did not reign for her self, but
for her People; that what was good for them, was either good for her, or that
her good ought not to come into competition with that of the whole Nation; and
that she was by Oath obliged to pass such Laws as were presented to her on
their behalf. This not only shows that there is no such thing as a Legislative
Power placed in Kings by the Laws of God and Nature, but that Nations have it
in themselves. It was not by Law nor by Right, but by Usurpation, Fraud and
Perjury, that some Kings took upon them to pick what they pleased out of the
public Acts. Henry the fifth did not grant us the right of making our own
Laws; but with his approbation we abolished a detestable abuse that might have
proved fatal to us. And if we examine our History we shall find, that every good
and generous Prince has sought to establish our Libertys, as much as the most
base and wicked to infringe them. *

THE END.
The COPY of a PAPER Delivered to the SHERIFFS, Upon the Scaffold on
Tower Hill, On Friday December. 7. 1683. BY Algernon Sidney Esquire Immediately
before his Death. Men, Brethren, and Fathers; Friends, Countrymen, and
Strangers:
IT May be expected that I should now say some great matters unto you; but the
Rigor of the Season, and the Infirmitys of my Age, increased by a close
Imprisonment of above five Months, do not permit me.

Moreover, we live in an Age that makes Truth pass for Treason: I dare not say
any thing contrary unto it, and the Ears of those that are about me will
probably be found too tender to hear it. My Trial and Condemnation does
sufficiently evidence this.

West, Rumsey, and Keyling, who were brought to prove the Plot, said no more of
me, than that they knew me not; and some others equally unknown to me, had used
my Name, and that of some others, to give a little Reputation to their Designs.
The Lord Howard is too infamous by his Life, and the many Perjurys not to be
denied, or rather sworn by himself, to deserve mention; and being a single
Witness would be of no value, tho he had been of unblemished Credit, or had not
seen and confessed that the Crimes committed by him would be pardoned only for
committing more; and even the Pardon promised could not be obtained till the
drudgery of Swearing was over.

This being laid aside, the whole matter is reduced to the Papers said to be
found in my Cl^f^t by the King's Officers, without any other Proof of their
being written by me, than what is taken from suppositions upon the similitude
of an Hand that is easily counterfeited, and which has been lately declared in
the Lady Car's Case to be no lawful Evidence in Criminal Causes.

But if I had been seen to write them, the matter would not be much altered.
They plainly appear to relate to a large Treatise written long since in Answer
to Filmer's Book, which by all Intelligent Men is thought to be grounded upon
wicked Principles, equally pernicious to Magistrates and People.

If he might publish to the World his Opinion, That all Men are born under a
necessity derived from the Laws of God and Nature, to submit to an Absolute
Kingly Government, which could be restrained by no Law, or Oath; and that he
that has the Power, whether he came to it by Creation, Election, Inheritance,
Usurpation, or any other way, had the Right; and none must oppose his Will, but
the Persons and Estates of his Subjects must be indispensably subject unto it;
I know not why I might not have published my Opinion to the contrary, without
the breach of any Law I have yet known.

I might as freely as he, publicly have declared my Thought, and the reasons
upon which they were grounded, and I persuaded to believe, That God had left
Nations to the Liberty of setting up such Governments as best pleased
themselves.

That Magistrates were set up for the good of Nations, not Nations for the
honor or glory of Magistrates.

That the Right and Power of Magistrates in every Country, was that which the
Laws of that Country made it to be.

That those Laws were to be observed, and the Oaths taken by them, having the
force of a Contract between Magistrate and People, could not be violated
without danger of dissolving the whole Fabric.

That Usurpation could give no Right, and the most dangerous of all Enemies to
Kings were they, who raising their Power to an exorbitant height, allowed to
Usurpers all the Rights belonging unto it.

That such Usurpations being seldom compassed without the Slaughter of the
Reigning Person, or Family, the worst of all Villanys was thereby rewarded with
the most glorious Privileges.

That if such Doctrines were received, they would stir up Men to the Destruct
on of Princes with more Violence than all the Passions that have hitherto raged
in the Hearts of the most Unruly.

That none could be safe, if such a Reward were proposed to any that could
destro^ them.

That few would be so gentle as to spare even the Best, if by their destruction
a wild Usurper could become God's Anointed, and by the most execrable
Wickedness invest himself with that Divine Character.

This is the scope of the whole Treatise; the Writer gives such Reasons as at
present did occur unto him, to prove it. This seems to agree with the Doctrines
of the most Reverenced Authors of all Times, Nations and Religions. The best
and wisest of Kings have ever acknowledged it. The present King of France has
declared that Kings have that happy want of Power, that they can do nothing
contrary to the Laws of their Country, and grounds his Quarrel with the King of
Spain, Anno 1667. upon that Principle* King James in his Speech to the
Parliament Anno 1603. does in the highest degree assert it: The Scripture seems
to declare it. If nevertheless the Writer was mistaken, he might have been
refuted by Law, Reason and Scripture; and no Man for such matters was ever
otherwise punished, than by being made to see his Error; and it has not (as I
think) been ever known that they had been referred to the Judgment of a Jury,
composed of Men utterly unable to comprehend them.

But there was little of this in my Case; the extravagance of my Prosecutors
goes higher: the abovementioned Treatise was never finished, nor could be in
many years, and most probably would never have been. So much as is of it was
written long since, never reviewed nor shown to any Man; and the fiftieth part
of it was not produced, and not the tenth of that offered to be read. That
which was never known to those who are said to have conspired with me, was said
to be intended to stir up the People in Prosecution of the Designs of those
Conspirators.

When nothing of particular Application to Time, Place, or Person, could be
found in it, (as has ever been done by those who endeavored to raise
Insurrections) all was supplied by Innuendo's.

Whatsoever is said of the Expulsion of Tarquin; the Insurrection against Nero;
the Slaughter of Caligula, or Domitian; the Translation of the Crown of France
from Meroveus his Race to Pepin, and from his Descendents to Hugh Capet, and
the like, was applied by Innuendo to the King.

They have not considered, that if such Acts of State be not good, there is not
a King in the World that has any Title to the Crown he wears; nor can have any,
unless he could deduce his Pedigree from the eldest Son of Noah, and show that
the Succession had still continued in the eldest of the eldest Line, and been
so deduced to him.

Every one may see what advantage this would be to all the Kings of the World;
and whether that failing, it were not better for them to acknowledge they had
received their Crowns by the Consent of willing Nations, or to have no better
Title to them than Usurpation and Violence, which by the same ways may be taken
from them.

But I was long since told that I must die, or the Plot must die.

Lest the means of destroying the best Protestants in England should fail, the
Bench must be filled with such as had been Blemishes to the Bar.

None but such as these would have advised with the King's Council of the means
of bringing a Man to death; suffered a Jury to be packed by the King's
Solicitors, and the Undersheriff; admit of Jury men who are not Freeholders;
receive such Evidence as is above mention d; refuse a Copy of an Indictment, or
suffer the Statute of 46 Edw. 3. to be read, that does expressly Enact, It
should in no case be denied to any Man upon any occasion whatsoever; overruled
the most important Points of Law without hearing. And whereas the Statute, 25
Ed. 3. upon which they said I should be tried, does reserve to the Parliament
all Constructions to be made in Points of Treason, they could assume to
themselves not only a Power to make Constructions, but such Constructions as
neither agree with Law, Reason, or common Sense.

By these means I am brought to this Place. The Lord forgive these Practices,
and avert the Evils that threaten the Nation from them. The Lord sanctify these
my Sufferings unto me; and tho I fall as a Sacrifice to Idols, suffer not
Idolatry to be established in this Land. Bless thy People, and save them.
Defend thy own Cause, and defend those that defend it. Stir up such as are
saint; direct those that are willing; confirm those that waver; give Wisdom and
Integrity unto all. Order all things so as may most redound to thine own Glory.
Grant that I may die glorifying Thee for all thy Mercys, and that at the last
Thou have permitted me to be singl'd out as a Witness of thy Truth, and even by
the Confession of my Opposers, for that OLD CAUSE in which I was srom my Youth
engaged, and for which Thou have often and wonderfully declared thy Self.

FINIS.
AN ALPHABETICAL TABLE To the Whole.
A.
AARON, vid. Moses. Abdication, Camillus the Dictator obliged to abdicate his
Magistracy. 226 Abraham, and the Patriarchs not Kings. 14, 17 Could never
exercise a Regal Power. 16 Lived with Lot in perfect Freedom. 66
Abrogation, where a Person Abrogates the Magistracy. 87, 156, 157 God declared
Readiness Kingdom to be entirely Abrogated. 235 A whole People, or part of them,
may at their own Pleasure abrogate a Kingdom. 236 What is said to be so. 287
None can abrogate the Law of God. 315, 31^
Absalom, his Revolt. 237, 238 Absolute Power and Monarchy, out in its first
beginning. 16, 39 Of France and Turkey. 39, 63, 107, 137, 13^, 319 Burdensome and
Dangerous. 61 Who sit Subjects for it. 83, 12^, 135, 13^ Scarce ever conquered
a free People. 92, 98, 13^, 144 Who Advocates sor it. ^^, 113 Nothing more
mutable, or unstable. 9^, ^^ Cannot be restrained by Law. ^^, 131, 132, 135
Where it should be of more strength than the Limited. 97 The sad effects of it.
108, 163, 185, 186, 187, 319, 320, 407, 408 Rome decayed, and perished under
it. 109 The Root and Foundation of it. 117, 130, 131 Not established among the
Greeks by Law. 122 Encourages Venality and Corruption. 129, 130, 180 Advances
the worst of Men. 131, 132, 133, 161 In what sense most contrary to Nature. 134
By whom only to be endured. 136, 319 The People under it always miserable. 137,
149, 152, 179 All things managed by one, or a very few men. 138 Seems totally
to be exempted srom Mistakes, and why. 153 Almost all Troubles arising in them,
proceed from Malice. 153 Sedition m^st frequently in, and natural to them 161,
163, 171, 172, 173 By what means this Arbitrary Power is set up. 161, 179 ^^w
o^ none long subsist under it. 168 Where it cannot be introduced. 180 Integrity
not to be found therein. 184 What care such Monarchs have for their People.
191, 192 Their chief Labor is to be above the Law. 207
Absolute Power, no Society can be established, or subsist without it
somewhere. 414 Never well placed in Men and their Successors, if not obliged to
obey the Laws that should be made. 415
Abufes in Government, when never to be reformed. 198 Account, to whom the
People of Rome were to give theirs. 32 Accusers, vid. false Witnesses.
Acquisition, what Right can be pretended from it. 367 Acts of Parliament, till
the days of Henry V. for the most part were penned by the Kings Officers, 343,
418. v. Statutes. Adam, his Sin, what. 3 His Kingdom. 14 Had only an
Oeconomical, not a Political Power. 64
Adoption, wherein the folly of it. 43, 44, 45, 46 What may be called so
improperly. 44, 45 Jacob adopted Ephraim and Manasseh. 62
Advancements, ought ever to be for the sake of the Public, not of the Man. 56
Have oftentimes made People worse. 282, 283
Adversary, who a vicious Prince reckons such. 192 Adultery, became as common
in Sparta, as in any part of the World, and why. 228 Cannot be dispensed
withal, even by the Pope himself. 362
Affections of the People, the Prince's most important Treasure. 219 Agesilaus,
his great Achievements. 97, 98, 123 His denial of Alexander to be greater than
He. 251 Xenophon's great Character of him, and for what. 269, 270
Agreements, the Treachery of violating them aggravated by Perjury. 158 vid.
Contracts. Made by King John of France, when Prisoner at London, and Francis
under the same Circumstances at Madrid, reputed null. 212 A good Man performs
them tho he is a loser by the Bargain. 298 The necessity of standing to them
from Religion, and the Law of Nature. 310 Between Princes confirmed afterward
by Parliaments, etc. 402
Agrippa (Menenius) appeased one of the most violent Seditions at Rome, and
how. 153 Ahab's growing sick on Naboth's refusing him his Vineyard. 251 When
his House was to be cut off. 396
Alexander of Macedon, thought to be meant by Aristotle for the Man framed by
Nature for a King. 54, 56, 95 His Extravagant Frolicks. 95 His Fortune
overthrew his Virtue. 95, 98, 394 His Reign full of Conspiracys 163 After his
Death the Kingdom fell all to pieces. 119 It is thought he died by Poison, 119,
163
Alexander of Epirus, in Valor thought equal, in Power little inferior to him.
150 Alfred, Magna Charta grounded upon his Laws. 9 Acknowledged he found and
left this Kingdom perfectly Free. 372
Alienation, vid. Dominion. Allegiance, is such an Obedience as the Law
requires. 350, 377 Cannot relate to a whole Nation. 377
Alliances. 71, 106, 189 All things in their beginning are weak. 146 Change by
length of time. 151
Altar, the Horns of it no protection to wilful Murderers. 269 Ambassadors,
from whence Kings have their Right of sending them. 359, 402 Charles Gustavus,
his excellent saying to one. 364, 365 From the Privernates, their brave and
resolute Answer to Plautius the Consul, when they were suing for a Peace. 376,
377 From the Estates of Scotland, to Q. Eliz. 396
Ambition, honest and wise Men expose the Folly of it. 45, 61 Can never give a
Right to any over the Libertys of a whole Nation. 71 Tends to public Ruin. 121
Is the Overthrow of States and Empires. 130, 131 Man naturally prone to it, 131
What it prompts to. 165 Has produced more Mischiefs than any other Desires and
Passions. 168, 172, 173, 176
St. Ambrose, seems to have no Knowledge of the Gothic Polity. 260, 261
Ancestors, what we ought to do, if we will be just to them. 382, 419, 420 Never
thought their Posterity would so degenerate, as to sell themselves and their
Country. 415 By exerting their Vigor we shall maintain our Laws. 417
Angli, or Saxons; Tacitus his Description of their Coming hither, and that
they had the Root of Power and Liberty in themselves. 348 Antiochus, his vain
boast to destroy Greece and Italy. 98 How soon he lost all he possessed in
Greece, etc. 139
Apostles, what their Work was in relation to the Civil State. 160, 172, 174,
176 Appanages, in France to the King's Brothers, produced very bad Effects. 119
Or to their Sons, but they remain still subject to the Crown. 213, 307
Appeals, the Right of them to the People. 104, 105, 108, 115, 127, 158, 226,
284, 269 None from Parliamentary Decrees. 156 To whom they were made when there
was in Rome no superior Magistrate in being. 284 No pardoning a Man condemned
upon one. 403 An Instance of it. 404
Arcana Imperii, how to be meddled with. 6, 7, 8 Arians, as cruel as the
Pagans. 96 Aristocracy, what. 19, 291 For whom best. 53 How set up. 58 Was the
Jewish Government. 84, 87, 216 Who Patrons for it. 136 The Lacedaemonians sor
it. 216 Whether it seems established by Nature. 327
Aristotle, slighted by Filmer. 10 Commendation of him. 51, 90 His Notion of
Civil Societys. 52, 53, 56, 57, 61, 83, 208 Who he thought was framed by Nature
for a King. 54, 56, 95 Wherein he highly applauds Monarchy. 90, 91 Thinks the
first Monarchs were but little restrained, because they were chosen for their
Virtue. 210 His distinction between a King and a Tyrant. 252, 326 Who, he says,
are governed by God, rather than by Men. 288, 289 Proves that no Man is
entrusted with an absolute Power. 326
Armies, of the East and West, set up Emperors for themselves. 101 Out of what
sort of Men they are to be formed. 149. Vid. Mercenary and Soldiery.

Arminius, killed for aiming at a Crown, which blemished all his other Virtues.
276, 347 Arms, those just and pious that are necessary, and those necessary,
when there was no hope of safety by any other way. 396 Artaxerxes, and his Army
overthrown by the Valor of 10000 Grecians. 97 Artificer, what sort of one he is
to whom implicit Faith is due. 7 Assemblys, that took their Authority from the
Law of Nature, considered. 70 General of the People. 86, 87, 88 The use of
them. 96, 348 Of the Estates in France, brought now to nothing. 120 Settled the
Crown on Pepin. 171 What they ought to see performed. 214 Had the Power always
of the whole People in them. 263 In them none judge for themselves. 284, 285 The
greatest Trust that can be was ever reposed in them. 345 Inconsistent with the
absolute Sovereignty of Kings. 351 Refused giving Supplys to their Kings in
Spain and France, without Orders from their Principals. 412

Assyrians, vid. Eastern Nations. That Empire wholly abolished on the Death of
Belshazzar. 94 Their Valor irresistible under Nebuchadnezzar. 147 Little more
known of them than from Scripture. 164
Athaliah, more ready to cry out Treason than David. 154. Destroyed the King's
Race, and by whom herself was killed. 162. vid. Queen. Athens, its Government
not so much approved as that of Sparta. 123 Banished some worthy Men, and put
others to Death. 123 The Cruelty of the thirty Tyrants there. 124 As much
inclined to War as Rome. 142 The thirty Tyrants destroyed by Thrasybulus. 155
Their Ostracism proceeded solely from fear. 206 Was not without Laws when she
had Kings. 281
Athletick Habit, what. 106, 113 Attila, called the Scourge of God, and gloried
in the Name. 292 Avarice, the evil effects of it. 45 Augustus, Rome's longest
Peace under his Reign. 108, 163 What happened in it. 110 Was worse in the
beginning than latter end of his Reign. 111 Had thirty mercenary Legions to
execute his Commands. 329 Whether he truly deserved to be called the Head of
the Romans. 391 The Name of Augustus is a Title belonging to the German Emperor
at this day. 368
Austria, Spain after many Revolutions came to this House. 151 Princes of this
House pretend to know their Original. 302 The German Empire came to Rodolphus
of this Name about 300 Years ago. 303 What Claim this House has to the Crown of
France. 308, 361
Authors of great Revolutions, their Aims. 129 Axioms in Law, are evident to
common sense, and nothing to be taken for one that is not so. 337
B.
BAbel, vid. Nations. Babylonian Kings, what Right is pretended to be in them.
27, 28 Monarchy ruled by Force, the stronger turning out the weaker. 94 How its
Pride fell. 100 Little more known of its Monarchy than from Scripture. 164
Babylon and Susa trembled at the Motion of the Grecian Arms. 185 There were a
People there before Nimrod was King. 330
Balance of Power, where and how it is broken. 219, 381, 382 Nations have
suffered extremely through want of this Prudence in rightly balancing, etc. 394 In
what manner Power should be balanced for the Advantage and Service of the
State. 406
Banishment, not above 5 or 6 Men suffered unjustly in the Roman Government, in
the space of about 300 Years. 104, 106, 125 The Temporary of the Athenians
never accounted as a Punishment. 123 Camillus recalled from it, and afterward
honored. 124
Barbarorum Regna. 208 Baron, the extent of the Name. 352, 353, 356 Baronagium,
what. 69, 352, 353 Bartholomew de las Casas (a Spanish Bishop) his admirable
Saying concerning the Office of a King. 34 Bassompierre, his Saying about
Rochel. 197 Bastards, those Children can inherit nothing. 77 Declared with
relation to Crowns. 79, 310 Advanced before Legitimate Brethren. 116, 117, 305,
306, 307, 365 In some Places wholly excluded. 167
Beggars of a King to Samuel, such as would not be denied. 89 Parliaments no
Beggars. 296, 297
Belial, who his Sons. 90 Bellarmine 's Tenants. 4, 5, 11, 12, 13, 19
Benjamites, How they proceeded in preparing for their defense. 88 Best Men,
content with a due Liberty under the Protection of a just Law. 135, 312, 313
Have ever bin against absolute Monarchy. 136 Despised, hated and marked out for
Destruction. 196, 314 Have their Affections and Passions, and are subject to be
misled by them. 208, 324 Were so esteemed who destroyed Tyranny. 253 Whom they
had need to fear. 267 Can never wholly divest themselves of Passions and
Affections. 333
Birthright, gives a Right to Sovereign Dominion. 75 Some have bin accused of
supposititious Births. 310
Bishops, the King's Power in making them. 190 What Words of Servitude are said
to be introduced by them among us. 276
Blake, the Terror his Fleet struck every where. 199 Blood; by God's Law, that
Man's is to be shed, who sheds another. 264 The nearest in Blood set aside,
when 'twas thought more convenient to advance others. 304, 305
Boccalini, the Princes of Europe angry with him for his Definition of a
Tyrant, vid. 1 Cent. 76 Advertisement. 209
Bought and Sold, how Places come to be so. 182, 184 Senates and People cannot
so easily be. 183, 184
Bourbon, Henry of that Name, not admitted to the Crown till he abjured his
Religion, and promised to rule by Law. 213 Bracton, his Words, Omnes sub eo,
and ipse sub nullo, etc. how to be understood. 263, 264 What he calls Esse sub
Lege. 283, 287 What, he says, the King is obliged to do by his Oath. 340 His
Saying about evil, or unskilful Judges. 341
Brethren, All so by Nature. 22 Nature abhors a difference in specie between
them. 63 Where a fraternal Equality continued. 66 Are Equals. 74 What advanced
some above the rest. 85 The Governed so called, by their Magistrates. 390
Bribery, natural to Courts. 128, 129, 179, 180 Seeks the largest Bidder. 147
Cannot corrupt, wheir Virtue is preferred. 181 The way to prevent it. 183, 184 A
Noble Person turned out of a considerable Office, as a Scandal to the Court,
for being an Enemy to this Vice. 183 Parliaments not so easily to be prevailed
upon. 415
Britain, shamefully lost. 109 Kings imposed upon the Britans by the Romans,
and to what end. 231, 341 Severe Assertors of their Libertys. 331, 346 Tho they
chose Commanders in their Wars, yet they kept the Government in themselves. 347
Ever had their great Councils to determine their most important Affairs. 348
Brutus, found it dangerous to be thought wise, and why. 158, 168 Established
Liberty and the Consulate together. 318
Buchanan, joined to Doleman. 4 His Character of K. James the Third. 211
Concerning the Violation of the Laws of Scotland. 286
Burgundy, continued in Hugh C^pet's eldest Son Robert, and his Descendents for
ten Generations. 307
C.
CAesar, of giving him his due. 8, 257 Julius subverted all Order by invading
the supreme Magistracy by force. 101, 119, 258, 389 Worse than Tarquin. 121 By
what means he set up his Tyranny. 128, 250, 251
Caesar, Julius, scarce any Prince had so many good Qualitys, till they were
extinguished by Ambition. 130 Designed to make himself a Tyrant. 132 Thought
all things lawful, when the Consulate was denied him. 165 When the Power of the
Romans was expressed by this Name. 257 Had a Diadem offered him by Mark Anthony.
275 How observant he was of his Word, when taken by Pirates. 297 The State of
the Roman Empire after his Usurpation. 320 Augustus his Power not given, but
usurped. 328, 329 Julius, what account he gives of our Affairs here. 331, 346
When, if ever, Fear entered into his Heart. 247
Caesar's, never called Kings till the 6th Age of Christianity. 368 Julius, in
despair would have killed himself. 389
Cain, had no Dominion over his Brethren after Adam's Death. 59, 60 From whence
his fear (that every Man would slay him) proceeded. 230
Caligula, His Wish that the People had but one Neck. 10, 50, 159, 189, 391 A
Monster of Mankind. 27, 285 His making Love to the Moon, 43 His Expedition,
when he said, he had subdued the Sea. 109 Valerius Asiaticus appeased the
Guards, by saying, he wished he had bin the Man had killed him. 160, 285
Murdered by his own Guards. 163 Affected the Title of being called God, which
Claudius Caesar calls Turpem Caii Insaniam. 206 vid. 275
Whose Minister he might be said to be. 272 Said of him, that no Man ever knew
a better Servant, nor a worse Master. 280 Wherein he placed his Sovereign
Majesty. 321
Calvin, his Opinion of the Government instituted by God. 84, 87 Camden, his
Credit forfeited by a great number of Untruths. 352 Campus Martius, was the
Land that belonged to the Kings of Rome (not above ten Acres) afterward
consecrated to Mars. 251 Cardinals, the Respect paid them, who have the Power
of choosing Popes. 64 Carthage, how she grew to that Excess of Power that only
Rome was able to overthrow, 113, 143 One of the most potent Citys in the World,
143
Castile, the Lords thereof had no other Title for many Ages than that of
Count, which was afterward changed to that of King, without any addition to
the Power. 368 Concerning the States thereof erring. 387
Catiline, his Temper. 114 One of the leudest Men in the World. 128
Cesset Processus, said to be annexed to the Person of the King. 403 Ceylon, an
Island in the East Indies, where the King knows no Law but his own Will. 407
Change, of Government, no proof of Irregularity or Prejudice to it, by those
that have Right. 103, 121 Nothing found more orderly. 116 A mortal one in Root
and Principle. 119 In Government unavoidable. 120 What Changes deserve Praise.
121 Where the Wisdom of it is shown. 121 Where they are requisite sometimes.
334 What are for the worse. 381
Charter of Liberty, not from Men, but from God. 370 Parliaments interposed
their Authority in these matters. 385
Chatham, the City of London's Dread at the Dutch Fleet's burning our Ships
there. 144 Cheat of Mario Chigi, Brother of Alexander VII. upon the Sale of
Corn. 187 Child or Children, a wise one, Eccl. 4. 13. 25, 43, 82, 201, 261
Their Duty is perpetual. 47, 59, 227, 228, 232 Of God and of the Devil. 48, 50
If Children then Heirs. 62 Woe to thee, O Land, when thy King is a Child! 63, 81
On what account Children are admitted to rule. 81 What understood by the word
Child, 82 They do not always prove like their Parents. 184, 286, 287
Children, the Danger of having them to be Kings. 201 The Law gives them relief
against the Severitys of their Parents. 230, 231 Were punished with Death, and
for what. 231
Christianity, has bin split into variety of Opinions, ever since it was
preached. 144 The first Professors were of the meanest of the People. 271 St.
Paul's work was to preserve the Professors of it from Errors concerning the
State. 272 Sufficiently proved to be Ancient, if proved to be good and true. 332
Citys, consist of Eqals. 52, 53, 56 What makes them free. 370
Cives, v. Incolae. Civil War, v. War. Cleanthes, his Philosophical reply to
Aristippus, about Flattery. 181 Clergy, the Veneration our Ancestors had for
them. 350, 351 Collectors, their Extortions. 186 Commanders, after the
Captivity, who thought most fit. 24 Of Armies, who best to be made so. 53 The
best among the Greeks and Romans in their times, would not know how to manage
an Army now. 381 Where they have bin put to Death for Misbehaviour, etc. 385
Commands of a Master, how far the Servant is bound to obey them, etc. 315, 316
Commission, from God, what. 49 They who hereby grant Authority, do always
retain more than they give. 384, 413
Comitia Centuriata, what, 281 Commons, whether they had a part in the
Government. 349, 350 Always had a place in the Councils that managed it. 351
Many of them in Antiquity and Eminency, little inferior to the chief of the
Titular Nobility. 351, 354 Tho Nation's Strength and Virtue in them. 354 How
all things have bin brought into the King's and their Hands. 382 Yet never can
be united to the Court. 382 Have refused to give their Opinions in many Cases,
till they had consulted with those that sent them. 386
Commonwealths, for what end instituted. 1 All the Regular Kingdoms in the
World are so, 19, 52 Of Italy, not without Valor and Virtue. 111 How they seek
Peace and War. 141 Whether better to constitute one for War or Trade. 143
Another sort composed of many Citys associated together, and living aequo Jure.
144 Seldom advance Women, Children, or such like, to the Supreme Power. 176 In
them all men fight for themselves. 179 When the Laws are abolished, the Name
also ceases. 179 Less Slaughter in these, than in Absolute Kingdoms. 185 Of
Greece and Italy, why called Nurserys of Virtue. 187, 188 Justice very well
administered in them. 266 How they may be saved from Ruin. 383
Competitors, Sovereigns do impatiently bear them. 17 Where their own Swords
have decided their Disputes. 154, 168 Contests between them relating to the
Crown, are often very bloody. 169, 171, 173, 174, 175, 179
Compulsion; he that will suffer himself to be compelled, knows not how to die.
274 Conquest, what is so called. 20, 31 William I. had the name of Conqueror
odiously given to him. 72 The extent thereof not the only thing to be
considered. 108, 109 Some Commonwealths hereby designed to enlarge their
Territorys. 142 Some Conquerors never deserved the Name of Usurpers. 265 The
King cannot dispose of a conquered Country, because it is annexed to the Office.
359 It Is the People that Conquer, not any one Man by his own Strength. 367
Conscience, how it ought to be regulated. 273 Consent General, to resign part
of their Liberty for the Good of all, is the Voice of Nature. 10, 20, 134 First
conferred Power. 17, 19, 31, 66, 80 Government arises from it. 32, 33, 66, 72,
222, 223 The Right of Magistrates essentially depends upon it. 72, 73, 208,
303, 325, 330 None to Tyrannys. 73 No complete lawful Power without it. 74, 80,
137, 155 Of the three Estates in many places required, to pass a Law. 217
Whatsoever proceeds not from it, must be de facto only. 367
Constantine the Great, with what Blood he was polluted. 169, 218 His Power
kept up Hereditary, but with extreme Confusion and Disorder. 223
Constitutions of every Government to whom referred. 32 Human subject to
Corruption, and therefore to be reduced to their first Principles. 103 Where
new ones are necessarily required. 120 That the best, which is attended with
the least Inconveniences. 125 Who endeavors the Subversion of them. 135, 382 Of
Commonwealths various. 141, 365 Of the Northern Nations that invaded the Roman
Empire. 143 The Temper of that of the United Provinces. 145 Good ones remain,
tho the Authors of them perish. 148 The Salutary ones made by Men, God approves
and ratifies. 268 Of a State aims at Perpetuity. 280 Are made for and by the
People. 318 What the Imperfections of all Human Constitutions. 332 Our Ancient,
has bin wholly inverted. 354 What are most to be commended. 379, 394 Of no
value, if there be not a Power to support them. 379, 380
Consuls, made of Plebeians, how seldom chosen, and with what Prudence. 103
Represented Kings, and were vested with equal Power. 115, 117, 226, 277, 372
Were created after the Expulsion of Tarquin. 121, 218
Consuls* Strangers raised to that Honor. 142 Tho Supreme in Power, yet subject
to the People. 156, 225, 250 Marius continued 5 Years in the Office. 218 Only
for a Year. 226 Title of dread Sovereign might justly have bin given to them.
372 If they grew insolent, how they might be reduced. 380
Contracts, how framed between Nations and their Kings. 233. v. 243, 244, 377
Vid. Judges, Nations, Original. Entered into by Princes before their
Investiture. 271 The breaking them overthrows all Societys. 297 In writing,
said to be invented only to bind Villains, and why. 297 All are mutual, and
whoever fails of his part discharges the other. 300
Contrariorum Contraria est Ratio. 272 Controversys, with other Nations, the
Decision of them left to Judges chosen by mutual Agreement. 398 Coriolanus duly
condemned by the Romans. 124 Coronation Oath. 74, 75, 80, 81 Norman Kings
obliged to take it. 263 How far our Kings are obliged to observe it. 294, 295,
297, 298, 299, 300, 339, 373
Corporations, or Bodies Politic, what places were thought fit by the King and
Council to be made so. 385 Corruption, natural to Courts, instances given. 128,
etc. 132, 180 Of Ministers in Foreign Courts. 138 The Effect of that which
proceeds from the Government in particular Instances. 150, 399 Of a People
tends to Tyranny. 161 Makes Princes Titles good, and how* 164 Where it
certainly most abounds 179, 180, 183 Must always be opposed by free
Governments, and why. 180, 181 The basest, but most lucrative trafsick. 182 In
the Head, must necessarily diffuse it self into most of the Members of the
Commonwealth. 183 19^ A just Prince that will hear his Peoples complaints
himself, prevents it 184.
Corruption, rooted in the very Principle of absolute Monarchy, which cannot
subsist without it. 184 Mankind naturally propense to it. 250 Of Judgment
proceeds from private Passions. 285 Of Members of Parliament. 415
Counselors, made choice of according to the Temper of the Prince. 7, 193,
291, 292 Signify little to an absolute Monarch. 139, 151 In the multitude of
them generally is safety. 386 Whether those of the King are exposed to
Punishments, and for what. 404, 418
Council of seventy chosen Men. 86 God's Counsels are impenetrable. 100 A wise
and good one cannot always supply the Defects, or correct the Vices of a young
or ill-dispos'd Prince. 291 Where it is of no use unless Princes are obliged to
follow it. 292 Of Toledo, what it made the Prince to swear before he was placed
in the Royal Seat. 308 Of what Persons it anciently consisted. 351, 352, 385
General, how expressed anciently by Authors. 356 When the boldest are most safe.
395 The King is obliged to act, cum Magnatum and Sapientum Consilio. 404 He can
speak only by their Advice, and every Man of them is with his Head to answer
for the Advice he gives. 418
Council Table, the Proceedings and Jurisdiction of it regulated by 16 Car. 1.
cap. X. 344 Courtiers, what things are inseparable from their Lives. 182 Their
Phrase is, To make as much Profit of their Places as they can. 183 A wise
Prince's saying to some about him of such. 183, 184 Wherein their Art consists.
190, 406 The modern Ones by their Names and Titles, what they are apt to put us
in mind of. 351 When they speak most Truth. 373 Of Philip III. and IV. of
Spain, their Sottishness. 383, 384
Cowards, the cruellest of Men. 206 Crown, how the English ^^came hereditary.
77, 79 Crown, changed from one Family to another by the Estates of the Realm.
117, 227, 306, 307, 344, 345 Comprehends all that can be grateful to the most
violent and vicious. 165 Hereditary or Elective, it has its Defects. 184 The
Spartan transported into nine several Familys. 210 Of France, is from the
People. 213, 306, 307 Where none would accept it, but such as did not deserve
it. 219 Arminius slain for aiming at One. 276 Of England, upon what Conditions
accepted. 298, 299 Five different manners of disposing Crowns esteemed
hereditary. 301 Of Spain not fixed in a Line, but disposed of as the Nobility
and People thought fit. 305 Many and bloody Contests for One. 325, 374, 375 The
Demeasns of it cannot be alienated. 359 The Parliament's Power of giving and
taking it away. 375 Some have feared the Luster of it. 394 He that wears it
cannot determine the Affairs which the Law refers to the King. 401, 403
Curio, by Corruption made an Instrument of Mischief, who had bin an eminent
Supporter of the Laws. 130 Custom, the Authority of it, as well as of Law,
consists only in its Rectitude. 332 The various ones used in Elections. 384,
385 Had its beginning and continuance from the universal Consent of the Nation.
405 The reason why we pay Customs. 416

D.
DAvid, the most Reverend King, had his Posterity deprived, and his Kingdom at
last came to the Asmoncan Race. 23, 24 Chose and anointed King by the Tribe of
Judah. 80, 237 Slew the Sons of Rimmon, and why. 80 Not without his Infirmitys
and Punishments. 95
David, who were his Followers, notwithstanding the Justice of his Cause. 162,
237 His Affection toward his People. 231 His resisting of Saul, without
assuming the Power of a King. 235, 236 How his Heart smote him when he had cut
off Readiness Skirt. 236 His War with Saul, how grounded. 237 There were many
Rebellions against him. 238 How he feared Men more than God. 247 Why he
commanded Solomon not to suffer Joab to go to the Grave in Peace. 269 Wise as
an Angel of God. 386
Death, of no eminent Roman, except one, for a long time. 104 Citizens to be
condemned in Public by the Roman Law. 127 Of Barnewelt, and de Wit. 145 Often
the reward of such Services as cannot be sufficiently valued. 168 Of the nearest
Relations, Regnandi causa. 169 The Bitterness of it, how assuag'd. 219 Very few
suffered in Sparta for above 800 Years. 269
Decemviri, only for a Year. 118 For two Years. 284 To regulate the Law. 121,
281 Patricians favored them. 153 Proceeded against as private Men, when they
continued beyond their time. 156 Used with great gentleness. 176 The Romans
easily beaten under them. 198 The Power given to them, sine Provocatione, was
only in private Cases. 284 Why the People destroyed both their Power and them.
284
Decision of the most difficult matters, anciently left to the Priests in all
Countries. 398 In England, where made by Judges and Jurys, and where by
Parliaments. 404, 405
Defense, all terminates in Force. 147, 148 Whether better for every Man to
stand in his own defense, than to enter into Societys. 159 Of one's self,
natural. 242, 256, 25^
Delatores, See Roman Empire. 101 Delegated Persons, their Powers, to whom
referred. 68, 69, 70 In General Assemblys. 71 How binding the Acts of such are
to the whole Nation. 72 Where the King acts by this Power. 404 Can have no
Power but what is conferred on them by their Principals. 409 How those in the
United Provinces, and in Switzerland are used. 410 Deputys of Castile, refused
in the Cortez to give Charles V. the Supplys he desired, and why. 412
Deliverers of their Countries from Oppressions, how they have bin esteemed in
all Ages. 8 What Gifts God bestowed on them. 25, 85, 92, 100 Often rewarded
with Inheritances. 68 Their Actions carry their own Justification. 160
Democracy, God said to be the Author of it. 11, 88 Perfect, what. 19 For whom
best. 53, 87, 115 How instituted. 58 A Democratical Embassy. 86, 87 Of the
Hebrew Government. 87 Never good but in small Towns. 115, 122 Pure, if it be in
the World, the Author has nothing to say to it. 132 Where it would prove the
most just, rational and natural. 134 To what Mistakes most liable. 153 With
whom in a strict sense it can only suit. 216
Denmark, the last King thereof overthrew in one day all the Laws of his
Country. 130 The Crown Elective till 1660, and then made Hereditary. 303, 365
In some parts thereof the whole Volumes of their Laws may be read in few Hours.
337 The Authority of their Kings said to have bin for above 3000 Years, 346
Nobleman and Gentleman the same there. 353
Deposition of Princes, said to be the Doctrine of Rome and Geneva. 4
Deposition for Misgovernment, and others placed in their rooms. 69, 79, 116,
117, 201, 212, 238, 305, 331, 384 Kings, when deposed, lose the Right of
sending Ambassadors. 402 The Practice of France and other Countries. 79, 120,
172, 174, 202, 305, 306, 307, 345 For Religion differing from the Body of the
Nation. 79, 82, 117 If they become Enemies to their People. 159 For their ill
Lives. 270, 271 Of Wamba, a Gothic King, who was made a Monk after he had
reigned many Years well. 305
Desertion, the Cause of it. 138 Common to all absolute Monarchys. 138 Of
Soldiers. 197, 198, 199
Detur Digniori. 24, 25, 34, 53 Dictator, from whence his Power arose. 104, 250
Caesar made himself perpetual. 107 Made occasionally at the beginning. 118,
119, 121 A mortal Change in Root and Principle. 119 Why Mamercus and others had
this Honor. 124, 195 Tho supreme, yet subject to the People, if they transgrest
the Law. 156, 225, 226, 372 His Power but for six Months at most. 226, 277, 284
Camillus in his fourth Dictatorship threatened with a Fine. 226 The Commission
that was given them, what. 365 How high the Romans carried the Power and
Veneration due to them. 372 None ever usurped a Power over Liberty till the
time of Sylla. 380
Diets, vid. Estates of the Realm, and Parliaments. General Assemblys.
Difference between a lawful King and Tyrant. 61, 63, 205, 253, 290 Between
Brethren, only in proportion. 62 Between Lord and Servant in specie, not in
degree. 62 Between Men fighting for their own Interest, and such as serve for
Pay. 197 Between Senates and absolute Princes. 222
Difference between Magistrates to whom Obedience is due, and to whom not. 274,
275 Between good and bad Princes, is from the Observation or Violation of the
Laws of their Country. 279
Dioclesian 's Saying, Bonus, cautus, optimus Imperator venditur. 180 What made
him renounce the Empire. 180
Dionysius, his Tyranny destroyed by the Syracusians. 10 His Character. 27, 191
Diogenes his saying of him. 191
Discipline, the Excellency of the Roman. 127, 128, 140 The like in all Nations
that have kept their Liberty. 140 The Effects of good and bad. 196, 197, 198
The Excellency of the Spartan. 210, 269
Dispensing Power, our Kings have it not beyond what the Law gives them. 326
Dissimulation, what. 202 Dissolute Persons fittest Subjects for absolute
Monarchs. 83, 129, 161 Abhor the Dominion of the Law. 133, 192
Doctrine; some by that which is false, poison the Springs of Religion and
Virtue. 314 Dominion, equally divided among all, is universal Liberty. 21 Of
the whole World cannot belong to one Man. 37, 39 Nor over a Nation, ever
inseparably united to one Man and his Family. 52, 62, 63, 65, 74 Deeds by which
the Right of it is conferred. 80 Usurped by the ruin of the best part of
Mankind. 128 Of France not to be alienated. 213 Every Child of a Parent cannot
inherit it. 220 How, and by whom it was conferred. 221, 369 Implies Protection.
371
Dominus, its Signification. 63 The Romans often called Lords of the World. 355
Domitian, his Character. 189 Tacitus calls him, an Enemy to Virtue. 267
Duels in France, who only could refuse Challenges from any Gentleman. 353
Dukes of Venice, Moscovy, etc. 157, 158 Duke, Earl and Vicount, the Names of
Offices. 360 Where these Names are Subjects, and where little less than
Sovereigns. 369
Duty, arising from a benefit received, must be proportionable to it. 232 Of a
Magistrate, what. 267 Of no Man to deny any one that which is his due, much
less to oppose the Minister of God in the exercise of his Office. 272 What to
be expected from, and rendered to them. 277

E.
EAstern Nations what remarkable for. 92 Force is the prevailing Law with them.
94 Were and are still under the Government of those, whom all free People call
Tyrants. 253, 318 Solomon's prudent Advice to private Persons living under the
Government of these Countries. 261
Edward II. imprisoned and deposed by his Parliament. 413 IV. his Wants
supplied by Fraud and Rapine. 418
Election, most Princes chosen by the People. 68, 69, 74, 81 Proved from
Scripture-Instances. 69, 71, 74, 80, 81, 87, 235, 237 From Examples of the
Saxons. 71, 72, 77, 270, 271, 352 Makes a Right. 73, 80, 81 The various ways of
electing Princes. 116 Frequent choosing of Magistrates makes Nurserys of great
and able men. 140, 148, 194 The Prudence of Election surpasses the Accidents of
Birth. 149 Of Kings in France. 212, 213, 306, 307 Of our Kings, how. 298, 299
Of Charles Gustavus to the Crown of Sweden. 364 The various Customs used in
choosing Parliament Men. 384, 385
Elective Kingdoms. 304 Elizabeth, Queen, her Government, not without some
mixture of Blood. 175 Elizabeth, what Power made her capable of the Succession.
310, 362 Her Character and Failings. 323, 324 The Earl of Morton sent
Ambassador to her by the Estates of Scotland, to justify their Proceedings
against Q. Mary. 396 None so much imitated Henry V. as she. 420
Eminent, the most, ought only to be advanced to Places of public Trust and
Dignity. 33, 57, 58 Most obnoxious to be taken off. 105 126, 191 Are most
feared. 168, 171 When these are most impatient. 170, 171 The Pillars of every
State. 171
Emperors, Roman, three or four, and at one time thirty, who called themselves
by this name. 119 Endeavored to make their Power hereditary. 223 The height of
their Regal Majesty. 240, 241 St. Austin's, and Ulpian's Saying, that they were
subject to no Law, and why. 261, 322 Some foully polluted themselves with
innocent Blood. 273 The Title never solemnly assumed by, nor conferred on them.
275, 276 Theodosius confessed, it was the Glory of a good one to own himself
bound by Laws. 322 The present one in Germany, an account of him. 387
Empire, grounded on the Pope's Donation. 34 Gained by Violence is mere
Tyranny. 75, 77 Acquired by Virtue, cannot long be supported by Money. 102 The
Calamitys which the Roman suffered. 121 Settled in Germany. 172 What made
Dioclesian to renounce the Empire. 180 Under what sort of Governors it was
ruined. 194, 195, 223 Of the World divided between God and Caesar. 316 Not
obliged by any Stipulation of the Emperor without their Consent. 402
Enacting Laws, continued in the People of Rome. 104, 108 Enemy of a Nation,
who. 33, 155, 188, 191 Every Man is a Soldier against him. 155 Who the most
dangerous to supreme Magistrates. 160, 311 Who is so to all that is good. 181
Who is so to Virtue and Religion, is an Enemy to Mankind. 188, 190 Those that
know they have such abroad, endeavor to get Friends at home. 255 Sycophants
the worst Enemies. 293, 420 How a King declares he has none when he comes to the
Crown. 325 A Prince that seeks assistance from foreign Powers, is so. 391
England, how the Crown became hereditary. 77 The State of it since the Year
1660. 114 How, and when the Glory of our Arms was turned into shame. 148 How
the Succession of her Kings has bin. 167, 345 Her Wars with France merely upon
Contests for the Crown. 173 Her Miserys by our Civil Contests. 174, 175 When
her Reputation and Power was at a great height. 199 Whether our Kings were ever
Proprietors of all the Lands. 247 The naked condition of our Ancestors upon
Caesar's Invasion. 256 Has no Dictatorian Power over her. 258 Ever a free
Nation, and chose her own Kings. 299, 356 Made her own Laws. 346, 347, 356 We
know little of the first Inhabitants, but what is involved in Fables and
Obscurity. 331 The great number of our Laws make them inconvenient. 337 Wherein
she ought to be compared with Rome. 341 Brave in William I's time, when she saw
her Laws and Libertys were in danger. 342 What has cost her much Blood, and has
bin the Cause of our late difficultys. 345 Our Security, the best Anchor we
have, ought to be preserved with all care. 416 The general impairing of her may
be dated from the Death of Henry the fifth. 418
Epaminondas, Forfeiture of his Life (tho saved) for serving his Country longer
than the time limited. 155, 156 Ephori, established to restrain the Power of
Kings. 76, 210, 345 When they were created. 393
Equality, in all by Nature. 3, 5, 12, 22, 31, 52, 327, 397 Just among Equals.
53 Civil Society composed of Equals. 59 Leagues don't imply absolute Equality
between Partys. 80 Where it is hard to preserve a Civil Equality. 106 Popular,
to what it is an Enemy. 161 Of Right, what is called Liberty. 221 Kings under
this Law with the rest of the People. 239 Equals cannot have a Right over each
other. 370, 398 No Nation can have an Equal within it self. 398
Error, all subject to it. 106, 124, 153, 192 Discovered by the Discourse of a
wise and good man. 176 By it popular Governments may sometimes hurt private
Persons. 188 A polite People may relinquish those of their Ancestors, which
they have bin guilty of in the times of their Ignorance. 332 Would be
perpetual, if no change were admitted. 334 Where they are in Government, tho it
may be easy for a while, yet it cannot be lasting. 414
Escheat of the Crown for want of an Heir. 35, 36 Estates of the Realm, divided
the Kingdom of France. 213, 306, 307 Their Power in voting. 217 Have disposed
of Crowns as they pleased. 306, 307, 345, 364, 365. Vid. Parliaments, Assemblys
general.

Evil, what is so of it self, by continnance is made worse, and on the first
Opportunity is justly to be abolished. 346 Eutropius, when a Slave picked
Pockets, etc. but when a Minister he sold Citys, etc. 182 Excommunication
denounced on the Violators of Magna Charta. 296
F.
FAbius Maximus one of the greatest and best of men that ever Rome produced.
104 Fabius, Quintus, in danger of his Life for fighting without Order, tho he
gained a signal Victory. 372 Factions about Regal Power and Succession, how to
be prevented. 168 The Convulsions they make. 170, 173, 382 Of the Guelphs and
Ghibelins. 186, 187 Virtue and Vice were made the Badges of them. 192, 193
Faith, implicit, to whom it belongs. 6, 7, 314 Familys, none antienter than
other, and why. 42 What required to make a complete one. 59 When our Ancestors
sent to seek a King in one of the meanest of them in Wales. 169 None that does
not often produce weak, ignorant, or cruel Children. 278, 279
Famous men for Wisdom, Virtue and good Government. 128, 134, 135, 148, 149
Have Eyes, and will always see the way they go. 314
Fathers, the Power of Fatherhood belongs only to a Father. 18, 19, 42, 47
Cruel Princes no Fathers of their Country. 32, 33, 253, 254, 292, 293 Their
Character indelible. 42, 47, 59 Adoption of them absurd. 43, 44, 45, 46, 47 Who
deserve the Obedience due to natural Parents. 44 By Usurpation. 49, 68 The
Fifth Commandment how explained. 50 Who has the Right of Fathers. 58, 59 When
it ceases. 59, 64 Embrace all their Children alike. 62 There is a sort of
Tyrant that has no Father. 292
Favorites, not always the best of Men. 44, 45 Their influence over Princes.
96, 97 Whom the Monarch commonly makes such. 180 How their exorbitant Desires
are gratified. 223
Faustina, two of them, who by their Ascendency tarnish'd the Glory of
Antoninus Pius and Marcus Aurelius. 180 Fear, what it transports a wicked Man
to do. 206 Renders Communitys gentle and cautious. 207 Puts People on desperate
Courses. 218 What is the Measure of it to that Magistrate who is the Minister
of God. 270
Fear, when, if ever, said to enter Caesar's Heart. 347 Felicity, Man's, where
placed. 3, 4 Females, vid. Women. Excluded from all Offices in the
Commonwealth. 392
Figurative Expressions, all have their Strength only from Similitude. 389
Filmer, his Right of all Kings. 1, etc. 84, 85, 86 Takes the World to be the
Patrimony of one man. 1, 2, 205 Uses not one Argument but what is false, nor
cites one Author but whom he has perverted or abused. 2, 289 And his Partisans,
why reserved to this Age. 5, 343 His Business is to overthrow Liberty and
Truth. 6, 419 His bitter Malice against England. 9 Makes God the Author of
Democracy. 11 His Lord Paramount over Children's Children to all Generations.
13, 14, 15 His Opinion, to whom all Kings are reputed next Heirs. 26 Where his
Kingly Power escheats on independent Heads of Familys. 35, 42 His Adoption of
Fathers of Provinces, for what. 45 His Notion, That we must regard the Power,
not the means by which it is gained. 46, 67, 68, 155, 235, 322 His distinction
between eligere and instituere. 73, 74 His vile abusing of the Reverend Hooker.
75, 80 His Notion of begging a King. 80 Absolute Monarchy to be the Nursery of
Virtue. 92 Attributing Order and Stability to it. 92, 122 Imputing much
Bloodshed to Rome's popular Government. 105 His Backdoor, Sedition and Faction.
116, 118 His Opinion, That the worst men in Rome thrived best. 122, 125 That
the Nature of all People is to desire Liberty without restraint. 133 His Cipher
of the Form of mixed Governments. 136, 137 That there is a Necessity upon every
People to choose the worst men, for being most like themselves. 148 His
Description of the Tumults of Rome. 179 Affirms that more men are slain in
popular than absolute Governments. 185
Filmer, the extent of his Crueltys of a Tyrant. 188 His attributing Ignorance
and Negligence to popular Governments. 193 His Notion, That the Virtues and
Wisdom of a Prince supply all Distempers of a State. 200 That there is no such
Tyranny as that of a Multitude. 202 That Kings must be absolute. 207, 208 His
Notion of a King's ceasing to be so. 207, 215 His Whimsy about Democracys. 216
That all the Peoples Libertys flow from the gracious Concessions of Princes.
220, 246 That there is no coming at a King, if he break his Contract with his
People. 224 That a Father of a Family governs it by no other Law than his own
Will. 228 That patient Obedience is due both to Kings and Tyrants. 228 That
there were Kings, before any Laws were made. 229 That Abraham, Isaac, Jacob,
and Moses were Kings. 241 That Samuel by telling what a King would do,
instructed the People what they were to suffer. 242, 244 That Inconveniences
and Mischiefs are some of the Essentials of Kingly Government. 245 That all
Laws are the Mandates of Kings. 246 His ridiculous Saying, Those that will have
a King. 249 That the Jews did not ask a Tyrant of Samuel. 252 That the Peoples
Cries are not always an Argument of their living under a Tyrant. 254 That our
Savior limits and distinguishes Royal Power. 257 That the Tribute Caesar
imposed was all their Coin. 258 Cites Bracton, as a Patron of the absolute
Power of Kings. 264 That St. Paul's higher Powers meant only a Monarch that
carrys the Sword, etc. 266 That Kings are not bound by the positive Laws of any
Nation. 273, 289 That the Original of Laws was to keep the Multitude in Order.
278 That Laws were invented for every particular Subject to find his Prince's
Pleasure. 282 That Kings are above the Laws. 284
Filmer, his Opinion when Princes degenerate into Tyrants. 286 That Tyrants and
Conquerors are Kings and Fathers. 289 That the King swears to observe no Laws,
but such as in his Judgment are upright, etc. 294 That Kings are not obliged by
voluntary Oaths, etc. 297 His Principles animadverted on. 311, 312 That
Obedience is due to a Command, tho contrary to Law. 314 That the King's
Prerogative to be above the Law, is only for the good of them that are under
it. 317 His equivocal King. 320 His Opinion, That the Law is no better than a
Tyrant. 324 That a perfect Kingdom wherein the King rules by his own Will. 326
That the first Power was the Kingly in this Nation. 329 That all Judges receive
their Authority from the King. 337 That the Power of Kings cannot be restrained
by Act of Parliament. 343 That the King is the Author, Corrector and Moderator
of both Statute and Common Law. 346 His trivial Conceits about Parliaments, the
time when they began, etc. 346, 349, 350 His Notion about Usurpers and lawful
Kings. 361 That the Libertys claimed in Parliament, are Libertys of Grace from
the King, and not of Nature to the People. 363 That the Peoples Language is
submissive to the King, but his is haughty to them. 372 That Kings may call and
dissolve Parliaments at pleasure. 383 Admires the profound Wisdom of all Kings.
386 A bitter Enemy to all Mankind. 407, 408 His Book here lately reprinted, as
an Introduction to a Popish Successor. 408 His meaning of Le Roy le veut. 416,
417, 418
Flatterers, what the vilest of them dare not deny. 7 What called by Tacitus.
112 The Hebrew Kings not without them. 162 Their pernicious Advices to what end
given. 165
Flatterers, weak Princes most subject to them. 170, 180, 182, 196 Cleanthes 's
saying to Aristippus. 181 By what ^andle they lead their Princes. 190 Have made
Valor ridiculous. 198 By whom thought the best Friends, and most worthy of
great Trusts. 313, 314 The Author's wish, that Princes would abbor these
Wretches. 341 Almost ever encompass crowned Heads. 406
Fleets, when ours were very famous. 199 Florence, the Seditions there, and in
Tuscany. 186 More depopulated now than any part of that Province, tho formerly
in a few hours it could bring together 135000 well-arm'd men. 187, 318
Folly; Mankind does not universally commit, and perpetually persist in any. 36
Some are Fools at 40 years of Age. 201 Lord Chancellor Egerton said he did not
sit to relieve Fools. 298
Force, where it is the only Law that prevails. 94 What the Romans gained by the
Valor of their Forces. 109 All Defense terminates therein. 147, 215 Those that
use it, must perfect their Work or perish. 153 Or Fraud, in opposition to the
Laws of ones Country, is absolutely Monarchical. 179 When the Spartan Kings
were overthrown by it. 210 Is generally mortal to those that provoke it. 215 To
be used, when there is no help in the Law. 219, 279, 395 Can never create a
Right. 222, 233, 367 The French under a Force they are not able to resist. 246,
247 What is gained by it may be recovered the same way. 303, 367 When all
Disputes about Right naturally end in force. 379
Forfeiture of Liberty, how it can be. 370 Fortune, of all things the most
variable. 100 How Right is made a Slave to it. 167, 168 Of a Prince, supplys
all natural Defects. 200
France, the Salick Law there. 40, 78, 301, 302 France, Her ancient Kings Right
how conferred on them, and what was her ancient Government. 77, 366 Her Revenge
on England for all the Overthrows she received from our Ancestors. 114
Frequently divided into several Partys. 119 Her Races of Kings four times
wholly changed. 120, 169, 170, 201, 212 The miserable condition of her People.
137, 171, 172, 198, 199, 378, 417 Her greatest Advantages have bin by the
mistaken Counsels of England. 138 Her bloody Contests and Slaughters for the
Crown. 169, 170, 171, 172, 173 Had ten base and slothful Kings, called, Les
Roys faineans. 170, 201 The Regal Power limited. 172, 212 Had four Kings
deposed within 150 Years. 172
Civil Wars frequent there, tho not so cruel as formerly. 173 Compared with
Venice. 196 Her Soldiers running from their Colors. 198, 199 Her general
Assemblys continued the exercise of the Sovereign Power, long after Lewis XI's
Death. 211, 212 Had never any Kings but of her own choosing. 212 Henry V. of
England most terrible to her. 212 Their Laws made by themselves, and not
imposed on them. 212 The People have understood their Rights. 213 The reason of
the Peoples Miserys. 246, 247, 251, 252 The Right to the Crown is in a great
measure from the Law of that Country. Instances hereof. 306, 307 She does not
allow her Kings the Right of making a Will. 307 By whom the Power of conferring
the Sovereignty was exercised. 365 By the Peoples increasing the Power of their
Master, they add weight to their own Chains. 378 Her King cannot be called the
Head of his People, and why. 392 Le Royle veut, and tell est notre plaisir, are
French Rants; but no Edict there has the Power of a Law, till it be registered
in Parliament. 417 The Conquest of her only to be effected by the Bravery of a
free and well satisfied People. 420
Franks, soon incorporated themselves with the Gauls. 143 Fraud, accounted a
Crime so detestable, as not to be imputed to any but Slaves. 342 All wicked
Designs have bin thereby carried on. 388 Who delight in it, and will have no
other Ministers but such as will be the Instruments of it. 419
Free, what Nations so esteemed. 9, 318 Vid. Popular Governments. Men, how to
know our selves such. 19, 65, 66, 89, 300, 318 People, scarce ever conquered by
an absolute Monarch. 92, 98 Philip of Macedon confessed his People to be free
men. 98 The Britans were so, because governed by their own Laws. 346 Men, or
Noblemen, exempt from Burdens, and reserved, like Arms, for the uses of War.
354 Free Citys, what and who made them. 370
Frugality, the Virtues that are upheld by it. 250 Fruits of our corrupt
Nature. 84 Own Labor. 86 Recovered Liberty. 116 Victory, how gained and lost.
148
Always of the same Nature with the Seeds from whence they come. 196

G.
GEnealogys, the Hebrews exact in observing them. 23, 223 Of Princes nicely to
be searched into, would be dangerous to some Crowns. 36, 37, 39, 366 Of Mankind
very confused. 36, 224, 302 Of being the eldest Son of the eldest Line of Noah.
221
Geneva and Rome, wherein they only can concur. 4 Genoa, how it is governed.
115, 143 By whom that City was infected. 144
Gentlemen, at this day comprehends all that are raised above the common
People. 353 Germanicus his Modesty in refusing the Empire, was the occasion of
his Death. 168, 298 Germany, how governed. 115, 347 Equal to the Gauls in
Fortune, so long as Rome was free. 150 The Power of the German Kings. 210 The
Power of this Emperor. 211
Germany, from thence our Original and Government is drawn. 270 When she had no
King. 276 The Emperors thereof restrained by Laws. 279 The Western Empire, how
it came hither. 303 Tacitus's account of the Peoples Valor. 347 Not imaginable,
that these People, jealous of Liberty, should conquer this Country to enslave
themselves. 349 No Monarchy more limited. 373
Gibeonites by deceit got Joshua to make a League with them. 298 Gladiators
were Slaves. 106, 111 Their Fury extinguished with their Blood. 111
God, with an equal hand, gave to All the Benefit of Liberty. 11 What sort of
Kings he approves in Scripture. 13 Can save by few as well as by many. 14
Always constant to himself. 24, 234 Never prescribed any Rule about dividing
the World. 37 The Fountain of Justice, Mercy and Truth. 48, 55 By a universal
Law gave no Rule for the making of Kings. 73 Is our Lord by Right of Creation.
89 How he endowed the Rulers of his People. 92 His secret Counsels
impenetrable. 100 What the usual course of his Providence. 113 Helps those who
justly defend themselves. 147 His general Ordinance. 154 Gave Laws to the Jews
only. 166 When he refused to bear the Cries of his People. 234, 240, 244 His
Anointed and Accursed. 237 A Law in Rome, that no God should be worshipped
without the Consent of the Senate. 272, 273
Good; every one seeks their own, according to the various motions of their
Mind. 32, 66, 205 The Public, the end of all Government. 79, 229, 255, 285,
286 Is more observed in mixed than absolute ones. 193 Of Mankind depends on
Religion and Virtue. 190 Called Evil, and Evil Good. 267 Actions always carry a
Reward with them. 312
Good and Evil, but three ways of distinguishing between them. 24 Good Men, who
deserve to be called so. 1 How they obey their Princes. 180, 181 Know the
weight of Sovereign Power, and doubt their own Strength. 394
Goodness is always accompanied with Wisdom. 286 Gospel, the Light of the
Spiritual Man. 190 Goths, their Polity. 115, 321 For above 300 Years never
contracted Marriages, nor mixed with the Spaniards. 143 Seized Rome, whilst
Honorius was looking after his Hens. 150 Subdued by the Saxons in one day. 198
Grew famous by the Overthrow of the Roman Tyranny. 261 Concerning Succession to
the Crown during their Reign. 301 Not above four in 300 Years time were the
immediate Successors of their Fathers. 304 In Spain overthrown by the Moors.
305, 399 Their Kings in Spain never ventured to dispute with the Nobility. 345
Their Kingdom never restored. 399
Government, the Original Principles of it to be examined, and our own in
particular. 6, 91 An Ordinance of God. 11, 13 The several Forms thereof left to
Man's choice. 11, 13, 20, 32, 37, 38, 41, 58, 61, 65, 66, 83, 103, 115, 132,
134, 216 Of the lawfulness of changing it, considered. 12, 103, 116, 256
Despotical differs from the Regal. 14, 15, 51 The Ground of all just
Governments. 19, 127, 137, 339 No Man has it either for or from himself. 24,
81, 155, 208, 290 None ever began with the paternal Power. 27 To whom the
Constitution of every Government is referred. 32 All for the good of the People
and their Posterity. 48, 60, 61, 67, 81, 85, 91, 108, 132, 146, 147, 149, 292,
333, 379 Is a Collation of every man's private Right into a public Stock. 52,
64 Where just, it has ever bin the Nurse of Virtue. 52, 57 Popular sor whom
best. 53 For whom instituted. 60, 63, 127 What sort was ordained by God. 86 The
Effects of one well ordered. 100 What only deserves Praise. 109, 111
Government, how the best has bin composed. 115, 143 Regal had a mixture of
Aristocratical and Democratical in them. 117 Whence the Denomination of all is
taken. 117, 123, 216 The Foundation remaining good, the Superstructures may be
altered. 118, 121, 122, 152, 256 When it cannot subsist. 124 The Effects of a
disordered One. 125 All subject to Corruption and Decay. 131 None imposed on
men by God or Nature. 133, 137 Mixed compared with Absolute. 135, 407 What the
only just one, by consent of Nations. 137 What may be imputed to it. 140 None
ever freer from popular Seditions than Switzerland. 145 That the best, which
best provides for War. 146, 147, 149 None without Civil Wars, Tumults and
Seditions. 152, 185, 186 The end for which it is constituted. 159, 160, 207,
371 The Roman, how introduced. 163 Exposed to the most infamous Traffic. 182
Of what parts it may consist. 210 Is a great Burden to the Wise and Good. 218,
219, 280, 282, 292, 319 To reform it, is to bring it to its first Principles.
219, 399 Questions ari^ing concerning our own, must be decided by our Laws, and
not by the Writings of the Fathers. 259 St. Paul's Obedience to higher Powers,
must be understood to all sorts of Government. 266 What would make all in the
World magna Latrocinia. 274 When the Ends of it are accomplished. 320 Most of
them have bin mixed, at least good ones. 321, 407 What only is reckoned good.
327, 328 Our own the same with the Roman in principle, tho not in form. 342
From whence the great variety of them proceeds. 379 The English, not ill
constituted. 38^ By what means the Foundations may be removed, and the
Superstructure overthrown. 381 In a well constituted one the Remedys against
ill Magistrates are safe and easy. 39^ Wisdom and Valor required for the
Institution of a good one. 400
Government, where it is either entirely to be changed, or reformed according
to its first Institution. 400 The Blessings of an Absolute one. 408 Its
Establishment is an arbitrary Act, wholly depending upon the Will of man. 414
Governors appointed to execute the Laws for the good of the People. 52, 54,
63, 156, 399 The Law appoints helps for their Infirmitys, and restrains their
Vices. 218 The Peoples Creature. 241, 249, 370, 397 Where they are removable,
if they will not be reclaimed. 399 The Good and Bad make the People happy and
miserable in their turns. 407
Grants of K. John to the Pope, declared by Parliament to be unjust, illegal,
etc. 296 What implys an Annihilation of some Grants. 328 Where they ought well
to be proved, that the Nature and Intention of them may appear. 358 Of what
nature those of our Kings are. 350 Of Lands, where they have bin resumed. 360
Grecians, knew no other Original Title to Government, than that Wisdom, etc.
which was beneficial to the People. 30, 31 Wherein they excelled other Nations.
92 Overthrew the vast Armies of the Persians. 97, 98 Were reduced to yield to a
Virtue greater than their own. 113 No absolute Monarch among them established
by Law. 122 Have bin by disorder in Government, exposed as a Prey to the first
Invader. 150 When they were happy and glorious. 185 Their Virtue expired with
their Liberty. 195 The word Tyrant came from Greece, and what it signified. 253
Flourished in Liberty in the time of Saul. 255
Grotius, his Explanation of Sovereign and limited Power. 156, 214, 366 Wherein
he justifys Subjects in taking up Arms. 190 His making St. Peter and St. Paul
perfectly agree, about their different Phrases of Ordinances of God, and
Ordinance of Man. 268 His saying, Qui dat finem, dat media ad finem necessaria.
384
Grotius, about King's Stipulations, and Right of sending Ambassadors. 402
Guelphs and Ghibelins, their Factions in Tuscany. 111, 186, 187 Genoa infected
with their Factions. 144
Gustavus (Charles) his confessing to an Ambassador how he ought to reign over
the People that had chose him. 364, 365 He and his Uncle Adolphus were content
with the Power that the Laws of their Country gave them. 387

H.
HAnnibal, killed more great Roman Captains than any Kingdom ever had. 140 The
Samnites Embassy to him. 140 How he lost the Fruit of all his Victorys. 150
When he invaded Italy, no Country seemed to have bin of greater Strength. 186
What to be done, if he be at the Gates. 383
Hanseatick Towns. 145 Hatred Universal incurred by Princes, who always fear
those that hate them. 189, 192, 232 To all that is good. 191
Head, why Kings are called by this Name, and the import of the Word both in
Scripture and Profane Authors. 388, 389 The differences between the Natural and
Political. 389 What the Office of a Head is in a natural Body. 390, 391, 392
Hebrew Judge different from a King. 85 Kings not instituted by God, but given
as a Punishment. 85 How their Government consisted. 115, 143 Kings their Power
exceeded the Rules set by God. 162, 215 What their Discipline. 210 In their
Creation of Judges, Kings, etc. had no regard to Paternity. 221 Like to their
Neighbors in Folly and Vice, and would be like them too in Government. 234
Their Power greater than what the Law allows to our Kings. 261 Whether the Law
given them by God be so perfect as to be obligatory to all Nations. 335
Heir reputed, the absurdity of the Notion. 26, 27, 28, 29, 31, 35, 42 Heir,
next in Blood. 39, 40, 59, 60, 78, 79, 93, 365 Annexed to one single Person. 62
All the Children of Noah were his Heirs. 62 Next to the Crown set aside. 78,
80, 305, 306, 307 Bellay's extravagant Doctrine of an Heir apparent. 309 Enjoys
the same Rights as the Parent, and devolves the same to his Posterity. 370
Hengist and Horsa, on what Terms the County of Kent was given them. 357 Henry
IV. of France, how he desired to recommend himself to his People. 309 I. of
England, whether he was an Usurper or not. 361 V. His Care was to please his
People, and to raise their Spirits. 418 Was terrible to France. 212 His
Character. 418, 419, 420 VI. Became a Prey to a furious French Woman. 418 VII.
Had neither Cross nor Pile for his Title. 362 VIII. acknowledged the Power of
the Parliament, in making, changing and repealing Laws. 287, 342
Heptarchy, when this was divided into 7 Kingdoms, each kept still the same
Usage within it self. 348 Could as easily unite the 7 Councils as the 7
Kingdoms into one. 349
Hercules, an account of him. 113 Hereditary Right cannot naturally be in any.
38, ^0 Prerogative of Dominion, how understood. 52 Right, as a Reward of
Virtue. 68 How a Kingdom comes to be so. 76, 77 Crowns so as to their ordinary
Course, but the Power restrained. 116 Monarchys, in them no care is taken of
him that is to command. 149 According to Proximity of Blood, not prescribed by
any Laws of God. 166 Children seldom prove like their Parents. 184 Crowns, five
different ways of disposing them. 301
Heroum Regna. 31, 58, 229 The Government of whom. 221
History Roman, Tacitus says it wanted men to write theirs. 194 Hobbs,
scurrilously derides Plato, Aristotle and Cicero. 32 His Bellum omnium contra
omnes. 37, 41, 311
Hobbs, his Hostis and Latro. 153 The first that contrived a compendious way of
justifying Kings in the most abominable Perjurys. 295
Holland, of great Strength since the Recovery of their Liberty from the
Spanish Yoke. 98 The War with them in 1665. 199, 200 How they have defended
themselves from the greatest Monarchys. 266 The States are called High and
Mighty Lords; and the word Here, which signifys Lord, is as common as Monsieur
in France, etc. 355, 373 The Condition of the 17 Provinces of the Netherlands,
when they fell to the House of Austria. 378 The Power of the States General how
limited. 402
Honors, the highest falsely attributed to ill men. 45 Given to ill-gotten
Wealth. 55, 100, 101, 114, 182, 183 To suffering Virtue sometimes. 124 Where
they have bin the Rewards of Vice. 129 To those who disserv'd the
Commonwealth. 135, 136 Justly bestowed on those that rightly perform their
Duty. 157 From whom purchased. 182 Given for Services done to the Public. 223
Princes could not without breach of Trust confer them upon those that did not
deserve them. 350
Hooker, his Mistake in the fundamentals of natural Liberty. 10 His admirable
Saying about lawful Powers. 74 Slighted by Filmer. 80. vid. 10
Hottoman his Character and Account of the French Kings. 212 Human Nature, the
miserable State of it, if not improved by Art and Discipline. 256 Frailty,
Allowances must be made for it. 324
Hurt, They do none who do nothing, where this Rule is false. 170
I.
JAmes I. (King) his Saying about his making of Judges and Bishops. 190
Acknowledges himself the Servant of the Commonwealth. 214 Said he was sworn to
maintain the Laws, and should be perjured if he broke them. 286, 416
James II. what we might expect from him. 408 Japhet, this part of the World
seems by the Scriptures to be given to his Sons. 302 Jealousy of State. 168,
175 Jesuits joined to Geneva. 4 To be believed with caution. 58 The present
Emperor of Germany too much governed by them. 387 The Soul that gives Life to
the whole Body of the Popish Faction. 408 The Order banished out of the Kingdom
by an Arrest of the Parliament of Paris, but refused by those of Toulouse and
Bourdeaux. 417
Jews had a great Veneration for the House of David, and why. 81 Grown weary of
God's Government. 89, 252 Had leave to destroy their Enemies. 94 Idolaters among
them in David and Hezekiah's days. 129 Idolatry the production of the
Government they had set up. 162, 163, 209 Submit to the Roman Power. 257
Thought Christ's first Work would be to throw off the Roman Yoke. 259 Being
converted, thought themselves freed from the Obligation of human Laws. 271 Some
pretend to know their Original. 302 A Proclamation to extirpate them. 407
Imperator, a Name given by the Roman Armies to Pretors and Consuls. 368
Imperium summum summo modo, modo non summo, Liberrimum. 78, 156, 366 Ab eo a
quo Spiritus. 369
Imposing on Peoples Consciences. 144 On some Princes how easy it is. 182
Incolae, who they are at Venice. 115 Distinction between them here and Cives.
384, 385
Indemnity, the assurance of it would turn men's other Vices into Madness. 225
Industry, what is a Spur to it. 193 Infancy, vid. Child. Inheritance, the
common division of it among Brothers. 62, 63 Where it gave no Right to Crowns.
77, 80 To one Family. 78, 80, 93 Of the Sword left to Familys. 95 What the
Apostles left to their Successors in relation to the supreme Power on Earth.
160 Private, many Controversys arise upon them. 166
Inheritance; what Right is equally inherited by all Children on the Death of
their Parents. 220 William I. did not leave the Kingdom as such at his Death.
271 What belongs to Females. 302 Little regard to it in the Austrian House
according to Blood. 309 In some Places the Law gives private Inheritance to the
next Heir, in others makes Proportions and Allotments. 309
Injurys, the ways to prevent or punish them, either judicial or extrajudicial.
154, 160 Great ones, will one time or other fall on those that do them. 215 The
Italians say, he that does an Injury never pardons. 232 Those that are extreme,
when so to be understood. 287
Injustice, what is so in the beginning, can never be the effect of Justice.
327 Inquisition of Spain and other Places. 273, 408 Instinct, what. 87
Institution, he that institutes may also abrogate. 12, 48, 287 Is an Election.
73 Of a Kingdom is the Act of a free Nation. 213, 250 No Prince had a more
solemn one than Saul. 235 Some Kings have by it but little Power. 261 The
Magistrates Prerogatives depend upon it. 275 Of Power is coercive. 277 When
Princes deflect from the end of theirs. 284 Wherein the End of it chiefly
consists. 311, 320 Often the Corruption of the State is taken for it. 332 They
who institute a Magistracy, best know whether the end of the Institution be
rightly pursued or not. 364, 394
Integrity of Manners makes Laws as it were useless. 128 Never subservient to
the Lust of Princes. 129 Makes men contented with a due Liberty. 135 Preserves
popular Equality. 161 Cannot be found in absolute Governments. 184 Preserves the
Peoples Safety. 250
Interest, what advantages are reaped from uniting the Nations to that of the
Government. 197 Interest, Personal, preferred to the public Good. 250
Interregnum, that there can be none, a fundamental Maxim of great Monarchys.
166 John's (King) Grants to the Pope declared by the Parliament unjust,
illegal. 296 Josephus of the Jewish Government. 84 On what account he calls it
a Theocracy and an Aristocracy. 87, 216 Says, their Princes were to do nothing
without the advice of the Sanhedrin, or to be opposed if they did. 209
Joshua, had neither the Name nor Power of a King. 85, 230 Isaac, his
Character. 15 Israelites, had no Kings in the first Institution of their
Government. 30 Nor till 400 Years after. 331 Strangers only excluded from being
Kings. 74 Their Government Aristocratical. 84 What the effect of their having
Kings. 94, 215 After Solomon, perpetually vexed with civil Seditions and
Conspiracys, etc. 162 Asked for a Tyrant (tho not by that Name) when they asked
for a King after the manner of other Nations. 252 Not known certainly by what
Law they were governed. 331 Lived under the Power of Tyrants whose
Proclamations were Laws. 409
Italy, when she lay desolate. 100, 164 How her Commonwealths have flourished
and decayed. 111, 112, 149, 151, 164, 186, 187 Charles VIII. of France
conquered the best part of it without breaking a Lance. 138, 150, 236
Judge, where every Man is to be his own. 65, 66, 286, 387, 397 Who shall be
between Prince and People. 158, 159, 284, 285, 310, 333 No Prince fit to be
judge of his own Facts. 284, 285, 318, 397, 399 The Power of judging when it is
fit to call the Senate or People together, to whom and by whom referred. 364,
383 The Parliament the best Judge in dubious Cases. 386, 387, 399 Where it is not
fit to be a Judge in his own Case. 398
Judges (such as Joshua, Gideon, etc.) whether their Power was regal and just
or not. 23, 24, 226 Whether there be any concerning Kings Titles. 166
Judges, the Power of making them. 190 Sometimes the Courts are filled with ill
ones. 192, 338 Appointed to decide the Contests arising from the breach of
Contracts. 225 Their Opinion concerning Ship-mony. 249, 403 The Religion of
their Oath. 283, 288, 323, 337, 338, 339 Parliament owned by Kings to be Judges
of their Stipulations. 297 What they ought to be, and in what sense chosen by
the King. 323 Who were executed as Traitors for subverting the Laws of the
Land. 323, 338, 403 What Act Edw. 3. promoted for his Judges to do Justice. 324
The general Rule they are sworn to observe. 325, 338, 403 The Power by which
they act is from the Law. 336, 337, 338 When they become the Ministers of the
Devil. 341 The sad consequence of having all Kings constituted Judges over the
Body of the People. 386, 387, 397, 399 To determine Controversys in a matter of
Right. 398 Whose Commands they are bound to obey. 403
Judgment perverted, the ill effects of it. 7 Future, not sufficient to
restrain men from being vicious. 264 Here they are passed by Equals. 338 Those
the Kings of Judah gave, were in and with the Sanhedrin. 338 None that is right
can be given of human things, without a particular regard to the time wherein
they passed. 381 Kings can give none upon any of their Subjects, and why. 401,
402, 403 Human is subject to Error. 418
Jurys, Grand and Petit, their Power. 323, 338 How the Judges are Assistants to
them. 338 In whose sight they give their Verdict. 403
Justice, has always Truth for its Rule. 28, 59 What the proper Act of it. 54
Of every Government depends on an Original Grant. 67 Has sometimes bin
perverted by the deceit of ill men. 124, 324 The Sword of it for what Use and
End. 154 Where it will be exposed to sale. 183
Justice, the Rule of Civil and Moral Actions. 190 How well administered in
Republics. 266 What is meant by it. 272, 274 The distribution of it justly, is
a Work above the Strength of one Man. 282 When the Course of it is certainly
interrupted. 312 Deviations from it. 324 Where it is best administered. 333
Overthrown by the number of Laws. 337 In receiving it the King is equal to
another man. 338 Magistrates made to see it well executed. 399

K.
KAtherine de Medicis said never to have done any good but by mistake. 125
Kingcraft, what. 202, 213, 214 Was wholly exerted in the subversion of the Laws
of France, and the Nobility that supported them. 418
Kingdom, the Patriarchs had a spiritual one. 14, 15 No paternal one among the
Hebrews. 23 Thought never to be bought at too dear a rate. 30 How the first
Kingdoms were set up. 35 What are lawful ones. 52 What it imports. 76 One
possessed by nine several Familys within 200 Years. 95 All have their various
Fluctuations, through ill Discipline or Conduct. 96, 147 The greatest have bin
destroyed by Commonwealths. 149 Disputes about them most difficult and
dangerous, and very bloody in several Instances. 166, 169, 170 Of France
divided by the Estates of the Realm. 213 Not established but for the good of
the People. 218 Of Granada, their Usage of their Princes. 218 All erected at
first by the Consent of Nations. 222 Frequently reduced to their first
Principles. 222 Some Elective, some Hereditary, and how directed. 365, 366
Constituted by conquering Armies, and those established in the most orderly
manner. 367 And States, how they came to be erected. 371
Kings, the Prerogative or Royal Charter granted to them. 2, 57 The end of
their Institution. 4, 5, 12, 32, 34, 48, 54, 55, 67, 77, 191, 340, 399 Whether
they may be restrained or censured. 5, 12, 35, 50, 116, 156, 158, 159, 209,
215, 218, 239, 277, 278, 366, 369, 384, 396 In what sense they are like other
men. 7, 43, 89 Evil ones will have evil Ministers. 7, 131 The relation between
them and the People. 10 The only sort mentioned in Scripture with approbation.
13, 85, 250, 321 The first a cruel Tyrant. 16 Who taken from out of the least
Family of the youngest Tribe. 23 All not the natural Fathers of their People.
26 Whom the Ancients chose for theirs. 30, 31, 60, 85 Not all of them wise. 43,
201, 386 A King by Nature, who. 54, 56, 58, 90, 95, 268, 327 No design to speak
irreverently of them. 71, 131 Set up by the Nobles, Ancients and People. 72,
74, 76, 77, 80, 108, 213, 215, 290, 305 All not alike in Power, nor Spirit and
Principle. 77, 286 Some good and some bad. 387, 407 Whether any are immediately
so on the Death of the Predecessor, and before they are proclaimed. 80, 81, 166
Given in Wrath. 85, 86, 117, 308 426700 Kings. 88 Many great Ones overthrown by
small Republics. 92 Few possess the Qualitys requisite. 94, 184, 208, 217 The
Name thereof abolished. 116, 275, 276 Regis ad exemplum, not always so in all.
129 A virtuous one, but a momentary help sometimes, when his Virtues die with
him. 139, 171, 184 Whether those may be thrown down that set up themselves. 159
The Slothful and Negligent accounted great Evils. 170, 171, 172, 175, 192, 194
The best liable to be corrupted, and subject to Mistakes and Passions. 180,
318, 397 Who said to be like a Phaenix. 184
Kings, none so vicious but will sometimes favor Justice. 188 Apt to live under
the Power of their Lusts. 190 Wherein just ones will find their Honor and
Security. 193 Where lawful ones have proved equal to the worst Usurpers. 189
Whose Condition most miserable, and why. 201, 202 Some have experience as men,
but not otherwise. 202 The Name cannot make a King, unless he be one. 205, 374
Have a Power of granting Honors, Immunitys, etc. out of the public Stock. 208,
220, 350, 385 None to have more Power or Abilitys to perform his Office than
Moses. 209 Advanced by abjuring their Religion. 213 Under the happy Inability
to do any thing against the Laws of their Country. 213, 214, 218, 226, 280,
309, 322, 394 Where they have their share (and the Senate theirs) of the
supreme Authority, the Government is best supported. 214 Have found out now
easier ways of doing what they please. 219 How there would be as many Kings in
the World as men. 221 If they have no Title, they must be made so either by
Force or Consent. 222, 233 The consequence of being unaccountable. 225 Have no
other just Power than what the Laws give. 227, 250 The safety of their
Kingdoms, their chiefest Law. 228 The first were of the accursed Race, while
the holy Seed had none. 230 By what wicked means many of them have come in. 231
Of Israel and Judah under a Law not safely to be transgrest. 238 Why those of
Israel committed many extravagances. 238 Judged by the Great Sanhedrin. 239
This sort of Government the Peoples Creature. 241, 249, 370, 375, 399, 410, 411
Not to claim the Liberty of doing Injustice in virtue of their Prerogative.
242, 243 Bound up to the Laws as to matters of Property. 247 Not to be too
powerful, nor too rich. 249, 250
Kings of Israel, tho they led vast Armies into the Field, seem to have possessed
but little. 251 What their Government ought to be. 253 Of England reign by Law,
and are under it, and why. 258, 261, 264, 404 What will indear them to their
People. 262 The Sovereign Power often meant by this Name. 263 What meant by
lawful Ones. 265, 283, 290 Why those of Judah could make no Laws. 269 May be
feared by those that do ill. 269, 270 How made in the Saxon times. 270 What
those of the greatest Nations have suffered. 274 What is that King which never
dies. 283, 403 Cannot mitigate or interpret Laws. 287, etc. When said to become
perjured. 286 Not Masters but Servants of the Commonwealth. 290. vid. 214
Cannot be Interpreters of their own Oaths. 294 Compelled to perform the
conditions of Magna Charta. 296, 297 May resign, if they will not observe their
Oaths. 299, 300 Next in Blood, generally cannot be said to be Kings till they
are crowned. 301, 303 How he is not to be heard. 324 The Regal Power, not the
first in this Nation. 329 Where the same Power that had created this
Government, abolished it. 331 What our Ancestors did with relation to them. 331
Judges rightly qualified are to instruct them in matters of Law. 337 Wherein
they are equal to other men. 338 None as such have the Power of judging any.
338, 340, 401, 402 Where they cease to be so, and become Tyrants. 340 Their
Power not restrained, but created by Magna Charta and other Laws. 343 What is
natural for the worst of them to do. 344 The Norman, had no more Power than the
Saxon, and why. 349 Tacitus says, they were taken out of the Nobility. 350
Kings, said to be chosen, or made, and sometimes deposed by their Great
Councils. 356, 384 Never Masters of the Soil of England. 357, 370, 371 Why they
speak always in the plural number. 359 The Titles of ours examined into. 362
Whom the Parliament have made are lawful, or we have had none for these 700
Years. 362 Their Power of calling Parliaments was given to them. 363, 383
Naturally delight in Power, and hate what crosses their Wills. 366, 413 The
most absolute Princes in the World never had this Name. 368 Some subject to a
Foreign Power, some Tributary, and the Romans had many depending upon them. 369
The Acts of one de facto, considered. 374, 375 Wherein the Essence of a King
consists. 374 Detered from endeavoring to seduce any of their great men from
their Duty. 381 Who are a great calamity to a Nation. 383, 419 Who only are the
Heads of the People. 388, 390, 391, 392 If their Actions are to be examined,
and their Persons punished. 396 None less capable oftentimes of forming a right
Judgment than they, and why. 397 Nor can be present in all their Courts. 401
Don't stipulate for themselves, but their People. 402 In what cases they are
perpetually Minors. 403 Their Power not universal, for many things they cannot
do. 403 May in some degree mitigate the vindictive Power of the Law. 404 The
advantage of their being restrained. 407 Not created to make Laws, but to
govern by them; and what is signified by le Roy le veut. 417, 418 Are sworn to
pass such Laws as the People choose. 417, 419
King's Bench, for what end established. 340 The King that renders Justice is
always there, etc. 403
Knight's Service, what. 352 Knighthood, the Dignity of it, and what was
accounted a degrading. 352, 353 Knights of Shires in the Saxon times. 353
L.
LAWS, the prevalency of them over Sovereign Commands. 2, 9 Who best obeys
them. 4 The end of them is to enjoy our Libertys. 9, 10, 262, 330 Invest
Magistrates with Power for the public good. 34, 61 Of England acknowledge one
only Heir. 38, 62 Said to be written Reason. 55 Have in 'em a constraining
Force. 74 To whom the Power of making them belongs. 75, 76, 281 Are the measure
of Power. 76, 78, 90, 208, 219, 403, 404 Of each Country create a Right to the
Person that governs it. 77 Prescribe Rules how Power should be transmitted. 78
Where good ones do no good. 92, 231 To be suited to present Exigences. 103, 120
Make no distinction of Persons. 125 Lex perduellionis. 127 Made in a sort
useless by integrity of Manners. 129 Abhorrers of the Dominion of it. 133
Instituted for the preventing of Evil. 154, 159, 214, 300 Those that go beyond
them act therein as private Persons. 156 Who most restrained by them. 158
Subsist by executing Justice. 159, 230 Concerning the Succession. 166, 280
Tricks at Law to put men to death. 168, 192 When in force, men of Wisdom and
Valor are never wanting. 176 When they were overthrown. 188 The Despisers
destroyed without Law. 210, 214 Don't always go by plurality of Voices. 217 Of
every place, show the Power of each Magistrate. 225 Were before Kings. 229
Proofs hereof. 230, 278 Of God, not to be abrogated by Man. 239 Our Kings can
make none of themselves. 261, 287, 366 We know none but those of God and our
selves. 262 Are not made in vain. 264 Some neither just nor commendable;
Instances thereof. 272, 273, 336
Laws; the directive Power, which is certain, has a Power over the Conscience.
273 The Sanction that deserves the Name of a Law. 274, 281, 320, 333, 336 To
what end made as to Magistrates. 278, 279 Princes and Nations both Gainers by
the due observance of them. 280, 283, 299, 300, 394, 395 That is not a State or
Government which has them not. 281 Athenians not without them when they had
Kings. ibid. How said to be above the King. 283 Can only be altered in
Parliament. 287, 288, 336, 345 For what reason established: an Encomium. 288
Who violate those of Nature in the highest degree. 292 Of ones Country to be
submitted to. 302 Of Nature, eternal. 302, 306 By whom the rigor of it is to be
tempered. 323 None made by man can be perfect. 326, 336, 337, 343 By them Kings
became first what they were. 331, 343 Those good for one People, that are not
so for all. 334, 335 The Statute of Henry VII. concerning a King de facto, for
what end made. 374, 375 Plain ones have bin industriously rendered perplexed.
382 Good ones prescribe safe Remedys against the Mischiefs of ill Magistrates.
393, 394 Where they are merciful both to ill and good men. 394 Should aim at
perpetuity. 406 The Mischiefs effected by a Persons Word having the force of a
Law. 407 When they may be easily overthrown, it will be attempted. 414 What
gives the Power of Law to the Sanctions under which we live. 416
Leagues, don't imply absolute Equality between Partys. 80 With conquered
Nations. 106 League-Factions and Wars of the Hugonots. 119, 120 How faithfully
they have bin observed. 145 Men cannot too much rely upon them. 145, 146, 147
Those that make such as are detrimental to the Public are punishable. 157
Leagues, Made against the Hollanders. 266 Of Joshua with the Gibeonites gained
by deceit. 298 Made on a national, not personal Account. 402
Learning makes men excel in Virtue. 97 Said to make men seditious, but
disproved. 91, 123
Legislative Power of Rome and Sparta continued in the People. 104, 108, 269
When it came to be scorned. 106 The Magistratical Power receives its Being and
Measure from hence. 277 Cannot be conferred by the Writ of Summons, but must be
essentially and radically in the People. 409 Is always arbitrary. 414 Only
trusted in the hands of those who are bound to obey the Laws that are made. 416
The King cannot have it in himself, nor any other part of it than what is
formal. 418, 420
Legislators should always be of the wisest men. 74, 75 Wherein their Wisdom
consists. 121 Wherein they show themselves wise and good. 414
Legitimacy contracted. 79 vid. Bastardy. Some Children, tho born in Wedlock,
utterly rejected as being begotten in Adultery. 310
Lewis XI. his subverting the Laws of his Country. 211 XIV. accounted his not
being able to act contrary to Law, a happy impotence. 309
Liberty, the Notions thereof, and from whence. 3, 5, 11 Natural, the
consequence if removed. 5 Wherein it solely consists. 9, 290 Filmer's notion of
the greatest Liberty in the World. 9 Oppugners of public Liberty. 10 Universal
asserted, and what that is. 15, 21, 38, 65 The Assertors thereof have God for
their Patron. 52, 132 Produces Virtue, Order, Stability. 92, 123 The loss of it
in the Roman Empire. 95, 96, 98, 99, 107, 111, 126, 329 The Mother and Nurse of
Virtues. 95, 98, 111, 141, 181, 188, 195 Made the most virtuous People in the
World. 112
Liberty, when subverted, the worst men thrive best. 125, 126 How our natural
Love to it is tempered. 133 None sought it but with some restraint. 135 What
the Love of it inspires. 140. v. p. 123
At home, and War abroad. 141 When this is lost, Kingdoms and States come to
nothing. 149. v. 98, 111, 112 Patricians the best Defenders of it. 153 The way
to recover it. 160 Cannot be preserved, if the Manners of the People be
corrupted. 180 None remained in Rome, when Sylla resigned his Power. 188 When
lost, excellent Spirits failed. 194, 195 A People can desire nothing besides
it. 207 Cannot subsist, if Vice and Corruption prevail. 219 Is a Right common to
all. 220, 221 God gave the Israelites this Law. 240 Who have no true sense of
it. 245 Our Ancestors left us the best Laws they could devise to defend it. 262
All by the Law of Nature have a Right to their Libertys, Lands, Goods, etc.
292, 358 What Principles make men Lovers of it. 311 None can subsist where
there is an absolute Power above the Law. 318 Where it is destroyed by the
Prerogative. 319 Of a People, naturally inherent in themselves. 330, 358, 370
The value our Ancestors set upon theirs. 336, 371, 412 None has better defended
them than this Nation. 342, 412 To it Tacitus attributes the German Bravery.
347 What is the utmost Act of it. 349 The exercise of the natural Liberty of
Nations, in the several Limitations of the Sovereign Power. 366 Of a People,
the Gift of God and Nature. 369 Forfeited or resigned. 370 No Veneration paid
to Magistrate es can lessen the Liberty of a Nation. 372 Nothing valuable to it
in the Opinion of the Romans. 377 Easy to get Partisans to make good by force
the greatest Violations of it. 380
Liberty, how to use ones own with relation to the Public. 397 Liberty with a
Mischief. 409, 410, 411 Of those who act in their own Persons, and of those who
send Delegates, is perfectly the same. 411 That for which we contend as the
Gift of God and Nature, remains equally in all. 411
Lineal Subjection never learned from Moses. 58 Succession, where not followed.
78, 79
London, the Privilege of the Common Hall. 385 Lord Paramount, over whom. 13,
14, 15, 16 From whence he must come. 21 None by nature over his Brethren. 63
The Mischiefs they both do and suffer are very great. 218
Lords, how they have lost the Authority which they had formerly. 382
Lord's Day, not to be spent in Sports and Revellings. 315 Love to ones Country,
Commonwealths have it most. 139, 141, 142 The happy effects of it. 140 A
Resolution to die for, or live with it. 140, 144, 146 The way to make People in
love with it. 146, 172, 196 This now turned into a care of private Interest.
151, 152 The Behavior of those that are Lovers, etc. 172, 195 Occasions
sometimes Wars and Tumults. 186
Loyalty, those that boast loudest of it, most apply it the wrong way. 219
Lucullus, his little Army put Tygranes with 200000 men to flight. 98 Luxury of
the Romans, the occasion of their ruin. 114 Brought into Rome by C. Manlius.
128 Exposes the virtuous to scorn. 181 When in fashion, the desire of Riches
must increase. 183 The bravest Nations most enslaved by it. 252
Lycurgus, his Laws received their Authority from the General Assembly. 269,
281 Absurd to think of restoring his Laws. 334 To what the long continuance of
them is attributed. 406

M.
MAcedonian Kings, their Power was but small. 98 Their Army overthrown by
Paulus Emilius. 147 Vid. Monarchy.
Machiavel, his admirable Saying. 92, 205 Magi, who usurped the Dominion of
Persia after the Death of Cambyses. 155 Magistracy, can have no Interest
distinct from the public. 48, 129 Its Office is to execute the Law. 48, 154,
320 If the People be base, etc. it cannot be supported, be the Ruler never so
perfect. 132, 164 Whether it be that Power which above all restrains Liberty.
133 Strangers admitted into that of Rome. 142 The effect of regal Power
committed to an annual or otherwise chosen Magistracy. 148, 194 None can have
the Right of it that is not a Magistrate. 155 Where it had nothing to do in
spiritual things. 259, 260 The Ordinance both of God and Man. 268, 275, 276,
277 Circumscribed by such Rules as cannot be safely transgrest. 270, 394 Where
Obedience is due. 273, 274, 275 On what the Right and Power of it depends. 275
The Nature of it. 372, 373 None now in being, which owes not its Original to
some Judgment of the People. 400
Magistrates, by whom constituted. 6, 54, 61, 224, 317 To what end set up. 32,
48 Ministers of God. 48, 257 How they are helpful to Nations. 55, 85, 383, 390
Under several Names and Limitations. 78, 225 Jewish, wherein like the Dictators
of Rome. 86 Punishable with Death by the Roman Law. 127, 156, 157 Annual
Election of them. 140 Have enjoyed large Powers, that never had the name of
Kings. 158 How to be restrained. 159, 278, 279, 394 A particular Character of
good and evil ones 312, 313
Magistrates, when they were temporary and occasional. 331 Walk in obscure and
slippery Places. 394 What to be done to those who despise the Law. 395 Wherein
their Strength is. 398 The first may be virtuous, but their Successors may soon
be corrupted. 414
Magna Charta grounded on K. Alfred's Laws. 9 The Jews had none such. 258 What
it obliges the King to swear to. 283 Puts every thing on the Laws of the Land,
and Customs of England. 288 Is only an Abridgment of them. 296, 356 Not the
Original, but a Declaration of the English Libertys. 343, 414 The Rights the
Nation have resolved to maintain. 356
Male-Line examined. 40, 167, 267 Malice, is blind. 127 Seditions, etc. arise
from thence. 152, 153
Mamalukes, their great defeat near Tripoli by Selim. 128 Accounted themselves
all Noble, tho born Slaves, 356
Man naturally free. 3, 19, 369, 370 Every one Chief in his own Family. 13, 18
Cannot overthrow what God and Nature have instituted. 17, 262, 263 Creates
Governments and Magistrates. 20 None knows originally from whom he is derived.
23, 25, 36, 302 Whence his Misery proceeds. 55 Wants help in all things. 55,
406 What makes a natural difference among men. 57 All subject to Error. 106,
165, 280 Enters into some kind of Government by Reason. 134 Follow what seems
advantageous to themselves. 196 What every one ought to be. 231 None can serve
two contrary Interests. 255 Are all by Nature equal. 327 Where every one is a
Magistrate. 383
Manors, etc. enjoyed by Tenure from Kings. 359 Marriages, often declared
null. 79 Of Plebeians with Patricians. 103, 118, 121 Where proved of no force
to legitimate Children. 310
Marriages, a Power must be lodged somewhere to decide them. 310 Masters, how
far their Commands are binding. 314, 315 Only to decide Contests between them
and their Servants. 398
Maxims, nothing to be received as a general one, which is not generally true.
292 Mazarine, the ways of his Advancement. 184 Medices, of the Title of that
Family to Tuscany. 378 Members of Parliament sent to serve for the whole
Naiion, not for a particular Borough, etc. 410 Instructions are often given to
them. 412 Have no Power before they are chosen, nor ever could, if those that
send them had it not in themselves. 413 Must take care that the Commonwealth
receives no detriment by their Votes. ibid. A few possibly may be corrupted. 415
Mercenary Army, vid. Soldiery. Their Business is to keep on their Employment.
138 Soldiers, always want Fidelity or Courage. 147, 198 Courtiers, will expose
not only Honors, but even Justice to Sale. 182, 183 Wretches, their Power at
Court. 184 Augustus Caesar had thirty Legions of them to execute his Commands.
329
Merit, men rarely make a right Estimate of their own. 165 The way of
Advancement to Honor. 194 What preserves, and what abolishes it. 196
Mickle-Gemots were General Assemblys of the Noble and Free men. 348, 354, 384
They set up seven Magistrates over the Heptarchy. 349 Of what they were in the
beginning of the Saxons Reign. 384
Miltiades, his Desire to wear an Olive-Garland for his Victory at Marathon,
and the Answer given to him. 222 Ministers, according to the Temper and Genius
of the Prince. 7 Of the Devil, who. 37, 48, 51, 267, 273, 274 Of God, who. 48,
49, 118, 192, 267, 273, 274 Must receive their Dignity from a Title not common
to all. 269 Every Man by his Works will declare whose he is. 272
Ministers, the Devils of a lower Order. 314 Of God, how they may become the
worst of men. 322 What sort have seldom escaped Punishment. 324 Of the Devil,
have always carried on their Designs by fraud. 388
Mistakes in Punishments carefully repaired by Honors. 106 Seditions, Tumults
and Wars arise from thence. 152 None in Sparta after Lycurgus's Laws were
established. 153 That some have fallen into by the Form of Writs, summoning
Persons to appear before the King, rectified. 401
Mithridates, what reckoned the greatest danger of War with him. 98 Monarchs,
who have their Right from God and Nature. 9 Ought to consult the public good.
34 How most came to their Dignitys. 117 Are not above the Law. 291
Monarchy, Paternal, over whom exercised. 17 Whence so called. 19 For whom
best. 53 No natural propensity in Men and Beasts to it. 82, 83 How Aristotle
commends it. 90, 91 Mixed, regulated by Law. 93, 96, 129, 135 Of Rome, at first
not absolute. 108 Most have suffered far greater Changes than Rome. 110
Macedonian fell all to pieces after the Death of Alexander. 119, 163 In what
sense said to be natural. 132 A peaceable one in Peru for 12 Generations. 164,
165 The French has bin full of Blood and Slaughter. 172, 173. v. 137 The
gentlest more heavy than any Commonwealth. 175 All subject to Civil Wars.
ibid. Well regulated, when its Powers are limited by Law. 207 The Justice of
them established by common Consent. 208. v. 72, 73, 80, 137, 155 Why so called.
216. v. 117, 123 Nothing in the Nature and Institution of it that obliges
Nations to bear with its Exorbitances. 232 What sort was displeasing to Samuel,
and a rejection of God. 240 Paternal, overthrown by Filmer. 249 Not universally
evil. 253
Monarchy, where it is regular, Kings can neither make nor change Laws. 283
None established among us in Julius Caesar's time. 331 Mixed, what the best way
to support it. 381 What has given Beginning, Growth and Continuance to all the
mixed ones in the World. 407 That not free, which is regulated by a Law not to
be broken without the Guilt of Perjury. 416 When the mixed Monarchys began to
be terribly shaken. 418
Money, Charles VII. of France raised it by his own Authority. 418 Moses and
Aaron, the first Rulers of the People, neither of the eldest Tribe, nor eldest
Line. 23 His admirable Gifts. 25, 92, 282 Had not the Name, or Power of a King.
61, 85, 230 Gave the People leave to choose their own Magistrates. 121 Divided
the Hebrews under several Captains. 143 Power insupportable to him. 282 His
Character. 209, 284, 390 Whether we ought to conform to his Law. 335, 336
Multitude, what Right it has to change a Tyrannical Government. 12 Composed of
Free men; the Power that is placed in them. 65 None can be seditious till a
Commonwealth be established. 70 Those that enter into Contracts, act according
to their own Will. 71 Where it brings Confusion. 146 Is the Glory and Strength
of every Prince. 191 May have its Fears as well as Tyrants. 207 Confers on the
Prince all the Power he has. 221 What is natural thereto in relation to
Government. 224
Murderers wilful, the Horns of the Altar gave no Protection to such. 269
Mysterys of State. 6
N.
NAmes, are not essential to Magistrates. 368 Of Sovereign Lord, etc.
consistent with Liberty. 372, 373 Nothing of Majesty among the Romans and
Grecians to a single Person. 373
Names, there must be some used in all public Transactions. 402 Not to be
regarded so much as the Power. 411
Nations, what their Rights are. 6, 298, 321, 326, 341, 343, 345, 366, 380,
411, 420 That went from Babylon, how many. 16, 18, 20, 21, 22, 28, 36, 66, 220
Natural for them to choose Governors. 51, 58, 61, 137, 277, 321 Northern, their
Governments how instituted. 69, 214, 352 Free, never conquered but with
difficulty. 98 Oppressed, can never grow wanton. 107 None safe without Valor
and Strength. 109, 345 Foreign, called in by some Princes to destroy their own
People. 189 Some sell their Children. 147 Slight matters sometimes bring them
into Confusion. Instances thereof. 162 When they are most unquiet. 170, 171,
185 The wisest have set bounds to their Princes Power, etc. 218, 225, 250 Their
Libertys are from God and Nature. 220, 233 Where they have taken the extremest
Courses. 225 Owe nothing to Kings till they are Kings. 243, 304 What set limits
to their Patience. 245, 246 What inclines them to set up Governments. 246 When
All were governed by Tyrants. 255 Their Safety ought not to depend on the Will
of their Princes. 288 What are free and what not. 318 Those that had no Kings
had Power. 330 What shows best their Wisdom and Virtue, or their Vices and
Folly. 335 Wherein their failure has bin too frequent. 338 This divided into
seven Kingdoms. 349 None can have a Power over any, otherwise than de jure, or
de facto. 366 Obedience due from the whole Body, what. 376 Their Libertys don't
rise from the Grants of Princes. 378 Delight in the Peace and Justice of a good
Government. 379 What the most ready way to effect their Ruin. 382, 399, 400,
406 When obliged to remove the Evils they lie under. 396
Nations, none can have an Equal within it self. 398 One that is powerful
cannot recede from its own Right. 398 What King none ever wants that has a
Sovereign Power. 403 What those ought to do that are so happy as to have good
Kings. 406 Great Ones never ordained by God to be Slaves. 411
Naturalization, Rome was for a general One. 142 Negative Voice, how far it is
said to extend. 344 Le Roy s*avisera, what meant by it. 373
Nero, the Power of the State over him. 12, 261 His Endeavor to make a Woman
of a Man. 43, 50 To tear up Virtue by the Roots. 50, 126, 191
Condemned to be put to death. 127, 274 What sort of Vermin be encouraged. 129
Set the City on fire. 159, 189, 272 Died by the hand of a Slave. 163, 261 His
Character. 285 His Madness not to be cured but by his Death. 395
Nimrod the first King. 15, 16, 20, 50, 229 Usurped the Power over his Father,
etc. 17, 232 Heir to no man as King. 27 Slain by Ninus. ibid. No Right can be
derived from him. 36, 38, 42 Erected his Kingdom contrary to paternal Right.
220, 330
Noah, bore no Image of a King. 15, 330 His dividing of Asia, Europe and Africa
among his Sons. 26 When he went out of the Ark, God gave him a Law sufficient
for the State of things at that time. 230 None but his right Heir can have a
Title to an universal Patriarchal Right. 265, 302
Nobility of Rome extirpated. 109 The Roman Power chiefly in them after the
expulsion of the Kings. 118 Hold the Balance between the King and the Commons;
when and how weakened. 172, 175 Of Arragon's Saying to their newmade King. 216
What our Ancestors meant by them. 350, 356, 360 The Strength of the Government
when placed in them. 350, 382
Nobility, sometimes called infinita Multitudo. 352, 354, 355 Knighthood always
esteemed Noble. 352 In France, etc. of what esteem. 353 The present Titular has
no Affinity to the ancient Nobility of England. 354 Of Venice and Switzerland
what makes them so. 355 Their Virtue and Power formerly kept the Kings within
the limits of the Law. 381 Many have lost their Estates and Interest now. 382
Noli prosequi, said to be annexed to the Person of the King. 403 Norman Kings,
swore to govern by the same Laws as the Saxons had. 349, 415 Notions, common,
what are agreed to by all Mankind. 34
O.
OAth of Allegiance used in the Kingdom of Arragon. 68 Agreements between
Prince and People always confirmed by them. 158 How Kings may be absolved from
them. 294, 295 Its force consists in the declared sense of those who give it.
295, 377 Scarce any Prince broke it but to his Ruin. 297 All either voluntary
or unvoluntary. 278 Ought to be performed in reverence to the Religion of it.
297, 300 What to be done, where the Observation of it would be grievous. 299
How the Judges are bound by theirs. 323, 324 Wherein that of the Crown had not
bin kept. 325 What Kings are obliged to do by them. 340, 414 How far those of
Allegiance bind private Persons. 378
Obedience, Active and Passive. 8, 316 Where due and not due. 33, 49, 67, 228,
232, 243, 276, 277, 376 How far a good man will pay it to his Prince. 180, 181
The effects of its Discipline among the Romans. 195 To higher Powers, St. Paul's
words favor all sorts of Governments as well as Monarchy. 266, 267, 268, 276,
277 Why it should be paid. 272 Is not due to that which is not Law. 273, 274,
275, 314
Obedience, the Prince owes it to the Laws as well as the meanest Subject. 283
Due to Parents, from whence it arises. 370 Simple and unconditional, to what
King we all owe it. 403
Object, the only worthy one of man's desire. 55 Obligation arising from
Benefits can only be to those who confer them. 38 Of Gratitude, to whom due.
233 How far the extent of it can be known. 243 Henry VIII. owned it lay on him
rightly to use the Power with which he was entrusted. 287
Occupation, the meaning of the word. 156 Offa, vid. Saxons. Officers, great
Ones in Armies think only of enriching themselves. 198 How their Authority and
Power is to be regulated. 277 Ought to have their Places for the Peoples good.
341 Frequently put to death by the Athenians, etc. 385
Offices, what fits men for the execution of them. 57 Those that buy will make
the most of them. 183 Or must be turned out as a Scandal to the Court. 183 By
what means they have bin often obtained. 184
Oppression, sometimes makes Nations outrageous. 107 Does People such Injnry,
as can never be pardoned. 232
Order, when inverted, introduces extreme Confusion. 55 Wherein it principally
consists. 92. v. 55, 64, 66, 70 The effect of it. 93, 97 Good, not wanting in
Venice. 98 Nor among the Romans. 100 Being established, makes good men. 148
The best sometimes subverted by Malice and Violence. 332
Ordinance, what is Blasphemy to impute to God. 36 Civil and Human. 71 God's
general, and the particular Ordinance of all Societys. 154 Of God, appointed
for the distribution of Justice. 159 Several tending to the same end. 268
Original, no man knows his own. 25, 30, 32, 223, 302 Contract. 54, 55, 56, 57,
58, 59, 66, 67, 69, 71, 72, 226, 244
Original Right must be regulated according to it. 222 Where it would be of no
value. 224, 225 Of Nations almost wholly unknown to us. 229 Ours is deduced
both from the Romans and Saxons. 347, 371
Ostracism of the Athenians, no Dishonor, nor accounted as a Punishment. 123
Nothing savor'd so much of Injustice. 206
Otho, had the Empire given him, by whom. 163 Was a Self-murderer. ibid. Why he
was advanced. 166
Outlaw, or Lawless, often applied to the Wicked, but never to the Just. 230
P.
PApal Power, the foundation of it. 6 The Civil Dissensions in Germany
proceeded from thence. 279 Pretends to the Power of Absolution. 295 Her
Excommunications, bruta fulmina. 296
Papists, their kindness to the Protestants instanced in. 408 Paradoxes, many
of them true. 51 Pardons, said to be only the Bounty of the Prerogative. 324,
403 The meaning of a general one at a Coronation. 325 Where granted against the
Oath of the Crown. ibid. Granted by Act of Parliament. 326 None for a Man
condemned upon an Appeal. 403, 404 The King cannot always pardon in cases of
Treason. 404
Parents, how obliged by Nature to seek their Childrens good. 228, 231
Parliaments, the Institution of them, and for what. 69 The settling and
transferring of Crowns lodged in them. 72, 116, 223 In France, set up to
receive Appeals from other Courts, and to judge Sovereignly, now of little use.
120, 213 A free and well regulated one to choose Ministers of State. 135, 136
Their great Power in all the Kingdoms that came from the North. 211 Declared
Henry III. of France fallen from the Crown. 212 How they may be made useless.
251 England never wanted them. 263
Parliaments, the word Parliament came from the French, but the Power was
always in our selves. 269 Henry VIII. confesses them to be the Lawmakers. 287,
342 Doubtful Cases referred to them. 288, 324, 325 By Writs compel the King to
perform the Conditions of the Great Charter. 296, 297 Have given the Crown to
whom they pleased. 302, 306, 307, 345, 352, 356, 362, 363, 364 Judge of Disputes
arising from the Children of Royal Marriages. 310, 342 Have the sole Power to
explain and correct Laws. 326, 344, 345, 352, 375 Ought of Right to be
annually. 344, 388 From whence they derive their Authority. 346, 363, 364, 383
-- 385 Have refused to be dissolved till their Work was finished. 385 Not
impeccable or infallible, but less subject to Error than some Princes. 386,
387, 405 Our Lives and Libertys depend upon this Court. 405 What the great
Burleigh and Sir Tho. Moor said of their Power. 412 If they make unjust Laws,
their Posterity will suffer. 415 How difficult they are to be bribed. ibid. To
have their Rolls in their Offices, not a mere Ceremony. 417 What Kings have had
continual disputes with them. 419
Partys, what certainly divides the Nation into them. 312 Threaten a national
Ruin. 382
Passions, every one has 'em, few know how to moderate 'em. 165 Put Princes
upon the most unjust designs. 172 The Law is without passion. 288
Patents, began long after the coming of the Normans. 351 Pater Patriae, the
Title thereof considered. 26, 50 By killing a Tyrant how said to become so. 29,
30, 33, 47
Paternal Right, Abraham arrogated none to himself. 16, 17 Impossible to be
known. 21, 25, 28, 29, 60 All the Kingdoms of the Earth established upon it. 28
Government of Rome not Paternal. 32 Cannot be conferred on Princes. 42, 46, 47,
74 To whom it belongs. 26, 62, 63, 249
Paternal Right, in what the Hebrews had no regard to it. 221, 232 Is a mere
Fiction. 223 Is from Nature, and incommunicable. 227
Patriarchal Right, Women and Children have it, according to Filmer. 2 The
Absurdity of it. 13, 14, 37, 265, 411 All pretense to it destroyed. 16, 20, 22,
26, 346 Must accrue to every Father. 18 Either divisible or indivisible. 21, 28
Patriarchal Power different from the Regal. 14, 15, 51 Peace, there can be
none without Justice. 12, 111 Desirable by a State constituted for it. 109
Slavish. 110 What men have in their Graves. ibid. What the Spaniards settled in
the West Indies. ibid. The Name of it given to Desolation. 110, 185, 186, 187
The sad one which France enjoyed for five or six Ages. 171, 172 In Spain to
what imputed. 174 The Terms offered, if good, like to be observed; if bad, will
soon be broken. 377
Peers, act for themselves in their own House. 413 Pembroke, a late Earl of
that Noble Family, his Saying. 168 People, not originally created for Kings to
reign over them. 4 Whether they choose Governors. 11, 51, 54, 68, 74, 79
Scripture-Instances for the proof of it. 85, 215 The choice of the Constitution
is from them. 75, 115, 116, 225, 304, 330 Kings receive their Right from them.
77, 223 How God deals with a People when he intends to exalt them. 100 Of Rome,
their sad degeneracy. 101 Their Right to Appeals. 104, 105, 108, 115, 127
Acting according to their own Will, never set up unworthy men, unless through
mistake. 133 The Body of them the public Defense. 139, 143 None ever well
defended but those who fight for themselves. 143 In Civil Contests they equally
suffer. 153 Whether to be Judges in their own Cases. 158
People, when generally corrupted, the Event is always the Erection of a
Tyrant. 161, 179 Their Condition where tolerable under very cruel Emperors. 170
Their hating of cruel Princes, and they them. 192 Must necessarily have all the
Power originally in themselves. 208, 215, 216, 330 Their Right of looking into
matters of Government, etc. 237, 284 -- 286, 318, 385, 397, 398 Can never fall
into Nonage or Dotage. 291 Did never part with all their Power to Kings. 295
May govern by themselves. 299 Their whole Body not subject to the Commands of
the Magistrate. 376 In their collective Body always continue as free as the
inward Thoughts of a man. 378 They certainly perish who suffer themselves to be
oppressed. 395 That are not free, cannot substitute Delegates. 409 Vid. Nations
and Multitude.

Perfection, simple and relative. 335 Persecution among the first Christian
Emperors. 96 Persia, their Kings reigned from the Indies to the Hellefpont. 26
The Decrees of these Kings passed for Laws. 76 The just Sentence of the Princes
about Daniel. 94 Torn to pieces hy the fury of two Brothers. 122 Under what ill
Conduct and Discipline their Army was. 147
Petition, the haughty Romans condescended to join in one with their Tribunes
to their Dictator. 372 Pharamond, his Race in France, an account of it. 306
Pharaoh, his Monarchy an Act of Tyranny. 23 Pharisees, their Superstition. 315
Philo, to what he imputes the Institution of Kingly Government in Israel. 84,
85 Philosophy true, perfectly conformable with what is taught by men divinely
inspired. 56 Phocion, of his Death. 124 Phoenicians settling in Africa, brought
their Liberty with them. 370 Plato, a Commendation of him. 51 His Principles of
Government. 54, 57, 61
Plato, his Opinion, who ought to be advanced above all. 57, 85, 208 Plays, the
consequence of 'em. 101, 111, 129, 137 Plebeians elected to the chief
Magistracys. 103, 118, 121, 176 Their Jealousy of the Patricians. 152
Polity, its signification. 59 Political Science abstruse. 82, 83 Pompey, his
Cause more plausible, but his Designs as bad as Caesar's. 188 The first Step to
his Ruin was by violating the Laws. 214
Popular Government for what People best. 53 No where disprais'd by Aristotle.
91 The extent of its Conquests. 92, 96, 112, 113 Of Rome, how supported. 112,
113 Something of Monarchical in them. 117 Can never be upheld but by Virtue.
130, 181 Possible, but not easily to fall into Corruption, etc. 132, 179, 180,
184 Improperly what, and what in the strictest sense. 132 Preserves Peace, and
manages War best. 136, 137 Every Man concerned in them. 139, 188, 193 States
remarkable for Peace. 145 Excellent men are generally chosen in them. 149 What
Seditions are seldom seen in them. 152, 153 How ruined. 161 Encourage Industry.
187 Never hurt private Persons but through Errors. 188, 207 When they began to
appear in the World. 259 Obedience due to them as well as to Monarchys. 266
Portugal, who accounted King thereof by the English Court. 402 Poverty, no
Inconvenience in it, if Virtue be honored. 181 The miserable Condition of
Greece, Italy, etc. 185, 186, 187 When it grew^odious in Rome. 252
Power (all just Sovereign) from the People. 47, 68, 70, 78, 172, 215, 216, 224
How he that has it is the Minister of God. 48, 49, 309, 322, 344, 380 Not an
Advantage but a Burden. 60, 61 Delegated, to whom referred. 68, 69, 70 The Root
and Foundation of it. 70
Power, Civil, an human Ordinance. 71 Of the People subject to no Rule but
their own Will. 105 Of the Romans after the expulsion of the Kings, chiefly in
the Nobility. 118 Naturally of a fierce and aspiring Temper. 130, 131 Sovereign
and limited. 156, 172 What, in all the Kingdoms peopled from the North. 211
Most safe when least envied and hated. ibid. If it has bin divided, it may be
so in infinitum. 222 The Roman Emperors endeavored to make their Power
hereditary. 223 The ill effects of unlimited Power might cause it to be
moderated. 229 What may be lawfully resisted. 235 What Prince ought to have it,
and what not. 261 Will thou not be afraid of the Power?what meant by it. 266
Directive and Coercive. 273, 274, 277 Why it ought to be limited. 280 Of the
King is the Power of the Law. 287, 338, 344 What requisite in every State. 292
None can be just but what is good. 328 Over Nations must either be de Jure, or
de Facto. 366 Of the King various according to the Constitutions of every
State. 367 Nothing can make that inherent, which is only delegated. 385
Restrained, when it began to grow insolent. Instances. 393 Where it is not
universal, it is not inherent. 403 How that of every County, City and Borough
of England is regulated. 410 What must be in those that act by a delegated
Power. 413 Where it is placed by well constituted Governments. 414
Practice cannot declare the Greatness of Authority. 238 The consequence of
such a Doctrine. 239 Of Nations to their Sovereigns. 372
Prayers and Tears the only Arms of the first Christians. 257 Preferments, by
what means men now rise to them. 184 Given to those that were most propense to
Slavery. 194 Where obtained only by Virtue. 196
Prerogative of Kings, what. 2, 57 Of Birth. 25 Hereditary of Dominion. 52
Prerogative, all granted by Consent of the whole Society. 66 What the most
glorious. 243, 340 The utmost extent of it, what. 290, 340 Only instituted to
preserve Liberty. 319, 336 What is not the gracious Bounty of it. 325, 419 Who
thought whatever could be detracted from the Liberty of the Nation, would serve
to advance the Prerogative. 419
Princes, ordained for the good of the People. 33, 50, 52, 53, 54 Ought to be
rich in Virtue and Wisdom. 56, 57, 297 All things vary according to the humor
of those that govern. 94, 95, 96 Very few of an inflexible Virtue. 131 Killing
one to obtain the Crown. 171. v. 33 Easily imposed on by Pretenders. 182 By
setting up their own Interest become Enemies to the Public. 188, 189, 190, 192,
229 God's Vicegerents, doing their Duty. 191 The best, by what means drawn out
of the way of Justice. 124, 285 For they have their Failings. 324 Virtuous ones
will have virtuous Courts. 183, 184 Evil ones just the contrary. 129, 131, 181,
182, 194, 195, 196, 290 How they soon lose their Dominions. 150, 151, 170 Seek
the destruction of their best Subjects. 171, 192, 267 Some consider Nations, as
Grasiers do their Herds and Flocks. 191 May commit many Errors in the beginning
of their Reigns, to the ruin of themselves and People. Instances. 200, 201 The
Treachery and Perjury of some. 219 What those that govern them instigate them
to. 229 How far their legal Power extends. 235 Such as are barbarous to their
own People, are usually gentle to the Enemies of their Country. 255 A dangerous
thing to arm them with too much force. 279 Bound by their Oaths and Promises.
297, 298 From whence their Power is derived. 344 Not safe to contradict some,
tho never so justly. 406
Princes, an unlimited one what compared to, and an Instance of such an one in
Scripture. 407 Principes, the extent of the word. 13, 44, 64, 275, 347, 353,
355 The Sanhedrin meant hereby. 209
Principles of all generous Nations before Christ's time, what. 4 And Practices
the best way to judge men by. 129
Prisoners, ought to pay their promised Ransom. 297 Private Person, what
Actions denote a Magistrate so. 156, 158 Privernates, their City taken by
Plautius the Consul. 376 Process, Judicial and Legal, what. 154 Or
Extrajudicial. 159, 160
Proclamations, are at most but temporary. 405, 409 The danger of their being
accounted Laws. 406, 407, 408
Promises, ought justly to be performed. 297 Even those extorted by Fraud. A
Scripture-Instance. 297, 298
Property, is an Appendage to Liberty. 290 Of our Kings, if they be the
Fountain of it. 357
Propositions, ought to be universally true. 10, 16 Filmer's general one found
false. 27, 192
Proscriptions. 100, 102, 107, 110, 125, 163 Prosperity runs naturally into all
manner of Excesses. 107, 128 Men have bin precipitated into ruin by it. 394
Proxys, the way of using them. 71 Proximity of Blood, only regarded in some
Places, whether legitimate or not. 167, 365 How Right descends this way. 362
Vid. Succession.

Punishment of supreme Magistrates in three Instances. 155, 156, 157 To exempt
all Persons from it, supposes they would be guilty of the worst. 160 Where
there is no fear of it. 182, 183 Future, many don't believe or not regard it.
231, 264 Of those the Prince corrupted to desert the public Cause. 381 Of
those that give Princes ill Advice. 385, 404, 405 Whether it ought to fall upon
one or a few guilty Persons, or a whole Nation that is innocent. 396 To what
Members of Parliament are subject. 410
Punishment, in whom the Power of it is lodged. 413 Pyrrhus, seems equal to
either of the Alexanders. 150 His Answer to him that asked who should succeed
him. 164

Q.
QValitys, no more extraordinary in Princes than in others of less degree. 7
What are requisite for chief Magistrates. 32, 35, 52 Few Kings possess all that
are requisite. 94 What subsist in a well-ordered Government. 100 The most
eminent without Virtue, reputed vile and odious. 104
Quarrels among Princes for the most part begun upon personal Titles. 154, 171,
172, 173 Of Princes, where they have bin decided with their own Swords. 154,
168 What would make a perpetual Spring of irreconcilable and mortal Quarrels.
167 Such as arise between the Nobles and Commons frequently produce good Laws.
176 Ours with the Dutch. 189

R.
RAwleigh, Sir Walter, reflected on by Filmer. 362, 363 His Morals no way exact
to a well qualified Gentleman. 363
Reason, is Man's Nature. 134, 241, 281, 285 Universal, is that to which all
Nations owe an equal Veneration. 274
Rebellion, the greatest Empire of the East overthrown by that of the
Mamalukes. 107 People driven to it by Misery or Despair. 107, 238, 239 There
can be no such as that of a Nation against its own Magistrates. 376 What it
implys. ibid. Is nothing but a renewed War. 376, 379 What is compared to
Witchcraft. 379
Regal Power, never exercised by Abraham. 16 The first Fathers after the Flood
had not the exercise of it. 220
Regicides, their abominable Sin. 322 Regnum, the signification of the word.
229 Rehoboam, a sad account of him. 95, 201 His Power far from being absolute.
261 Had good Counsel, but would not hearken to it. 291 Was not the Head of his
People, and why. 391
Religion, always dangerous in the times of the best Roman Emperors. 96 Of the
same Nature with Virtue. 190 The Principles of the Popish. 408
Remedys to Government applied according to the Necessity of Circumstances.
103, 120, 393, 394 What Children have, against their too severe Parents. 231
None to the Hebrews Cries and Prayers under their Miserys. 234 Must be tried,
how difficult soever. 395 Which most fit to be applied, the best time to apply
them, and who the properest Judges. 399
Representatives, how, and by whom they came to be deputed. 348, 353, 355, 384
Whether the People should judge of their Behavior. 385
Republics, v. Commonwealths. Resignation of ones Liberty, what. 370 Of the
Crown. 396. v. 299, 300
Resistance, in what Cases justified. 190, 235, 237, 245 Every one has a Right
to resist what ought not to be done to him. 242 Scripture-Instances of
resisting Princes. 264
Resumption of Lands. v. Grants. Retaliation, where nothing was more just. 94
Kings under this Law as well as People. 239, 240
Revenue, how granted to and settled on Kings. 251 Revolts of conquered
Nations. 106 Of Subjects or Allys. 107, 163 Of Israel in Solomon 's time. 162,
238 Of Absalom. 237, 238 Of the ten Tribes. 239 General of a Nation cannot be
called a Rebellion. 376
Revolutions, vid. Authors. Rewards and Punishments how to be proportioned. 124
Make men subservient to ill Designs. 250, 251 What called the Rewards of the
vilest Servitde. 347
Riches, the Root of all Evil. 45, 46, 181, 182 Riches, when they become
formidable. 103 Exhausted by Tribute and Rapine. 108, 182 Desired, to gain
Followers. 251 From thence all Mischiefs ensue. 252
Right, of those Sovereigns that are limited. 156, 158 Proceeds from Identity,
not from Similitude. 389 What belongs to every man in all cases. 397
Right acquired, how to be obtained. 303, 358 How the Resignation of it to
another operates. 358 Hereditary to the Dominion of the World, no such thing.
38, 60 Great variety in the deduction of it. 77
Universal, conferred by God and Nature. 32 Where it must have bin. 35, 37, 42,
67 Must be in one, or divided. 36, 37 Where it devolves on particular Nations.
67

Right of Choosing, infers a Right of making a King. 73 Created by an explicit
Act of Approbation. 73, 80 Naturally belonging to Nations, not impaired by the
Name of Supreme given to Magistrates. 156 Of proceeding judicially or
extrajudicially against all that transgress the Laws. 159, 235
Right of Occupancy. 32, 33, 46 None can come by Conquest. 20 None to be
deduced from him that had none. 20, 37, 47 Where to be acknowledged. 33 Of Jack
Straw, Wat. Tyler, Perkin Warbeck. 167 The Continuance of an unjust Usurpation
can never create a Right. 224
Right of particular Nations, how it may subsist. 8, 9 Proceeds from the Laws
of Nature. 9, 346
Right to Crowns, what said to be inseparable from Kings. 85 Must be either
natural, created, or acquired. 303
Rochel, how it came to be taken. 197 Rods and Axes, before whom, and why
carried. 127, 155, 156 Roman Emperors, who the best and wisest of them. 180 How
they were set up. 259
Roman Empire, destroyed by the Loss of her Liberty. 95, 98, 99, 100, 101, 109,
110, 113, 121 Its extent after the recovery of Liberty. 100, 109 Tacitus's
Description of it in its declension. 100, 102 It did not fall on a sudden, and
why. 101 Her Delatores what sort of People. 101 Subdued by the most barbarous
Nations. 102, 110, 126 Perpetually decayed when it fell into the hands of one
man. 108, 109, 110, 209, 248 Its own Prudence preserved it. 112, 121
Romans had three ways of dealing with conquered Nations. 106 What raised them
above the rest of Mankind. 139, 140 They only fit to be so, who thought nothing
valuable but Liberty. 377
Rome, whether that Government was paternal. 32 Overthrew all the Monarchys
within their reach. 32, 100, 112 Its extent at first. 64, 108 Wherein she
excelled other Nations. 92, 109 When she met with Defeats and Ruin. 93, 194, 195
All that ever was desirable in her proceeded from Liberty. 99 Never produced a
brave man since the first Age of her Slavery. 101 How it was composed. 115
Sought her Grandeur by War. 118, 142 Her Fortune when she became a Monarchy.
119 None so free from Crimes of wilful Injustice, nor guilty of so few Errors
as she. 124 Her Generosity. ibid. The mildness of her Government for 300 Years.
125, 127, 128 Struggling for Liberty, at last was ruined by the Barbarians. 126
Not enslaved when Brutus was killed. 148 Was jealous of Valerius Publicola, and
why. 152 The Peace she had under Augustus. 163 When filled with Blood and
Ashes. 163, 164 Her Condition now. 186 Suffered more by one Villain, than by
all the Defeats received from Hannibal. 187 A perpetual spring of brave and
valiant M^n so long as Liberty lasted. 195
Rome, remained in Slavery notwithstanding the Slaughter of Caesar. 244 Her
Kings Lands, after their expulsion, consecrated to Mars. 251
Romulus, slain for aiming at too great an Authority. 31 How not made King by
the People but by God. 47. v. 330 Laid the Right of Appeals to the People, as
the Foundation of his Commonwealth. 105 How he tempered the fierce humor of
the People. 334
Rule, there must be one relating to the Acquisition and Exercise of Power.
206, 365 The Law of Nature is that which God has given to things. 241 If any
had bin given by God and Nature, it must have bin from the beginning universal
and perpetual. 332 There is one which Kings are obliged to follow. 365 None can
be so exact as to make provision against all disputes. 379 Without it Society
cannot subsist. 397 Men subject to none but that of their own Reason. 414
Rules, set to distinguish between Right and Wrong in Princes. 33 By which Men
are governed, are named Laws. 52 Not generally true, if there be any just
Exceptions against them. 69 In Politics, some which ought always to be
observed. 120, 121, 133 Observed in England as to point of Succession. 167

S.
SAbeans, their Kings, tho obeyed in all things within their Palace, yet might
be stoned without it. 78 Sacred, not to be accounted so by Crimes. 159 The
Style given to the Tribunes as well as Monarchs. 372
Salick Law in France. 40, 167, 212, 301, 304 Has bin in force above 1200
Years. 212 Not without difficultys sufficient to subvert the Polity of that
Kingdom. Instances thereof. 310
Salmasius his Story of Bees. 83 Salus Populi, Lex est suprema. 79, 229, 255,
290, 304, 305, 336, 340 To what this Safety extends. 290 The End for which
Governments are instituted. 202
Samuel was no King, for the Israelites asked one of him. 230 What he wrote in
a Book was not a Law to the People but to the King. ibid. Told them their Folly
and Misery in asking a King. 234, 240 Not he, but God was rejected by them. 253
How he behaved himself as Head of the Israelites. 390
Sanhedrin instituted by Moses. 86, 115 How permanent. 87 Always to be Advisers
of the Jewish Kings. 209, 269 Where said that Kings can do nothing without
them. 239 For what end constituted Judges. ibid.
Saul, his first Sin by which he fell. 84, 87 Opposing God's Command he
pretended to fulfill it. 89 The effects of his various fits of Fury. 94, 255 His
Vices never discovered, till he was on the Throne. 184 Gave the Israelites no
Law. 230 Chosen King in the most Democratical Way, by Lot. 232, 235 How he
overthrew his own Right. 236 Not made King by virtue of God's Unction only. 237
Savoy, the Duke, found out thirteen halves to be in every Year. 378 Saxons,
set up Kings and deposed them as they pleased. 270, 349 The brave Saying of
King Offa. 298, 365, 372 Laws to which all our Kings have sworn continue still
in force among us. 299 Severe Asserters of their Libertys and Laws. 331, 347,
358 We chiesly derive our Original and Manners from them. 347, 371 Their
Assemblys the same in Power with our Parliaments. 348 In their own Country
scorned all Employments but that of the Sword. 355 By what Names they and their
General Assemblys were called. 356 Came hither under Hengist and Horsa. 357 How
they came to reform their Manners, and frame Laws. 371 Their great Wisdom in
making Laws. 415
Schoolmen, an unjust Imputation on them. 3, 4, 10, 51 To what a nicety they
have minced Oaths. 295
Scientes temporum, who. 194 Scipio Africanus, the first that disdained the
Power of the Law. 124, 125 Scotland, the Mischiefs brought upon it by their
Contests. 174 When and how conquered. 198 Their little number of Foot beat the
King's Army at Newborn. 199 James the Third, Lewis XI's apt Scholar in
subverting the Laws, etc. 211 Many of their Kings punished with Death,
Imprisonment and Exile. 396, 399
Scripture, the Places therein relating to Government, how best interpreted. 13
What it says concerning Kings. 13, 85, 250 The Accounts there given concerning
their Leaders. 85 What it occasionally relates of the Babylonian and other
Monarchys. 164 Declares the necessity of setting bounds to Princes. 209 Is
clear concerning the antiquity of Laws. 230
Senate, their Power. 12, 104 Julius Caesar slain in it. 95 Set up by the
People. 108 How exposed and destroyed. 110 Condemned Nero to be put to death.
127 Killed Romulus. 142 Strangers admitted into that of Rome. ibid. Abrogated
the Power of the Decemviri. 156 The best Judges. 158, 159 And People of Rome
not to be bribed. 183, 184 Of Rome like to be butchered, and for what. 163
Chosen for their Virtues. 185 Of what constituent parts it may be composed. 216
The greatest part of them fell at the Battle of Pharsalia. 329 Of Sparta and
Venice their great Power. 345 Senators and Servants employed in our public
Affairs. 410
Sedition, popular. 8 What. 154 What it implys. 70, 160 Said to be occasioned
by Learning. 91, 97, 123 None hurtful to Rome till men got above the Law. 105,
106 From whence it arises. 152, 153, 165 Proceeding from Malice, is seldom or
never seen in popular Governments. 153 But always detestable. 161
Sedition, one of the greatest that ever was at Rome appeased, and how. 161
When justified by God and Man. 154, 155, 156, 157, 160 Most natural to absolute
Monarchys. 161 From Solomon's time the Jews perpetually vexed with them. 162 To
what some Magistrates give this Name. 312
Seneff, the Battle of it. 199 Servants of God, who. 48 Raised to high degrees
of Honor. 55, 56 None can be Members of a Commonwealth. 59, 69
Ship-mony. vid. Judges. Shires, far more ancient than Alfred's time, and what
meant by them. 353, 354 Singulis major, universis minor. 157, 264 Slaves by
Nature, who. 4, 9, 29, 55, 79, 245 Oftentimes advanced. 55, 100, 101, 122, 126,
129, 288 No Members of the Civil Society. 106 Absolutely resign themselves to
the Will of others, and why. 135, 136 What States become so to their Protector.
147 What Tributes they are forced to pay. 262 What denotes a Slave. 290, 318,
319 What the true Badges of Slaves. 314 Sad, when the worst of them came to
govern Kings. 419 Will always be Cowards, and Enemies to their Master. 420
Slavery, what to be understood by it. 9, 19, 20, 25 What it is accompanied
with. 92, 122 The Produce of it. 112, 137 The Asiaticks underwent the greatest.
234 A great part of the Curse against Cham and all his Posterity. 239 None of
God's Institution. 240 What brings it upon any Nation, together with its ruin.
400 With a Witness. 409
Sloth in Princes, the miserable Effects thereof. 170 Smyrna, the design of
taking that Fleet. 200 Societys, must in some measure diminish Liberty. 19, 20,
22, 52 Subsist only by Order. 55, 66, 397 Civil, composed of Equals. 59 How
instituted. 64, 70 When once entered into, oblige all to the Laws thereof. 70
Societys are maintained by mutual Contracts. 214 Socrates put to death by
false Witnesses. 123, 124 Soil, Kings not originally Lords of it. 357, 370, 371
Soldiers in Scripture, there were as many to fight for their Country, as there
were able men to fight. 143, 144 Every man is one against a public Enemy. 155
The Grecian in the time of their Virtue had no Equals. 195 The Christian their
Obligation. 316, 317
Soldiers Mercenary, overthrow all the Laws of a Country. 130, 214 Often betray
their Masters in distress. 138, 139 Several Citys in Italy made their Wars by
them. 142 Always want Fidelity or Courage. 147 Sent to the Wars by force. 198
And other Villains subdued the Syracusans, Spartans and Romans. 222
Soldiery, accounted a Trade. 105 Solomon, his Idolatry and Oppression. 95 The
bad effect of his Magnificence. 162 His peaceable Reign. ibid. Overthrew the
Law given by Moses. 238 None will say he was a Tyrant, yet he was complained of
by the People. 254 His Wisdom surpassed that of all the People. 386
Sovereigns, impatiently bear Competitors. 17 Majesty, the extravagance of it
in Augustus Caesar's time. 329
Sovereignty, remained in the Roman People. 104 To whom the disposal of it must
perpetually belong. 304, 365
Spain, has nothing save Milan, but what is come to her by Marriage. 151 The
Civil Wars there. 174 The ancient Kingdoms of Spain heredttary. 301. v. 78 When
one Kingdom comprehended all Spain. 305 How the Crown was disposed of according
to the humor of the People. 305, 306 The only Title Isabel had to the Crown,
was derived from Illegitimation. 310 How the King may deserve the name of being
Head of his People. 392
Spaniards, their Valor against the Carthaginians and Romans, and their
Overthrow by two lewd Tyrants. 151 Spaniards, the condition to which they have
reduced Naples, Sicily, the West Indies, etc. 187 Spartan Kings, what they were
subject to from their People. 76, 77 Together with their Power. 210 Government
in what it consisted. 115 Preferred by Xenophon to Athens. 123 Framed a most
severe Discipline. 142 Never any Sedition against their Kings. 210 Called an
Aristocracy by all the Greek Authors. 216 Appointed Limits to the Power of
their Kings. 218, 380, 393 Had no Law against Adultery, and why. 228

Spartans, whom they brought from Thebes and Epirus to be their Kings. 31
Jealous of Lycurgus, and why. 152 Had Kings before the time of Hercules and
Achilles. 77 Sacrificed their Lives in defense of their Country. 140 Never
heard an Enemies Trumpet for 880 Years. 142 Whether descended from the Hebrews,
and what Power the collective Body of the People had over them. 210 The Poverty
and Simplicity of their Kings. 251 Their Legislature was in the People. 269
Stability, the effect of good Order in that which is good. 32, 93, 94 Wherein
it consists in Man. 93 There can be none in absolute Kingdoms. 96, 163, 172,
173 Produces Strength. 97 Not wanting in Venice. 98 Nor among the Romans. 100
Star Chamber, its Jurisdiction abolished. 344 States General, vid. Holland.
Statutes, from whom they receive their Authority and Force. 405 Vid. Acts of
Parliament.
Stipulations are not Personal but National. 402 Suarez, his Saying about Adam.
59 Subjection lineal, never anciently dreamt of. 58 To the Power, however
acquired. 155 And Protection are Relatives. 371
Submission, all manner of it is a restraint of Liberty. 134 The nature and
measure of it how to be determined. 397
Succession, no difference in Religion said to be able to divert the Right of
it. 21 The eldest Brother preferred before the Son. 78 To the next in Blood. 93
Of Blood, the Disease incident to it. 148 Laws concerning it. 166, 280 By the
Law of God and Nature. 166 The various ways of it in several Kingdoms. 167 The
Slaughters about it in France. 169 Sometimes comes to Monsters in Cruelty, to
Children and Fools. 279 The Law gives the Rule of it. 283, 301, 304 Five
different ways of disposing of it. 301, 365, 366 In Spain according to the
Pleasure of the Nobility and People. 305 Where in France it is like to be
questioned, if not overthrown by the House of Austria. 308, 361 Contests will
arise concerning it, how exactly soever it be disposed of by Law. 309 No
Footsteps of any regular one, either by Inheritance or Election. 331 Of the
Crown settled by Parliament. 345 Several Questions arising from that which is
hereditary. 360, 361
Superiority, given to Moses, who was the younger Brother. 23 Not in Nature.
but in Virtue. 52, 53, 56
Supplications and Remonstrances, where to be used. 395 Supreme, the extent of
the Word. 156, 157, 158, 225, 226, 321, 344. Power has bin enjoyed in the
fullest extent by such as never had the Name of King. 277 Where there was a
reservation of this Power in the People. 284
Sweden, the Blood Royal not to marry out of the Country, or without the
Consent of the States. 167 How the Inheritance to the Crown is settled there.
301, 364 Election the best Title to it. 303, 353 Their Laws but few. 337 Who
the Nobility of that Country. 353 What Charles Gustavus told an Ambassador
there. 364
Switzers, the 13 Cantons, how long they have enjoyed more Peace than any other
State of Europe. 144, 145 None more free from popular Seditions. 145
Switzers, the Laws of their Country read over in a few Hours. 337 How they use
their Delegates. 410
Sword, where left as an Inheritance to Familys. 95 The right of Appeals
overthrown by it. 105 He that draws it against his Prince, ought to throw away
the Scabbard. 153 Of Justice, and of War. 154, 259, 260 When the only Law that
governs. 164, 188 Away of killing worse than that of the Sword. 186 To what end
Swords were given to men. 245 The use of the Civil as well as Military, equally
condemned by the first Christians. 259, 260 Of Power, in all sorts of
Governments. 266 So to be used that Nations may live peaceably. 268 What meant
by this Word. 268, 269 Of Justice comprehends the Legislative and Executive
Power. 269 What the Military signifys. 269, 270 Questions about Title to Crowns
often determined this way. 309 Where Edicts are besitated at by the Parliament
at Paris, this Power has bin made use of to compel. 417
Sylla, the Crimes of his Life, and Miserys of his Death. 179 If not a Tyrant,
there never was any in the World. 188 Resigns his Power, tho too late for
Rome's recovery. ibid.

T.
TAcitus, his sad account of Rome. 50, 100, 102, 112, 125, 126, 137 Speaks of
the Burden of absolute Power. 61 Mentions a sort of Kings used by the Romans to
keep Nations in servitude to them. 331 When he says the Roman Laws grew
innumerable. 337
Tamerlan said he was not a Man, but the Scourge of God, and the Plague of
Mankind. 292 Tarquin, the expulsion of him from Rome. 10, 330, 331 The first
that reigned fine jussu populi. 68
Tarquin, came in by Treachery and Murder. 99, 108, 121, 158 How the People
delivered themselves from him. 116, 135, 176 What followed from his being
expelled. 152, 244 His Counsel concerning the Poppys. 168
Taxes, upon what accounts to be given, but not to oppress the People. 251, 252
Tenants, how they now look upon their Lords. 382 Tenure, none in England owes
any but by virtue of a Contract, made either by himself or his Predecessors.
246, 247 Those of Turpitude now abolished. 247 Of the Commons as ancient as
many of the Nobility's. 351
Tertullian, several Sayings out of his Apologeticks. 259, 260 The design of
his Apology and Treatise to Scapula. 260 Calls the whole People of Carthage,
Antiquitate Nobiles, Nobilitate felices. 356
Thanestry, the Law of it. 78 Themistocles, his Character. 123 His Envy and
Spite to Aristides. ibid. All the Citizens of Athens able to bear Arms went
along with him against Xerxes. 141 A great and true Saying of his. 180
Tiberius, his Reign an uninterrupted Series of Murders, Subornations,
Perjurys, etc. 163, 169 Assumed the name of Caesar without any Title. 257 His
detestable Lust described by Tacitus. 276 To what Counselors he only inclined.
291
Time, changes nothing. 152, 196 Can make nothing lawful and just that is not
so of it self. 346
Titles, of the first Kings came not from Paternity. 27, 221 Of Princes,
derived from Murders, etc. 33, 35 Some would not have them examined into. 33,
155 Hobbs of another Opinion. 155 Instances of ours in particular. 362 Of
Civility have no power to create a Right of Dominion. 63 Disputes about them by
what power to be determined. 79, 80, 310, 311 Thought good if the Princes could
corrupt two or three Legions. 164 No Emperor had a better than what he got by
Money or Violence. ibid.
Titles, to Dominion by whom conferred. 221 The sordid ways of attaining them in
our days. 351 On whom those of Offices were anciently conferred. ibid. In what
just ones do consist. 360 Several ways to overthrow most of them. 361 Kings,
where instanced in to have no other than what was conferred on them by the
People. 364 Whatever is given to the chief Magistrate, he can have no other
Power than what is given him by the People and the Laws. 368 The most swelling
and august, to whom given. 373, 381
Trade, subservient to the end of War. 142, 143 Spartans banished all the
curious Arts that are useful to it. 142
Trajan, his Expedition into the East. 109 Bitterly derided for his Clemency by
Tertullian, and why. 273 Whom he bid to use the Sword for or against him, as he
reigned well or ill. 366, 413
Treason, the principal part of Tresilian's, was his Opinion that Kings might
dissolve Parliaments at their pleasure. 384 Persons executed as Traitors for
things done by the King's Command. 404 It Is enacted, that to kill the King is
so, and to be punished with death. 416
Treatys, the King's name always used in them, tho they are Children, or
otherwise incapable, but yet they oblige them, their Successors and People. 402
If Parliaments should make ignominious Ones, when the Session is ended, they
must bear the Burden as much as others. 415
Tribes, the Ten, why they did not return to the House of David. 238 Tribunes
of the People, their Creation. 118, 176 Military, with a Consular Power. 118,
121 How Caesar corrupted them. 119, 130 The most dangerous Sedition composed by
them. 153 Threaten the Dictator with a great Fine. 226 Esteemed sacred and
inviolable. 373
Tribute, the ancient Jews scrupled paying it to the Emperors. 351 What
understood by that name. 257, 258
Tribute, we owe none but what we freely give. 262 Triumvirate, first set up by
Pompey. 188 Trust, what the greatest that can be reposed in men. 345 Where that
reposed in Kings has bin misemploy'd. 354 How Kings are said to dispense with
it out of the public Stock. 385 Vid. Kings.
Truth, no Consequence can destroy it. 5 Is comprehended by examining
Principles. 6, 329 Is the Rule of Justice. 28 Our Thoughts ought ever to be
guided by it. 29, 57 The Knowledge of it makes men wise. 57 Can never be
repugnant to Justice. 59 What are real Truths grounded on the Laws of God and
Nature. 75, 76 Kings seldom hear it, till they are ruined by Lys. 201, 202 Can
never be made too evident in matters of Importance. 304 Of absolute necessity
to keep the Tongue from Falsehood. 311 The bond of Union. 313 They that enquire
for it, must not deny or conceal any thing. 359 Can seldom or ever conduce to
mischief. 388
Trial, vid. Law. Once acquitted, not questioned a second time for the same
Fact. 213 In France the King cannot be present at any, for no man can be judged
if he be. 401 Here is said to be coram Rege, but it must only be according to
the Law of the Land. 403
Tumults, where they do no hurt. 92 From whence they arise. 152 What. 154 Among
the Hebrews. 162 Of Rome, their difference from some of our Battles. 176 What
Reigns are most accompanied with them. 185. v. 171
Turks, all the Royal Brethren exposed to be destroyed by the Sultan. 63 Their
greatest Strength consists in Children that do not know their own Fathers. 137
How they came by their Ruin. 187 When the Germans fled to them for Protection.
387
Tuscany, when one of the most flourishing Provinces in the World, now to how
low an Ebb reduced. 378 Tyranny, how it may be weakened. 5, 6, 92 Abhorred by
the Laws of God and Man. 34, 179, 208 Brought ruin to those subjected thereto.
52 To impose Laws arbitrarily. 75 Can create no Right. 77 Is Empire gained by
Violence. 77 The occasion of Revolts. 107 All had their beginning from
Corruption. 129, 161 Introduced by the worst of men. 134, 250 The Overthrow of
Spain. 151 The People miserable under all. 157, 188, 189 Never founded on
Contracts. 233 When it began to become odious. 254 Where it is very cruel, a
Nation cannot subsist, unless it be corrected or suppressed. 285 To set it up,
is to abolish Kings. 293 Is the Death of a State. 395 Not the Tyrant, but
Tyranny must be destroyed. 400 Tyranny with a Mischief. 409
Tyrants, how they have bin accounted. 8, 27, 50, 122 The first King a cruel
one, and called the mighty Hunter. 16, 94 Consult only their own Greatness. 34,
61, 119, 223 Obedience said to be due to them from the fifth Commandment. 50
The difference between lawful Kings and them. 61, 205 Few go to their Graves in
Peace. 61, 179, 215, 219, 244, 279 Many would resist but cannot. 73 Destroyed
by one another. 95, 159, 161, 171, 172, 285, 293 When they reign, the Virtuous
are unregarded. 99 Fear and abhor all men of Reputation or Virtue. 110, 158,
171, 189 All Evils come in with them. 111 Destroyed by their own People. 116,
223 The Thirty of Athens. 124, 155 Said exuisse hominem. 134, 157 Consider
Nations as Grasiers do their Herds. 191 A virtuous man could scarce die in his
Bed under them. 126 Among the most virtuous Nations every man might lawfully
kill them. 155, 205, 223, 293 Tyranni sine Titulo. 155, 375 Extrajudicial
Proceedings must be sometimes against them. 160 What may be expected from them.
191
Tyrants, none such upon Filmer 's Principles. 205, 289, 290, 291, 292, 293 To
what excesses of Cruelty their fear drives them. 206 Whom Aristotle accounts
such. 208, 209 Who said to have laid the foundations of Tyranny. 211 Do many
mischiefs, and suffer more. 215, 218 Their Life miserable, Death infamous, and
Memory detestable. 219 Whether the whole course of their Actions do well suit
with the sacred Name of Father. 227, 228, 229, 292, 293 Some in removing them
have cut Tyranny by the Roots. 244 No Name for one in any of the Oriental
Tongues. 253 He Is no more than an evil or corrupted Monarch. 253, 285 No
Obedience due to any of them. 276, 277 When Kings are said to degenerate into
such. 286, 287 Set themselves up against all Laws. 289 Called so, because they
have no Rights. 293 Are the worst of all God's Creatures. 328 Speak always in
the singular Number. 339

V.
Valor, the Roman was for the good of their Country. 99, 100 By the excellence
of it the greatest Powers in the World were subdued by the Romans. 105
Venality, natural to Courts. 128, 129, 179, 180 Looks always after the best
Bargain. 147
Venetians, of what they are composed. 115, 158 Relying on Trade and mercenary
Soldiers, too much are forced to depend on Foreign Potentates. 142, 143 Their
too great Inclinations to Peace accounted a mortal Error in their Constitution.
144
Venice, the Dukes, tho styled supreme, yet are so under the Power of the Law,
that diverse have bin put to Death for transgressing it. 156, 157, 380, 393
Their Noblemens Love for their Commonwealth. 176, 177 Concerning the Council of
Ten. 366
Verdict of Jurys, in this consists the Strength of every Judgment. 338 Virtue,
what. 190 What requisite in Kings. 24, 29, 34, 35, 52, 53, 55 Gave birth to the
Grecian Governments. 31 Gives a natural preference of one Man above another.
51, 91 And also to Children. 62 Carrys the true Marks of Sovereignty. 54, 57,
90 Never continues in any Race of Men. 63, 164, 184, 185, 340, 406 Essentially
necessary for preserving of Liberty. 92, 102, 196 When persecuted, few will
follow it. 100 No way to real Honor without it. 104, 181, 196 Not to be
considered when it is departed from. 124 When attended with certain
destruction. 125, 126, 191, 195, 267 The Roman, of being as a Law to
themselves. 128 Whose will be remembered in all Ages. 134, 135, 149, 160, 195
Makes as many Soldiers as there are Freemen. 139, 195 Overcomes all
Difficultys. 140, 148 And Strength make and preserve Conquests. 151 He that
has Virtue and Power to save a People, can never want a Right of doing it. 160
Can never long uphold what is vicious in the Principle. 161, 162 By what means
it becomes popular. 181 Those hated and feared, who most excel in it. 183 Hated
for its own sake. 190 Expires with loss of Liberty. 194, 195 Given where God
pleases without distinction. 202 Where it has the Advantage, there can be no
arbitrary Power. 219 Once blemished, makes former Services forgot. 276 Who
encourage it most. 313 Makes the distinction between Men, simply or relatively
considered. 327 Men are truly ennobled by it only. 351 Those that are Enemies to
her, and fear not God, are afraid of Men. 388 The Virtues of a Man die with
him. 406
Vice, Mankind inclined to it. 100 128 The Effects of it to a Nation. 101, 154,
161, 172, 176
Vice, may be profitable to private Men, but can never be so to the Government.
129 Its deformity when most conspicuous. 130 What England has lost by her
Vices. 148 Those of Princes result to the damage of the People. 175, 190, 192
The Vermin that attend vicious Courts. 194, 195 By what means and to what end
the Vices of Princes have bin fomented. 250
Vicious Persons, they will submit to any Power that promises them Impunity.
135 Care not what they do, if they can find their account in it. 314
Villains, little better than Slaves, appointed to cultivate the Lands, and to
other servile Offices. 354 Villainy, where it has bin promoted to supreme
Dignity. 32, 42, 182 What it inspires, to attain its end. 46, 155* v. 30
Tarquin hated only for his Villanys. 158 None, that Men of desperate Fortunes
will not undertake. 161 Supported by committing yet more. 182 What Rome
suffered by it. 187
Vitellius thrown into the Common-shore. 163, 275 His contemptible Character.
166
Ulpian his Saying, that Princeps Legibus non tenetur, concludes nothing
against us. 341 Union; Similitude of Interests, Manners and Designs, is a link
of it. 133 United Provinces, so steady in Practice and Principle, as hardly to
be paralleled in the World. 145 How the Deputys are used there. 410 Have had
Dukes, Earls or Marquesses. 411
Vortigern, the last and worst of the British Kings. 350 His Favor to the
Saxons, and Carriage to the Britans. 357, 358
Vox Populi est vox Dei. 47 Nothing more natural than to follow the Voice of
all Mankind. 75, 396 General Consent is the Voice of Nature. 19, 20, 134 The
Consequence of one Voice in each State. 215
Usurpation, made the first King. 16* 17, 35 Grounding Pretensions of Right
from thence. 20, 27, 31, 32, 42, 46, 67, 90
Usurpation justified. 42 The greatest Injury can be done to Man. 67, 134, 155
What Power is so. 75 By whom bid to submit to it. 155 Lawful for an injured
People to resume their own. 159 And Violence, said to confer an incontestable
Right. 205, 227 All is detestable and abominable. 265 None can deduce any Title
from it. 361
Usurpers, Athaliah an Vsurpress. 41 Have their Root in Violence and Fraud. 71,
117 Seem to be born for Plagues to Mankind. 104 What lawful against One is
lawful against All, that is, to get rid of them. 155 May be suppressed as
Enemies and Robbers. 235 Some that never were Conquerors. 265 Declare their
Contempt of all human and divine Laws. 318 We ought to examine the Titles so,
as to judge of them. 361
Usury, the Cruelty of it. 103 The mitigation of it composed intestine
Quarrels. 176

W.
WAntonness, from whence it proceeds. 107 War and Peace, the Kings of Sparta
never bad the Power of either. 77 Transacted by the collected Body of the
People. 86, 87, 88
War, the Hebrew Government fitted them for War. 115, 143 Of Charles Duke of
Burgundy with the Swiss-Cantons. 144 Better performed in popular Governments
than in Monarchys. 149 It is Decertatio per vim. 154 When the People may engage
in it justly. 154, 155 What to be accounted making of War. 235, 236 Differs
much from what it was formerly. 256 There is such a thing among men as a just
War, and why. 265 Kings of Judah could not make any without the consent of the
Sanhedrin. 269 Whether a Subject may examine if it be just or unjust. 316, 317
Where the Cause of it is originally just, and it proves successful; what Right
the Generals have over their Enemies. 367 The Events of it various. 374
Wars, Civil, only made by Members of the Civil Society. 106 None till the
times of Marius, Sylla and Catiline. ibid. Esteemed the last struglings of
expiring Liberty. ibid. The Root of the Romans, what. 114 In France. 119, 173
From whence they arise. 152, 174 Pretenses for them commonly false. 153 When
they will always be frequent. 170 What Reigns most accompanied with them. 171
In Spain. 174 More in Kingdoms than in Commonwealths. 175, 185, 187 Not the
greatest evil that befalls Nations. 185 The Romans and Grecians glory in freeing
their Countries from a Civil War. 198 In Macchiavel's account are a Disease. 395
Wards, that Court, how the Institution of it was perverted. 44 Westminster,
what its Privileges in point of Elections. 385 Wickedness, makes men Cowards.
206 Will, is ever drawn by some real good, or the appearance of it. 32 The
dividing of the World left to the Will of Man. 37, 38 Passing for Law, the
effects of it. 96, 205, 206, 223, 414, 415 Where this is the Rule, the Prince
sets up an Interest separate from that of his People. 219
William the First, elected a Clero and Populo. 72, 271 Could inherit nothing.
77 On what Conditions sworn to be received. 298 In his time our Ancestors were
in a low Condition. 342
Wisdom, not always annexed to the Character of Kings. 43 When Men give
Testimony of it. ibid. Whose we ought to admire and imitate. 57, 157 The wisest
men most sit for Government. 92 Of Man imperfect. 120 A kind of Ability to
dispatch some sort of Affairs, is so called. 202 Of the collected Body of the
People surpasses that of a single Man. 290
Witnesses false encouraged, and called Custodes Legum. 101, 129 No sufficient
defense against them either by the Laws of God or Man. 124 Ministers of
Iniquity. 151, 192 God or Man. 124 Countenanced at Rome. 186 The best Tribunals
in the World may be mis^ed by them. 206 Irish. 101
Wittena-Gemote, its Power as declared by Camden. 350 The Power of the Nation
resided in them. 354, 384
Women, on what account they are excluded in France and Turkey. 40, 78, 167,
301, 302, 365 And were by other Nations. 41 Some do admit them. 78, 167 What
have governed Kings, but seldom Senats or popular Assemblys. 170, 179, 180 What
Mischiefs Kings have bin guilty of to gratify 'em. 407
Work, that of all Magistrates and Governors. 48, 53 Worst Men advanced, and
most ambitious to be so. 44, 50, 55, 56, 61 And by whom preferred. 131, 132,
133, 136 Styled Fathers of their People. 47, 48 Have their Tools to execute
their detestable Designs. 111 Tyranny set up by them. 134, 135, 136, 192
Engaged in all Tumults. 162 Most frequently have obtained the Empire by the
worst means. 166 Their Principles ought to be destroyed. 181 Easily swallow
Bribes. 182, 184 Have most Power in some Courts. 183, 184 How Princes become
so, as also the most miserable. 219 Delight in the worst things. 241
Worst Men, whom they had no need to fear. 267 What base courses they take to
gain the favor of weak and vicious Princes. 279 What encourages them to murder
the best of Princes. 344
Worthy Men, in ill times suspected for their Virtue. 101 Ought to be had in
highest Veneration. 333
Wrong, is a Breach of the Laws, which determine what is Right. 205 If there be
none done, there can be no Revenge. 206 Where Kings can do none. 403

X.
XEnophon, why he called Agesilaus a good and faithful King. 76 Conducted the
Grecians Retreat in despite of above 400000 men, who endeavored to oppose them.
97 His Opinion concerning Tyranny. 122 For Aristocracy. 122, 123, 136
Xerxes, his Folly in inflicting Stripes on the Sea. 43 His Invasion of Greece.
141

Y.
YNca Garcilasso of Peru, the fabulous Story of him. 164, 165 Younger Brothers
preferred to the Elder. 23, 80
Z.
ZEal, Excess of Violence is but an ill Testimony of it. 144 When it can never
be capable of Excess. 235
Zimri, his Title to the supreme Honor how acquired. 29 Zoroaster, supposed to
be Ham. 27
FINIS.
Books printed by J. Darby in Bartholomew-Close.
THE Oceana of James Harrington, and his other Works, some of which are now
first published from the Manuscripts. The whole Collected, Methodiz'd and
Reviewed, with an exact Account of his Life prefixed. Fol.

The History of the Reign of Henry the Fifth, King of England, etc. In Nine
Books. Fol.

Pliny's Panegyric on the Emperor Trajan, faithfully rendered into English
from the Original, and dedicated to her Royal Highness the Princess Sophia of
Hanover. By George Smith Esquire

The true Interest and Political Maxims of the Republic of Holland and
West-Friesland. In three Parts. Treating of Liberty in General, of
Manufactures. Fisherys. Traffic. Navigation. Toleration of Religion. A General
Naturalization. Freedom from Imposts. Impartial Justice; and settling of
Colonys. Of a Free Navigation and clearing the Seas. Of War and Peace. Of
Treatys of Peace and Alliances, particularly with England, France and Spain. Of
the natural Strength and Fortifications of Holland. And of its Interest in all
Respects as to the Government of a Single Person. Written by John de Wit, and
other Great Men in Holland.

A Collection of Fables taken from the most celebrated Mythologists. With
Political Reflections upon them, treating of the different Kinds of Government
in the World, in order to discover which is most conducive to the Happiness of
Mankind. In two Vol. Supposed to be written by the same Authors as the former.

The History of France from the Origin of that Nation to the Year 1702.
Containing, besides all the material Transactions in Peace and War, a
particular Account of the Steps taken by their late Princes, to subvert their
Civil Libertys, and to extirpate the Reformed Religion. With an Introductory
Account of that Country during the time of the Gauls and Franks, both before
and after the Roman Conquest. To which is added, the ancient and present State
of France, as to its Constitution and Government, the Royal Family, the
Nobility, and Offices Civil and Military, etc. With the Efsigies of all their
Kings, curiously engraven. In 2 Vol.

The History of Flanders, from its first Establishment as a Principality to the
Death of the late King of Spain. To which is prefixed a General Survey of that
Country, illustrated with the best Map that was ever made of it, done by Mr.
Moll, containing the Seat of the War in those Parts. Dedicated to his Grace the
Duke of Ormond.

A Complete History of the Turks, from their Origin in the Year 755, to the
Year 1701. Containing the Rise, Growth, and Decay of that Empire, in its
respective Periods, under their several Kings and Emperors. In 2 Vol.

An Account of the first Voyages and Discoverys made by the Spaniards in
America; with the Crueltys they exercised on the Natives, in destroying above
40000000 of them. Written by Bartholomew de las Casas, Bishop of Chiapa, an
Eyewitness thereof. Adorned with Cuts. To which is added, the Art of
Traveling, showing how a man may dispose his Travels to the best Advantage.
Translated by Mr. Stennett.

The Truth of the Christian Religion, written originally in Italian by the
Marquess of Pianezza. To which is prefixed some Account of the Author, etc. By
Tho. Wise, M. A. Fellow of Exeter-College in Oxford.

A Complete System, or Body of Divinity, both Speculative and Practical,
founded on Scripture and Reason: Written originally in Latin, by Philip
Limborch, Professor of Divinity. Dedicated to his Grace the Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury. In 2 Vol.

A Vindication of the Catholic Church, and the Church of England, as to
several important Points of Faith, viz. On the Canon of the New Testament,
against Mr. Toland and Mr. Dodwel. On Grace and Freewill. On the Doctrine of
the Trinity, in 4 Letters to a Peer; and in a later Tract, intitul'd,
Institutions concerning the Trinity, and the manner of our Savior's Divinity,
against the Socinians and Tritheists. All bound up together. Written by the
Reverend Mr. Stephen Nigh, Rector of Hormead.

An Inquiry concerning Virtue; in 2 Discourses. The first of Virtue, and the
Belief of a Deity. The second, of the Obligations to Virtue.

Free Thoughts in defense of a future State, as discoverable by natural Reason,
and stripped of all superstitious Appendages. With Remarks on the Inquiry
concerning Virtue, and a Refutation of the revived Hylozoicism of Democritus
and Leucippus.


