A PILL To Purge the Dispensary Doctors: OR, A Cure for the present State of
Physic.
THE State of Physic may be truly said to be sick, and stand in need of the
Doctor: I mean the Cordial Administration of the Law, to bring it out of its
Convulsive Motions; for the whole Body is in such an uproar and confusion, I
know not how any particular Member that has a Dependence on the Welfare of the
whole, should be able to perform his Functions regularly. I design therefore to
State the Case impartially betwixt the honest Dispensary Physicians (as they
are pleased to entitle themselves) on the one part; And the Apothecary's
Advocates, what the Apothecaries themselves on the other part, and propose a
Medium: To reconcile both Parties, if possible, the Case stands thus: Several
Eminent Members of the Dispensary Catalogue, after many Years Diligence in
hunting out Business, and getting little, at last found it entirely fall into
the hands of the Younger Fry; began then to set upon a prospect how to employ
themselves; for finding they had began at the wrong End first, they thought
upon the Design of erecting a Laboratory, to instruct themselves a little
better in the Materia Medica; which, after many Years Observation, they had at
last picked up amongst the Apothecaries. A happy Thought indeed! After a
hundred Years Study, to hit upon the Right at last, and think upon doing
something to be taken Notice of, after so long a time of being remarkably
Eminent for doing Nothing that tended either to the Improvement of real
Knowledge, or the more effectual Curing of Diseases. But now to show the World
the College (I mean the Dispensary College) was not much of their Labor, and
rather than lie idle they would practice gratis, they offered Proposals to the
Apothecaries, That if they would find Medicines, they would be so Charitable as
to Prescribe to all the Poor of the City of London. Indeed I think this was a
little too hard upon the Apothecaries; for, considering the Physicians that
made those Proposals had little or nothing else to do, it was not much out of
their way but the Apothecaries being to find all the Materials; and the (...)
rightly, that these Men's Bills would never answer the Charge to them again,
very reasonably declined it. Well, this would not do; but having erected a
Laboratory, they hit upon this Design to enjoin all the Community to subscribe
for a Dispensary, as at first pretended only to supply the Poor with good
Medicines at the prime Cost. Though the Apothecaries at their first Proposal were
to do it for nothing. e Now comes the the Dissension of their own Members, for
the Learned part of their Body very well understanding the Materia Medica, and
seeing through the shallow Pretext of so mean a Fraud, to take Apothecary's Trade
upon themselves, straitways show their Aversion to such a poor Design, veiled
under the Specious Name of Charity; hence has arisen all those Animosities and
Feuds, so wittily Burlesqu'd by a Member of their own. And now to revenge this
mighty Quarrel, the Authority of the College must be exercised upon every one
that seem to discountenance this Grand and Laudable Design. I shall therefore
here take occasion to observe how fitly qualified most of these Worthy
Subscribers were for Apothecaries? What Choice they made of Operators? And how
their Medicines were at first prepared. In the first place, I wonder to hear
some of these Men of late set up for great Operators, and can now tell in every
Coffee-house, how Mithridate and Diascordium is compounded, when a few days ago
they made many modest Mistakes in Simple, Waters; nay in their own Laboratory,
one that mounted the Guard for that day, lest there should be any Minute
difference in the Composition, had like to have sent for a Consultation to the
Committee, to distinguish betwixt Liquorish and Gentian. If these be the Men
that are to regulate the Practice of Physic, to Inspect the Apothecarie's
Medicines; nay to set up Shops, and dispense better Medicines of their own
Making; even the Lord have mercy upon us. I never thought these Dispensary Men
were really in Earnest before, but that this was only done to bring the
Apothecaries to some reasonable Compliance, to take their Submission, and send
'em to their Shops again; but this is the ready way to make 'em all forsake
their Shops; and Sell their blue Aprons to the Dispensary Doctors. For one of
the first Operators these ingenious Men employed in this great Work, was one
that had been some time Prentice to an Apothecary of New Castle upon Tine, who
there are generally Grocers as well as Apothecaries; but (by the by, observe
all their Skill in Pharmacy has been learned from the Apothecaries, or their
Boys that instructed some of 'em, to my knowledge) where after some Years
Experience in Distilling of Mint, Camomil and Aniseed Water, he is at last
advanced to the great Trust of Prime Operator to the Dispensary (always
observing he is under the Care and Management of the Committee.) Now I leave
you to judge, if the World must not needs be very well supplied, when I shall
tell you this Country Booby knew not the Names, Form, or Figure of his
Utensils, much less how to use them: For by Chance I happened to be present,
when a grave Dispensary Doctor and this Philosopher by Fire, were hotly
Disputing which was the Head, and which the Body of a Cucurbit, and how to hit
the Junctures close; This occasioned me (when the Magisterial Doctor was
withdrawn) to ask some few Questions about the Preparations of some Medicines,
which I imagined they could not be without: But I soon found the Assuming
Operator (who was not a little Proud of his new Title) as ignorant as his
Master. But I fear this will give so much Offense, that these Gentlemen will
never think I can have that Respect for them, as to offer any thing for their
Advantage; but indeed they are mistaken: and I think they have taken the wrong
Measures themselves, either for promoting the Honor or Advantage of the
Faculty of Physic; For certainly nothing can tend so much to the Interest and
Reputation of Physic, as a hearty Union amongst the Professors of it; and such
a right Understanding amongst all those that profess any part of it, that
neither the Physician may encroach upon the Office and particular Duty of the
Surgeon or Apothecary, or either of them upon the Physicians, or each other's
proper Business, but that every one of 'em act distinctly in his own Sphere,
and not endeavor to Usurp the Practice of one another. But instead of all
this, every one of these 3 distinct Bodies have promiscuously interfer'd with
each other's Business, and so at last brought a Confusion and Controversy in
the Profession, therefore it ought to be inquired into, who were the first
Aggressors; And 2dly, What Remedy ought to be taken to cure this growing Evil,
both to themselves and the whole Nation. And first of all, I think it highly
unreasonable, that the College of Physicians should have any such Power in them
to Censure and Condemn the other two Bodies of Surgery and Pharmacy; or that
they should have a Power to practice all the parts of Physic, and to vend
Medicines, since there are two Bodies likewise incorporated, as well as
themselves, to exercise the particular Parts of Surgery and Pharmacy; For I
think it the highest Injustice to make 'em a Body Politic, and afterward
restrain 'em to the Jurisdiction of another, since the Incorporating of any
Persons, is with Design to bring 'em under the Limitation only of their own
Laws and Government: Therefore we are to enquire who were the first Aggressors.
I cannot but think it was, and is always the Apothecary's Interest to call in a
Physician to the Patient as soon as he can; and therefore, why he should err in
this, I cannot understand; besides, if it was not always his Interest, it would
be his Safety, because then the Care of the Patient lies wholly on the
Physician, and the Miscarriage ought to be imputed to him. But when the
Apothecary meet with poor Patients, he must either Advice him something
himself, or else he must have nothing: Because most of the Physicians, and
especially of late, will not take the Trouble to Prescribe and give Advice
gratis, and so they may thank themselves. But therefore, to take off this
Objection, the College set up the Dispensary, as a Pretense to assist the Poor,
when, before they sold Medicines, it was difficult to get any of 'em upon
Request to give any Advice, without such Fees as poor People could not give;
then the continual Threats, and Trouble, and Suits at Law they have put several
of the Apothecaries to, is a very great Reason why the Apothecaries have been
necessitated to make the best advantage they could of their Business, and the
Permission the College have given to Quacks, and others that daily Vend
Medicines to the great Detriment of the Apothecaries, while on the other hand,
they unjustly, and contrary to all Right and Reason, prosecute the Graduate
Physicians of our own Universities, upon pretense of an Act of Parliament, that
never had the Royal Assent to it; nor can it be reasonably supposed it should,
since there is no respect had of the Privileges of our own Universities, which
yet never was unexcepted before. And I hope those two Learned Bodies will take
care to vindicate and assert their own Rights against a Monopoly of a few Men,
(I call 'em so) because the greater Part, and those Men of the best Business
will never consent to their unreasonable Proceedings. Therefore to remedy this,
there is only this way left: viz. To petition the next Sessions of Parliament,
either to explain the Acts of Parliament granted already in behalf of the
Faculty, and to restrain all their illegal Practices, or else to grant Leave to
bring in a Bill for the Regulation and better Establishin^ the Practice of
Physic, wherein every distinct Body should have their Privileges free to
themselves, and the Exor^tances of the College Practices taken away, so that
the^ should have no Power to oppress others, nor want any Power to vindicate
themselves; and such Laws as should not be detrimental to the Privileges of
the Universities And first, That none should be permitted to be Members o^ ^he
College of Physicians but Dr's of our own Universities, ^awfully create and
made. 2dly, That all should have equal Right to enter themselves in the College
so qualified, without the hindrance of the rest; And last of all, to be all of
one Denomination and Community, and admit none as Licentiates in discouragement
to all University Education. That none of this Body should be permitted to
Practice Surgery, or Compound, or Sell Medicines, nor Practice Man-Midwifry.
That the Surgeons be governed by their own Laws, and not subject to the
College, nor be permitted to give any Physic inwardly, except the Pox alone,
but that they buy all their Medicines of the Apothecaries; and that severe
Penalties be inflicted on 'em for doing the contrary. That the Apothecaries
shall not administer Physic inwardly or outwardly by Bills, as a Physician, or
Practice any Part of Surgery, but that all Medicines be rated by the Laws of
their own Corporation, and Tables hung up in every Shop; and that they be no
ways Subject to the Physicians or Surgeons, but act separately by themselves.

Note. I would have the Reader observe I am no interested Man to any Party, but
am for the College, when they act like Men of Learning and Honesty; and against
'em when they expose themselves to the World, as Men of neither Conscience nor
Honor.

Again, I am no Advocate for the Apothecaries or Sur^^^ns, but have a Desire
that the Faculty may flourish; ^^d that no one Party may be oppressed, by the
Injustice (...) Arbitrary Proceedings of any of the others. And to ^^at End I
write this Sheet, to stir up all Persons that ^ave a Concern or Interest in the
Welfare of the Pra^tice of Physic, that they may endeavor their utmost to
^^ocure such wholesome Laws, as may establish the practice of Physic upon a
better Foundation; that it may he both more Serviceable to the Public, and
more Advantageous to the Faculty of Physic, and every particular Person that
have their Dependence thereon.

FINIS.
LONDON: Printed for the Author. 1702. Price 2 d.


