Capt. Dampier's Vindication of his Voyage To the South-Seas in the Ship St.
George.
With some small Obse^^ations for the (...) on Mr F^^^el 's Chime^ical (...) Of
the Voyage Roun^ the World; and Det^^^ed in Little. until he shall be Examined
more at Large.
IN the first place, he calls himself my Mate; He went out my Steward, and
afterward I did ma^e a Mi^^hipman of him: Indeed he had the Advan^age of
perusing Draughts and Books, of which he afterward (...) a slender Account,
for some he pre^ended were lost, and others the Draug^^^ are torn (...) of
th^^; Especially the Draughts of Winds, which I grea^ly suspect him of Doing,
because he is not the first Man that has Endeavored to build upon another
Man's Foundation.

2. In page 3. lin. 4. he says, that Cap^. Pullen was going in Comp^ny with us;
but while we lay at Anchor in the Downs, there arose a Difference between to
^wo Captains, on which Pullen went away.

I wonder at his Impudence for I was at London, when Cap^. Pullen ^ent away;
and (...) was the Owner's, His, and Mine could not agree* to whom I Appeal.

3. In p. 2. 1. 27. Our P^^posals, says he, were to go into the River of Plate,
and to (...) Air^s, to take 2 or 3 Spanish Galleons, which Cap^ (...) gives an^
A^co^nt of (I say Capt. Dampier, as he does, (...) Gentleman that (...) not to
return Home (...) (...) there I des^re to kn^w of th^^ Gentleman, when it was
tha^ (...) gave this Accou^^, and to (...): I must confess there was some
Discourse about it; but I never desig^^ ^o go to Buonas Aires, for ^^em, being
such a Dangerous River (...) Up: And I think Capt. Pullen (...) something (...)
from thence may conclude that be plea^^^* For (...)* He giv^ Reasons of his
(...) we did not go to Buonas Aires. (...) produce Reasons!

Where Mr. Funn^^^ says C^pt. Dampier and Lie^t. Huzford (...)*

T^ere (...) Mr. Morg^n, Purser and Agent that disagreed with (...) Huzford*
went ashore* and Fought; upon (...) Corri^idor, Co^fu'^ Mr. H^xford, and a
(...), he himself sent f^r (...) Ch^^t and Clothes, which (...) I ^ay before
(...) I ^ent for him Aboard, and (...) actually came, (...) I had no (...) of
(...) but Mr. Morgan swore if Mr Huxford, saved ^^ not go the Voyage. And where
ill Blood (...) upon which I ordered him to go on Boa^d Capt. (...), whose Boat
was on (...) along our ^ide, an^ (...) after a Gen^leman (...)-manner) (...),
but it happened (...) carrying (...) to the (...), He and ^^xford disagreeing
(...) they were goi^g from (...), he (...) him on Boa^d a Portugueze
Mar^han^-Man.

4 In relation to J^mes Ba^^^by, second Lie^t He say^s, that (...) and eight of
the Men went on shore and left us, taking their Chests and Clothes with them,

To the (...): I take God to witness I never (...) but I r^fus'd them; (...)
nothing like the for^mer Design; This Mr. Morgan can (...).

In p. ^3 Mr* Fa^nel^, to settle my Mistakes says he saw (...). But every body
know^ it is a Greater (...)

^.

^

The' th^re may be more (...) that we pass over to abrevi^te this Matter, as
yet, my Crew not being wholly ^ere, I m^^^ion o^^, the two Action^ of the
Voyage, (...).

The first of which is the (...) Engaged, that was cr^^sing to the Island of
^^an Fernando's, to whom we gave Chase from 3 in the Afternoon, and (...),
making of her (...) I found she was an E^^opean Ship and not a Spaniard (...)
not willing to pursue (...) farther, but the (...) Right or Wrong (...)
followed her, and next (...), we came up (...) her; and when I saw nothing
would (...) Attempt, I encouraged them (...). By this time my Consort (...)
given her a Broad side; (...) up (...) and gave her a Broadside likewise.
(...) were then (...), they Fired upon our (...) his (...) his Help
Notwithstanding (...), and Exchanged 3 or 4 Broadsides (...) suffered, 9 killed
and ^ wound^d, which (...) much, they a^tually run down off the Deck, and made
nothing of it afterward; So that when I could have boarded her and carried her
the Mate, Cleppington by Name, (...) The Men ar^ all gone; and Bel^ha^h the
Master, whose Offic^ it was (...) upon Deck, (...) also; th^^ this (...).

In p. 25, 26. Mr. Funnell says the Crew were Desirous to (...) this Ship (...)
they made nothing of i^ while in (...) Power; What was to be done afterward?
And as to my telling (...) (as he says) I could ^et at a^y time 500000 l. I
say, so I, (...) my Boats which were then (...) my People have been Ruled. In
p. 32. Mr. Funnell says we took a Ship of 200 Tuns, laden (...) several good
Commodities, as Indigo, Cochineel, etc.

Now for Cochineel, I never heard of any, Indigo there was; (...) the other,
and the Turtlesh^l, he so frequently speaks of, (...) be go^^ the same w^y th^^
many Rich and Valuable Goods have, by the Management of those Pyrating Fellows,
rather (...) Sailors, the Indigo I could not take on Board; nor could I trust
any of them with the Sailing such a Ship, as could neither keep me Company, nor
make a right Steerage-way.

In p. 33. He says truth as to Mr. Observator's Ship and the Monkey that was
left in her; but as to Firing at any thing but the Ship, and the whole Crew,
who before we could make up to her, had made into their Boats, and nothing
beside^ the Cargo and the Monkey were indeed on Board, which (...) along, had
we not Observators enough at Home.

The next thing they Charge me with, especi^lly Mr* F^nn^ll in p. 41. in the
(...) of St Michael, (...) were in the Barque last taken, and Indian C^noe
(...) and that I ordered her to be Fired upon. The (...), for when I saw some
of them that had F^r'd without my Orders, I wa^ very Uneasy and Troubled at it,
knowing the Consequence of it.

The Second Thing that is Material is* that the Ship mentioned by Mr. Funnel in
p. 45. 46. where he seems to (...) Dollars was Hid in the Run of the Ship, and
I slipped the (...) of taking it, and (...) her Adrift; So this I answer, That I
had evident Proof had Landed her Money at Truxille; and as to Provisions, we
took as much as would provide us for One Year, and much longer, if well
managed, that was, what our Ship could well (...), and this was the Steward and
the Crew's Calculation. Now as to a Report that they make about Town (...)
Dollars that (...) Ransom; First I had no convenient Road to Ride in and the
strong Southerly Winds were set in, and so if I had Loyter'd for her, must
certainly been Imbay'd for 3 or 4 Months: Besides the Winds, through the
Treachery of the Spaniards, I have had the Experience of it before in a like
Case, Riding (...) for Ransom with Capt. Swa^^ and Capt. (...), for instead of
keeping their Faith, they (...) off with a (...) the Night and 14 Pe^^agoes;
and (...) better Crew and (...) Men. We came narrowly of^

Now, th^^ they are Judges in my Case and Conduct, a (...) who were perpetually
drunk, and very tit, you will say, (...) the Night, or being kept in any Decorum.

(...) p. 46. 47. Whereas Mr. Funnell frequently would Insinuate, that I could
agree with no body; and so says that parted this way with Capt. Stradling. I
say, I (...) Stradling; nay not only that, but at Juan de Fernandos, when all
hi^ Men left him, I reconciled them and him again; therefore (...).

^.

The next Morning (...) who is a very Valiant Man (...), with (...) Men and
^ire-Arms with them. (...)

What Is observable is, it is not enough to Run away with (...) do what you
please with (...) of Si^k, (...) or any other (...) (...) (...) and that I
r^fer my self to all Sailors in the World, wh^^er it was right or not. A^^
c^^sidering the Inequality of our (...) of Ship.

^^fore (...) Action^* we were to the Wind^^^ of he^ (...) st^nd^ng (...), and
we Bearing (...) her ^ith (...) o^der'd my Officers to (...) to (...) to (...)
of her; instead of this, (...) of my Heart, they Edged away, and were so far
from ^^ving the Power to Command and Board her, as I intended, (...) we lost
the Opportunity, and were forced to Leward the (...) time; aft^^ that I ^^ck'd,
cam^ abo^^, and had her under my Lee-(...) the^ I hoped to (...)* with my Chase
Guns, she hav^^g no (...)-Chase to (...); this I took to be the best way of
Disabli^^ he, (...) this (...) made her yield. (...) o^ this, ^^ show (...)
^orld now (...) my Office^^ were (...) Master and the Mate (...) the^ ^o the
Great (...) the p^i^ate Men (...) her* For (...) an (...) a Man (...) Man at
H^lm (...) o^ce mo^e: (...) While thing, (...) at (...), I asked (...) to Bo^^d
her. Clap he^ (...) then, s^id I. (...) his time ^the^ being (...) and (...) to
our (...), (...)* Now (...) I have gotten along (...), they were (...) her,
that the Mast^^ we^^ about (...) of the (...)*

^.

^^

^

^

^para.^

^

^

^

^.

FINIS.
POSTSCRIPT.
Having Read Capt. Le Wright's Proposals for another Expedition into (...)
Seas, I do think it P^oper and Advantageous, and that he was (...) Right; and I
am ready to Satisfy any (...) of (...) cable and Expedient i^ is to put it in
Execution f^rthwith.

London. Printed by J. (...), at the Bibl^ in (...)-Lane.


