A SERMON PREACHED BEFORE THE SONS OF THE CLERGY, IN THE CATHEDRAL CHURCH OF
St. PAUL, On FRIDAY May 6th, 1763. By THOMAS FRANCKLIN, M. A. Vicar of WARE in
Hertfordshire, and MINISTER of Queen's-street Chapel, Lincoln's-inn-fields. TO
WHICH IS ANNEXED, A LIST of the annual Amount of the Collection for this
CHARITY, from the Year 1721.

LONDON: Printed for R. FRANCKLIN, in Russel Street, Covent Garden. MDCCLXIII.

TO THE RIGHT HON. THE EARL OF OXFORD, THE RIGHT REV. THE LORD BISHOP OF
GLOUCESTER, SIR SIDNEY STAFFORD SMYTHE, KNT. SIR WILLIAM STEPHENSON, KNT. AND
ALDERMAN, THE REV. THOMAS PATTEN, D. D. THE REV. WILLIAM NOWEL, M. A. THE REV.
JAMES TATTERSALL, M. A. THE REV. EDWARD MORETON, M. A. THE REV. OLIVER MARTON,
L. L. B. PETER DELME, ESQUIRE. THOMAS KYNASTON, ESQUIRE. JOHN THORNTON, ESQUIRE. STEWARDS
FOR THE LATE FEAST OF THE SONS OF THE CLERGY, THIS SERMON, PREACHED AND
PUBLISHED AT THEIR REQUEST, IS INSCRIBED,

BY THEIR MOST FAITHFUL SERVANT, THOMAS FRANCKLIN.

A SERMON PREACHED BEFORE THE SONS OF THE CLERGY.
JEREMIAH xlix. 11. Leave thy fatherless children, I will preserve them alive,
and let thy widows trust in me.
THE superintendency of divine providence over all the affairs of mankind, is a
point so fully proved by experience, that it is seldom called in question, but
by the most thoughtless and abandoned. The great disposer of all things has,
in various parts of holy writ, graciously promised his kind interposition, to
counteract the designs and oppressions of men; in a more especial manner has
he frequently declared to aid and protect those who stand most in need of his
assistance; to be the father of the fatherless, and to defend the cause of the
widow; to deliver the poor that cry, and him that has none to help him. On
this comfortable assurance we may safely rely, under all our plagues, sorrows,
and calamities; for God is not a man that he should lie, or the son of man that
he should repent: has he said, and shall he not do it: has he spoken, and
shall he not make it good?

Leave thy fatherless children, says he, I will preserve them, and let thy
widows trust in me.

Now, though these words were at first addressed to a particular nation, the
promise contained in them does most certainly extend to all the sons of men,
and may, I think, with the utmost propriety, be applied to the occasion of this
day's solemnity, when we are met to commemorate, support, and encourage an
institution, raised up, and inspired by the providence of God, in favor of his
chosen servants and ministers, the persecuted disciples and followers of his
beloved Son; who, as I shall endeavor in the following discourse more fully to
prove, could not possibly have carried on the great task allotted them, without
the manifest and frequent interposition of divine providence exerted in their
favor.

THERE is not perhaps, upon the face of the earth, any order of men, much less
the teachers and preachers of any religion, so poorly and so contemptuously
treated as the regular and established clergy of the church of England:
provided for in a manner so inadequate to their services, so unworthy of their
dignity, so unsuitable to the use and importance of their profession: the
little patrimony allotted to them, is so unequally divided, that whilst a few,
a very few, are adorned, rewarded, loaded with dignities and preferments, all
the rest are either confined within the pale of bare competency and
subsistence; or, which is more generally the case, languishing in vile
obscurity, and reduced to the utmost streights of penury and distress, obliged
at the same time to contribute out of their scanty revenues, in as large a
proportion to all the exigencies of the state, as those whose fortunes are
entailed on their posterity.

IN a country where christianity, in its purest form, is universally professed;
where the obligations, which the civil power lies under to the influence of
religion, is every day acknowledged; where the Sea the very learned and
ingenious Dr. Warburton (now bishop of Gloucester's) ALLIANCE BETWEEN CHURCH
AND STATE, one of the most excellent and spirited performances in the English
language.
church is so serviceable to the state, it is astonishing that the state should
be so forgetful of the church; that it should have made no public parliamentary
provision for the widows and orphans of a body of men, to whom it is so greatly
indebted for its safety and preservation.

THE clergy have withal the heavier cause of complaint, as they are perhaps
almost the only persons, whose distresses have not at some time or other
engaged the general attention. A kind and necessary relief has, we know, been
provided for the widows of those who hazard their lives in the defense of their
country; the state, no doubt, wisely considering, that those, who generously
sacrificed their private happiness and comfort to the good and welfare of the
community, had an incontestable right to public favor and protection; that,
however warmly attached the gallant officer might be to his king and country,
the ties of nature might still prevail; that deep care and anxiety for the
interest and safety of a beloved wife might unnerve the strongest arm, and
depress the bravest heart; that, on the other hand, the satisfaction of leaving
her possessed of a moderate competency, might smooth the rugged paths of
danger, and animate him in the pursuit of glory That assistance therefore,
which, though imperfect, the legislature have here afforded, is noble and
praiseworthy.

BUT, whilst those who fight the battles of earthly princes, and vindicate the
cause of men, are thus beneficently and piously remembered, the soldiers of
Christ, the champions of the Lord of Hosts are neglected and forgotten: is
there nothing due to those who guard the principles, and watch over the morals
of a nation; nothing to the instructors of our youth, and the advocates of our
religion; to them who check the progress of incroaching vice, and cherish the
blossoms of rising virtue? In our army, must the generals alone enjoy all the
honor and all the profit in our triumphs over atheism and infidelity, and no
civic crown be given, as of old, to the private soldier, to him who defends
with bravery the cause of his divine Master, bears the shield of faith, and
fights the battles of the Almighty?

If the religion of Jesus Christ has any thing in it sacred or respectable; if
it has a right to command deference and veneration from those who profess and
embrace it, surely the preachers and teachers of that religion, the ministers
and dispensers of God's holy word and sacraments, have a title to some regard
and esteem amongst men; if they perform their duty, as worthy and conscientious
servants, for their master's sake, they deserve some degree of respect, some
regard for their welfare, some compassion for their misfortunes, some relief of
their necessities. But it is too truly and universally observed, that the
clergy have of late years fallen into most undeserved neglect and contempt;
even the poor tribute of external respect, formerly paid to their character and
function, is withdrawn from them, and the sacred order itself treated by too
many as an object of ridicule: a conduct, partly owing to the low and indigent
state of many of our unfortunate brethren, and partly, I believe, to the
dangerous influence acquired over the minds of the multitude by our new
sectaries and enthusiasts, who make it their chief business to inspire their
followers with an utter abhorrence and contempt of us.

To describe the miseries and distresses that attend the lower part of the
clergy, would present a picture to your eyes too gloomy and terrible to behold.
Let us then, the better to illustrate and confirm the melancholy truth before
asserted, select one from the middle rank, one of those happy few, whom some
lucky incident, the favor of some powerful friend, or the beneficence of some
kind relation has advanced to what is generally termed a good living More than
one half what are called Livings are under 50 l. a Year, and near one fourth
part under 20 l. See Ecton and other authors on this subject.
; let us suppose him possessed of a moderate income, and blessed in the
comforts and conveniences of life; even this much envied station, which so many
look up to with an eye of hopeless desire, is by no means so eligible as we may
be at first inclined to think it. Excluded by the nature of his function, by
laws and statutes, which he is bound to obey, from all farther views of
interest or advantage in any other profession; shut out from every other avenue
to riches and independency, and confined to the narrow path which he is obliged
to tread in; defrauded, perhaps, of half his scanty pittance, by perverse and
litigious men, and compelled either to sacrifice a part of his legal rights, or
the whole of his much dearer peace and tranquillity, obliged to act in all
things agreeably to his rank and character; to maintain in his habit,
appearance, and conversation, the decency and dignity of his profession, to
live with some degree of taste and elegance suitable to his education and
connections, and to join his richer brethren in all the acts of charity,
hospitality, and beneficence required of him; his family and expenses
increasing, his means to support them at best continuing the same, perhaps
every year diminishing; unable to guard against arts which he is incapable of
practicing, or to struggle with difficulties which he has never experienced; he
sinks by slow and insensible degrees into poverty, despondency, and despair;
scoffed at, despised, and trampled on by every other order of men, and, which
is still more grating, it may be, treated with contempt, insolence, and
oppression, by the superiors of his own.

IF to all these bitter and galling calamities, he adds also the melancholy
reflection, that those who are nearest and dearest to him, the wife of his
bosom, and the children of his loins, hang but on the slender thread of his
life, and depend on that alone for their maintenance and support; that the
moment it shall please the Almighty to take him hence, they must change the
pleasing scene of domestic happiness and comfort; all the conveniences of
moderate competency, for a distressful state of penury and dependence; every
misfortune heightened by their reflections on lost happiness; every sorrow
embittered by the cruel remembrance of past felicity. Under these gloomy and
dreadful apprehensions, what shall support him in his labors, what shall
animate him in the cheerful exercise of his function, remove his fears, and
lessen his affliction, but the firm confidence in, and reliance on, his divine
master, whose eyes are ever watchful to guard and protect his sons and
servants; who has promised to be a father to the fatherless, and to defend the
cause of his widow: were it not indeed for this comfortable assurance, he must
inevitably sink beneath the weight of his misfortunes.

To mitigate the rigor of these distresses, to soften the pressure of these
calamities, is the business which has this day called us together. Thanks be to
God, the defects of the whole community have been supplied by the generosity of
individuals, and the evils arising from public parsimony in a great measure
removed by private beneficence.

AMONGST all the fair daughters of charity that adorn this benevolent nation,
and shine forth as the polished corners of the temple, there is not one whose
charms are more striking, whose beauties are more attractive, than the noble
and excellent institution which we are this day met to encourage and support. A
design, which, in spite of all the attempts that have been made to subvert, and
all the arts which have been practiced to undermine and destroy it, has
hitherto answered the warmest wishes of its friends, and defeated the malice of
its enemies: like that religion whose cause it espouses, and whose ministers it
relieves, it is built upon a rock, even the rock of Christ, and can never fail.

THE excellent charity now under our consideration does naturally address
itself to three orders of men, namely, the laity, the superior, and the
inferior clergy; what claim it may with justice lay to protection and support
from each of them, will perhaps appear more evident from the following
considerations.

THERE was a time, when the secular interests of the clergy and laity of this
kingdom were entirely separate, and distinct from each other: in the days of
popery and superstition, the clergy received great and manifold advantages from
the community, and returned nothing to it; that celibacy, which brought shame
and disgrace on themselves, was attended also with the most pernicious effects
to society.

BY the reformation, this wall was broken down; the holy institution of
marriage, which had been long withheld, and was now restored to the ministers
of the gospel, opened a social intercourse and free communication between them,
which was soon productive of the greatest benefits and advantages to the
commonweal. The clergy, notwithstanding, who by their labors and assiduity in
the cause of truth, had been the chief instruments in perfecting that noble and
salutary work, were themselves (with respect to temporal affairs) the least
gainers by it; they, who had freed others, continued still in a state of
bondage, and groaning beneath the yoke of penury and oppression; the lands and
revenues which had been unjustly wrested from them, instead of being restored,
were lavished away by a licentious and despotic sovereign, amongst his greedy
courtiers and dependents, and the clergy left from that time, even unto this
day, the sad and reproachful monuments of public ingratitude.

YOU, my brethren of the laity, received the benefits of the reformation,
whilst they, and they alone, who had best deserved the reward, were unjustly
and uncharitably deprived of it: on you, therefore, it is in some measure
incumbent to repair the injury, and as you contributed to our poverty, to
relieve the inconveniences and distresses arising from it.

TO those amongst the laity, who are descended from the clergy, I am satisfied,
it is needless to add any exhortation: their noble and liberal contributions,
their unwearied pains and assiduity, their cheerful acceptance of that
expensive office, which they so readily every year take upon them, with their
constant appearance at this solemnity, do most abundantly testify their
good will, tenderness, and affection toward us. So far are they from being
ashamed of their birth and origin, that they openly and zealously proclaim it,
standing forth with joy and alacrity in the defense and support of their
distressed and unfortunate brethren. There are indeed amongst them so many of
high rank and fortune, that a partial observer might be almost tempted to doubt
the truth of what has been before advanced, and to imagine, that the sons of
the clergy, far from being the most indigent and oppressed, are the richest and
happiest of men; but this would, notwithstanding, be a false and ill-grounded
conclusion; as most of those, whose The brave Admiral Pocock, Joint-conqueror
of the Havannah, most generously contributed one hundred guineas toward the
support of this charity on the feast day; as did also John Thornton, Esquire one of
the stewards for the present year.
ample fortunes enable them so generously to contribute to this charity, are not
indebted to the church for their affluence, not to the ecclesiastical
preferments of their fathers, but either to their family estates and
possessions* or to their own industry and success in more lucrative professions.

THE superior clergy of the church of England, enjoy many and great temporal
advantages; some of them bear a part in the legislature of the kingdom; others,
by their rank and dignity, their fortunes and preferments, are enabled to
associate with, and consequently, in some measure, to influence and direct the
rich and great. Honor and respect, ease and affluence, all the good, and all
the desirable things of this life are in their possession; but of all their
valuable pre-eminences, doubtless the most to be envied, is their extensive
power of doing good, the power of assisting and relieving their indigent and
distressed brethren.

A GENEROUS contribution toward the support and encouragement of this peculiar
branch of christian charity, may be considered in others as an act of kindness,
humanity, and benevolence, but with regard to them it is certainly a debt; a
debt of honor, a debt of gratitude, a debt of piety, which they are bound by
the most sacred ties, punctually, faithfully, and religiously to perform.

WHEN indeed they consider, as no doubt they do, and must consider, that the
more is given, the more will be required; that whilst their fellow servants
(for fellow servants we all are, and fellow laborers we ought to be) are
toiling in the vineyard of Christ, and bearing the heat and burden of the day,
their happier lot has exempted them from all the bitter hardships and cruel
indignities incident to their profession; indignities which few know or attend
to, but those who feel and experience them: -- that while their distressed
brethren, the inferior part of the clergy, are lamenting their unfortunate
condition, and trembling at the melancholy prospect of future miseries, they
are looking forward toward the honors, and dignities, the riches, affluence
and happiness of their posterity. With what grateful hearts should they
acknowledge the goodness of that divine Being, who has cast their lot into so
fair a ground, and given them such a goodly heritage: doubtless, in proportion
to their advantages, should be their benevolence, in proportion to their
abundance, should be their generosity.

TO the inferior clergy, I have only to add, that the cause, which we are here
pleading, is peculiarly their own, and that it would be highly unreasonable in
them to expect, that others will aid or assist those who will not help
themselves. If they cast their bread on these waters, they may find it again
after many days. Such indeed is the uncertainty of all human blessings, so
various are the changes and chances of human life, that thousands, who are not
now in that state or condition, which can entitle them to a part or portion of
this charity, who now give freely, without the least distant prospect of
receiving, may yet one day be indebted to it for the preservation of those who
shall hereafter be dear unto them, of widows yet unseen, and children yet
unborn.

BUT those, to whom I am now addressing myself, are too well acquainted with
the difficulties and disappointments, the sorrows and distresses, all the
dangers which accompany their spiritual warfare, not to make use of every
method in their power, to lighten, if possible, the general burden. Those, who
have smarted beneath the rod of affliction, are seldom insensible to the
miseries of others; they have hearts ever ready to compassionate, hands ever
open to relieve the distresses of their fellow creatures.

FROM the pious designs and zealous endeavors of these men, the charity I am
here recommending is indebted for its origin and foundation; to this they have
always cheerfully contributed, in proportion to their several abilities: these
little rivulets have, from time to time, supplied and replenished that large
and copious stream which glideth through our fertile soil, blesses our earth
with increase, and waters the furrows thereof.

TO conclude therefore by an earnest exhortation to this whole assembly;

AS we have begun, let us endeavor to perfect this labor of love: let us
remember, that those, whose cause we are now pleading, were stewards and
dispensers of the mysteries of God, and that their names are worthy to be had
in remembrance. Let us remember, that whilst upon earth, their prayers were
sent up to God for our welfare, their faculties dedicated to our service, their
hours employed in the pious endeavors to promote our true happiness, and
ensure our everlasting salvation. Many of those, whose widows and children now
solicit our bounty, were themselves kind and constant contributors to this
charity: in proportion to their abilities, they threw in their mite, not
grudgingly, or of necessity, but as cheerful givers. -- What they bestowed on
others, they have doubtless a right, when they stand in need of it, to demand
for themselves: he that has pity upon the poor, lends unto the Lord, and
look, what he lays out, it shall be paid him again. -- Let us imagine, the
parents of those orphans, the widows of those husbands, for whom we are now
soliciting, still present before us; let us imagine them with their last
breath, bequeathing to us the dear pledges of their love, and the objects of
their affection, imploring us, by all the tender ties of humanity and
compassion, by our enjoyment of present bliss, and all our hopes of future
happiness, to visit the fatherless and widow in their affliction, to relieve
their necessities, mitigate their sorrows, and alleviate, if possible, their
terrible misfortunes.

CONSIDERABLE as the subscriptions have been to this excellent institution,
they are still found insufficient. This noble charity, which, like an aged and
venerable oak, spreads its luxuriant branches on every side, wide and extensive
as it is, cannot cover all those who fly to it for shelter.

LET us then strive, my brethren, by every method in our power, to render it
more useful and more effectual, that it may relieve every object worthy of its
protection, and answer every end designed by its pious and worthy sounders;
till finished to the highest degree of human perfection, it shall imitate the
example, and adopt the words of the great Creator of all things, and say unto
the ambassadors of Christ, in the words of my text, Leave thy fatherless
children, I will preserve them alive, and let thy widows trust in me.

FINIS.
ERRATUM,
Page 8, Line 17, for have, read has.

A LIST of the annual Amount of this Charity, as complete as could be procured,
commencing in the Year 1721. By which will be perceived, how much in general
the Charity has increased from the Approbation and Bounty of the Public, and
which, it is hoped, it will continue to do, so as to equal the Wants of those
whom it was calculated to provide for.
l. s. d. 1721 330 16 0 1722 328 16 0 1723 382 6 0 1724 566 10 0 1725 630 5 0
1726 575 4 0 1727 655 0 0 1728 579 17 9 1729 523 6 11 1730 722 6 4 1731 840 1 0
1732 951 1 3 1733 909 6 0 1734 1000 3 0 1735 850 5 3 1736 837 7 0 1737 856 9 7
1738 935 2 7 1739 912 11 3 1740 784 1 6 1741 834 2 0 1742 866 6 2 1743 819 0 0
1744 848 16 9 1745 1044 0 0 1746 922 10 6 1747 1062 2 0 1748 916 6 6 1749 985
12 6 1750 1134 14 0 1751 1167 19 0 1752 1101 18 6 1753 1063 2 6 1754 976 8 2
1755 1096 3 6 1756 973 18 3 1757 912 7 6 1758 1081 18 7 1759 1163 9 9 1760 1122
8 9 1761 1096 15 0 1762 858 18 9 1763 1202 5 0

N. B. The whole Money, collected on this Occasion, is disposed of by the
Stewards within the Year, in placing out the Children of poor Clergymen
Apprentices: Whereby Sixty were provided for in the Course of the last Year.

Lately Published, by R. FRANCKLIN, in Russel Street, Covent Garden,
THE Tragedies of Sophocles, in two vols. 4to. translated from the Greek, by
the Rev. Thomas Francklin, late Greek Professor in the University of Cambridge.

Also by the same Hand, I. Translation, a Poem. II. The Epistles of Phalaris,
translated from the Greek; to which are added, some select Epistles of the most
eminent Greek Authors. III. A Sermon preached at St. Peter's, Cornhill, on the
Sunday after the Fire. IV. A Sermon preached before the Trustees for
establishing the Colony of Georgia. V. A Sermon preached at St. George's,
Bloomsbury, occasioned by the Death of the Rev. Mr. Sturges. VI. A Sermon
preached on the Fast Day, 1758. VII. A Sermon preached before the Governors of
the Middlesex Hospital. VIII. A Sermon, occasioned by the Death of his late
Majesty.



