THE HISTORY OF The Robinhood Society. IN WHICH THE ORIGIN OF THAT ILLUSTRIOUS
BODY of MEN is traced; The Method of managing their DEBATES is shown; The
MEMOIRS of the various Members that compose it are given; And some ORIGINAL
SPEECHES, as Specimens of their Oratorical Abilities, are recorded. Chiefly
compiled from Original Papers.

I will a round, unvarnish'd Tale deliver;
-- nothing extenuate,
Nor set down aught in Malice.
SHAKESPEARE. LONDON: Printed for JAMES FLETCHER and Co. at the Oxford Theater
in St. Paul's Churchyard. M.DCC.LXIV.

TO THE Truly Honorable and Highly Respectable BODY of MEN, CALLED, The
Robinhood Society, THIS HISTORY, WITH The most perfect ADMIRATION of Their
UNRIVALLED ABILITIES, AND With the Profoundest Respect, Is most submissively
DEDICATED, BY

The Author.

TO THE PUBLIC.
SEVERAL Pamphlets having from Time to Time been published concerning the
ROBINHOOD SOCIETY, some in Vindication of it, and others against it, the public
Attention has been awakened; and many have desired to know the Origin of this
Society, and to be acquainted with its Proceedings, from it first Formation to
its present State. But no Work hitherto printed, has related these Particulars.
Indeed, they have all been so remarkably silent on these Heads, that, like the
brave Irishman, who, born of a common Prostitute, and unable to learn who was
his real Father, concluded he had none at all, many People imagine, either that
this Society had no Origin, or that it is so obscure and uncertain, that no
Traces of it can now be discovered.

BUT this is a Mistake. A true and impartial Review of these Particulars may be
expected in these Memoirs; and it is not doubted, but it will amply gratify the
Curiosity of the Reader. If he desires to know from whence these Materials have
been drawn, I shall inform him, that they were from Manuscripts of my
Grandfather and Father; the former of whom was not only a Member, but the
Promoter of "THE SOCIETY FOR FREE AND CANDYD INQUIRY," for so were they at
first called; and indeed, they have retained the Title ever since.

AS to the History of the Members of the ROBINHOOD SOCIETY, for 1764, that,
indeed, is entirely my own Work. I have been obliged to no one for Anecdotes,
but to the Members themselves; and I have, with no small Pains and Industry, as
well as Time and Expense, collected from them such Accounts as the Reader will
here meet with. Indeed, in a Work of this Nature, some Anecdotes, not founded
on Facts, must be expected; Anecdotes invented by the Envy or Vanity of the
Relater. But it is hoped, the Number of these is but few: For the Author, or
rather Compiler, has, when he suspected the Truth of any Relation, not
contented himself with having something new to say, as too many of our
Biographers and History-Writers do; but has made the most diligent Enquiries of
different People, to whom the several Members were intimately known, and some
as School-fellows; and from them he has learnt their real Parentage and
Education, Life, Character and Behavior: So that, in general, these Memoirs
may be deemed as authentic and genuine, as, perhaps, any that have been ever
given to the World, though they may not be so gaudily dressed.

THE Speeches I have given on different Subjects, as Specimens of the Members
Abilities, are, in the strict Sense of the Word, Original; for they were taken
down in Shorthand, at the very Time they were spoken.

THE Reader may now discern what he has to expect in this Work. And, without
the Imputation of Vanity, I think I may affirm, that the Public will be both
instructed and entertained in the Perusal of it. The ROBINHOOD SOCIETY has, of
late, greatly attracted the Notice of the World; and is now so much frequented,
that, almost every Monday Night, Numbers are robbed of the Entertainment they
expect, because it is so crowded, that no more can be admitted.

TO those who have often attended the Society, and are acquainted with the
Nature of it, the Author of these Memoirs appeals for a Character of Candor
and Impartiality; and he is confident they will allow, that his Description of
the Debates is true and faithful, his Portraits of the Members just and
striking, and the Speeches he has selected authentic and original.

HE will only add farther concerning this Work, that he believes no other MSS.
but those he has in his Possession, containing the Origin of the Society and
its Proceedings, till it was removed to the Butcher-Row, are now extant.

AS then no other Person is able to trace the Original of the Society, and
relate its Progress for no less a Term than 151 Years, (for so long it has
subsisted) he doubts not but his complete History will favorably be received.

THE HISTORY OF THE Robinhood Society.
THE English have been characterised by many ingenious Foreigners, as a People
that delight greatly in Clubs and Assemblies; which they impute to a social and
good-natured Disposition, and to a Love of Science. It is owing to this
Disposition, and to this affection for Knowledge, that there is scarce a Town
or Village in our Kingdom, but what has its Clubs, or Places of nocturnal
Entertainment; where, after the Fatigues of the Day, Men of various Occupations
in Life, meet to dissipate the Gloom which has been spread by Study, or any
intense Application; and, by a mutual Communication of Sentiment, either in
Flashes of Wit, or solid Argument, to improve their Judgments, and entertain
their Imaginations.

SUCH is the favorable Point of View in which judicious Foreigners behold our
natural Propensity of forming and frequenting Clubs; and such their Description
of the good Effects resulting from them.

BUT, I am afraid, that though some Clubs produce these Effects, the
Generarality of them produce the Reverse; and may be deemed Receptacles for the
Idle and the Dissolute, where Modesty is thrown aside, like their Great Coats,
and where Impiety, Obscenity, and Licentiousness prevail to the greatest
Degree; where a Love of Laziness, and an Aversion to honest Industry are
contracted; where the keeping ill Hours is encouraged, to the great Detriment
of Individuals, and to the Prejudice of the Community; and where, in short, no
useful Subject employs their Thoughts or Tongues, but mere Noise and Nonsense,
obscene Songs or Tales, and large Draughts of Liquor, form their Savage
Happiness.

BUT, however true this Description may be of Clubs in general, it cannot be
said, that the particular Kind of Club, resembling that of the ROBINHOOD, is of
their Nature, or produces their Effects: Those are Drinking Clubs; this is a
Disputing one. At those Places, Men meet to feed their Bodies; at this, they
assemble to feed their Minds. At those, Intoxication is very frequent; at this,
very rare. I could heighten the Contrast, but it is needless. The Perusal of
these Sheets will sufficiently acquaint the Reader with the Nature and Tendency
of the ROBINHOOD SOCIETY, and of Disputing Clubs in general; and therefore,
without striving to biass his Judgment, or preclude his Remarks by any of my
own, I shall proceed to my Account of "THE SOCIETY FOR FREE AND CANDID
ENQUIRY", from its infant State, to its present mature Growth, at the ROBINHOOD
and LITTLE JOHN, in Butcher-Row.

IN the Year 1613, when that fine Piece of Work, equally honorable and useful,
the New River was completed, Sir HUGH MYDDLETON, who had a great Affection and
Regard for my Grandfather, WILLIAM G********, Esquire being in Company with him
one Day, lamented it as a great Infelicity, and a vast Obstruction of human
Knowledge, that light and trivial Subjects alone generally found Admittance
into polite Companies, while important and weighty ones were excluded. My
Grandfather acquiesced with him in Sentiments, and proposed it as his Opinion,
that a Society might be formed to consist of a certain Number of Gentlemen, of
liberal Education and acquired Accomplishments, to meet Weekly, at some
convenient Room, to discourse on Subjects that would contribute to their mutual
Instruction and Entertainment. Sir HUGH declared it was a lucky Suggestion, and
he would think of it at Leisure, and let him know his Opinion of the
Practicability of putting such a Scheme into Execution the next Time he saw him.

THE Intimacy that had, for many Years, subsisted between Sir HUGH and my
Grandfather, would not permit their being absent for any considerable Time
after this Meeting, and the Starting of a Subject which had such Charms for
both. My Grandfather was a good Speaker, and no bad Writer. In the juvenile
Part of his Life, he had been engaged in mercantile Business in a very
extensive Manner; and conducting his Affairs with Skill and Prudence for about
seven-and-twenty Years, he had amassed no less a Sum than forty-seven thousand
Pounds; with which, contrary to a great Number of Merchants, being contented,
he retired from Business, and lived on the Interest of his Fortune. As to Sir
HUGH, he was a Man of extreme good natural Parts, heightened and embellished by
the Acquisition of the useful and ornamental Parts of Learning; and having, at
the Expense of the greatest Part of an opulent Fortune, completed his darling
Project of bringing Water from Ware, through various Turnings and Windings, to
London, thereby supplying that great Metropolis with one of the greatest
Necessaries of Life, he had now Leisure to consider of other Employments, and
partake of other Amusements, not less suited to his Taste, and for which he was
not less qualified. At the Meeting my Grandfather and Sir HUGH had at the
oldest Tavern in London, the London Stone, in Cannon-Street, over a Bottle of
sound Red Port, and, while smoking a Pipe of the newfound Plant, Tobacco,
(which had been introduced into England by Sir WALTER RALEIGH, but about
twenty-five Years before) they discoursed at large of the Advantages that might
be reaped from a Society of judicious Persons, meeting once a Week to debate on
Subjects of Importance. For an Account of the Institution and Nature of the
Society, I am indebted to a Folio Book, which I have now in my Custody, in my
Grand-father's own Handwriting, and from which I have transcribed the
following Passages.

IT was here (says the good old Man) that we fully discoursed of the Affair.
Sir HUGH declared the Number of Persons that were to compose our Society ought
to be limited, and that they should not exceed twenty; and in fine, we
both agreed in this Point, that we would forthwith look out and search for
proper Persons to belong to the Society, and whose Names we would enter
into a little Book: And after that we had gained our proposed Number of
Persons, which we also agreed should be noe more than twenty, nor less than
twelve, we would assembel oureselves once in a Week, at a House of one of the
Society, and the next Week, at the House of another, and so on 'till we had
been at each other's House. After we had spoken of these Things, and fully
agreed thereon, as I have here amply related, we parted; Sir HUGH going to a
Country House he had lately rented at Mile-end, and I going to mine in
Norfolk-Street. ABOUT one Month after this, we had gotten the Number of
fifteen Persons, all of whom were Men of goodly Parts and discreet and
worthy Conduct; and at the Entreaty of my very good Friend Sir HUGH, we
met all of us at the London-Stone, of a Wednesday Night, to write down our
Names in a Book, and to abide by, and agree to, a few Articles, which were
drawn up by Sir HUGH, which contained all the Rules that we would be subject
to, and which I think meet here to set down. LET not the Reader think me too
circumstantial for giving him the Articles which this Society of Disputants
drew up and signed: Any Thing relative to the Institution of a Society which
has since that Time made such Noise in the World, cannot be uninteresting; on
the contrary, it may afford greater Pleasure to a curious Person, than the
Perusal of the trifling Anecdotes that the most eminent History-Writers often
swell their Works with, or even than many Papers that are obtruded on the World
by a certain Society, who yet deem themselves great Philosophers.

ARTICLES and RULES Which WE, The undernamed PERSONS, Do hereby agree to abide
bye, and to perform.
First, THAT we do agree to compose and form a Society, which shall be styled
and called, THE SOCIETY FOR FREE AND CANDID INQUIRY.

Second, That we will assemble and meet at each other's Houses or Places of
Abode Weeklie; that is to say, at the House of Sir HUGH MYDDLETON, the first
Week, at the House of THOMAS VENNE, Esquier, the second Week, and at the
succeeding thirteen Gentlemen's Houses, whose Names are hereunder set, in the
Order they there appear, the thirteen next Weeks.

Third, That the Day of our Meetinge shall be a Mondaie, and to meet at Seven
of the Clock in the Eveninge, and to break up at Ten of the Clock.

Fourth, That to answer the End of our Intentions, we do agree, each and all
of us, to write down such useful Questions as may from Time to Time occur to
us, which shall be copyed into a Book, and shall be debated on in the Order
wherein they are set down.

Fifth, That the first Thing to be done every Mondaie Night shall be to read
the Question which is to be discoursed off that Eveninge, and then every one
that desires to speak to it may do it, but he shall not be allowed to
speak more than ten Minutes, nor shall he speak again 'till it comes to his
Turn.

Sixth, That we do agree that noe Question that is professedlie on, or
savoureth of Religion or Affairs of State be proposed or discoursed off; for
we all are of Opinion, that the first is of divine Origin, and pure and
undefyled, as set forth in our excellent Liturgy, and the taking on us such
unwarrantable Liberty as to censure or to call in Question the Conduct of
those whom the King has appointed to manage the Affairs of his Kingdom, is
not a fit Matter for us to handel, nor a proper Objecte for the Enquiryes of
studious Men, who want only to cultivate and to mende their reasonable
Faculties. Besides, it is flying in the Face of the King himself, whose sole
Business it is to see his Kingdom has proper and fit Ministers to manage the
Affairs thereoff, and in Effect censuring him that he does not see public
Affairs better conducted.

Seventh, That it shall and may be lawful to and for any Member of this
Society to propose any Person to belong to it, but that the Name of such
Person shall be delivered in Writing to all the present undernamed and
subscribinge Members; but no more than five shall be admitted this present
Year.

In Witness of these our Articles, Rules, and Agreements, we have hereunto set
our Names in our own Hand-Writinge this fiveteenth Day of the Month of
October, and in the Year of our Lord 1613.

HUGH MYDDLETON. THOMAS VENNE. WILLIAM G********. JOSEPH LEWIS. SAMUEL READ.
JOHN DOWDING. SAM. COOK. BEN. JERVIS. RICHARD PALMER. WILL. SOMERVILLE. WILL.
WHITAKER. JOHN WHITAKER. JOHN SLADE. RICHARD READ. JOHN GRANT.


THE first Meeting which this Society of Gentlemen had, was the Monday
subsequent to the Drawing up and Signing the foregoing Articles, being the 20th
Day of October, 1613. At Seven o'Clock in the Evening, precisely, they all met
at Sir HUGH MYDDLETON'S Town House, which was in the Strand; and, after
congratulating each other on their proposed Undertaking, and drinking two
Glasses of Wine each, Sir HUGH got into a large Elbow Chair, and officiated as
President, the rest being seated in common Chairs, placed there for that
Purpose.

SIR HUGH then read the Question to them, for their Night's Debate; which was
as follows:

Whether the common Methods of educateing Youth, in this Nation, are not very
defective, both with respect to Morals, and a Knowledge of the English Tongue?
THIS Question, the Reader will perceive, was a very good one, and worthy the
Consideration of the most respectable Society. I might be thought unpardonably
prolix, were I to transcribe the long Account which my Grandfather has given
of the Debate upon this Question, and the many learned and ingenious Arguments
produced by the several Members; yet it would be equally unpardonable, to omit
the capital Arguments, and pass over in Silence the Manner in which this first
Question of The Society for Free and Candid Enquiry, was handled.

Sir HUGH, after he had read the Question, asked if any of the Gentlemen
present chose to deliver his sentiments of it to the Company. On which Mr.
WHITAKER got up, and in a learned Speech pointed out the many errors, which, he
apprehended, prevailed in the then defective System of Education. He expatiated
on the Folly of the major Part of Parents of the lower Class, in sending their
Sons to School, to learn many Parts of Education, which it was almost
impossible, and highly improbable, from their situation in life, they could
possibly ever have any Occasion for. He then pointed out the erroneous Methods
that Schoolmasters in general made Use of, to introduce Youth to the Knowledge
of the Languages; distinguished with great Propriety and Precision, the various
Qualifications that ought to center in that Person, that took on him the
arduous Business of fashioning the juvenile Mind, and instilling the Principles
of Science; and showed how these various Qualifications ought to be exerted
toward those committed to their Care, if any Fruit was to be expected from the
young Nursery. He then considered the Business of Education, so far as it
related to the Morals of Youth: And here he lamented, that the most important
should be the most neglected Branch of Education; that the inculcating the
great Duties of Religion and Morality, should be looked on as of such small
moment, as to be totally disregarded; and, in fine, that the System of
Education in general, left the Minds of Youth unfurnished with real Knowledge,
and their Hearts uninfluenced by the great Principles of Christianity.

MY Grandfather enforced this Speech of Mr. WHITAKER by some additional
Arguments, and placing the others in a stronger and more striking Light. But
the best, and most remarkable Speech, is that which was made by Mr. JERVIS, who
was, as appears by my MS. at that time possessed of a Place at Court, which
produced him upwards of thirteeen hundred Pounds a Year; an immense Sum at that
time! This Speech, in my Opinion, is so good, and the Complaint he makes of the
defective Methods of Education in those Days, so well adapted to the modern
Method of Education, that, I think, I cannot do better than give his Speech at
full Length.

THIS Question, Mr. President, is certainly of the last Importance, and worthy
of the most serious Consideration. The forming of the Minds of Youth, and
implanting in them such Seeds as, when ripened to Maturity, may bring forth
much good Fruit, is, in my Opinion, of more Moment than any other Subject about
which we may interest ourselves; and therefore deserves to be fully spoken to.

THE human Mind has been compared, by ancient Writers, to a Piece of Wax, that
may be molded to any Form, and is capable of receiving any Impression, while
it is young and pliable; but when it grows old and stiff, it is with the utmost
Labor, and at a vast Expense of Time, that we can imprint the Shape of what we
desire, on it. From hence we may and must infer, that it is the Duty of every
Parent to train up his Child to such Learning, as may in time qualify him to be
a worthy Member of that Community to which he belongs: And let it be considered
too, that Youth is the best Time for doing this, for the Reason before
assigned, and also, because such Principles both of Religion, Morality and
Learning, which are inculcated, or, as it were, engraved on his Heart, will
grow with his Growth, and strengthen with his Strength, and at length will be
written on the Tablet of his Soul, in such deep and legible Characters, as Time
itself shall not be able to erase. Consider too, Gentlemen, it is far easier to
learn good things, than to unlearn bad ones, which, I apprehend, there is some
Necessity of doing, according to the present System of Education prevailing in
this Kingdom, and which I shall now endeavor to prove.

IN the first Place then, I think, that the true End of Education is both
grossly neglected, and manifestly perverted by the Professors of it, not duly
considering the Difference of Genius in Boys, the different Conditions of Life
in which they are placed, and the different Professions and Trades they are
designed for. Education is like a vast Basin of fine Water, which belongs to a
large Town, and to which every Inhabitant has an equal Right; but every one
that would receive the Advantages of it, must furnish Conduit-Pipes to direct
it to his own House, in like Manner as our worthy President first planned, and
has now completed, the Current of Ware Water, to the House of every Inhabitant
in London. But if our Professors of Education do not duly consider the
Capacities of those entrusted to their Care, but furnish the Heads of intended
Tailors, Barbers, and Shoemakers, with such Branches of Learning, as are not
only ornamental, but absolutely necessary in Divines, Lawyers, Physicians, or
Gentlemen of Rank, who want to make a Figure in the World, then Education may
be truly said, like Water running to Waste, though extremely good in itself, to
be of no real service to any one, but rather a Misfortune to the educated
Person; since the Length of Time employed in gathering Chaff, might have been
much better employed in reaping Corn; by which, I mean such Parts of Education
as are necessary for such particular Person.

When a Person, like that I have been describing, arrives to an Age, when
Reason begins to exert itself, and to blaze forth with a considerable Degree of
Luster, he finds he has miserably misspent his Time, in learning Things which
can possibly be of no Service to him, and neglecting those which are necessary
to his going through life with Credit to himself, and Utility to Society in
general. Before he can furnish himself with Pieces of useful Knowledge, it is
necessary that he divest himself of some Prejudices which he must have
contracted, and some Things which he must have learnt, while at School: And it
is not less difficult to do these Things, than to gain new and useful
Acquisitions, in traveling the Road of Science, and rambling in the Fields of
Learning. Since then Substances, not Shadows, Things, not Sounds, deserve the
Attention of a wise Man, it is highly necessary, that Wisdom and real Learning,
should be taught in our public Schools and Seminaries. But it may be asked,
what are Wisdom and real Learning? I answer, a thorough Knowledge of the
Principles of the Christian Religion, and of the great Duties of Morality, and
a competent Knowledge of the English Tongue. But neither of these, I apprehend,
are taught. The dead Languages only engross the Attention, and excite the Care
of Tutors and Schoolmasters: And, indeed, if a Knowledge of those Languages
would facilitate the Attainment of Wisdom itself, and mend the Morals of those
that learn them, it would be a useful and an ornamental Part of Education to
every one; not only to the Prince, but Peasant; not only to the Nobleman or
Divine, but to the Tradesman and Artificer. But I will be bold to say, these
Things are not so, nor do they produce these effects. A Knowledge of the
Languages, is not Knowledge itself, but a Key only, that being in the Hands of
People of Rank and Fortune, or those of the learned Professions, may by them be
made an Instrument to unlock and open the Chests of Knowledge, from whence they
may load themselves with Treasure; but the same Things taken from these Chests
of Knowledge, are not only of no Value to Men in mean Trades, or to low
Artisans, but absolutely an Encumbrance.

NAY, we may go still farther, and assert, that the learning of some particular
Branches of Literature, has manifestly a bad Tendency to encourage in the Minds
of those Youths intended for Trade, such Notions of Things as will absolutely
disqualify them from excelling in their Businesses; for, instead of
endeavoring to become eminent in their Trades, they will be ambitious of being
thought great Scholars; though, after all, perhaps, the Rudiments and first
Principles of Learning only they have Capacities for acquiring. Hence a
mistaken Notion of their Superiority over others in the same humble Stations of
Life will arise; and the Pride and Vanity they possess, and which lead them to
disdain their Fellows, will infallibly draw down on them their Contempt and
Indignation, and the Laughter or Pity of the rest of Mankind. By these Means,
Men that might have become useful Members, turn Pests of Society, or, at least,
mere excrescences; and thus is the Community robbed of the Industry and Genius
of many Individuals, whose Talents, if diverted into a proper Channel, and
exerted on proper Objects, might have brought Honor to their Country,
Improvement to their particular Trade, and Profit to themselves and Family.

THE Care and Attention of a Schoolmaster ought to be immediately directed to
these Points. He should endeavor to discover the particular Genius which every
Boy possesses; for there is no Boy but has a Genius for some Art or Science
more than another; and it ought to be cherished, and cultivated to the utmost.
Many a Man, for Want of a due Attention to this Rule, now cuts a despicable
Figure as a Poverty-struck Physician, who might have proved an ingenious
Painter, and have acquired great Fame and Wealth: And many a dull Clergyman now
thumps a Cushion, or reads a dull Composition to a drowsy Audience, who might
have proved an excellent Cutler, and furnished the World with such Wares as
might have engrossed the Trade in that Branch of Manufacture to Britain alone,
which is now shared by other Nations.

BESIDES, consider too, Gentlemen, that the Time we are at School is by far too
long, and too precious to be thrown idly away; which it most certainly is, if
not properly employed. No less than seven or eight Years is thought sufficient
to lay in a proper Stock of Learning, even for the lowest Rank of People; and
what that Learning is, I have before told you. For my Part, I must pronounce it
a most ridiculous Piece of Vanity, in the lowest Order of People, to have their
Children taught Latin, Greek, French, the Mathematics, or any other Branch of
Literature, which is not immediately necessary and requisite to them in the
Trades they are designed for: And I would gladly know, whether, to weigh a
Pound of Rasins or Sugar, to make a full-bottomed Peruque, to cut out a Suit of
Clothes, or to sell a Pair of Shoes, a Man that is illiterate is not as well
qualified as he that understands Algebra or Greek?

I AM not, Gentlemen, speaking against the Utility of such Branches of
Learning; but I am for confining them to their proper Learners: nor am I to be
understood as an Enemy to Tradesmen and Artisans partaking of the common
Advantages that flow from Literature; but I am for limitting them to such
Branches of it as may be for their own Good. What these Branches are is very
evident; a Knowledge of their own Tongue, so as to be capable of reading and
speaking it with Propriety; a Knowledge of the Principles of their Religion;
and a Knowledge also of Writing and Arithmetic: And these, in my Opinion, are
sufficient for People intended for mean Trades.

I SHALL now, Gentlemen, show you another Defect in the Conduct of our Schools;
and that is, an improper Choice of Books. Sure I am, that a great Number of
Books now universally made Use of, are a Disgrace to Humanity, and a Scandal to
a Christian Nation. It has ever been an Opinion of mine, that without a Perusal
of HORACE, JUVENAL, CATULLUS, MARTIAL, in our tender Years, we might attain a
thorough Knowledge of the Latin Language; and we might understand Greek without
learning ARISTOPHANES. All these Authors were great Libertines, and speak of a
detestable Vice, that reflects Dishonor on Human Nature, in such Terms, as
show their Approbation and Practice of it; and I must declare it as my Opinion,
that had such Authors not have mentioned it in the Manner they do, the Vice
itself would have been unknown to, and unpractised by succeeding Ages. Were
there no other Cause but this, those Authors ought never to enter a School; and
surely, the Impossibility of learning Latin or Greek without them, can never be
pleaded, when we have Christian Writers that have written on the most important
Subjects, in a pure and classical Style, in such great Numbers.

THE Knowledge of the English Tongue is of the last Importance to every one;
but this great Branch is almost entirely neglected. We do not learn to speak it
at all; and how we are taught to read it, I leave to every one's own
Experience. In Latin and Greek, which, perhaps, we have no Occasion to make Use
of above once a Year, no Pains, no Expense, is thought too great to make us
Adepts; but to make us speak English well, which we have Occasion to do every
Day of our Lives, no Expense, no Pains are bestowed on us.

In these several Particulars I have mentioned, I think the common Methods of
educating Youth in this Nation, are very defective; and, I think, that Man who
would point out a proper Remedy for these Diseases, would deserve well of
Society, and be justly considered as a Friend to Mankind in general. I shall
mention one, which, I think, would contribute not a little to cure the
Disorders that must inevitably ensue from the present defective System; for he
must be a bad Man who shows us our Unhappiness, and does not in some Measure
endeavor to remove it.

THE remedy then which I imagine would be serviceable in the literary Disease I
am speaking of, is, to compel all those who set up public Schools for the
Education of Youth, to wait on four or five Clergymen of Integrity and
Learning, to be examined with Respect to their Abilities, and to receive under
their Hands, duly attested, proper Certificates of their being capable of
undertaking that great Work, previous to their actually engaging in it. Were
this to be done, the Number of Schoolmasters would be greatly reduced; but it
would excite a sufficient Number of able Men to engage in the Business of
Teaching, as the fewer there were of them, the greater would be their Profit.

I COULD point out more Methods, Mr. President, to advance Education, but I
have been already too prolix, and therefore shall trespass no more on your Time
at present, but propose a Question on that Subject for our debating some future
evening.

How far these Complaints of one of the first Members of the Disputing Society,
made one hundred and fifty one Years ago, were just, appears by the unanimous
Applause my Grandfather has observed was given to his Speech: And how far
applicable his Observations on the defective System of Education then in Vogue,
are to the present, I leave to the Determination of every learned Reader.

THE subsequent Monday, being the 27th of October, 1613, the Society met for
the second Time. This Meeting was held at the House of THOMAS VENNE, Esquire a Man
of an immense Fortune, and great Erudition, at his House in St. James's Square.

THE Question debated that Evening, was,

Whether, notwithstanding the Complaints made both by the Clergy and Laitye of
the Degeneracye of the Age, the Moderns are not more virtuous and wise than the
Ancients? IN discussing this Question, many learned and ingenious Arguments
were produced by the Members, in Support both of the Affirmative and Negative
Sides of it: But the major Part of the Society were for the Affirmative, and
evidently demonstrated the Superiority of the then present Age to any former,
both with Respect to their Knowledge of the Arts and Sciences, and their
leading more exemplary Lives. They proved these two Opinions, by the infallible
Evidence of Scripture, drawing a Comparison between the Principles and Manners
of the People of old, with the present, wherein the latter appeared infinitely
more wise, and not near so wicked as the Holy Writings inform us the World
anciently was. They then enquired into the Cause of public Speakers and Writers
representing the Degeneracy of the Age in such lively Colors, and their being
sunk deeper into the Pits of Iniquity and Ignorance than any former Ages; and
they supposed it to arise from the Want of a Relish for innocent
Gratifications, in those public Speakers and Writers; from their having been
disappointed in their Pursuits and Expectations, which sowered their Minds, and
gave them a Disgust to the World; and from Pride and Vanity, which swelling
their Souls, and intoxicating their Imaginations, made them look down with
Contempt from their own fancied Height of Excellence, on those they imagined so
far beneath them.

THE next Time of their Meeting was on Monday the 3d of November, at my
Grand-father's House near Charing Cross; but I should be too prolix, were I to
relate the Particulars of this Meeting, and the several Arguments which this
ingenious Set of Gentlemen made Use of in the debating of their Question. I
shall however inform my Reader what that Question was, and mention a few
others, which were debated in their Turn at the Houses of the other Members.

Whether, from the various Accounts given to us in History, we may not
reasonably conclude, that Demosthenes was a greater Orator than Cicero?
Whether the Manufacture of Broad Cloth might not be carried to a still greater
Degree of Perfection? THIS Question was agreed by the Society to be debated on
again the next Monday Night, which was the 24th of November; and the Subject
being, in their Opinion, of the greatest Importance, and not exhausted, after
they had again discussed it that Evening, it was agreed that it should be a
Subject for their Entertainment a third Night.

Whether Emulation in brave and noble Minds, and Envy in cowardly and base
ones, are not Acquirements in the Possessors own Power? ON this Question I must
remark, that, however intelligible it might be at that Time of the Day, it is
not so now; nor do I see what Purpose the proposing it could serve -- no
Debates appear by my Manuscript to have been made upon it.

Whether the Improvement of our Heads and the Improvement of our Hearts, do not
go Hand in Hand? What Kind of Education is the most proper for a Nobleman, a
Gentleman, and a Tradesman? What Regulations or Improvements are needful to be
made, in Order to advance the great Work of Education in this Kingdom? Whether,
if a Committee or Number of Gentlemen of acknowledged Abilities, were appointed
either to draw up, or to alter the Epitaphs which, according to the present
Method, disgrace our Churchyards, it would not reflect Honor on the Nation,
and excite a higher Opinion of our Wisdom in the Minds of judicious Foreigners?
Whether the Stage, under proper Regulations, might not be made an Aid to
Wisdom, an Enforcer of Virtue, and a Supplement to the Pulpit? Whether a
Spendthrift or a Miser, is the most useless Member of the Community? ON this
Question, my Grandfather made a Remark, which I cannot forbear transcribing.

A Spendthrift, says he, is like a Grasshopper, and a Miser like a Jackdaw. The
former dissipates his Substance, and sings away his Time, in his Summer of
Life, regardless of what may happen to him in Winter, and not considering that
wilful Waste brings woeful Want; and the latter hides the Treasure he has
collected, and which he can never enjoy. They both are Fools, and unfit for
Society; but the Miser, I think, is most so. The Miser is a mere Muckworm, a
Dunghillmaker, that has brought together a Quantity of Manure, which, if
properly distributed, would enrich the national Soil; the Spendthrift, however
an Enemy to himself, is the generous Hand that scatters the rich Dung, that
does Good to Thousands. Whether the Difference of Genius, observable in the
People of different Nations, is owing to the Climate, Soil, Form of Government,
or Education? Whether an hypocritical Sinner, or an open and audacious one, be
the greatest Enemy to Society? SUCH were the first thirteen Questions debated
by the then infant Society, at their Meetings at the Members Houses; the last
of which was held at the House of my Grandfather.

I SHALL now take a Liberty frequently used by Biographers, and other Writers,
that of skipping over a long Space of Time, in which nothing material happened
in the Society, save that it increased in Numbers and in Fame.

FOR no less than eight-and-twenty Years was it continued on the same
Principles, and conducted in the same Manner, as at its first Establishment,
during all which Time my Grandfather belonged to it, who has not only
preserved in a large Folio Book all the Questions proposed, but also the
Debates on those that were more particularly interesting, or which more
forcibly excited his Curiosity.

FROM whatever Cause it was owing, I know not, but for half a Year the Society
was adjourned, which was the Summer of 1641. I have been sometimes tempted to
impute it to the particular Severity of the Usurper's Government, and the
critical Exigency of the Times; but that could not be the Case, as the Meetings
were again held in October, being at the Time of the dreadful Irish Massacre,
when no less than 45,000 Souls were cruelly murdered; though some Writers, for
some sinister Views, or Reasons best known to themselves, have diminished the
Numbers that fell by the Hands of the Murderers, more than two-thirds.

SHORTLY after their assembling together again, a great Number of Gentlemen of
Rank and Fortune, having heard of their Fame, and approving their Scheme,
offered themselves as Members: But the Society imagining that it would be
extremely inconvenient for a greater Number of Members to meet together,
refused admitting them, and declared they would not alter, or break in on their
original Plan.

IN this Manner they continued 'till the Restoration of King CHARLES II. in
1660; and to show in what Esteem they were held, I shall transcribe the
following curious Anecdote, which the Reader may depend on as a Matter of Fact.

OUR Society now began to attract the public Attention in a very particular
Manner, and was so much discoursed of, and so universally applaused, that it
even excited Majesty itself to pay us a Visit. He was introduced to us by Sir
HUGH, who informed us he was a distant Relation of his; that coming lately from
the Country, and hearing of our Fame, as he expressed it, was desirous of
hearing himself those Debates which the World talked so loudly of. Now several
of us would have known the King, had he appeared in propria Persona, but he had
put a Piece of black Silk over his left Cheek, which almost covered it; and his
Eyebrows which were quite black, he had by some Artifice or other, converted to
a light brown, or rather to a flaxen Color, and had disguised himself in his
Apparel and Looks so effectually, that none of us knew him; and of this
Circumstance my good Friend, Sir HUGH, was entirely silent 'till two Years
afterward, being, no Doubt, so cautioned by his Majesty. THIS little Anecdote
throws a farther Light on the Character of that facetious Monarch, who, as we
may gather from History, loved a Frolic at his Heart, and was never happier
than when at some public Entertainments, or Assemblies, of his Subjects, where
he might throw off the cumbrous Robes of Majesty, and give a free and natural
Vent to his humorous Disposition. I find that he was so well entertained with
the Debates of the Society, that he came there three Times more, and expressed
himself greatly satisfied with an Institution, which, he declared, had so great
a Tendency to enlarge the Mind, and to refine the Taste.

THE Society had now existed forty-seven Years, and of the Members that first
formed it, two only survived, my Grandfather and Sir HUGH. But it being like
the immortal Regiment of FREDERICK II. King of Prussia, supplied with new
Members as the old ones dropped off, there was no Doubt of its Dissolution,
especially as they took Care to elect such Men only as were possessed of
Integrity and Abilities; for it was an invariable Maxim with them that none but
such should be admitted, let their Station in Life, Age, Connections, or
Fortune, be what they would.

FIVE Years after this Time, the dreadful Plague happened, which carried off no
less than sixty-eight Thousand five Hundred and eighty-six Souls, Men, Women,
and Children. Among them was my Grandfather, who, after being seized with it,
and continuing excessively ill for eleven Days, departed this Life in the
eighty-seventh Year of his Age, having for the last fifty-two Years been a
Member of the Society for free Enquiry, of which he was the first Proposer and
Promoter, and, with the Assistance of Sir HUGH MYDDLETON, the chief Establisher.

End of the FIRST PART.
THE HISTORY OF THE Robinhood Society.
PART II.
HITHERTO we have been enabled to compile this History by the Manuscript of my
Grandfather. He has been, as it were, our Polar Star, by whose Light we have
directed our Course; and if that Light shall be adjudged sufficient to reflect
a Splendour on so obscure a Subject as that which we have attempted, (a Subject
whose Original, Rise, and Progress cannot, I believe, be traced with greater
Fidelity, involved as it is in the Darkness of Time) and to satisfy the
Expectations of the Reader, we shall think ourselves very happy. It is true,
that we could have been more minute in the Description of several Things; could
have transcribed many Speeches of various Members on different Subjects, which
we have entirely omitted; and have given all the Questions that were debated by
the Society from their first Establishment in 1613, to the Time of my
Grand-father's Death in 1665. But the doing these Things we have conceived
unnecessary, since it must have been very dry and insipid to our Readers, a
very disagreeable Task for ourselves, and would have swelled this History to an
enormous Size.

WE shall now, in this Second Part, continue our History from my Grandfather's
Death, till the Removal of the Society to the Essex-Head in Essex-Street, when
its original Plan was altered, and its Conduct became very different; and show
its various Fortune, till its last Transmigration to the Robinhood in
Butcher-Row, where it now continues to be held.

MY Father, for some Years before my Grand-father's Death, had been admitted a
Member of the Society, and was looked on as a very intelligent and worthy Man.
He was not less fond of it than my Grandfather, and no less particular in
transcribing from the Club-Book the various Questions that were inserted there,
and the several Arguments that passed pro and con on the Subjects, when they
came to be debated. This he performed in the same large Folio Book my
Grandfather made Use of for the same Purpose; and which being now in my
Possession, enables me to compile this Work.

IN the Year 1667 the Society had some Thoughts of enlarging their Plan, and
admitting more Members. They had received Applications from several Men of
Quality, and great Numbers of others distinguished for Wit and Judgment, for
their being admitted to partake of the Instruction and Entertainment which
their Debates afforded; but so general an Admission was deemed impracticable,
on Account of the great Inconvenience the Members would all be put to, in their
Turn, to entertain so many Persons, and therefore such Applications were to no
Purpose.

OCCASIONAL Visitants had been, however, allowed the Liberty of being present
at the Debates, and to speak themselves to the Question if they thought proper.
Restraint irritates Desire, and Things forbidden have greater Charms for
Mankind, than those they are at free Liberty to enjoy. So proved it with those
Gentlemen, who, though they had been present at the Debates of the Society,
were not Members of it. Enraged to find they had not the Liberty of becoming
Members, they deviated from the Questions they should have spoken to; and
complained, that a Society that was not free for the Reception of every one in
general that had an Inclination to frequent it, could have no good Effect, and
that, supposing its Influence on the Manners and Principles of those that
attended it ever so great, the Public in general could reap no Advantage from
it.

IN this Manner the Society went on for some Time, and the Debates were a motly
Mixture of angry Censures and solid Arguments, Animadversions on the Questions
proposed, and Complaints of the narrow Spirit of the Society: So that the
original Intention of the first Members was entirely frustrated, and the
Satisfaction and Pleasure which must always arise from a reciprocal
Communication of Sentiments between learned and ingenious Men, gave Way to
private Cabals and personal Invectives; which will ever check the Growth of
Knowledge, and choke up the Paths of Truth.

TO put a Stop to these Proceedings, one of the Members, a Man of a violent
Spirit, and boisterous Disposition, proposed it to the Consideration of the
Society, whether it would not be advisable to refuse Admittance, for the
future, to any Gentleman whatever, that might desire to be an occasional
Visitant, and to make such an Order in their Book. And he gave it as his
Opinion, that without doing it, the Society must soon fall to the Ground, by
the Uproar and tumultuous Proceedings which frequently prevailed there.

HE was seconded in his Motion by another of the Members, a Man of like Temper
with himself; who also gave it as his Opinion, that no Person whatever, let his
Fortune or Rank in Life be what it would, ought to be admitted as an occasional
Visitant. He observed, that their Society was of a private Nature; and that,
for People to insist on pushing into their Company, and hearing their
Sentiments of Men and Things, whether they would or not, was an unparallelled
Piece of Assurance, and equally unmannerly with a Beggar, that, clothed in
Rags and Wretchedness, yet, full of a true Hibernian Impudence, would force his
Way into a Gentleman's Parlour against his Consent. He expatiated largely on
the Folly of first permitting any Gentleman to attend there who was not a
Member, and observed, that though it was a Custom to grant such Permission, yet
the Breach of foolish Customs is better than the Observance of them: And
concluded, by remarking, that if they had, in that Respect, traveled on in a
wrong Road for fifteen Years last past, there was no Reason they should still
travel in it, especially as they had then experienced the Inconveniences that
arose from it.

THE many Debates and Arguments they had at various Times on this Topic, at
last produced the following Question:

Whether it is proper to allow any Gentleman, who is not a regularly chosen
Member of this Society, a Liberty of attending it? THIS Question gave Rise to
many Arguments on both Sides, and produced no small Commotion. The two
hotheaded Members I have just mentioned, were of Opinion, that no Man, however
dignified or distinguished, ought to have Liberty of coming there; and urged
all the Arguments they were Masters of to support their Opinions; which they
did not do with the calm Demeanor of a venerable and pacific NESTOR, whose
Words fall from him like Flakes of Snow, that melted as they fell, but with all
the Fire and Fury of an enraged AJAX.

AS the Issue of this Debate produced a Revolution in the Society not less
remarkable, in Proportion to the Numbers that were affected by it, than the
Revolution in the State that happened but two Years afterward, I shall
transcribe the Speech that my Father made on the Occasion, and which, he
declares, made such an Impression on them, that they followed his Advice, in
the Alteration and Enlargement of their Plan.

I LOOK on this Question, Gentlemen to be of no small Importance; as not only
the Well-being, but the very Existence of our Society must depend on the
Determination we make concerning it, and the Influence such Determination must
necessarily have on our Conduct. It has been allowed, ye all know, for
Gentlemen, recommended by any Member of our Society, to be present at our
Debates. How long it has been allowed, I cannot say; but it has been so ever
since I have had the Honor of belonging to it. The Advantage our Society
derives from this Permission is not inconsiderable. It receives a Luster and
Character from the Reports which our occasional Visitants make of it to their
Friends; and thus Men of real Genius and Learning are induced to visit us, and
by their hearing our Debates, and listening to our Sentiments on Subjects of
Importance, or Matters of Controversy, they are excited to give us theirs; and
thus we are mutually improved, and mutually obligated. Besides, consider that
very frequently not one Half of the Members attend, and if occasional Visitants
were not then to come among us, the Debates would grow languid, and no Argument
could subsist. Those Gentlemen that are for having no Persons to partake of the
Entertainment they may expect, and seek for here, but Members, seem to resemble
an avaritious, covetous old Miser, that hoards up his Bags, and would have no
one the better for them. Let us not be misers in Knowledge, but despise the
Character as much as we do him that closets up his Gold. The worst Avarice is
that of Wisdom; and if we really possess any, let us act like the generous Man,
and the good Christian, that will communicate to others the good Things that he
has, and give unto him that wants: If we have not that Wisdom which we may
imagine, and without Vanity imagine, People think we have, and which they come
here to partake of, they will, perhaps, give us some. Ye all know, Gentlemen,
that in the Distribution of Things of this Kind, he that gives away the most is
never the poorer for it; his Treasures are not the more exhausted: Then let us
not be afraid that ours will be so, but rather hope that we shall be enriched
by the Treasures of those that often visit us, and frequently come to us very
opportunely in the Absence of some of our Members.

ONE Gentleman has observed, that foolish Customs ought to be broke through;
and that if we have traveled in a wrong Road for some Time, it is proper to
quit it, and travel in a right Road. I allow it, Gentlemen; but he ought to
have proved these two Things: He ought to have shown that our Admission of
Visiters was a foolish Custom, and that the Road we had hitherto traveled in
was a wrong one; but he has not done these Things; he has only given us his
mere Ipse Dixit.

HE has observed likewise, that for People to push themselves into our Society,
to hear our Debates, is as unmannerly as for a Beggar to push, without
Permission, into a Gentleman's Parlour. This I deny. Gentlemen that come here,
do it by the Liberty that is given to each Member, to bring one Friend with
him; and therefore, that is not a Case in Point. As to the Inconveniences that
have arisen, and the Tumults that have been raised, they have not been owing to
our admitting Visiters, as that Gentleman has asserted, but to our not
admitting more. And really, I am of Opinion, that a Society for free and candid
Inquiry, ought to be a free rnd candid Society. But how can it be a free one,
if Gentlemen are denied Entrance? How can it be a candid one, if we obstruct
the Propagation of Knowledge? -- In short, Gentlemen, I think our Plan might be
improved, and a very necessary Reformation take Place; a Reformation that will
put a Stop to all Manner of Disturbances, and increase our Reputation by the
Accession of more Members.

YOU experience very clearly, Gentlemen, that the chief Inconveniences we are
put to, is the Want of Room. Could we but get a larger Place, capable of
holding conveniently a larger Company, we should neither be so crowded, nor
would the Debates meet with such Obstructions. Besides, to speak my Sentiments
plainly, I don't think that meeting at each other's Houses is at all proper. We
put ourselves to many Inconveniences we might avoid; we suffer many
Perplexities we have no Occasion to suffer; and we disorder our Family Affairs,
when we might avoid doing it.

I AM confident, Gentlemen, there is not a Man among ye, how attached soever he
is to the Interest of the Society, but dreads the Approach of that Monday,
when, perhaps, no less than fifty People are to assemble; and some of us
perfectly tremble at it. For my Part, I must contess, that on the Monday
Evening the Society meets at my House, I am the unhappiest Creature imaginable;
my Wife dislikes it, and my Servants detest it. I doubt not but this is the
Case with ye all, Gentlemen, though your Respect for the Society, and for one
another, has prevented your making Mention of it. The Method of Meeting at each
other's Houses might be extremely proper for the Society in its Infancy; but I
don't apprehend it is so now. The same Reasons do not now exist as might then;
and therefore we are not under the same Obligation to follow the same Method of
Procedure in this Respect.

WHEN this Society was first instituted, which was fifty-three Years ago, there
were only fifteen Members that composed it; and no more were added to it for
some considerable Time. No Member then brought a Friend with him; so that the
Society might then be, with great Propriety, styled a private one. But that is
not the Case now. Our Number of established Members doubles theirs, and the
Number of occasional Visitants that come among us, allowing for the Absence of
some Members every Monday Night, at least trebles it. The Inconveniency that
such a Number of People occasion to a Family I have before set forth; and
therefore shall now deliver it as my Opinion, that this is a Grievance that
wants a speedy Redress, and demands our Attention much more than, whether it is
proper to allow Gentlemen, not Members of our Society, a Liberty of attending
it.

This Speech was received with universal Applause. Even the Gentlemen that
opposed my Father in the former Part of his Speech, could not but join with him
in the latter; and they all came to a Resolution, that their meeting at one
another's Houses to debate, threw their Families into great Confusion, was
improper in itself, and required an Alteration.

IN Consequence of this Opinion, the Society came to a Determination, of having
their Meetings at some Tavern or Coffeehouse, where they might be accommodated
with a Room sufficient to hold a large Number of Gentlemen, and where every
one, whose Curiosity excited him to attend the Debates, might have a Liberty of
entering.

IT may easily be imagined, that in a City like London, it could not be a very
long Time before a House possessed of such a Room was discovered. Indeed, many
such occurred to the Minds of the Members; but that which seemed most
commodious, and best adapted to their Purpose, was the Essex-Head in
Essex-Street.

TO this House, therefore, several of the Members went; and having examined it
very attentively, reported to their Brethren, on their Return, that it would,
with some Alterations, answer their Purpose extremely well; that they had
spoken to the Landlord concerning it; and that he had promised to do every
Thing in his Power to make it agreeable to them.

THE Society received this Account with general Approbation; and informing the
Landlord of the Nature of their Club, he fitted up the largest Room in his
House, fixing Benches therein, so as to make it contain upwards of an hundred
Persons.

THE Rules and Orders the Society had before observed, were now altered.
Before, every Member had, in his Turn, defrayed the whole Expense attendant on
the Meeting held at his House; but now, they ordered, that every Member, and
every Person that came to the Society to hear their Debates, should, previous
to his Admission into the Club-Room, take a Ticket at the Bar, for which he
should pay Sixpence: That every Sixpence so paid would be received by the
Landlord; in Consideration of which, he should furnish them with as much Porter
and Lemonade as would amount to the Sum total received: That the Price of both
those Kinds of Liquors should be rated at Four-pence a Pot: That if any
Gentleman chose other Liquors, he should pay for them separately: And that if
any Money remained in the Landlord's Hands, after he had deducted, from the
whole Money received, the Price of the Porter and Lemonade he had furnished the
Society with, it should be paid to his Servants, in proportionable Shares, in
Consideration of the Trouble they were put to.

THEY likewise formed some new Rules with Respect to the Conduct of the
Society, and their Methods of Debate; of which the following are the most
remarkable.

Ordered, THAT the Society for free and candid Inquiry, be a free one, and open
to any Person that thinks proper to attend it. Ordered, THAT that no Person be
admitted a Member of the Society, unless he is elected by a Majority of Voices;
and that no Meeting be held for the Election of new Members, but once a
Quarter, which shall be in a private Room, after the Debates of the Night are
over. Ordered, THAT Religion and Politics shall be debated on in this Society,
provided Decency and good Order be observed, both in the wording the Question
on those Subjects, and in the Discussion thereof. Ordered, THAT more than one
Question be debated of a Night, if there is Time sufficient for so doing.
Ordered, THAT no one shall be allowed more than five Minutes to speak to the
Question. Ordered, THAT no Question shall be proposed to the Consideration of
the Society, nor admitted in the Book as a Question, unless it is signed by
some Name. Ordered, THAT no Person shall be obliged to sign his own Name to any
Question he shall think proper to propose, but a fictitious one, if he thinks
proper. Ordered, THAT in the debating any Question, the Proposer shall not be
obliged to father it, or to open it by explaining the Terms, and the Manner he
would have it considered in, unless he thinks proper: But if no Person owns the
Question, it shall go from the President, and be deemed as his; after which it
shall be debated in due Order; the Person that sits on the Left Hand of the
President to speak to it first, and so on.
THESE are the most material new Regulations which the Society made on their
removing to the Essex-Head, their other Rules and Orders being the same as
before.

IT is impossible to conceive what Numbers of People attended the Society as
soon as it was declared a free one, and Liberty was given to every Person to
enter it, on paying Sixpence. No one Topic for Conversation so universally
prevailed as this. It became a general Subject of Debate without Doors, as much
as Philosophy, Metaphysics, and the Belles Lettres did within. From the
Courtier down to the Peasant, from the hoary Sage down to the playful
Schoolboy, Curiosity had extended her Influence, and excited Desires in every
one to visit an Assembly of Men that had rendered themselves so famous.

IN Consequence of such an universal and eager Curiosity, Multitudes of People
assembled at the Essex-Head every Monday Night, some as Orators, and some as
Auditors; some to be instructed, some to be entertained; some to see, and some
to be seen; some to show their fine Clothes, and delicate Persons; and some to
criticize the Speeches of the Essex-Head Orators, and entertain their
Mistresses with an Account of the Debates, and display their own Sagacity in
distinguishing their Merits, and their Defects.

IT is not more wonderful for Critics to congregate at such Places, than for
Rooks and Jackdaws to meet in the Fields of human Slaughter. A Critic that has
not the Power of speaking a single Sentence in Public, is yet able to dissect
the finest Orations of the finest Orators; he can diminish the Graces of
Elocution and Action, and exaggerate little Defects, with all the petulance of
Pedantry, and Rage of Censure.

SUCH Critics are like Eunuchs: They have not Vigor nor Courage to act
manfully themselves, and they envy and censure those that do. When they come
into a public Assembly, it is not to partake of its Entertainments, but to seek
Occasions of finding Fault, and giving an ill-natured Turn to the most harmless
Amusements. They are like so many Hounds at a Carcass, devouring their Prey as
fast as they can, and growling all the Time they are eating.

THERE was likewise a Number of these Gentlemen of a higher Class, the Writing
Critics, who attended the Society, in Search of fresh Topics to exercise their
Abilities, and amuse the Public. They knew that the Passion for Novelties must
be gratified; and when almost every Subject had been exhausted, and every Field
been so much traversed, as to render the Whole a common, beaten, and highway
Path, it was necessary for those Sportsmen to turn out of the common Road,
where nothing but common Objects, and Things that have been a thousand Times
described, meet the Eye, and strike into bye Lanes and covert Places, where,
perhaps, Plenty of original and curious Game might he started, hunted down with
Sport and Pleasure, and be at length cooked, and served up as a choice Dish for
the public Taste.

THIS was the Case of the Essex Head Society. While it was confined within the
Bounds of each Member's House, the Public in general knew but little of it, and
the venal Authors of those Days, not having Intimacy and Interest enough with
any of the Members to gain Admittance, were of Course disabled from informing
the World of the Nature of the Society, and signalizing themselves, by striking
into a new Species of Writing, and entertaining the Public with a new Subject.
Not but of late Years the Race of Writing-Critics is greatly improved.
Formerly, those Votaries of Dullness never attempted to write on Subjects of
which they had no Knowledge; but now, grown more vivacious, and cultivating the
finer Powers of Imagination, they can traduce Men whom they never knew, refute
Arguments they do not understand, and pronounce Sentence on Books they have not
read.

Nay, the Writing-Critics of the present Age, are so sagacious, that even the
raw and undisciplined can form a right Judgment of every new Production, by
reading only the first ten Lines; and as to Veterans, the Cooks of Monthly
Hashes for the public Palate, they can discover an Author by his Style, and of
Course know, in ten Minutes, whether they are to praise or censure his Piece:
Though, indeed, to their Credit it must be observed, that they are not absolute
Slaves to malignant Obduracy; for, after they have vowed to damn a Work and its
Author to Contempt and Obscurity, a Beef-Steak and a Bottle of Wine have had a
wonderful Efficacy in softening the Severity of their Dispositions, making them
adore and cherish that very Work, which, without the Interposition and Agency
of the Wine and the Beef, they would have butchered without Decency, and
devoured without Remorse.

SO much for Critics of every Species. -- I shall now return to my History, and
as I am too poor to give a Beef-Steak and a Bottle to secure it from the
Reviewer's Place of Torment, it must of Course be --, but no Matter.

AS the Society was now declared to be free, and Religion and Politics, those
inexhaustible Topics of Conversation, were allowed to be handled, the Room was
crowded every Night, and Orators, like Mushrooms in a foggy Morning, started up
from every Seat. The Exclusion of these Subjects from their Debates before,
had, in the general Opinion of the Society, robbed them of much Entertainment
and Knowledge. They, therefore, departed from the Maxims of the original
Members, who had declared, that the Christian Religion being of Divine
Original, could not but be pure and holy, and therefore not a fit Object for
the Debates of Disputing Clubs; and that for Philosophers and studious Men, who
wanted only to cultivate their rational Faculties by the Discussion of useful
Subjects, to wade into the Depths of Politics, and to take on them the Liberty
of scrutinizing into the Measures of State, would be an unwarrantable Action,
and productive of no Good.

NAY, as it is usual not only with private Men, but with public Assemblies, to
run into Extremes; so our Society now debated very few Questions, but what were
religious, or political.

TRUE Religion, they observed, like Silver seven Times purified in the Fire,
appeared the brighter the more it was examined into; and it was the
indispensible Duty of every Man, to search the Scriptures, and to endeavor to
give an Answer to him that asks a Reason for the Hope that is in him. Nay,
without doing it, every Man must be extremely criminal; since, if the only
Reason a Man can give for his being of any particular Persuasion with Respect
to his Religious Principles, is, that his Father and Mother were of the same
Religion he was, and that he professed that Religion, because he was educated
in it; then, by a Parity of Reason, a Hottentot, or a Mohammedan, a Jew, or a
Pagan, has as strong Reasons for his Mode of Religious Worship, and is as
justifiable in the Continuance of it, as the Christian. As to the seeming
Impropriety of debating on Religion in a Public House, and examining into its
Principles over a Pot of Beer, they concluded, it was not only warrantable, but
laudable, and infinitely better than doing it in private Houses, where they
could not have an Opportunity to instruct their Minds and refresh their Bodies
at the same Time: For they insisted, that in all Debates whatever, more
especially on Religion, the Conversation grows languid and insipid, in
Proportion as the Speakers grow hungry and thirsty; and therefore, a Welsh
Rabbit and a Pot of Beer, were as necessary Requisites for a professed Orator,
as Knowledge and Elocution, or even a Subject to harangue on.

AS to the Admission of Political Questions, they observed, that in this Land
of Liberty, where the Goddess herself reigns with so much Luster, and infuses
her chearing Influence into every Breast, it is absolutely necessary for every
one who has the Good of his Country at Heart, to scrutinize into, and examine
the Measures which are from Time to Time taken by our State Pilots, in the
Management of, and steering the Political Vessel: That it is a Duty incumbent
on every Man in a free State, in a Rank of Life, and possessed of Abilities
beyond the Vulgar, to fathom the Depths of Government, and to point out and
expose the hidden Rocks and dangerous Shoals, on which Statesmen often split:
That as we are all Links of one great Chain, we are all interested in the Fate
of each other, and bound by the most solemn Ties of doing our utmost, for the
Support and Welfare of that Community to which we belong: And, that though to
direct the Helm of State requires an able Head and an incorrupt Heart, Practice
and Experience, Courage and Prudence; yet, it has been found, that as a Pigmy
mounted on the Shoulders of a Giant, may be able to see farther than the Giant
himself, so People not conversant with State Affairs, may strike out some Road,
that, being pursued, may lead to Glory and Happiness, and make some
Observations, of which those that have the Direction of public Affairs, may
avail themselves.

FOR these, and some other Reasons equally cogent, they determined, that
Religion and Politics should find a Place in their Debates, and employ their
Attention as much as any other Subjects.

THE first Question they had of a religious Nature, was the following; which
the Reader will perceive was as ingenious as it was modest, highly emblematical
of that Freedom of Enquiry which afterward prevailed in that free Society.

Whether Faith and Belief are not one and the same Thing? And, if so, Whether
it is in the least meritorious to believe what we cannot help upon the
Conviction of the Senses? ANTI-FIDELIS. MANY Arguments were urged on both
Sides, and Religion and Reason were bandied to and fro by the various
Disputants, as a Football is by a Company of Soldiers, or a Shuttlecock by the
alternate Strokes of sounding Battledores.

THE Affirmatives strongly insisted that Faith was nothing but a Conviction in
the Mind, of the Truth of any particular Doctrine, or Thing; that we could not
help, from the internal Evidence we have of Things, to believe or disbelieve
them; that in Consequence of our examining them, we form our Opinion, or in
other Words, our Faith; and that since the Evidence produced within every Man's
Mind, is more or less forcible, in Proportion as it strikes the Imagination, it
is no Wonder that the Opinion, or Faith of Mankind, should be so greatly
different, and that one should firmly believe what another so strenuously
denies. They alleged, that if a Man did all in his Power to arrive at a due
Knowledge of Things, and in Consequence of his gaining the best Information he
could, grounded his Belief, he was not culpable, let that Belief be what it
would; but any one that sits down contented with Things as he finds them, and
believes them without a free and impartial Examination of their Nature and
Tendency, is extremely culpable; since he only believes what he has been
taught, as a Parrot may prate what he has been instructed in. That to examine
into the Truth of any Doctrine before we assent to it, is our Duty; that
implicit Faith is a Monster in its Nature, and worthy only of Papal Regions,
where the Mind is fettered and Credulity and Ignorance stalls at large.

MANY other Arguments were produced, in Support of the Opinions of those
ingenious Gentlemen, which it would be too tedious to enumerate; the Result,
however, of their Enquiries, and the Inferences they drew from their
Propositions, were, that Faith, of whatever Kind or Nature soever, was not in
the least meritorious, and of consequence not necessary to Salvation; since it
depended only on the Formation of our Minds, and their Capability of
distinguishing with Precision and Accuracy, the Nature of Things, which
accordingly influenced us to reject or admit, to believe or disbelieve any
Proposition or Doctrine which came under the Examination of our Senses; and
that an Infidel and a Christian, are alike acceptable to God, and useful
Members of the Community.

I SHALL not give the Substance of what was said on the other Side of the
Question, for the greater Part of the Speakers were those who disbelieved the
Truth of the Christian Religion; and those who spoke in its Defense, injured
the Cause they should have supported, and betrayed the Fort they should have
defended, by their feeble and ridiculous Arguments. To refute, therefore, the
Observations before made, would not be to record the Proceedings of the
Society, but to give my own Opinion.

ONE Observation I must, however, be permitted to make. An ignorant Christian
that pretends to defend Christianity against the Attacks of Infidels, is the
greatest Enemy it can have. The Shafts of Ridicule pointed against it by its
Foes, are too blunted, and the divine Shield of Truth, which Christianity has
to defend her, is too strong for any Impression to be made on it. It must not
be concluded therefore, that if, in public Societies, Christianity is not
always defended with a cool and intrepid Spirit, against the hot Assaults of a
whole Legion of Adversaries, that it is not defensible. Let but the pretended
Friends of Christianity hold their Tongues, and it will defend itself; but if
they open the Gate to its Foes, it is no Wonder that they should enter, and
triumph without a Victory.

TO give the Reader as satisfactory Account of the Society as I can, and to
enable him to form an adequate Idea of the Members that composed it, I shall
transcribe a few of the Questions they debated, and give a brief History of a
few of the principal Speakers.

SOME of the Questions that adorn the Book of Debates, and called forth the
Oratorial Abilities of the Members, are as follow:

RELIGIOUS QUESTIONS. Whether the Ceremonies and Practice of Mankind, relative
to Marriage, under the Mosaic Dispensation, were superseded, or set aside by
the Christian Revelation? JUDAEUS. Whether the Character of the Man after GOD's
own Heart, is proper for the Imitation of People in these Days? TITUS. Whether
a Plurality of Wives, practiced by the first Race of Men, is not justifiable by
the present, as the Doctrine and Practice were not abrogated by the first
Christians? ANGLICANUS. Whether the Doctrine of the Trinity can be justified
either by Reason or Scripture? ANTI-TRINITARIAN. Whether a positive Command to
believe in Doctrines we have no Conception of, and cannot compel our Reason to
submit to, has not a manifest Tendency to hoodwink our rational Faculties, and
to put us on a Level with Beasts, whom we command to perform our Wills without
giving them any Reasons for our so doing? PHILO-LIBERTATIS. Whether the
Doctrines of Christianity are not irreconcilable to the Reason, and repugnant
to the Interests of Mankind? DRACO. Whether the Exercise of our rational
Faculties, independent of any supernatural Assistance, be not sufficient to
guide us to Salvation? And if it is not a gross Affront to the Wisdom of the
Great First Cause to suppose the contrary? BRITANNICUS. Whether it is
consistent with the Common Sense of Mankind to believe, that the Divine LOGOS,
or Word, or Supreme Being, could be born of a Virgin? NEGATIVUS. Whether any
one is accountable to any Body of Men whatever for his religious Sentiments?
CHRISTIANUS. Whether the Variety of Religious Systems, all pretending to have
the Divine Authority of the Sacred Writings for their Foundation, does not
warrant an unprejudiced and a rational Person to suspect the Authenticity of
those Writings? Or, if not, to decline being a Member of any visible Church?
CHUBB.

As these Questions are sufficient to show into what Extravagancies Men may be
led by the Freedom of Enquiry, some, though not expunged from the Book of
Debates, are yet omitted here, as too impious and blasphemous to be repeated.

POLITICAL QUESTIONS. Whether the Power lodged in a Prime Minister, be not too
great to be entrusted with any Subject; and if, in Time, it will not sap the
very Vitals of our Constitution? ARISTARCHUS. Whether, if it can be undeniably
proved, that a K -- has broke his Coronation Oath, the Subjects are not
discharged from their Allegiance? DUBITOR. Whether a Monarch, who loads an
undeserving Favorite with Treasures, and who hears and sees every thing with
HIS Ears and Eyes, merits the glorious Title of a Patriot King, notwithstanding
the fulsome Adulation and servile Compliments paid him by dependent Sycophants
and venal Authors? REPUBLICANUS. Whether the great Snow we had some time past
The great Snow here alluded to happened in 1674, and continued without
Intermission eleven Days. Great Damages were occasioned thereby, Huts and
little Houses were entirely covered, the Current of our Rivers was stopped, and
Multitudes of People miserably perished.
, attended with a smart Frost, has not had a wonderful Effect in freezing and
congealing the Senses of some certain Ministers? SARCASTICUS. Whether a King,
who, in a Speech he makes from his Throne, solemnly declares he will perform
certain Actions which he never does perform, asserts manifest Falsehoods that
are evident to the whole Nation, and endeavors to make his Subjects believe
that black is white, and that two and two make five, is a better Monarch than
Alfred or Constantine? ANTONINUS. Whether the Smiles of a Monarch can purify
the Heart of a Gamester, or the Bed of a Countess sanctify Lewdness and
Adultery, notwithstanding both the UTOPIAN Monarch and Countess are bedawbed
over by venal Pens, and represented as Pious, Good, Great, and every Thing that
is excellent? DUN SCOTUS. Whether the notorious Practice of the Ministry's
interfering with the Election of Members of Parliament, and the Arts of Bribery
and Corruption, so universally known to be made Use of on those Occasions, do
not reflect Dishonor on the -- that permits or connives at those illegal
Practices, which manifestly tend to destroy the Freedom of the Subject? MARCUS
AURELIUS. Whether triennial Parliaments would not be for the good of this
Nation? AUGUSTUS.

THESE are some of the Religious and Political Questions debated by the
Society, and from their Nature and Tendency the Reader is enabled to judge of
the rest. He may observe, that the most abstruse, and the most easy Subjects,
are alike debated on; those that the greatest human Faculties cannot reach, and
those that the veriest Blockhead can understand.

THE Absurdity of such Questions must appear to every one. What can be more
ridiculous, than for a Society of Philosophers and Christians to endeavor to
explain Mysteries, to fathom what is unfathomable, and to conceive what is
inconceivable? Such is the Pride of human Wit, and such our Delight in
reconciling Paradoxes, and fighting with Shadows, that we neglect the Study of
Subjects that are of the last Importance, and easy to be understood, and employ
our Thoughts on those that are out of the Reach of finite Capacities, and
which, could they be explained and understood, would cease to be mysterious;
for, as an eminent Divine has justly observed, a Mystery explained is a
Contradiction in Terms, since, being explained, it becomes no Mystery at all.

NOR less absurd and ridiculous is the debating on Subjects that can admit of
no rational Debate, or the least Doubt. Why should an Assembly of Men, whose
professed Intention is to improve one another, propose a Queston, Whether Vice
is Vice or not? For that is the whole Purport of the sixth Political Question
before set down. That Vice is intrinsically Vice, in Subject or in King, can
admit of no Dispute: No Power, no Rank, no Fortune can alter the Essence of
Things, however they may gild them over, and conceal their native Horror. As to
the other Questions, both Religious and Political, I forbear commenting on
them: But I must needs observe, that I think the first are extremely indecent,
and the latter vastly bold, to be discussed in a public Society; to say nothing
of the Application that every one cannot help making when attentively
considering the last.

I COME now to perform the Promise I before made, of giving a concise Account
of a few of the principal Speakers in this illustrious Society: But as some of
them are still living, instead of their real Names, I shall characterise them
under fictitious ones.

POMPONIUS ATTICUS was a young Gentleman of Genius and Judgment, of a graceful
Presence, and ready Elocution. But Fancy frequently got the better of sober
Reflection, and hurried him into Inconsistencies and Paradoxes, which all his
Wit and Learning could not support. He was, according to the received Meaning
of the Word, a Deist; but, according to a true Expression of that Character, an
Unbeliever of the Truth of the Christian Religion, and the Divinity of its
Author. He had an Estate left him by his deceased Father, of seven hundred a
Year, which he had mortgaged to almost its full Value at different Times, and
dissipated the Produce in the Pursuit of fashionable Vices and Follies; so
that, at the Age of twenty-seven, when he first became a Member of the
Essex-Head Society, an Annuity for Life of sixty Pounds only remained. A loose
and disorderly Life generally brings on some Rebukes of Conscience, and some
alarming Reflections. To prevent their Influence, returning Appetite and strong
Temptation present themselves, and enlisting the Will under their Banners,
Reason is seduced, and Conscience smothered. But, as under the most mountainous
Oppression, these rigid Monitors will call sorth, with a loud Voice, and bid
their Master beware of the gilded Poison that presents itself to his View, and
dash the unblessed Cup from his desiring Lips; so, POMPONIUS feeling the
dreadful Consequences of Vice, and attending to the Monitors within, resolved
to reform his Life, and to forsake the Companions of his Wickedness. But this
Resolution was but transitory: The first fine Woman he saw disarmed him, and he
fell from his Heroism. A Continuance in Wickedness debilitates the Faculties,
and urges us to defend what we practice. Instead, therefore, of leaving off the
Practice of Vice, POMPONIUS began to extenuate it -- to justify it -- and to
admire it. He now commenced a philosophic Rake, defended his Actions by Figures
of Speech, and harangued on the Expediency and Utility of Fornication, with the
choicest Metaphors. He was now surprised at his former Pusillanimity and Doubt;
and was clearly of Opinion, that the Practice of Whoredom was justifiable by
Reason, that great Lord Chief Justice in the Court of Man, and tended greatly
to the Support of the Commonwealth. The Transition of this State of Mind, into
a perfect Composure and Serenity in the Practice of Vice, is very quick. Before
we have deviated from the Path of Duty, indeed, Conscience, that ill-natured
Snarler, that Enemy to our Happiness, suggests a thousand Reasons for our
Continuance in the same Road, and pretends to assert, that the pleasant Views,
and delightful Prospects we see on each Side of us, are unreal, and a mere
Mockery of the Senses; and warns us, with an an earnest and a loud Voice, not
to forsake the Road we are in, to grasp at Shadows, or to catch Butterflies.
Nobly disdaining to be controuled by so rigid a Monitor, we quit the Path in
which we safely trod, and turn toward the Bowers of Bliss, and Beds of Roses,
where Sirens solicit our Approach, and urge us to recreate our jaded Senses,
and refresh our tired Limbs. We comply with the kind Invitation: We are lulled
to rest by the soft Melody of ensnaring Voices: We enter the Bowers of Bliss;
we throw ourselves on the Beds of Roses, fully persuaded we shall there be
happy -- But, ah! what Horror invades us, when we find Harpies and Furies are
the Inhabitants of those Bowers, and that Adders, and Vipers, and Scorpions,
lurk beneath the Rose Beds!

So was it with POMPONIUS. But of the latter Pa t of this Description he
experienced not the Truth, 'till Conviction came to him on a Deathbed --
Frequenting the Essex-Head Society, he was considered by all as a fine Speaker,
and close Reasoner. No Christian dared enter the Lists with our Unbeliever; but
if, rash and impetuous, by Chance any one attempted it, he was sure of being
foiled.

IN this Manner he went on 'till he arrived at the Age of Forty, happy in his
Vices, and perfectly convinced of their Innocence. His deistical Notions were
confirmed by the Authority of many Writers of the first Note, and many Speakers
of the same Sentiments, that attended the Society; and they encouraged each
other in them, and from Time to Time entertained the World with their
Productions, in Order, as themselves observed, that the Cause of Truth should
be propagated, and Bigotry and Superstition be banished from the World.

A MELANCHOLY Sequel remains to complete the Story. Shall I relate, or leave
the Imagination to guess at the Power of Sickness, and the Prospect of Death?
-- No; there is no Occasion. Suffice it to say, that the witty, the facetious,
the learned POMPONIUS, retracted the Opinions he had espoused, and declared
that he felt Christianity was no empty Name, no Juggle or Trick put upon
Mankind by artful Priests, to fetter Reason, and impose on the Senses, but a
substantial Good, which its Professors may possess, but of which he could
entertain no Idea, but from the Despair and Horror he felt from the Want of it.
-- These Things he now declared; but where declared them? Alas! on a Bed from
whence he never more arose into this World: His immortal Spirit freed from its
Imprisonment in the Body, entered the Regions of Eternity.

A VERY different Kind of Being was that whose History I shall now give. GRIPUS
was born of very mean and poor Parents at Shiffnall in Shropshire, who, with
great Difficulty, brought him up to a Knowledge of Reading and Writing. At the
Age of thirteen, he was put Apprentice to a Peruke-maker, and on his Arrival to
his twenty-second Year, with eleven Shillings and nine Pence only, he set out
for London. On his coming to this great City, and examining into the State of
his Finances, he found he had one Shilling and three Pence Halspenny left. With
that Sum he determined to try his Fortune, and looked out for a Place in the
Capacity of a Journeyman Barber. His Endeavors were crowned with Success: He
found a Place, and he was happy. Nine Months he continued here, and saved up
the Sum of seven Pounds nine Shillings. It was a Fortune to him, and he
resolved to improve it; but not in the Business he was bred to, for he found it
would not answer his Purpose. With seven Pounds and nine Shillings only, GRIPUS
entered the Alley, and took on him a Business he knew nothing of; but he had
heard that small Sums had produced immense Fortunes in it. He was ignorant and
illiterate to the last Degree; had no Accomplishments that could recommend him
to the Notice of the World, or rescue him, according to all Probability, from
that low and mean State he had been bred in, and was then subject to.

AS Fortune is hoodwinked, and regardless of the Merits of her Suitors, it
frequently happens, that the Unworthy are admitted into her Temple, and
received as her peculiar Favorites, while the Learned and Ingenious languish
in Obscurity, or drag a heavy, galling Chain, condemned to Penury and Want.
GRIPUS experienced the Truth of this Observation. With not a single
Qualification that could entitle him to the Regard of any one, or rescue him
from the servile and ignominious State he had been used to, he met with great
Success, and abounded in Affluence; Wealth flowed in fast upon him, while Men
of infinitely greater Merit were sinking beneath a Load of Misfortunes, and
patiently enduring the Frowns of Fortune. The Alley proved a real Friend to
him, and his Substance continually increased. As he grew more wealthy, he was
more parsimonious; and he seldom or never spent more than three Halfpence for
his Breakfast, three Pence Halfpenny for his Dinner, and three Halfpence for
a Nipperkin of homebrewed, either at the Crooked Billet in Shire Lane, or the
Welsh Harp in Fullwood's Rents.

IN about twenty Years he had amassed together the Sum of Twenty Thousand
Pounds, with the greatest Part of which he purchased an Estate in Shropshire,
and laid out the Remainder in the Stocks. His Substance, like a Snow-ball, was
continually increasing, and with it the Desire of more. Like the Grave, his
Lust for Money was boundless, and he endeavored to obtain it by all the Means
in his Power.

ON his Arrival to his forty-seventh Year, Curiosity brought him to the Essex
Head, and Avarice kept him there. Sixpence a Night was, indeed, more than he
had made it a Rule to spend; but for that Sixpence he might drink a Gallon or
two of good Porter, and on the Days he went there, he took Care to drink none
any where else; so that he justly considered, that if he drank but three full
Pots, he was Threepence Gainer.

IT can scarcely be expected that such a Genius as I am describing, could be an
Orator; but he was as good a Drinker as any of them, and though he could
neither speak to a Question, or comprehend the Force of any Argument, yet while
the Debates were held, he could amuse himself with his Tankard, and smoke his
Pipe; and after they were finished, could for two or three Hours longer, smoke
his Pipe, and amuse himself with his Tankard -- and all for Sixpence.

IN this Manner old GRIPUS went on 'till the last Day of his Life, the Jest of
Fools, the Contempt of Coxcombs, the Pity of Men of Sense, and the Detestation
of his Relations; though, indeed, these latter being needy, paid him some
Court, and showed him some Respect, which his Wealth, not his Merit, extorted;
mere "Mouth-Honour, which the poor Heart would fain have denied."

GRIPUS had many Relations, who stood in Need of his Bounty; but, insensible to
every Thing but the Lust of Money, dead to all the social Feelings of the Soul,
he cared not a Straw if his Kindred and all Mankind were at the Bottom of the
Sea, so that he could stand safely on Land, survey the Scene, and, like a
Sussex or Cornish Savage, pillage the Wreck.

A LENGTH of Years, however, weighed him down at las;t, and he fell ill. Death
was written in his Face, and he was pronounced incurable. The Landlord, in
whose House he had for many Years lodged by Way of Cheapness, had Two Hundred
Pounds in his Hands belonging to GRIPUS; and this Sum, he determined, by some
Artifice, to appropriate to his own Use. How this was to be obtained, was the
grand Question, and well worthy the Contriver's Genius. WILL was no less a
Miser than GRIPUS, and had, by keeping a mean, beggarly Coffee-House, in a
dirty Lane, saved up Three or Four Thousand Pounds; but he considered, that Two
Hundred would be a good Addition to it. The Scheme being at length duly
adjusted, WILL made his Appearance before GRIPUS, attended by two Witnesses,
who were to stand concealed, hear the Discourse, and, if necessary, give in
Evidence of it. "I have Two Hundred Pounds of yours in my Hands, Mr. GRIPUS,
said WILL, and I want to know what I must do with it." GRIPUS, racked with
Pain, and scarce sensible of any Thing, replied, "Keep it yourself." A Wink of
the Eye, and a Projection of the Hand, now were necessary, to bring the two
Witnesses forward. They came. "What must I do with the Two Hundred Pounds, Mr.
GRIPUS? As you are now, in all Probability, on a Deathbed, it is best to
settle these Affairs." -- "You may keep it yourself, answered the sick Man."
"Then you give and bestow the Two Hundred Pounds on me, don't you?" -- "I do,
replied he." This was sufficient. WILL hastened down Stairs, had an Affidavit
drawn of the Legacy given him, and in a short Time after GRIPUS expired; That
GRIPUS who lived despised and hated, and died unlamented.

ANOTHER Member of the Society, was Father MURTAGH O'FLAHERTY, a Popish Priest.
Ireland gave him Birth, St. Omer's Education, and England a good Income. He had
for a long Time, after his Return from St. Omer's, resided in the North of
Ireland, and was looked on as a very learned and able Divine. The Aged revered
him for his Judgment; and the Youthful for his gay and lively Disposition,
freed from the Austerity and Rigor that frequently make Wisdom odious. MURTAGH
would demonstrate with the greatest Clearness, that Mirth and Cheerfulness were
not in the least inconsistent with Religion; that a Bottle of good Claret
fortified the Body, and raised the Spirits; and that the Joys which a good
Tavern and boon Companions afford, were not to be despised by Men of Sense.

IN Consequence of this natural Propensity, this longing Desire to be happy,
and to make others so, Father MURTAGH would frequent Clubs, and sing Catches,
speak Speeches, drink Toasts, break Glasses, and tell merry Stories, with any
one: And though some rigid Priests, and severe Moralists, would censure him
behind his Back for his immoral Conduct, as they termed it, yet, when he
appeared before them, he had such a pretty Way, such a forcible Method of
vindicating his Behavior, and winning their Affections, that they could not
find in their Hearts to blame him.

BUT, with such Accomplishments, if he was a Favorite of the Men, what must he
be with the Women? They perfectly idolized him, and, in Return, Father MURTAGH
had no less Passion and Veneration for them. Indeed, there was another
Circumstance, which, though it may be deemed a Trifle by some Folks, had a
wonderful Effect in forcing the Affections of the Fair. As he acted in the
Character of a Confessor, to rivet the Esteem of his Penitents, he used Lenity
instead of Severity, and in Cases where some Confessors would have scourged
with a Rod of Iron, he rebuked with the Mildness of a Father, and exhorted them
to a contrary Conduct, if they would avoid his just Indignation. These lenient
and gentle Methods prevailed where rough and violent ones would not. The human
Mind is rather won by Entreaty, than dragged by Force, and receives Conviction
from a Friend that soothes its Anguish, and makes Allowance for its Frailties;
when, by a contrary Conduct, venial Error might rise to Guilt, and youthful
Indulgence terminate in confirmed Wickedness and obstinate Villainy.

FATHER MURTAGH being such a professed Admirer of the Fair, and treating them
with such Mildness, he had so won their Hearts, that they resounded his Praises
continually. They insisted on it, he was the best Priest in the Kingdom, the
most learned and judicious Man, and infinitely the best qualified to be a
Confessor. In short, they would confess to no one but Father MURTAGH. Father
MURTAGH was the universal Cry.

THIS Trade continued so long, that a Conspiracy was formed by his envious
Brethren against his Monopoly, and by Force of Bribes and Numbers, he fell a
Victim to popular Wrath, and priestly Artifice.

FOR a long Time the good Man, poor and friendless, wandered about, a
melancholy Proof of the unhappy Fate that may attend Men of the greatest Parts,
and of the Want of Gratitude for past Favors, when the Power of continuing
them is taken away.

FINDING he could scarcely support himself in Ireland, he came to London, and
soon formed an Acquaintance with many People of his own Religion. An Irish
Roman Catholic Priest need never fear wanting a Beef-Steak and a Pot of Porter
for his Dinner in London: Nay, he need not fear wanting Venison or Ortolans,
and good Claret. There are Abundance of Papists in this City, who regard their
Priests as so many Demigods, and who will think themselves as highly honored
with their Presence at Dinner or Supper, as BAUCIS and PHILEMON thought
themselves by the Presence of their heavenly Guest; and in consequence of this
Opinion, the Markets are ransacked for the choicest Viands, and the Wine Vaults
for the best Wines, to entertain them. As stolen Interviews between Lovers are
the sweetest, so the Necessity the Roman Catholic Clergy are under to keep
themselves concealed, in order to gain Proselytes, and pervert the People to
their Religion, give a Relish to their Entertainments which they would
otherwise want.

FATHER MURTAGH soon saved up a good deal of Money, and lived as elegantly as
his Heart could wish. He attended every Monday night at the Essex-Head, spoke
to the Questions in the Character of a Protestant, yet could not help betraying
the cloven Foot on some Occasions. After the Debates of the Evening were over,
and the Company entered into private Conferences with each other, Father
Murtagh would single out that Person whom he conceived most fit for his
Purpose, and use the greatest Industry and exert all his Abilities, to
depreciate the established Religion of this Kingdom, and extol that of the
Roman Catholic, and his Endeavors were often successful.

HE is now very old, and having for many Years attended at the Essex-Head
Society, he comes to the Robinhood; but not constantly, on Account of his Age
and Infirmities.

BOB SCAMPER was a Man very different from the three I have been describing:
BOB was born in the West of England, and was reckoned a Youth of enterprising
Genius, and ready Parts. At the Age of eighteen he came to London, and having
spent the five Guineas he brought up with him on Women of the Town, was greatly
at a Loss to what to betake himself. Poverty stared him in the Face, and though
he had some good natural Parts, and a great Assurance, yet having no Learning,
he could get no genteel Employment. His Female associates, however, soon
furnished Hints, which a Lad of his ready Wit and enterprising Spirit, easily
understood, and as intrepidly executed. He turned Collector on the Road, and
having Success, rioted in the Spoils he had taken, and with his Girls enjoyed
all the Happiness he desired: Not but that sometimes it was dashed with some
Remorse, and the Dread of the fatal Consequences that might ensue. But Excess
of drinking, the Company of Libertines, and the Conversation of his Women,
dispersed the Clouds that obscured his Happiness, and confirmed him in the
Resolution he had taken to plunder and rob the Public, and to gain a Livelihood
by the bold Hands of Violence.

A CONTINUANCE in Wickedness familiarises the Mind to it, and what at first a
Man would start even to think of, he at length practices without Horror. All
Guilt is progressive: We go not at once, but Step by Step, into the Extremes of
Vice; and though it is impossible to silence the Cries of Conscience, and to
stifle the Dictates of Reason all at once, yet an habitual Violation of their
Admonitions, brings us to an Insensibility of the Horror of our Crimes, and
renders us quite callous to the Sense of Shame, and deaf to every Thing but the
importunate Cravings of sensual Appetite.

BOB SCAMPER experienced the Truth of these Observations. In the Daytime he
mounted his Horse, and robbed on the Highway with the same Composure, as any
other Man follows his customary Occupation, and at Night he spent the illgot
Treasure among Whores and Thieves, the Encouragers of his Wickedness, and the
Sharers of his Spoils.

THIS was a worthy Member of a Society that met to improve themselves by free
and candid Inquiry; but Captain SCAMPER, as he was entitled, was well received
by all. He was a tall handsome Fellow, endued with a Power of Face that
disdained a Blush, and though not wise was witty, though not learned was
ingenious, and had a Power of imposing on the Understandings of those he
conversed with, and making them believe him to be what he was not. He dressed
well, had a free and degagee Air, wanted not Words, and addressed the Passions
of those he conversed with, with such Skill and Success, that you could not
help giving him Credit for much more Understanding than he possessed.

THERE are two Kinds of People that are better thought of in most Companies,
than their intrinsic Merit deserves: These are the solemn Prig, and
well-dressed Coxcomb. The first, by the Help of a fulltrimmed grave Suit, and a
large Peruque, a sagacious Look, and a slow Delivery, shall make you take him
for a second SOLON. The most unmeaning Speech, the tritest Observation, the
most superficial Hint, delivered in a dry, yet important, slow but solemn Tone,
and enforced by some shakes of the Head, shrugs of the Shoulders, and
significant Hand-Oratory, shall be received as the Dictates of Wisdom, and
procure the Speaker the Character of the SOLOMON of the Age.

THE other, aided by his Tailor, Millener, and Barber, though he gives Vent to
the Fullness of his Soul only by dry Jokes, and insipid Remarks, is yet listened
to with Attention, and heard with Pleasure. No one will dare to contradict the
Assertions of a Wit, with laced Clothes, Bag-Wig, and a Sword; and thus Folly
is received for Wisdom, and vivacious Impudence for Genius.

SCAMPER was to be ranked in this second Class of Orators. He spoke to every
Question, and though what he said had no great Depth or much Meaning in it, yet
being delivered from the Mouth of a Man that was extremely well dressed, and
with no bad Accent or ill Grace, it was always well received, and the Speaker
was considered as a very great Genius, and an Ornament to the Society.

BUT this Ornament of the Society did not last above five Years and a Half. He
had committed a Robbery on Hounslow-Heath, and taken a Booty of no less than
three Hundred Guineas. The Gentleman he had robbed, happened accidentally to
come to the Essex-Head one Monday Evening, and the Moment he entered the Room,
Captain SCAMPER had got up to speak to the Question. The Question was

Whether the Doctrine of Repentance taught by the Christian Religion, has not a
manifest Tendency to encourage Wickedness? DEISTICUS. SCAMPER, after desiring
the President to read the Question again, spoke to it in the best Manner he
could. He vindicated Christianity in general, and demonstrated that all its
Doctrines tended to the Support of Morality, by discountenancing all Manner of
Vice. He showed its superior Excellency over all the Religions that had ever
appeared in the World; he proved the Authenticity of the Sacred Writings, and
defied the Deists, with all their Ingenuity, to point out any Defects in them.
He observed of our Savior's Sermon on the Mount, that as it comprehended in
one concise View, all the Doctrines and Precepts of Christiany, so it was the
most sublime System of Ethics in the World. He took Notice, that not only the
Philosophers and Sages of the Heathen World, considered abstractedly, were
unable to form a complete System of moral Duties, but that all their Writings
put together were insufficient to form such a System, and that if all their
Morality was to be extracted, that is, all their Excellencies to be reduced
into a System, it would still be an imperfect one. He then spoke more
immediately to the Question, and delivered it as his Opinion, that the Doctrine
of Repentance, as taught by the established Church, of which, he said, he was
not ashamed to own himself a Member, so far from encouraging Wickedness, had
the greatest Tendency imaginable to annihilate it; for he observed, that the
Repentance taught in the Gospel, is not merely a Sorrow for our past Sins, but
likewise a Resolution of reforming our Conduct for the future. As to the
Objection that had been brought by a Deist, who observed, that Repentance was
no Atonement, he said, it was very true, if we speak as Deists, but if we
believe as Christians, it must be looked on as an Atonement, since GOD, in
those Books which Christians believe were written by his Inspiration, has been
graciously pleased to declare, he will receive it as such. Our Duty he
observed, without Doubt, it was always incumbent on us to practice; and after
the Commission of the greatest Sins, and our sincere Repentance of them, we
perform no more than our Duty, by living a Righteous and a Holy Life: But as
the Deity had declared to every one, even the greatest of Sinners, that though
his Crimes were as red as Scarlet, yet by Repentance the should be made as
white as Snow; it is certainly a Doctrine that encourages the Soul, and
supports it under the Reproaches of Conscience, that would otherwise whip us
with her Scorpions, and throw us into the Agonies of Despair and Horror. He
concluded, by drawing a Contrast between the Repentance of the Protestant, and
the Absolution of the Roman Catholic Church; and insisted, that the former
tended to our spiritual and temporal Welfare, and the latter to the Destruction
of both.

DURING all the Time this great Advocate for Religion and Morality was
speaking, the Gentleman eyed him attentively, and thought he had seen him
somewhere before. He went up close to him, and after a minute examination of
his Person and Manner, at length recollected that it was on Hounslow-Heath he
had the Misfortune to have seen him. Without saying any Thing to him, or to the
Company, he withdrew, and in about a Quarter of an Hour returned with his
Servant, who was present at the Robbery, and with a Constable, who was to take
Care of SCAMPER, if the Servant agreed with his Master in the Identity of the
Person.

THE Servant had no sooner entered the Room, than, without his Master's
pointing the Object out, he swore that the tall Gentleman in laced Clothes,
near the President, was the Man that robbed his Master on Hounslow-Heath. This
was sufficient. The Constable went up to him, and tapping him on the Shoulder,
said, he should be glad to speak to him. The Captain obeyed, and they withdrew
out of the Disputing-Room, attended by the Gentleman and his Servant. They had
no sooner reached the Stairs, than SCAMPER wanted to know the Gentleman's
Commands. "Oh, says the Constable, there is a Coach waiting at the Door, and if
you will enter it, you will know presently." SCAMPER declined it, but the Constable
was importunate, and being somewhat irritated at his Obstinacy, told him he
must enter it. The Captain stared, bit his Lips, and was mute. The Gentleman
and his Servant now came up, and the latter opening the Coach-Door, waited for
his Master to enter. But he was too complaisant to go in before the Captain,
and bowing to him, asked him to go in first. The Captain still declined it, and
they insisted on it in a higher Tone, and declared that he should go whether he
would or not. Already was half the Captain's Sword out of the Scabbard, and he
had resolved to resist their utmost Efforts, when a Whistle from the Constable
made him stare, and of a Sudden suspend his Action. Immediately three strapping
Fellows came up, and the Constable pointing to SCAMPER, and telling them to do
their Duty, they took away his Sword, hurried him into the Coach, the
Gentleman, his Servant, and the Constable following, and drove off to Justice
DE VEIL'S.

I SHALL not multiply Words. The Gentleman and his Servant swore positively
that he was the Person that robbed them on Hounslow Heath. He was searched. A
Powder Horn, a Pair of Pistols, a Mask, and some other Things were found on
him. His Mittimus was made, and he was sent to Newgate.

IN a Fortnight, Abundance of People swore to their being robbed by him; and by
means of some of his Girls, three of his Confederates were taken, and sent to
bear him Company. In due Time, their Trials came on at the Old Baily, and they
were found guilty, and sentenced to be hanged.

SCAMPER had very little Hopes of gaining a Reprieve, yet did not prepare for
Death in the Manner he ought. His favorite Doctrine, Repentance, he hardly
thought of, at least he did not practice it. He drank to such Excess, that when
the Hour came that he was to suffer an ignominious Death in the Sight of a
numerous and gaping Populace, he seemed quite insensible of his Fate.

HE was put into the Cart with his Companions, and they were driven to Tyburn.
The fatal Rope was fastened round their Necks -- the Ordinary told them they
were going to another World -- the Cart was driven away -- and they were left
suspended in the Air.

THUS perished BOB SCAMPER, a Man of no mean Abilities, but who prostituted
them to infamous Purposes, and lived an immoral, vicious Life, though ever
haranguing in the Society, on the Beauty of Holiness, and the Necessity of
Repentance. -- I wish this were not a common Case in the World.

ANOTHER Member of the Society, not less worthy than this, was TOM RAKEWELL.
TOM, after having received an Education, that barely enabled him to read and
write, was sent from the West of England to London, and there bound Apprentice
to a Grocer. But TOM'S Genius was not to be confined within so narrow a
Channel. He soared to higher Things, and was ambitious enough to attempt
getting on the Stage, where all his Desires were placed, and all his Hopes
terminated. He offered himself to FLEETWOOD, the Manager, and was refused. Not
daunted, however, at this Repulse, he ran away from his Master in the third
Year of his Apprenticeship, went to Norwich, where a Company of Strollers were
then performing, made a Tender of his Services, and was accepted. The pitiful
Income of a strolling Player was too scanty for our Hero, and the Debts he had
contracted were so numerous, and his Creditors so pressing, that Norwich became
quickly too hot to hold him. He, therefore, set out from that Place for
Newcastle upon Tyne, where there was another Company of Players: But, to enable
himself to travel with greater Convenience, he took with him as large a Bundle
of the Manager's Clothes as he could carry, and set out early in the Morning in
a Post-Chaise.

HE quickly converted his Effects into ready Money, and reached Newcastle in
two Days. But he was soon forced to decamp. The News of his being there, having
reached his quondam Companions at Norwich, a Hue and Cry was raised, and two of
the Actors were sent to Newcastle to apprehend him. RAKEWELL, by some Means,
had Intelligence of their Arrival, and guessed their Errand; but declined the
Honor of their Company, by leaving the Town so precipitately, that he had not
even Time to pay the Landlord of the Inn he had set up at, a Score of
thirty-seven shillings.

FROM hence he went to Exeter, at which Town he was born; and going to his
Father, told him a long Story of his Master's ill Usage, and of the
Impossibility of his living with him. His Father produced a Letter from his
Master, informing him of his Son's running away without any Cause, but of his
Readiness to pardon him if he would return. The Father and Son had now a great
Contest, and the Master's Letter had greater Weight with the old Man, than the
Son's Assertions. He, however, promised RAKEWELL, that he would write to his
Master in his Favor, and that 'till he could receive an Answer, he might stay
with him. The Son acquiesced with the Proposal, seemed pleased with it, and the
old Man immediately wrote, extenuating his Son's Guilt, and apologizing for the
Misconduct which the Weakness incident to Youth had drawn him into.

THREE Days after, TOM got up at One in the Morning, and opening a Bureau,
found a Purse with no less than fifty-seven Guineas in it, being the poor old
Man's whole Fortune, and which he had been hoarding up ever since his Son was
first sent to London, out of the small Profits that accrued to him from a
little Trade he had as a Peruke-maker. This was a Fortune to the over-joyed
Youth, and putting it safe in his Pocket, he took his Stick, and walked 'till
Seven in the Morning very briskly, when he had reached ****. Here he
breakfasted, and the Stage-Coach coming by, he agreed with the Driver for his
Passage to London.

HE had no sooner arrived at the Metropolis, than the Scenes he had before been
engaged in, were renewed, and the same Pranks played over again. While he was
in his Apprenticeship, an indulgent Master had permitted him, after the
Business of the Night was over, and Shop was shut, to spend his Evenings
abroad. A Youth of such a Disposition as TOM had, it may naturally be imagined,
did not spend them in very good Company, nor very innocently. The Houses he
frequented were either Brothels, or Night-Houses, and the Company consisted of
wild, and thoughtless young Apprentices like himself, or thorough-paced Rogues,
who initiated the young ones into all the iniquitous Schemes and Arts they were
Masters of. Tutors of Villainy like these, for whom Tyburn groans, abound in
Houses of this Sort, and young Scholars attend there in great Numbers.

TOM keeping very bad Hours, was frequently locked out; but after he had the
Experience of three Weeks Learning from a Veteran, he knew how to seduce his
Master's Maid, and to prevail on her to let him in at any Hour. This Kindness
went not unrewarded: To discharge his Obligations to her, TOM robbed his Master
of Tea, Sugar, Spices and Snuff.

THIS was a pretty Life, which he now not only renewed, but improved. He became
a complete Buck and Blood, sallied out every Night in Quest of Adventures, beat
the Watch, bullied Constables, demolished Lamps, kicked Waiters, bilked
Bawdy-Houses, and went Home reeling to Bed.

ABOUT the Time he returned to London from Exeter, he attended the Essex-Head
Society. Their Debates charmed him, and he thought if he could be admitted a
Member of so respectable and learned a Body, he should be quite happy. If
Happiness consisted in being a Member, he was soon in Possession of it, for he
was chosen Nem. Con.

RAKEWELL had a great Talent for Disputation. He had a ready Wit, great
Volubility of Speech, and wanted not for a consummate Assurance. These
Accomplishments must have endeared him greatly to the Society, and he was
looked on as a valuable Acquisition. It is true, there was no Solidity of
Judgment, no Depth of Knowledge in him, any more than in his Friend SCAMPER;
but he had no less Art in exciting the Admiration of the Superficial, and the
Ignorant, (a vast Body of Men!) and in making his Tinsel Ornaments pass for
real Plate.

RAKEWELL's chief Fort was Religion. He distinguished himself greatly on
Subjects of this Kind, and was thought to be as good an Orthodox Member as any
in the Society. He combated the Deists with the invincible Armor of Revealed
Religion, and played off the great Guns of Mysteries against them with no
little Success. As the Doctrine of occult Causes is the greatest Friend of
Metaphysicians and natural Philosophers, and serves as a Retreat for them where
no Foes can enter; so, when pressed by Argument, or urged by Authority, the
Deists would demand Reasons for Assertions, and Proofs for Ipse Dixits,
RAKEWELL would prudently retire from the Charge, and tell them that where Faith
begins, Reason ends -- that the Natural Man cannot comprehend Spiritual
Subjects -- that what is an Object of Faith, cannot be intelligible by Reason
-- and that though Revealed Religion may seem above Reason, yet it is not
against it. These, and many other Answers of the like Kind, he gave to the
Heterodox Gentry, and ever showed an inviolable Resolution to defend Religion
in general, and the Established Church in particular, against all the Attacks
of their Foes: In Consequence of which, the Society looked on him as an
honorable Member, and a very learned and ingenious Man. After Debates on such
Subjects, and Holy Arguments alleged in Favor of his Opinions, our Orator
would leave the Society, and proceed to his usual Night Entertainments, of
breaking the Lamps, and going Home to his Girls, where he rioted in Excess of
Wickedness.

BY some Means or other, RAKEWELL had got acquainted with an old Maiden Lady,
worth no less than Thirteen Hundred Pounds. After paying his Addresses to her
for some Time, he gained her Heart, and a Day was proposed for Marriage. The
antiquated Virgin, not doubting the Honor of her Lover, the Day before the
intended Marriage, transferred over her whole Fortune to him. The Lover was now
happy. He sold out the Thirteen Hundred Pounds Old South Sea Annuities, and
Three per Cent. Bank Annuities, immediately. With the Money these produced, he
set up a Chariot and Pair, took genteel Lodgings in Pall Mall, and appeared in
every Respect as a Man of Fortune, quite regardless of the Attempts that might
be made on him by the Sons of Law, and hoping to find out some other wealthy
Dame, with whom he might meet with equal Success.

BUT though RAKEWELL was safe with Respect to the Revenge threatened him by the
Lady he had tricked, and her Friends, yet his high Living and Extravagance soon
dissipated his Substance, and he was at a Loss what to do. Paying ready Money
for some Time, however, induced Tradesmen to give him Credit; and having run in
Tick to the Amount of Three Hundred Pounds, with various People; and being
dunned, and threatened several Times by the most Importunate of them, he was
induced to shift his Quarters, to go away from his Lodgings without settling
with his Landlord or his Footman (for he kept one to the last) and set out
again for Exeter.

ON his Arrival there he told his Father a miserable Story, of his having been
robbed of Five Hundred Guineas, of his having a Combat with the Highwaymen that
had robbed him, and of his having employed several active Fellows to go in
Search of them. His Father seeing him well-dressed, and appear more like a Lord
than his Son, testified his Joy at his Return. RAKEWELL then voluntarily
mentioned his having robbed him of fifty-seven Guineas; and, putting a Bill in
his Hand, drawn on the most eminent Banker in London, for One Hundred Pounds,
told him, he was not to look on that as a Recompense in full, but as an Earnest
only of what he should receive. He then informed him of his having married a
Lady worth Twenty Thousand Pounds but a Fortnight ago; that he was then going
to Penzance to settle Affairs with her Guardian, and would return to London in
five Days, where his Lady impatiently expected him.

THE good old Man was so overjoyed at hearing this Account of his Son's good
Fortune, that he fell on his Neck, and kissed him, and with Tears in his Eyes
told him, that he was glad to hear of his Success in Life; but that he had no
Occasion for the Hundred Pounds he had given him, he having, by his Care and
Industry, since his leaving him last, saved up Twenty-seven Pounds; and
therefore he begged him to take back again his generous Gift of a Hundred
Pounds, as, till his Affairs were settled, he might have Occasion for it.

BUT this RAKEWELL declined, and observed, that the Trifle he had given him, he
could well spare; that he insisted on his keeping it; and that in a Fortnight
he might have the Pleasure of trebling it to him. The old Man, filled with Joy
at seeing such a Son, seemed perfectly happy; went about to his Friends -- told
them of his Son's good Fortune -- invited them to his House -- bought the
greatest Dainties he could possibly procure -- and at Eight at Night the House
was full of Guests, drinking Wine, Punch, and Beer, while roast Geese were at
the Fire, Fowls in the Pot, and some other substantial Dishes provided, to
entertain the Friends on the Prodigal's Return; a Prodigal, that had been
guilty of some Errors, that had been bred in Obscurity, and was now raised to
great Grandeur.

THE Evening was spent in great Jolity, and all but RAKEWELL were perfecty
intoxicated. After all the Company was gone, the old Man, whose Heart was now
quite merry, went to a private Closet, took out a Bottle of excellent Citron
Water, and desired his Son to take a Glass. The Son obeyed him, and the Father
followed the Example. One Glass introduced another, another followed, and, in
short, the Duumvirate emptied the Bottle. The Son was now what they call
half-seas over; but the old Man was so intoxicated, he could heither sit or
stand. With some Difficulty RAKEWELL got him to-bed, took the Key out of the
Door, locked it, and then -- went down Stairs.

HE began now to ransack the House, immediately seized the old Man's
twenty-seven Pounds, and took every Thing away he could conveniently carry. He
then went to the Inn he had put up at on his first coming to Town, ordered a
Post Chaise, and told the Driver to go on as fast as he could.

A CHANGE of Chaises soon brought him to London; and it happening to be on a
Monday Night, he attended at the Essex-Head Society, and spoke to the Question,
which was;

Whether, even in this World, a vicious and immoral Man, is not severely
punished? And if Virtue distressed, does not feel greater Happiness than
exalted Vice? PLATO. RAKEWELL took the Affirmative Side of the Question, and
proved, beyond all Manner of Contradiction, that Vice and Immorality met with
its Punishment, by inflicting the Stings of Conscience at present, and the
Dread of future Pain. Not that this Doctrine, he observed, tended in the least
to set aside that of a future Retribution of Rewards and Punishments in another
State; where, as we are taught by the Christian Religion, that Suffering Virtue
will meet its ample Reward, and Triumphant Vice be suitably punished: But the
Commission of good Actions, and the Consciousness of our having performed our
Duty, gave a placid Serenity to our Minds, and a Composure to our Thoughts: A
Felicity which the Huzzas of applauding Thousands could not give, nor the
Hisses of detracting and bitter Enemies take away. He took Notice also of the
Distresses and Agonies of Mind a wicked Man always labored under, through a
Fear of being exposed, and his Wickedness revealed to the World; which would
consequentially draw on him the severe Penalties of the Law, and the just
Detestation of Mankind. He insisted on it, that the continual Apprehensions of
Discovery a wicked Man must be under, and the Terrors of an abused Conscience,
must prevent the Approaches of Happiness, and dash the Cup of Pleasure with a
great Degree of nauseous and bitter Herbs. He then launched out into the
Pleasures of Virtue and Religion; and made it appear, that their Votaries
reaped greater Satisfaction, and tasted a more home-felt Pleasure than could
possibly result from the highest Gratifications of sensual Appetite, or mere
Animal Bliss. To prove these Assertions, he quoted a few Authors he had either
read or heard of, as Enforcers of his Sentiments, and as Authors of his
Doctrine: A great Name frequently proves more than a sound Argument; and
People, with whom Learning and Reason have no Sort of Weight, are yet prevailed
on to resign their Judgments, and to give up their Opinions to an Ancient whom
Time has sanctified, or to an illustrious Orthodox Writer, whose Notions and
Sentiments have been honored and embraced by the World.

THE Speech RAKEWELL delivered was well received, and the Society thought no
one could excel him in Propriety of Thought, or Regularity of Conduct. After
the Debates were over, RAKEWELL left the Society, and traversed the Streets,
till he met with a Female he liked, and with whom he went to the most
convenient Bagnio.

IN this Manner he continued for some Time, an unaccountable Aenigma, which
none was able to solve: But being at ength discovered to have robbed a
Gentleman of Eminence in Grosvenor-Square, he was tried, convicted, and
condemned, and executed at Tyburn, at the very Time that his Colleague and
Companion, the facetious BOB SCAMPER suffered. -- Thus was the Society deprived
of two of their best Members, the most powerful and ornamental Pillars of their
Fabric.

FOR some short Time after this the Society was observed to dwindle away, and
its staunch Advocates and firm Friends began to fear that its Dissolution was
nigh. Some imputed it to the Absence of two of their best Speakers, and the
Despair the Public in general had of hearing any Thing debated on by able
Orators, now the best were gone: Some imagined, that the melancholy Fate of
those two Members deterred People from attending a Society on which they had
once reflected such Honor, and which was now disgraced by their ignominious
Death; and some were earnestly wishing for its Annihilation.

IT was not long, however, before the Fears of the one Party, and the Hopes of
the other were turned into Certainty. The Society triumphed, their Friends
rejoiced, and their Enemies were disappointed.

To give a long Detail of every Event that happened in this Society, to
particularize all their Proceedings, and to characterize all their Members,
would exceed the Bounds I have prescribed myself, and would be uncommonly
tedious: I shall therefore only observe, that from the Time the Society was
removed to the Essex-Head, it increased both in Numbers and in Reputation; and
so well was it known, that Gentlemen who lived in the Country, as well as
Foreigners of all Nations, if in the least curious, learned, or ingenious,
resorted to it to hear Debates that had so much attracted the Attention, and
extorted the Admiration of the World.

End of the SECOND PART.
THE HISTORY OF THE Robinhood Society.
PART III.
IN the Year 1747, the Society was removed to the Robinhood in Butcher-Row, at
that Time kept by Mr. HALL. The Room here was vastly more convenient than the
other: New Benches were made, in order that a greater Number of People might be
admitted; a Branch for eighteen Candles was suspended from the Ceiling; a large
Chair for the President, curiously gilt, was erected; a Box to keep the Book of
Questions, was provided; a Hammer was purchased for the President; and, in
short, every Thing that was necessary to reflect Splendour on the Society, and
to accommodate its Visitants in the best Manner, was obtained by the
industrious Landlord, who had formed great Hopes of adding a Reputation to his
House, and enriching himself, from the vast Concourse of People he expected
would assemble there.

IN order to convey the best Idea I can of this famous Society to the Mind of
the Reader, I apprehend it is necessary for me to give a fuller Account of the
Management of it, than I have before done.

EVERY Person that attended it, was to pay Sixpence; and that while these
Disputants were enriching their Minds with the Treasures of Knowledge, they
might also practice the God-like Virtue of Charity, they agreed, that out of
every Sixpence the Landlord should be paid Four-pence for each Quart of
Lemonade and Porter; Three Halfpence should be set by, and appropriated to
charitable Uses, to be agreed on by a select Committee appointed for that
Purpose; and the remaining Halfpenny should be paid to the Clerk, as a
Recompense for the Trouble he was put to, in receiving each Person's Ticket,
and taking Care that the Society in general, and the Disputants in particular,
were duly served with Liquor.

A PERPETUAL President was also appointed, whose Name was JEACOCKE, who was to
act as Moderator, and who had, indeed, given great Satisfactio nin that
Character at the Essex-Head, for four Years. His Duty consisted in reading
whatever Questions were proposed for Consideration, and offering them
separately to the Choice of the Members: Those who chose that a Question,
should be admitted, and entered in the Book, were to signify it by holding up
their Hands; and those who did not think it a proper Question, were to signify
their Opinion in the same Manner; and the Majority carried it. After this Part
of his Duty, he was to read the Question for the Night's Debate, and then ask
the several Members whether they chose to speak to it, beginning with the
Person who sat next to his left Hand, and proceeding all round the Room 'till
he came to the Person who sat next his right Hand. When any Person got up to
speak, he was also to take Minutes of what he conceived to be of particular
Importance, and by thus collecting the different Sentiments of different
People, he was enabled, when it came to his Turn to speak, to enforce the
Arguments that strengthened his own Opinion, and invalidate those that were
against it. If no Person thought proper to own a Question, or to confess
himself the Proposer of it, then the President was the adopted Father, and he
opened the Question, by explaining the Terms of it, and concluded the Debates
on it, by a Speech of his own; but if the Author of the Question owned it, then
the Person next to his left Hand spoke to it, and it was to go round in due
Order, and the Proposer concluded it. The President was likewise to keep Order
and Decorum in the Society; to prevent any personal Altercations, or mean
Invectives; to make them stick to the Point; to bring them back when they went
astray; to see likewise with the Clerk, that the Society was well supplied with
Liquor; and, in short, to do every Thing that was for the Interest of the
Society, and the Good of the Members present.

BY this Account of the Duty of the President, it will appear that his Trouble
every Night was not little. It is always difficult to keep a promiscuous
Company in good Order; and a Society, like the ROBINHOOD, where every one is
admitted for his Sixpence, must be liable to many Irregularities. But though
the President's Trouble was so great, yet his Attachment to, and Veneration
for, the Society was such, that, unlike the interested Conduct of most other
Presidents, he acted Gratis, contenting himself only with the Honor of the
Office.

ONCE a Year a Paper was published by the Society, containing a Justification
of it from the Sneers of Witlings, and the Sarcasms of some satirical Authors,
and setting forth its Nature and Tendency; and underneath it, was an Account of
the Number of People that had attended it all the Year, distinguishing the
particular Number that met each Monday Night. This was thought more likely to
vindicate their Conduct, and wipe off the Aspersions that had been thrown on
them, than an elaborate Defense; since by seeing what a vast Number of People
attended each Night, amounting in a Year's Time to upwards of Five Thousand, on
a moderate Computation, the Public might perceive that no less than Five
Thousand three Half-pennies were distributed in Charity, amounting to 31 l. 5
s. -- And even supposing that the Society could not vie in Splendour with the
ROYAL SOCIETY, or in Dignity with the ANTIQUARIAN, or in Numbers with the
SOCIETY FOR THE ENCOURAGEMENT OF ARTS, MANUFACTURES AND COMMERCE, and even
granting their Antagonists Assertions to be true, that it was a Receptacle for
the Illiterate and the Impious, where horrid and blasphemous Notions were
defended and propagated, and where Religion and Virtue were trodden under Foot;
yet still, it may be urged from great Authority, that Charity covers a
Multitude of Sins.

THE Society now advancing in its Reputation, and some of the most
distinguished Wits and Scholars frequenting it, it greatly excited the public
Attention. There was scarce a public Paper, but in the Course of its
Animadversions, the ROBINHOOD SOCIETY was taken Notice of. Doctor HENLEY
vindicated it from his Rostrum, and comparing it to some of the famed
Assemblies of Yore, where a CICERO, or a DEMOSTHENES harangued, he affirmed it
to be of the most eminent Service to Mankind, by mending their Morals,
enlarging their Knowledge, and refining their Taste; that it was infinitely
preferable, considered as a School of Oratory, to the Bar, or the Senate; and
that it excelled the Pulpit, both with Respect to the Advancement of TRUE
RELIGION, and the spreading of Human Knowledge. Nay, he affirmed it to be the
Sun of the intellectual and moral World, that with its radiant Beams
enlightened, cheered, and vivified the Spiritual System, as the Firmamental Sun
does the Natural. -- In short, he undertook to vindicate it from his Rostrum in
Lincoln's End Fields, from all the Calumnies and Aspersions, that ever had
been, or could be raised against it, and insisted on its being the most perfect
human Institution that was ever formed, except -- his own Oratory.

ON the other Hand, the Pulpits every where displayed its evil Tendency, and
resounded with its Infamy. The Clergy were so much against it, that,
Surgeonlike, they dissected and cut it up without Mercy. They averred, that the
House itself could not stand long; that it was a second Pandemonium, or
Assembly of evil Spirits; that though they at present triumphed, yet they would
shortly be defeated; and that every one of the Members that composed it, would
infallibly be d -- d. Nay, one Reverend Gentleman in particular, That very
popular Gentleman, the candid, the ingenious, and ingenuous Mr. R -- M -- NE.
prophesied, some Years after the Period I am now describing, that as it was
absolutely certain, that the Merchants that were settling their Books at the
Earthquake in Lisbon, in the Year 1749, were swallowed up, and immediately
consigned to the Care of the D -- l; so the ROBINHOOD would shortly meet the
like Fate, or be torn from its Foundations, whirled through the Air by the
Prince of it, be carried, like OUR LADY OF Loretto, Thousands of Leagues, and
at Length, with its whole Cargo, thrown down to H -- ll.

THE Society, however, in Spite of these Denunciations, maintained its Ground,
and increased in Fame. The Names of the Members had been written in their Book
of Questions, and new ones were continually added. The Regulations they were
under, were likewise copied out fair; and these, with the List of the Questions
that succeeded them, were open to every one's Perusal.

THE President discharged his Trust with Fidelity and Honor, and the Society
in general thought themselves much obliged to him for the Care he had taken of
their Interest, and the good Order and Regularity he preserved.

TO make this History complete, and to perform my Promise made in the
Title Page, of giving Memoirs of the most remarkable Members, I shall, in this
third Part, as is most fit, begin with the President, Mr. CALEB JEACOCKE, Or,
As he is more frequently called, The BAKER.
MY Intention in giving a few Memoirs of this Gentleman, is not to surprise the
Reader, by a Relation of uncommon or interesting Events, but merely to rescue a
Character, greatly traduced, and viely misrepresented, by all the Authors, as
far as I have seen, who have employed their Pens on this Subject.

IN the Lives of the Generality of Men, there is nothing remarkable enough to
satisfy the Curiosity of Readers, unless the Imagination of the Author is
exerted, to feign Events that never happened, and employ his Hero in Scenes he
was never engaged in. This is the Case with Mr. JEACOCKE. His Life has not been
checkered with those variegated Hues that make so pleasing an Appearance in the
Biographer's Page, nor did he ever run through such a Variety of Adventures, as
in the Recital excite alternately the different Passions of the Mind.

HE was born in London, and having received such an Education as enabled him
only to read, write, and cast Accounts, he was put Apprentice to a Baker. He
behaved extremely well in his Apprenticeship, and was pointed out as an Example
for others in the same Station of Life. As soon as his Apprenticeship was
expired, by the generous Legacy of a good old Aunt, he was enabled to set up
for himself, and pitched upon St. Giles's for that Purpose. He was remarkably
diligent in his Business, punctual in his Engagements, and, in every Respect,
approved himself a truly honest Man; so that he was valued and esteemed by
every one to whom he was known.

HAVING a perfect Knowledge of Accounts, and being blessed with such a clear
Judgment, as could almost intuitively distinguish and separate Truth from
Falsehood, he was requested by many Merchants and Tradesmen, whose Accounts
were long, embarrassed, and intricate, to adjust and settle them: And this he
performed with an Expedition and Correctness, that few could equal, and none
excel; even after some of the most eminent Accomptants in London had despaired
settling them, and pronounced them impossible to be made out clear and evident.

PROVIDENCE smiled on his Undertakings, and he got Money apace. His being
appointed President of the ROBINHOOD SOCIETY, made him universally known, and
THE BAKER has been talked of, I believe, in every City and Town in England.
JEACOCKE was not averse to Popularity, nor in Love with it for its intrinsic
Worth, but for the Benefit that accompanied it, in making him known to some of
the greatest Men in the Kingdom, and some of the most respectable and wealthy
Merchants, whose Accounts he settled, and for which he was paid very large Sums.

IN this Situation he continued, increasing his Wealth and Fame, 'till the
latter End of the Year 1761, when he thought proper to resign his Office of
President of the ROBINHOOD SOCIETY, having continued in that honorable Station
nineteen Years: And in a few Months afterward, he was appointed one of his
Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the County of Middlesex, in which Capacity
he now acts with an Integrity and Honor, with a Clearness of Judgment, and a
Fervor of Humanity, excelled by none. He is considered by the Rational and
Judicious, as a tacit Satire on the Practice of some trading Justices, who sell
their Judgment and Mercy, as a Grocer sells his Raisins and Sugar, at so much
per Pound.

THOUGH JEACOCKE has never received, what we term, a liberal Education, yet his
Mind is stored with a greater Stock of real Knowledge, than nineteen Parts out
of twenty of those who have breathed a College Air for many Years. But though
his Judgment is clear, and his Knowledge extensive, yet his unbounded Humanity,
his amiable Cheerfulness, his discreet Complaisance, his incorruptible
Integrity, are still superior. His Philanthropy is so great, that Misery and
Distress never applied to him in vain. His Advice and Purse were ever open to
the Indigent; but his Knowledge of the World teaching him to distinguish
between real and pretended Distress, between honest Poverty and artful
Villainy, whenever he found Examples of the latter, he was as rigorous in
inflicting Punishments, as in the former he was ready to afford Relief. In his
Deportment he is grave, but not austere; serious, but not melancholy; cheerful,
but not merry; reserved, but not hypocritical. He possesses Judgment without
Ostentation; Humility without Meanness; and Worth without Pride. Ever open to
Conviction, in his Office of President, he never obtruded his Opinions on his
Auditors for certain Truths, but retracted them, and owned his Mistakes, if
pointed out. Slave to no Sect, but a Friend and Member of the Church of
England, he vindicated her from the rude Assaults of Deists and Unbelievers,
not by positive Dogmas, and mere Ipse Dixits, but by candid Reasoning, and fair
Argument. When unacquainted with the Subject of Debate, he sought not by
retailing the Sentiments of others, to pass as an intelligent Man, or to take
up their Time by delivering a String of Words without Meaning, but left the
Question to be debated by those whose Inclination or Situation in Life put it
in their Power to speak to it properly. By these Means, and having a retentive
Memory, and a fine natural Genius, and being remarkably attentive to whatever
was said on every Subject, there are few he has not now a general Knowledge of,
and a great many he is particularly conversant in. His Reasoning is close, but
not void of Perspicuity; and his Elocution free and natural, but not rapid and
verbose. He ever strives rather to convince the Mind, than to excite the
Passions, and to deliver wholesome Truths and useful Precepts, than to charm the
Imagination with Paradoxes, and lead the Soul to Fairy Ground, by the Pomp of
Words, and the Richness of Imagery; so that his Eloquence rather resembles a
smooth and gentle Current that glides softly along, than the foaming and
majestic Tyber, or the rapid Tagus, that rolls its golden Waves in Disdain of
Limits, overbearing and sweeping every Thing before it.

JEACOCKE being such a Person as I have described, it is no Wonder that he
should be revered by the Society. He He had a prodigious Influence over them,
and kept them in more Awe, than a Pedagogue does his Scholars, or even than the
Speaker of a great Assembly can frequently keep the Members, as Mr. A -- R O --
S -- W himself once owned to Mr. JEACOCKE.



ANOTHER Member of the Society at its first Opening at the ROBINHOOD, was the
NOTORIOUS Mr. Orator HENLEY.
SOME Account of this Phenomenon may not be unacceptable to the Public. But as
a better than I can give of him, has been already given in one of the Notes to
Mr. POPE'S Dunciad, I shall extract that Paragraph, and then hazard a few
Remarks of my own on this singular Genius.

J. HENLEY the Orator; he preached on the Sundays upon Theological Matters, and
on the Wednesdays upon all other Sciences. Each Auditor paid One Shilling. He
declaimed some Years against the greatest Persons, and occasionally did our
Author that Honor. WELSTED, in Oratory Transactions, No. I. published by
HENLEY himself, gives the following Account of him: He was born at Melton
Mowbray in Leicestershire. From his own Parish School he went to St. John's
College in Cambridge. He began there to be uneasy; for it shocked him to find
he was commanded to believe against his own Judgment in Points of Religion,
Philosophy, etc. for his Genius leading him freely to dispute all Propositions,
and call all Points to Account, he was impatient under those Fetters of the
freeborn Mind. Being admitted to Priest's Orders, he found the Examination
very short and superficial; and that it was not necessary to conform to the
Christian Religion, in order either to Deaconship or Priesthood. He came to
Town, and after having for some Years been a Writer for Booksellers, he had an
Ambition to be so for Ministers of State. The only Reason he did not rise in
the Church, we are told, was the Envy of others, and a Disrelish entertained of
him, because he was not qualified to be a complete Spaniel. However, he offered
the service of his Pen to two great Men, of Opinions and Interests directly
opposite; by both of whom being rejected, he set up a new Project, and styled
himself the Restorer of ancient Eloquence. He thought it as lawful to take a
License from the King and Parliament at one Place, as another; at Hick's Hall,
as at Doctors Commons; to set up his Oratory in Newport Market, Butcher Row.
There (says his Friend) he had the Assurance to form a Plan, which no Mortal
ever thought of; he had Success against all Opposition; challenged his
Adversaries to fair Disputations, and none would dispute with him: Writ, read,
and studied twelve Hours a Day; composed three Dissertations a Week on all
Subjects; undertook to teach in one Year, what Schools and Universities teach
in five; was not terrified by Menaces, Insults, or Satires, but still
proceeded, matured his bold Scheme, and put the Church, and all that in Danger.
WESLTED, Narrative in Orat. Transact. No. I. AFTER having stood some
Prosecutions, he turned his Rhetoric to Buffoonry upon all public and private
occurrences. All this passed in the same Room; where sometimes he broke Jests,
and sometimes that Bread which he called the Primitive Eucharist. -- This
wonderful Person struck Medals, which he dispersed as Tickets to his
Subscribers: The Device, a Star rising to the Meridian, with this Motto, AD
SUMMA; and below, INVENIAM VIAM AUT FACIAM. This Man had a Hundred Pounds a
Year given him for the secret Service of a Weekly Paper of unintelligible
Nonsense, called the Hyp-Doctor. POPE'S Works, Vol. V. THE Doctor was indeed a
Composition of Inconsistency and Singularity. He wanted not Sense or Learning,
but perverted both to the most unworthy Purposes. He understood the Principles
of Religion very well; but his chief Delight was in making it appear
ridiculous, by the ludicrous Light in which he viewed it himself, and
represented it to others. As to any fixed Principles, with Respect to political
Notions, he had none, but employed all his Talents to laugh at, and make all
Government appear a mere Joke. But though the Doctor understood Religion
tolerably well, and could, when he thought proper, compare the different Sects,
and exhibit their various Excellencies in a striking and picturesque Manner,
yet he was more disposed to cull out their several Defects and Imperfections,
so as to make all of them appear mere human Inventions, and the Creatures which
interested Priests and artful Knaves had dressed up, to impose on, and frighten
the Vulgar. His chief Talent lay in Buffoonery, and making the most amiable
Things appear mere Monsters, and hideous Caricatures. Thus Religion was
vilified, her Ministers traduced, Morality laughed at, Merit treated as a mere
Nonentity, and the greatest Characters in the Kingdom taken to Pieces and
anatomised with all the Licentiousness imaginable, every Sunday, when the Ollio
of Scandal and Nonsense was served up to the Public. He was of an over-bearing
Temper, insolent to his Inferiors, and unmannerly to his Superiors. His Pride,
which was excessive, taught him to despise every one with whom he conversed;
and his Self-Love, which was inordinate, and reigned over him with a despotic
Sway, led him to suppose, that every one was inferior to himself in Point of
Judgment. Hence that ridiculous Vanity which was visible in his every Action,
and prompted him to enforce his own Arguments with the most indecent Noise and
violent Gesticulations, to disregard the Sentiments of others, and to be
continually interrupting them in the Course of their Reasoning. As a Companion,
therefore, he was odious; as a Clergyman, indecent; as an Orator reprehensible;
as a Christian, culpable; and as Man, contemptible.

THE Doctor being such a Person as I have described him, it may be wondered
that his Oratory should be so prodigiously frequented: But, I apprehend, it is
no Wonder at all. Novelties will always attract; Scandal has Charms for many
Appetites; and an unrestrained Licentiousness of railing against Religion and
Government, will always draw vast Numbers of Infidels and Libertines to hear
their Patron and Advocate sounding the Trumpet of Sedition. Not but that others
of a different Cast attended the Oratory: Some came to laugh with the Orator,
and some to laugh at him: Some, to unbend their Minds, and forget the rigid
Rules of Morality they had just before heard in our Places of public Worship;
and some to confirm themselves in Infidelity and Impiety, and enable themselves
to become Disputants.

THE Orator, with various Success, still kept up his ORATORY KING GEORGE'S, or
CHARLES'S CHAPEL, as he differently termed it, 'till the Year 1759, when he
died. At its first Establishment it was amazingly crowded, and Money flowed in
upon him apace; and between whiles, it languished and drooped: But for some
Years before its Author's Death, it dwindled away so much, and fell into such
an hectic State, that the few Friends of it feared its Decease was very near.
The Doctor, indeed, kept it up to the last, determined it should live as long
as he did, and actually exhibited many Evenings to empty Benches. Finding no
one at length would attend, he admitted the Acquaintances of his Doorkeeper,
Runner, Mouth-Piece, and some others of his Followers, gratis. On the 13th of
October, however, the Doctor died, and the Oratory ceased; no one having
Iniquity or Impudence sufficient to continue it on; since which it is turned
into a Tradesman's Warehouse.



I SHALL now give a brief Account of the most considerable of the Oratorical
Members from its first Establishment at the ROBINHOOD, to the present Time.

Mr. B*RR***T*N.
FORMERLY a Governor of one of our Plantations. He was a Man of tolerable good
Parts, had been engaged in various Scenes of Life, was a close Reasoner, but
very deficient in oratorical Abilities; his Delivery being slow, and
accompanied with a Thickness of Voice, and an ungraceful Demeanor, which
greatly prejudiced the Audience against him. He was a rank Deist, and, on all
Occasions, ridiculed the Christian System, with an Asperity and Acrimony that
denoted his extreme Aversion to it; but, it is said, that on his Deathbed he
owned the beauty and Sanctity of that Religion, which alone can ensure an happy
Immortality to those who square their Lives agreeable to its holy Precepts,
and, in pathetic Terms, bewailed his own Infelicity, in being deprived of that
Comfort and that Light which can enable the Righteous to triumph over the
Grave, and make Death lose its Sting.



Mr. B*DD**PH.
A VERY Proteus in Principle and Conduct. This Day of one Opinion; the next of
a different. He changed his Sentiments much oftener than he did his Clothes; an
extravagant Life, and an Itch for Disputing, having reduced him from an
honorable Situation in Life, to a very mean one, with one Suit of Clothes only
to his Back. He is descended from noble Ancestors; has a Barone, for his elder
Brother, but is now in the Service of the East India Company, in the Character
of a private Soldier. He is endued with excellent Faculties, distinguishes
Things with a Clearness and Precision few can excel him; has a ready Wit, sound
Judgment, and an easy Delivery; but he has a squeaking disagreeable Tone, and,
on Account of his changing Sides so often, whatever he says has little or no
Effect on his Auditors. He has distinguished himself in the Republic of Letters
by many ingenious Productions; but what made him more particularly remarkable
as an Author, was, the uncommon Pains he took in the Affair of CANNING and
SQUIRES, searching and diving into that mysterious Transaction, and giving the
Result of his Enquiries, and his own Conjectures, in several Pamphlets and
Essays he wrote on the Subject. He was promised to be amply rewarded for his
Trouble, by the Magistrate who employed him in the Affair, but who, it is said,
never gave him one Penny on that Account.



Mr. G*NT**M*N.
A VERY ingenious Gentleman, the Son of a Colonel of the Irish Establishment,
Author of SEJANUS, a Tragedy, and many other well-wrote Pieces. He is now a
Lieutenant on Half-pay, and lives at Worcester. As an Orator he was excellent;
having an Energy of Expression, a Facility of Utterance, and a Reach of Thought
few can equal. Fortune, who, in the Distribution of her Favors, proves herself
a blind and ignorant Judge of Merit, has been peculiarly severe to this
Gentleman. He was promised, by a late deceased worthy Lord, to be provided for;
but nothing has been done for him, and he now lives upon a scanty Pittance; a
deplorable Instance that Men of the greatest Merit, Learing, and Genius, may
sit sighing in Rags and Poverty, while pliant Knaves, Fools, and Coxcombs, bask
in the Sunshine of a Court, and almost bend beneath the Load of Fortune's
Favors. He has not unfrequently wrote in Conjunction with



Mr. D*RR**K.
A MAN no more fit to stand in Competition with G*NT**M*N, than a Pigmy with
Hercules. This Gentleman, however, as an Author, and a facetious Companion, is
not without some Merit. His Merit, however, is tinctured with no small Degree
of Self-Conceit, and his Conversation with unpardonable Egotisms. He was born
in Dublin, and, by his Aunt, put Apprentice to a Linnen-draper; but, instead of
minding his Business, he was ever reading Plays, and composing Madrigals. In
Consequence of this Propensity, he ran away from his Master, came to London,
and commenced Author; in which honorable Vocation he continued, with various
Success, till about two Years ago, when he was chosen Master of the Ceremonies
at Bath; but was lately discharged from that Office, and Monsieur CAULETT
chosen in his Room.



Mr. FOOT.
THIS very ingenious Gentleman is so well known to the Public, that any Account
of him would be needless. The same Thing may also be observed of



Mr. MACKLIN,
WHO is now exhibiting his Abilities, both as an Author and an Actor, at the
Theater in Smock-Alley, Dublin.



Mr. GR***S.
A PAINTER by Trade, and a Deist in Principle. He was a strenuous Advocate for
the Society; but the very Household Abilities he poss ssed, put it out of his
Power to be eminently s rviceable to it. His Character is drawn with no
unskilful Hand by the Author of THE ROBINHOOD SOCIETY, a Satire. To which I
refer, and shall therefore say no more of him here.



JOHN H**KE, Esquire
A GENTLEMAN of Genius and Judgment, a firm Friend, and an agreeable Companion.
He possesses a Solidity of Thought, and a Vivacity of Imagination, that seldom
unite in the same Person. He is descended from a respectable Family, had high
Expectations from a wealthy Uncle, but was greatly disappointed, and
barbarously treated, by his leaving his Fortune from his Nephew, to People he
was not allied to. Mr. H**KE, however, by the Exertion of his Talents, has
gained a very pretty Fortune, and was lately chosen Member for M****n in Essex.
In this Capacity there is no Doubt but he will behave properly; for he has all
the Faculties and Accomplishments requisite to form the complete Senator; and,
in the Editor's Opinion, possesses an Integrity of Soul, not any ways inferior
to the Judgment of his Head. He is likewise a Member of the Society for the
ENCOURAGEMENT of ARTS; but has not for some Years belonged to the ROBINHOOD.



Mr. M*R*Y.
A TAILOR by Trade, formerly a Quaker, now a Deist; and a very merry Fellow he
is. He has no great Abilities, nor very contemptible ones. If an Attempt to
entertain is meritorious, this merry Fellow possesses a great Share of Merit;
for all his Speeches are calculated for that End.



Mr. WILLIAM C**TY.
FORMERLY a Cabinet-maker in the Strand. There was nothing very remarkable in
this Person, but that his Conceptions of Things were so dull, and the
Succession of his Ideas so rapid, that his Tongue could not give Utterance to
them. He was so sensible of his Deficiency in this Respect, that in the Course
of his Speechifying, he was ready to quarrel with himself, for not being able
to give a Vent to the Thoughts with which he was almost ready to burst. Whether
he was more happy in expressing his Sentiments in Writing, than in
extemporaneous Discourses, I know not, never having seen any of his
Compositions, though I am told he wrote a good deal.



GEORGE B**DG*S.
A Noted Bug-Doctor near Hatton-Garden, Author of several unintelligible
Pamphlets, full of pious Rants, enthusiastic Jargon, and unmeaning Stuff. He is
a Quaker, and has often held forth as a Preacher, in which Character he must
certainly appear to Advantage, as he has a Facility of Utterance, and can
harangue for half an Hour together in such a Style and Manner it shall be
impossible for any Mortal to fathom his Meaning. Fine Accomplishments these for
a Quaking Preacher!



Mr. S**ND**S*N.
A SURGEON of some Eminence in Great Queen Street, near Lincoln's Inn Fields.
He is of the established Church with Respect to his Religion, and a strenuous
Advocate for it. As a Scholar, he is by no Means contemptible; as a Surgeon,
skilful; as an Orator, middling; and as an Author, indifferent. He is a Man of
great Integrity, and is respected by all who have the Pleasure of his
Acquaintance. He is of an open, cheerful Temper, and extremely good-natured. He
belongs to a Society, not unlike that of the ROBINHOOD, held at the Devil
Tavern, near Temple Bar. He is a great Admirer of the Moderns, and thinks they
excel the Ancients, in the Goodness both of their Lives and Writings. How far
this Opinion of his is just, it is not our Business to enquire into here,
though such an Enquiry would be both pleasant and profitable.



Mr. R*B**S*N.
A GENIUS truly surprising: A perfect Phenomenon. He is characterised in the
Satire on the ROBINHOOD SOCIETY, under the Name of BIBO; and, indeed, that Name
suits him very well. It is a common Saying, that Poets are born, but Orators
are taught.

THE Meaning of this must be, that without a natural Genius, no Man can excel
in Verse; but without any Genius, a Man may be capable of shining as a Speaker:
This, however, is by no Means applicable to BIBO, for he was neither born, nor
made an Orator; and it is really astonishing, that without having any Thing to
say, he yet speaks his five Minutes at the ROBINHOOD without Intermission,
after which he sits down, and with a ghastly Grin smiling his own Applause,
proceeds to his darling Business of quaffing Porter.



Mr. B**C**Y.
THIS Gentleman is Master of an Academy at Tottenham High Cross, and has lately
taken Holy Orders. He is a Native of North Britain, and is a Man of Learning
and Integrity. Were it not for a strong Scotch Accent, he would be a very good
Orator, since his Sentiments are always orthodox and just, his Diction pure and
elegant, his Elocution free and graceful, and his Action spirited and easy. I
know of no Person to whom I would entrust the Education of a Son, sooner than
to him; for while he takes Care to improve their Heads, he neglects not to mend
their Hearts. He was one of the Candidates for the Lectureship of Whitechaple
Church not long since; and if Piety and Virtue, Learning and Good-Sense, had
been preferred, perhaps Mr. B**C**Y had been chosen Lecturer: But it is no
uncommon Thing to see Merit disregarded, and Ignorance exalted. -- Interest
nowadays, is the Empress of the World.



Mr. C**WF**D.
THIS Gentleman is also of the same Country, and of the same Profession as the
last mentioned, but not possessed of equal Abilities. He is, however, a Man of
good common Sense, but has no great Depth of Learning. What his Merit may be as
a Schoolmaster, I pretend not to say; but as an Orator, he is by no Means
contemptible. He is rather too diffuse in his Reasoning, and his Expressions
are frequently vague and undeterminate; but there is a Vein of Piety, and a
Zeal for the Interests of Religion, discoverable in all his Discourses. -- In
short, he is a Man of some Abilities, but they are not so great as he imagines
them to be.



Mr. WILLIAM W**Y.
THIS Gentleman is a facetious Companion, and possesses a considerable Share of
Learning and good Sense. He was bred to the Profession of the Law, but that dry
Study not agreeing with his gay and volatile Disposition, he frequently
indulged himself in a Correspondence with the Muses, and improved it to such
Advantage, as shortly to get them with Child, as COLLEY CIBBER humorously
expresses it. What sort of Offspring he has, appears by his SHRUBS OF
PARNASSUS, his BLOSSOMS OF HELICON, and the POETICAL CALENDAR in twelve
Volumes, in which last Work he was assisted by Mr. FAWKES. He is now Steward to
a noble Lord, and behaves in that Character with incorruptible Integrity, and
great Judgment. As an Orator, we pretend not to give our Opinion of him, as he
never spoke at the Society above twice or thrice.



Mr. RICHARD L***S,
AUTHOR of the ROBINHOOD SOCIETY a Satire, The Adventures of PATRICK O'DONNELL,
the Adventures of CHARLES CARELESS, and a Multitude of other Works. This
Gentleman, as well as his Friend Mr. W**Y, was bred to the Law, but, like him,
instead of studying COKE UPON LYTTLETON, or VINER'S Abridgment, was ever
reading SHAKESPEARE and POPE, and composing Madrigals. As an Author, we decline
giving our Opinion: His Works must speak for him. As an Orator, he must be
ranked in the third Class, having a weak Voice, a harsh and untuneable Accent,
and an ungraceful Action. He has not spoke in the Society for many Years; and,
indeed, if he had never spoken there at all, it would have been no Matter; for
as during the Time he belonged to the Society, he was no Ornament to it, so now
he has withdrawn himself from it, he is not missed.



Mr. PETER A*N*T.
THIS Gentleman has made himself very notorious. He has been pilloried, fined,
and imprisoned, several Times, for his ardent Zeal in inculcating the true
Religion, and his laudable Endeavors to prove MOSES a Bl -- h -- d, and the
Christian Religion a mere Ch -- t, intended to affront the common Sense of
Mankind. Strange! that so zealous a Reformer should be punished, instead of
being rewarded! and that Mankind are still blinded by Prejudice, which this
Gentleman would remove, and still hampered by the Shackles of Religion, which
he would knock off! He was formerly a Schoolmaster, after that Clerk to a
Merchant; then, he had some Employment in a public Office, and for these twelve
Months last past, he has enjoyed a Place in Bridewell. What he intends to do
now, I know not. He was for some Years a main Pillar of the ROBINHOOD SOCIETY,
and used to read his Productions to the Members, instead of speaking extempore.
As an Orator, he is to the last Degree contemptible, having a tame and lifeless
Pronunciation, and a mean and insipid Action. His Abilities are, however, far
from indifferent, but it is a Pity that Age and Experience should not have
taught him Discretion enough -- to refrain from insulting the Religion of his
Country.



Mr. WILLIAM R*D*R.
THIS Gentleman entered into Holy Orders about five Years ago, since which he
has not frequented the ROBINHOOD SOCIETY. Before that, he used to be a constant
Member, and spoke to every Question that was debated, with an Extent of
Knowledge, and a Clearness of Precision, that evinced, there were few Subjects
he was unacquainted with. But if his Judgment is very great, his Integrity is
still greater. He is a faithful Husband, an affectionate Father, a good
Christian, a firm Friend, a cheerful Companion. His Exposition of the BIBLE, is
a standing Proof of his Piety and Learning; his DICTIONARY, a noble Monument of
critical Accuracy; and his HISTORY of England, an undeniable Evidence of his
Candor and Judgment. As a Preacher, he is deservedly admired. His Compositions,
abstracted from the Charms of his Delivery, will bear the strictest Scrutiny;
but when heightened and enforced by the Beauty of Pronunciation, and Energy of
Action, it is no Wonder they should extort the Admiration, and secure the
Esteem of the enraptured Congregation. As a Scholar, he is greatly celebrated,
being thoroughly conversant with both the learned and modern Languages, and
which all his Works in general, but his BIBLE and DICTIONARY in particular,
irrefragably prove. The last contains a Fund of Knowledge beyond any other I
know of; and I dare pronounce it to be the best and most useful of any we have
in this Dictionary-making Age.



Mr. R*BL*S.
A JEW, a Deist, a Stock-broker, and an Author, united in one Person. What an
Hachis! What a strange Mixture! -- He wrote a Pamphlet some Time since,
entitled, SUPERSTITION WORSE THAN ATHEISM, which he had the Discretion to vend
privately, for Fear of the Censure of the Civil Magistrate. His Notions of
Religion exactly correspond with those of Mr. PETER A*N*T, and his Oratory is
not unlike his; he has a thick, mumbling, lisping Voice, a Hesitation of
Speech, confused Ideas, and an ungraceful Delivery. It is not a little to the
Honor of the Christian Religion, that it has for its Enemies such contemptible
Beings.



Mr. S*****S.
A VERY ingenious Gentleman, a good Writer, and a fine Speaker. He was some
Time Amanuensis to Mr. JOHNSON, and wrote many fugitive Pieces on temporary
Subjects, that are now forgotten, as well as some that are now justly esteemed.



Mr. RICHARD AC***D.
HE kept a Lottery-Office not many Years ago, after which he was Deputy
Commissary at Belleisle. He is now a Gentleman at large, and keeps Company with
Bucks and Choice Spirits. He is of a dry, saturnine, sarcastic Disposition, but
wants not Sense, though possessed of little scholastic Knowledge, or oratorical
Abilities. He takes great Delight in making personal Infirmities Objects of
Ridicule, and of viewing the most serious Subjects with an Eye of Levity.
However esteemed these Qualifications and Disposition may be by his Companions,
they are not regarded by Disputants; and therefore, we apprehend, Mr. AC***D is
much better formed to shine in a modern nocturnal Meeting of Bloods, than in a
Society of Philosophers.



Mr. THOMAS M**T*M*R.
THIS Gentleman was formerly a Linnen-Draper, but meeting with Misfortunes, to
which every Man in Trade is liable, was obliged to compound with his Creditors;
after which he turned Stockbroker, being induced thereto, as himself tells us,
by the Representations and Persuasions of a Set of Men, who endeavored to make
him believe that he might acquire a large Fortune in a short Space of Time. He
found himself, however, miserably mistaken, being egregiously duped by those
Vultures, who preyed upon his Substance, 'till he had lost his All. He then set
up a Lottery-Office in Conjunction with the last-mention'd Gentleman, but met
with no great Success. However, he has since that Time repaired his Fortune,
and is now his Majesty's Vice-Consul for the Austrian Netherlands. He is a
Person of excellent Sense, and great good Nature. As an Orator, indeed, he
never shone much, a Heaviness of Aspect, and a Thickness of Utterance, still
accompanying him. What he said was always worth hearing, but how he said it,
was not worthy Imitation. His Piece, entitled, Every Man his own Broker,
discovers him to be well versed in that mysterious Business, and to understand
the Genius of our Language very well. He is now compiling a History of England.



Mr. THOMAS FL**D.
THIS Gentleman is a fine Scholar, an able Orator, a judicious Writer, and a
good Christian. Not long since he took on him the sacred Function, and behaves
with that amiable Dignity, and cheerful Gravity, as reflects an Honor on the
Cloth, and shows how worthy he is to wear it. Were the Number of such Clergymen
greater, it would not be so common as it now is, to hear Christianity
ridiculed, and its Ministers treated with Contempt. He has not for some Years
frequented the Society; but formerly was very often there, and was an Ornament
to it. The Speech which the Author of the ROBINHOOD SOCIETY, a Satire, has put
in the Mouth of this Gentleman, whom he calls OTHO, on the Excellency of the
Christian Religion, is so good, that I cannot refrain transcribing it.

HAIL, noble Preses! Guide of Reas'ners, hail!
With thee my Speech begins, with thee shall end:
For Reason gave that Scepter to thy Hand,
And eke her sacred Laws, that thou might still
The Voice of Infidelity, and check her Friends.
It Is thine to speak the Dictates of thy Soul:
It Is thine to lend an Ear when Justice bids
Another speak, and to enforce his Thoughts.
Thy Smile is Truth, and Error is thy Frown:
Yet will I speak what right my Soul esteems.
Fixed is the Thought, and rivited by Time;
By Time, which gives to Truth increasing Charms,
And steals from Error all her borrowed Plumes.
RELIGION, hail! thou Guardian of our Lives;
Foundress of States; of Law, Protectress fair;
Virtue's strong Rock, and Reason's noblest Guide!
Without thy Aid each social Tie is lost:
Without thy Aid the Laws would threat in vain:
Without thy Aid this World were drowned in Blood.
Freed from the Fear of Hell, or Hope of Heaven,
Life were a Load, and Being were a Curse.
When Misery, with Hope-destroying Stake,
Impales the Wretch, and Horror wings the Soul,
Thy Balm affords Relief, allays the Pain,
And bids the harmless Weapon quit the Wound.
When Fortune and when Plenty load the Board,
Thou on the Altar of the human Heart
Do light a Flame, that, towering to the Clouds,
Exhales an Incense grateful to the Skies.
If Foes increase, thou bidd'st their Rancour end:
If Dangers press, Faith lends her ample Shield,
Defies their Threats, and frowns them into Bliss.
Even Death, that plucks the Planets from the Skies,
Owns thy superior Might, foregoes his Sting,
And the proud Grave, victorious over our Clay,
At thy Command his laurell'd Chaplet quits,
Returns the Shroud, and, growling, leaves his Prey.
SAY, mighty Reas'ners, Infidels baptized,
Who dress in Folly's Garb, yet idly dream
That Wisdom's Robe upon your Shoulders shines;
Say, when tempestuous Passions tear the Soul,
Cloud Reason's Beam, and put out Wisdom's Light;
Can the thin Cobweb, spun by subtle Brains,
Outlive the Storm, and dare the Tempest's Rage?
Yet, when to Reason's Aid Religion joins,
And in her Left Hand gives the redd'ning Bolt,
Or in her Right eternal Bliss consigns,
Nor Life nor Death can move the stable Soul;
Nor Life nor Death impart, or Hope or Fear;
Unmoved, we pass as Israel's Patriarch erst,
And make this World a Ladder to the Skies.
WORSHIP, whatever purblind Deists deem,
Worship's the noblest Converse of the Soul;
It opens Heaven's irradiating Doors,
Admits us to the Audience of the GOD,
Makes him our Friend, and makes us truly great.
Is it an Honor for the rustic Swain
To sit in Council with the sceptred Chief?
How great the Honor then to talk with him,
Who is the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords!
RELIGION shortens Sorrow's thorny Road,
Plucks from the Heart the Arrow of Despair;
Matures the Seeds of Virtue in the Soul;
Gives Reason Wings, and bids her scale the Skies.
MORE would I speak, but who, alas! can sound
This vast Abyss, or half its Stores exhaust?
Yet, in Obedience to thy sceptred Nod,
I stop the flowing Current of my Speech,
And glory in the Thoughts I have not spoke.


Mr. JOSEPH C*L***R.
THIS Gentleman is possessed of great good Sense, and many amiable Qualities.
Fortune has not been very kind to him, but has reduced him to the mortifying
Necessity of writing for Booksellers. Were there any other MECAENAS'S to be met
with, it is probable that so much Merit would not go unnoticed and unrewarded.
He is not very eminent as an Orator, an invincible Timidity still hanging on
him, and preventing a Display of those Abilities, and that good Sense he is
Master of. One would naturally imagine, that Knowledge should inspire a
becoming Assurance; and a Consciousness of our being thorough Masters of a
particular Subject, should make us speak to it, with an intrepid Spirit: But we
often see the Reverse, and that Ignorance bolts forth its Dictates with a free
and unconstrained Air, while Learning and Wisdom are shackled by the Fetters
which awkward Bashfulness puts on them. Mr. C*L***R has not belonged to the
Society for some Years; but after having attended it often enough to discern
its Nature and Tendency, he thought he could neither be instructed or
entertained, by going to it any more.



Mr. S**TT.
THIS Gentleman is a Physician of no small Eminence. He is a Man of great
Erudition, a nervous Writer, and a fine Speaker; though, in the Pronunciation
of many Words, he deviates from the established Custom so much, as has
subjected him to the Censures of many Critics, particularly the ingenious
Authors of the Connoisseur, and the Gray's-Inn Journal; the former by BONNEL
THORNTON, Esquire and the latter by ARTHUR MURPHY, Esquire As a Specimen of his
Oratory, and Turn of Thinking, we shall give a Speech he made some Years since,
on the following Question.

How are we to be certain of the Incorruptibility and Freedom of a Parliament?
Signed, ARISTARCHUS. THIS Question is undoubtedly, Mr. President, of no small
Importance; though whether it can be properly debated in a Society like this, I
much doubt. I don't insinuate by this Observation, that such Gentlemen of
Genius and Judgment as honor us with their Company, are incapable of
determining this Question, and ascertaining the Marks whereby we may judge and
distinguish a free and incorrupt Parliament from a venal and corrupt one; but
am afraid, very much afraid, that those Marks are not so easy to be pointed out
in any extempore Speech. To speak to a Question of this Nature properly,
requires a previous Consideration of the Subject, and a deliberate Thought of
what we are to utter, lest a hasty Judgment, or crude Conjectures, might
mislead instead of informing a candid Searcher after Truth. I shall, however,
attempt to point out some Criterions to judge of a free and incorrupt
Parliament, which, I apprehend, may be looked on as infallible; though I must
necessarily omit others, perhaps not less important, which the Brevity of Time
allowed me, will not permit my mentioning.

A FREE and incorrupt Parliament the People will ever repose the utmost
Confidence in, and though their Decisions may be sometimes erroneous, they will
never be unjust. When this is the Case, it will appear evidently by the
following Marks, viz.

WHEN the Members of Parliament act with a visible Independency, and will not
suffer any one Man to lead them by the Nose, or brow-beat them into Compliance
with his Schemes, and thereby destroy that Equality which is essentially
requisite to preserve the Liberty of these Assemblies.

WHEN all the Acts and Resolutions of Parliament are manifestly calculated for
the public Good, and not to serve any dark and private Purposes.

WHEN the Conduct of Gentlemen in Employment makes it evident, that they are
under no Restraint in the House, but are left at full Liberty to give their
Votes, upon all Occasions, according to their Consciences and Opinions.

THIS is, indeed, the strongest Mark of a free Parliament, and we may certainly
conclude it to be the Case, when the Members, who are in Office, do not
constantly run in Herds, and slavishly follow a Minister in all his Proposals;
but when it is observed, on the contrary, that they frequently divide against,
what is called, the Court Party, and are not turned out of their Places, at the
End of a Session, without any visible Reason, but giving a Vote, perhaps,
against some favorite Question, or to make Room for others, whose only Merit
is a sordid, pliant, and prostitute Complisance.

IN short, Gentlemen, a Parliament cannot be truly denominated free, which lies
under any Restraint or Discouragements whatsoever; nor will their Resolutions
have any other Weight than what Force gives them; for I will venture to assert,
that the most inconsiderable Minority, or even one honest Man, of the meanest
Understanding, is a better Judge of political Affairs than the largest
Majority, which is packed together, and bribed to serve the Purposes of a bad
Minister.

BY viewing our own Parliament, and having an Eye to the Marks and Tokens I
have pointed out, we may be enabled to judge whether it is such a one as
mentioned in the Question. I hope, I trust it is, and that it is quite opposite
to one I well remember, a few Years ago, when the grand Corrupter presided at
the Helm. Under his Administration Bribery and Corruption were reduced to a
Susetem, Election-Jobbing was carried on as openly as any other Trade, all
Virtue and Morality were laughed out of Countenance, the interests of Religion
were disregarded, and its sacred Foundations underminded, and sapped by Vice
and Venality. Nay, the great Engine of Corruption had so despicable an Opinion
of hooman Nature, that he laid it down as an incontestible Truth, that no Man
could, in the true Sense of the Word, deserve the Appellation of Patriot, for
every Man had his Price. I shall close these Remarks with a beautiful Passage
from our great Poet, describing the Situation of Things at this Juncture,
remarking, by the Way, that every Thing was subservient to the Cause of
Venality, and contracted, like the various Rays of the Sun, into one Focus, to
feed this dark and infamous Passion.

VIRTUE may choose the high or low Degree,
It Is just alike to Virtue and to me;
Dwell in a Monk, or light upon a King,
She Is still the same beloved, contented Thing.
VICE is undone if she forgets her Birth,
And stoops from Angels to the Dregs of Earth.
But it is the Fall degrades her to a Whore;
Let Greatness own her, and she is mean no more.
Her Birth, her Beauty, Crowds and Courts confess;
Chaste Matrons praise her, and grave Bishops bless.
In golden Chains the willing World she draws,
And hers the Gospel is, and hers the Laws;
Mounts the Tribunal, lifts her scarlet Head,
And sees pale VIRTUE carted in her stead.
Lo! at the Wheels of her triumphal Car,
Old England's Genius, rough with many a Scar,
Dragged in the Dust! his Arms hang idly round:
His Flag inverted trails along the Ground!
Our Youth, all liv'ry'd over with foreign Gold,
Before her dance: behind her crawl the Old!
See thronging Millions to the Pagod run,
And offer Country, Parent, Wife, or Son!
Hear her black Trumpet through the Land proclaim,
That NOT TO BE CORRUPTED IS THE SHAME!
In Soldier, Churchman, Patriot, Man in Power,
It Is Avarice all, Ambition is no more.
See all her Nobles begging to be Slaves!
See all her Fools aspiring to be Knaves!
The Wit of Cheats, the Courage of a Whore,
Are what ten thousand envy and adore:
All, all look up, with reverential Awe,
At Crimes that 'scape, or triumph over the Law:
While Truth, Worth, Wisdom, daily they decry --
NOTHING IS SACRED NOW BUT VILLAINY.
Yet shall this Verse, if such a Verse remain,
Show there was one who held it in Disdain.


Mr. W**TE.
A SCOTCH Schoolmaster, that has the Brogue on him as strong as an Highlander
just arrived from the bleak Mountains of the North. He lives in C -- l-Street
in the Strand, and advertises to each a just and graceful Pronunciation; for
which he is indisputably well qualified -- we mean, of his native Erse, but not
of the English, which he cannot himself pronounce so well as a Teague in the
County of Fipperary. He is, however, a Man of good Sense, and possesses no
small Share of Learning; but as an Orator, he may be compared with the Scotch
one mentioned by Mr. FOOT, in his last Farce; and, indeed, it is not
improbable, but that in exposing the Absurdity of a Schoolmaster, with a braod
Scotch Accent, teaching an elegant and graceful Pronunciation of English, the
ingenious Satirist had Mr. W**TE in his Eye. -- It has frequently been
observed, with surprise, that, in general, Schoolmasters are extremely subject
to Vanity and Self conceit. But, I think, it is no great Wonder. They assume
such a supercilious and haughty Air in their Schools, where, without Doubt, it
is, in a great Measure, necessary, and contract such an Opiniatetry and Conceit
of themselves, and their own Importance, as are not easily to be shaken off
when they leave their native Dominions. The Force of Habit is very srong, and,
without great Difficulty, cannot be conquered: But surely a Schoolmaster, when
he leaves his School, ought to leave his stiff-starched Airs, and imaginary
Consequence behind him, and come into Company with the Ease and Deportment of a
Gentleman. -- I mention these Things because the Person, whose Character I am
now attempting, is a professed Votary to Self-Conceit; and imagines he is
entitled to the same Respect and Homage without the Pale of his School, that he
has an undoubted Right to exact within -- But this, as I have before observed,
is the Case with all of the Profession.



Mr. H**H*M.
AUTHOR of Genuine and authentic Memoirs of the ROBINHOOD SOCIETY, and an
Oration in Praise of the LAW, pronounced there a few Years ago, by one PITTARD,
a strolling Actor. He is a Person of some Sense, but not half so much as he
thinks he has. He has not attended the Society for some Years, nor, indeed, is
the Loss of him very great; for, as he is to be ranked in the middling Class as
an Author; so, as an Orator, he is a very mean one, unfurnished with Ideas, and
destitute of a graceful Delivery.



End of the THIRD PART.
THE HISTORY OF THE Robinhood Society.
PART IV.
WE have thus brought down our History of the ROBINHOOD SOCIETY, from its first
Establishment, to the Time of the Death or Secession of several of its chief
Members: To render it therefore entirely complete, we shall now give Memoirs
and Characters of its principal speaking Members for the Year 1764.

THE Reader must consider, that we are now arrived at a very tender and
delicate Part of this History: Living Characters are to be exhibited, and must
therefore be drawn with so much Caution, that while the Reader is enabled to
distinguish to whom the Features belong, the Persons themselves may have no
just Cause to complain of our Severity. If, however, in some of our Portraits,
the Features are homely, and in others very deformed, let it not be imputed to
us as our Fault: We create not Features, or Characters, but paint them as we
find them.

WE shall begin with Mr. P*TT.
THIS Person is considered of so much Importance in the Society, that he has
frequently acted as President, in which Character he has appeared in a very
singular Light. To draw a Comparison between J**C**KE and him, might appear
invidious, and is certainly unnecessary; since every one that has seen each of
them in the Chair but once, must have perceived the Difference. He is by Trade
a Cabinet Maker, and lives in L -- g A -- e. He was born at Falmouth in
Devonshire; and though he has been settled in London some Years, he retains much
of his Country Dialect. Whether he scorns the ignoble Path of Imitation, or
whether having no Sense of what is proper and improper in the Conduct of
others, he is an Original without Design, we are not enough acquainted with his
Principles of Action to determine: But his Manner of opening and conducting the
Debates of the Night, is, in all Respects, different from that of every other
President of every Disputing-Club that we have either heard of, read of, or
seen.

HIS first Movement is a very singular Maneuver, or rather Doit-O Euvre: It is
a deliberate Extension of the Forefinger and Thumb of his Right Hand to that
Part of the Candle which is inflamed, and which he suddenly compresses between
his said Forefinger and Thumb, giving it a certain Pull, called by the Romans,
Vellicatio: and by this Doit-O Euvre, he severs the said inflamed Part of the
Candle exactly in the Middle, just as a Schoolboy severs a Halfpenny Cake,
for a Moiety of which he has received a Farthing from one of his
School-fellows; or, as a facetious old Gentleman divides and sub-divides the
Fragments of a Tobacco-Pipe, while with circumstantial Exactness he relates
some amorous Adventure of his youthful Days. After the useless Excrescence of
the Candle is thus nicely vellicated, the worthy President casts it on the
Floor, with a Grace similar to that, which one Poet says another exhibits with
his Dung; and then, while Mirth sits on every Face, and sparkles in every Eye,
wiping his aforesaid Forefinger and Thumb upon his Leathern Breeches, or Black
Everlasting Waistcoat, he cries out, "Will you be pleased, Gentlemen, to order?"

THE second Part of his great Work is, to open the Book of Questions, and
acquaint the Society, that the first Question on the Book is the next Question
they are to speak to for their Evening's Entertainment. As a Specimen of his
Oratory on this important Occasion, we have inserted the following Speech,
which he made in February 1764.

GENTLEMEN,
THE next Question on the Book for our Evening's Debate, is a Thing of
Importance; and it is this: Whether a Lawyer or a Sollier is the most
reputablest Person? -- Pray, Gentlemen, don't laugh; it is worded so in the
Question: Whether a Lawyer, or a Sollier -- Gentlemen, you may laugh, if you
please, but it is so here (pointing to the Book) -- Whether a Lawyer or a
Sollier is the most reputablest Person? There is no Occasion for my explaining
the Terms of the Question, for it is easy of themselves. The Question,
Gentlemen, is signed Britannius. -- Pray, Gentlemen, don't laugh -- It is
against Order -- Britannicus! Well; that is the same Thing. Is Mr. Britannius
here? If he is not, the Question is to go from me as if 'twere mine. Pray,
Gentlemen, is Mr. Britannius here, Gentlemen? -- Pray, Gentlemen, to Order!
This is against Rule, Gentlemen, for Gentlemen to laugh, and to show their
Mirth here. Pray, Gentlemen, will you be pleased to Order -- Well, Gentlemen,
as Mr. Britannius is not here, it often for to go from me; and the Terms of it
are very easy, Gentlemen: You all know, Gentlemen, What is meant by the
Question, which is, to know, which is the more reputabler Profession, that of
the Lawyer, or the Sollier. Now, as to a Lawyer, Gentlemen, I think, the Term
needs no Explanation, and therefore I sha'n't trespass on your Time to tell you
what it is: And as to a Sollier, it is as easy to understand as the other; and
therefore the Question may be thoft to be an Enquiry only, which is the
preferabler, a Lawyer, or a Sollier. Now, there is no Doubt but some Gentlemen
will think the Lawyer is the eminenter Man, and others will think the Sollier
is so; but that will appear by the Debates. Now, Gentlemen, I must needs say,
that for my own Part, I think a Sollier is the most cruellest Man; because as
why; he carries Destruction and Ruination with his Sword, when he is ordered by
the General: But so you may say, the Lawyer does likewise. It Is true; but then
People may avoid going to Law, but not to War: And therefore, I include, the
Sollier is the most cruellest, and his Profession froft with the greatest
Mischief in general. A Sollier is possessed with Enthusiam -- I say, Enthusiam
-- Pray, Gentlemen, don't laugh. -- I say, a Sollier is toft the Dictates of
Enthusiam, and he is a worser Character than a Lawyer, though some People may
say, that bad's the best. The most commonest Thing in the World is to hear both
these Characters traducified -- Pray, Gentlemen, don't laugh. Gentlemen, pray,
to Order -- You are guilty of great Irregulation -- Gentlemen, if you don't
behave better, I shall desire your Company out of the Room -- Well: Does any
Gentlemen here choose to speak to the Question? Do you choose to speak to it,
Sir? Does any Gentleman on this Side of the Way choose to give us his
Sentiments? What Nobody speak to it, Gentlemen! Why, Gentlemen, it is not a
difficulter Question than we usually have for our Discussation -- Pray,
Gentlemen, to Order -- I say, it is not a more difficulter Question than many
are that are proposed for our Discussation -- Why, Gentlemen, you should n't
laugh; you know what I mean; besides, I am a Falmouth Man; from Falmouth,
Gentlemen, in Devonshire; and you must not expect my Pronunsation to be the
most perfectest, for they all talk there as I do here -- Pray, Gentlemen, don't
laugh! -- Does any one choose to speak to the Question? Oh, a Gentleman is up --
Pray, Gentlemen; be silenced.



WE shall next give a Character of a Gentleman very well known in the Society,
by the Name of Mr. S**TH.
THIS Gentleman is by Trade a Dyer, and in Religion a red-hot Antimonian. When
he bellows forth his peculiar Notions, his Eyes are inflamed, and his whole
Body seems to be the Mansion of some turbulent Spirit. He is no tame Orator,
nor wants for Choice of Words, but is so unhappy in the Application of them,
that he conveys a quite different Meaning to the Minds of the Auditors from
what he himself understands: Let the Question be what it will, he lugs in
Religion by the Head and Shoulders, and the most carnal Proposition is
spiritualized into the most divine Meaning: Thus, the secret Parts of Religion
are all peeped into and exposed, and Discourses in the Style of the Canticles,
proposed as proper for Imitation. S**TH is a great Admirer of WHITFIELD, and
thinks him one of the greatest Men in Europe. If Regard is extorted, and Esteem
rivetted, by a mutual Sympathy of Minds, and a similar Turn of Thinking, it is
no Wonder our Orator should have conceived an high Opinion of his Brother
Orator: And, indeed, their Oratory is not much unlike, for Orator S**TH is as
ranting, as unintelligible, and as enthusiastic, as Orator WH**F***D.

AS to the Abilities of this curious Gentleman, they may be easily guessed at
from what we have said, and to dwell longer on such a Character, would be to
intimate he was of more Importance than he really is. However, we should ill
discharge our Duty of giving competent Ideas of our Orators, did we not draw
their leading Features; though we pretend not to be so particular as to paint
all of them.



Mr. B**K*R.
THIS Gentleman is a Physician, and lately lived at Trowbridge in Wilts, but
now resides in London. He is a Man of extensive Knowledge, and strict Probity,
and is almost the only Orator in the ROBINHOOD SOCIETY that speaks to a
Question; the Imagination of the major Part of those Gentlemen being either so
exalted, as to carry them into the Clouds, or so grovelling, as to put them on a
Level with Cobblers and Tinkers: The Question itself is seldom adverted to; and
the End of their speaking during the six Minutes allowed them, seems to be
merely to show that they are endued with one Faculty, which other Animals do
not possess.



Mr. RICHARD M*C**L*Y.
A PROFESSED Deist, and an Orator without Ideas, and with a very affected and
vicious Pronunciation. His Notions of Religion are entirely borrowed from
COLLINS, HOBBES, and TYNDALL, and his Oratory from Billingsgate. He was
formerly a Tobacconist, but is now Clerk to a Linnen-Draper.



Mr. C**D**L.
A BRAZIER in Business, and a Deist in Principle; illiterate to the last
Degree, and as void of good Manners as of good Sense. His Voice resembles a
Sowgelder's Horn, or a Crier of wild Beasts at a Country Fair. Need I say more
of such a worthy Member of so worthy a Society?



Mr. V*N*B**S.
AN Attorney, or an Attorney's Clerk, that pours out Vollies of Nonsense, as
fast as a London Militia Platoon fire their Muskets. He is a professed Advocate
for all ministerial Measures, and endeavors to prove, by Logic and Noise, that
Ministers, like Kings, can do no Wrong. If his Opponents insist, that if they
can do no Wrong, they must be infallible, and Infallibility only is the
Attribute of GOD; he answers, they are infallible, and are appointed by GOD; so
that the divine indefeasible Right of Kings, with all its concommitant
Circumstances of Non-Resistance and Passive Obedience, are strongly enforced by
this ingenious Quill-driver in every Political Debate. If it is objected to
him, that the Jure Divino is a Doctrine that strikes at the Vitals of our
present Constitution, by tacitly declaring the glorious Revolution to be an
Usurpation, and the present illustrious House of Hanover, to be mere P**t**d**s
to the Throne, he will not dispute the Inference, but maintain his Position. --
So much for his Political Notions. As to his religious ones, he is not less
strenuous. He thinks the Church, established by Law in this Kingdom, not only
the best visible Church on Earth, but that it is absolutely without Spot or
Blemish; and he would have as implicit a Regard paid to all human Ordinances
and Ceremonies as to the most divine Precepts; and in consequence of these very
orthodox and very charitable Opinions, he thinks all who dissent from the
established Church, should immediately quit England, and reside elsewhere: But
to what Place they are to retire he does not inform us. As to the Deists, he
lashes them without Mercy, and pronounces it impossible for them to be useful
Subjects, or honest Men; and therefore, as they cannot be serviceable in a
State, they should be banished from it, or broke upon the Wheel, or, at least,
be kept in Prison to hard Labor, till their Minds are open to Conviction, and
prepared to believe the glorious Truths of the Gospel.

IT is with no small Difficulty we have fathomed these Sentiments of our Man of
Law; who brings together such a Cloud of unmeaning Words, that it requires a
very penetrating Eye to see through the Obscurity: That Eye we think we possess.

AS an Orator, he is extremely contemptible: His Action is forced, violent, and
unnatural, and his Pronunciation, which is very vicious, is made more
disagreeable by his stammering. His Mind seems stored with very few Ideas, and
those few, very wrong ones. His mental Optics are extremely defective, and he
views Things by such broken and refracted Rays, as render them scarcely
visible. It is no Wonder, therefore, that he should not be able to make his
Auditors fully perceive what he does not clearly behold himself. In a Word, his
Character is well expressed in Mr. POPE'S Parody of a Passage in DENHAM'S
Cooper's-Hill, describing the River Thames: Flow, Welsted flow! like thine
Inspirer, Beer,
Though stale, not ripe, though thin, yet never clear;
So sweetly mawkish, and so smoothly dull:
Heady, not strong; overflowing, though not full.
A Specimen of his Oratory is given in the following little Speech which he
made on this Question, Whether the Robinhood Society has not a visible Tendency
to improve our Morals, and refine our Taste! BRITANNICUS. Mr. PRESIDENT!
I REALLY must be of the affirmative Side of this Question, though -- aw -- aw
-- the Gentleman yonder in the Cut Wig has -- aw -- aw -- declared himself --
aw -- aw -- of a contrray Opinion. A contrary Opinion, I say, Mr. President.
Mr. President, -- aw -- aw -- I really think -- aw -- aw -- that this Society
-- aw -- aw -- this Society I say, -- aw -- aw -- does tend -- aw -- to refine
our Morals, and -- aw -- aw -- to improve our Taste. To improve our Taste -- aw
-- aw -- is a noble Work, and -- aw -- aw -- useful to Society. Society is
benefited by it; that is, Mr. President. But aw -- aw -- there is another
Advantage -- aw -- aw -- our Society has, and that is, that we acquire
Eloquence, and with that -- aw -- aw -- get Wives; because we -- aw -- aw --
charm them with the Music of -- aw -- aw -- our Tongues, and they cannot -- aw
-- aw -- resist us.



WE must inform the Reader, that though the Speaker of this Speech has attended
the Society several Years, his Eloquence has not yet procured him a Wife. We
can also assure him, that the Speech itself is genuine, having taken it down
verbatim, in Shorthand, at the Time of its Delivery.

WE shall dwell no longer on this Gentleman than just to observe, that he is
extremely culpable in speaking out of Turn, entering into personal
Altercations, and answering every Observation that glances on himself, which
greatly obstructs the Debates, throws the Society into Disorder, and only
manifests the Author's Petulance of Temper.



Mr. A. M. E. C**KE.
SOME Readers will wonder what Mystery is couched under the Letters A. M. E.
and some will suppose that they are no more than the Initials of Mr. C**KE'S
Christian Names -- His Christian Name is THOMAS; but since a certain Operation
he performed on himself, he has, in his numerous Writings, entitled himself A.
M. E. C**KE; Letters, which though unintelligible to the Public, are yet full
of Meaning to us, who have a great Intimacy with this Gentleman; and they
signify ADAM, MOSES, EMANUEL. -- So much for his adopted Name.

HE was born in Northumberland, received a liberal Education there, and from
thence was sent to Oxford: In due Time he entered into Orders, returned to his
native County, and was soon after presented with a pretty good Living. A Turn
for Mysteries led him to a Perusal of some of our mystic Writers, and he caught
the same enthusiastic Flame which warmed them. A recluse and sedentary Life
greatly cherished his Notions, and it was not long before Parson C**KE was
looked on by all the Country as a second JACOB BEHMEN. But he had some Notions
peculiar to himself. He maintained in his Sermons, and in his private
Conversation, that the Jewish Ceremonies were not abrogated by the Christian
Dispensation, but were still of universal Obligation. In particular, he
insisted on the Necessity of Circumcision, and supported his Doctrine by his
own Practice. Such novel Notions, and such extravagant Behavior in a
Protestant Clergyman, soon reached the Ears of the Bishop of the Diocese, and
he was deprived, and his Living given to another. Our Jewish Christian then
came to London, and commenced Author; but his unintelligible Jargon not
selling, he was reduced to great Distress. In this Dilemma he knew not what to
do; but, at last, put in Practice another odd Notion, that the Goods of Fortune
ought to be shared in common by all God's Creatures..

AMONG various Expedients for satisfying his Hunger formed upon this Plan, one
was, to resort to some well-frequented Coffee-house, and placing himself at a
Table, to appropriate to his own Use the first buttered Muffin and Pot of
Coffee that was brought to it. This he would often be permitted to do, without
any Interruption from the Gentlemen that sat near him, some of whom were
diverted, and some astonished, to see a Clergyman thus familiarly regale
himself with a Breakfast that was not provided for him. As soon as it was
finished, however, he would rise from the Table, say a short Grace, and very
unconcernedly make toward the Door; and, when questioned by the Master of the
Coffee-house, about the Impropriety of using that which he did not order, and
the Injustice of not paying for it when he had done, he would prove by Mode and
Figure, that the good Things of this World ought to be in common. The Bucks and
Bloods enjoyed the Joke, and a Ring was usually formed for the two Disputants,
the Parson and the Coffee-man; but the Coffee-man being unable to invalidate
the Testimonies brought out of the Talmud, and many learned Writings, which
were quoted in Hebrew, Greek and Latin, the Parson always came off victorious.

ANOTHER Practice by which this Gentleman signalized himself, was
Street-Preaching; and having for some Time before let his Beard grow, he was
generally known by the Name of The Bearded Priest. In this extravagant Manner
he went on for some Time, 'till some Clergymen made Interest for him to be sent
to Bedlam, where he was confined for about two or three Years. As soon as he
was released, he took a Resolution of going to Scotland, and actually traveled
over that Country on Foot, with not a single Farthing in his Pocket,
subsisting, as himself informs us in one of his Pamphlets, by the Contributions
of the welldisposed. From thence he went to Ireland, and traveled over a great
Part of that Kingdom; and on his Arrival at Dublin, in 1760, was entertained by
some Gentlemen in Trinity College, who, compassionating the melancholy Case of
a Clergyman in Distress, gave him his Board and Lodging gratis. After he had
staid here a few Months, and published some very original Pieces, which no one
could understand but himself, he returned to England, visited Oxford, and then
came again to London, where he now resides, but intends going to America, as
soon as his Finances will enable him.



Mr. ST***T.
A YOUNG Surgeon, that possesses much Knowledge, and speaks with uncommon
Propriety and Correctness. He has not long frequented the Society, and comes
there, apparently, more with a View of being diverted, than the Hopes of being
edified.



Mr. W**L**GS.
A JUDICIOUS, humane, and honest Man. He is a Druggist by Profession, and lives
in the Poultry. As an Orator, he is neither excellent, nor contemptible. His
Reasoning is close, nervous, and always to the Point. His Sentiments are
judicious, orthodox, and pure, and breathe the true Spirit of Christianity,
which inspires an unrestrained Benevolence toward the whole human and animal
Species, and is not angry with those who differ in speculative Opinions, that
little interest the moral Conduct of Mankind. This Gentleman, however, seldom
comes to the ROBINHOOD, but is a constant Attendant at the Queen's Arms Society
in Newgate Street, a Society formed on much the same Plan, but conducted with
infinitely greater Decorum. He is also a President of that Society, and fills
the Chair with Honor.



Mr. W**H***LL.
COMMONLY called the good-natured Calvinist. Why he is called so, I own, is to
me a Mystery; as his pious Fury is breathed forth with an unextinguishable
Spirit against those who differ from him in Opinion; particularly the Roman
Catholics and the Deists. I need not say more of him, than that with Respect to
his Oratory, and many of his Sentiments, he is a second Edition of Mr. S**TH,
the Antinomian. He is an Exciseman by Profession.



Mr. BR**M*N.
A RED-hot Papist, with little Judgment, and less Charity, whose Yorkshire Wife
perverted him to the Roman Catholic Religion. Furious, persecuting, and
revengeful, he is himself an Epitome of his Church, and exhibits a true Picture
of a rigid Roman Catholic. By Profession he is a Schoolmaster, and lives in
Little Russel Street, near B -- y S --; but if the Pedagogue does not excel the
Orator, he is contemptible to the last Degree.



Mr. G**D***TH.
A MAN of Learning and Judgment, Author of An Inquiry into the modern State of
Literature in EUROPE, and many other ingenious Works; a good Orator, and a
candid Disputant, with a clear Head, and an honest Heart. He comes but seldom
to the Society.



Mr. W*LK*R.
A COMEDIAN belonging to the Theater in Covent Garden, a Man of extreme good
Sense, Erudition, and Candor. He greatly excels as an Orator, having a full,
round, and strong Voice, a Facility of Utterance, a graceful Pronunciation, and
a beautiful Action. If Wit, as it has been defined by a great Poet, consists in
a quick Conception, and an easy Delivery, Mr. W*LK*R has a great Share of it.
We have been much surprised at the low Estimation this Gentleman is held in
here, as an Actor. We have seen him perform very capital Characters at the
Theater Royal in Crow-Street, Dublin, with great Judgment and Execution, and
with universal Applause; and must own we are at a Loss to what to impute his
being placed on Covent Garden Stage in a different and inferior Walk.



Mr. WILLIAM H****S.
THE Clerk of the Society, who takes Care that the Disputants are duly supplied
with Porter and Lemonade, to refresh their Spirits, and enable them to speak
with Clearness and Energy. He lives in Barbican, keeps a Chandler's Shop there,
is a Porter also at the India Warehouse, is a very honest Man, and is possessed
of good natural Abilities.



Mr. B**D**GT*N.
A DEIST with Respect to his irreligious Notions, of tolerable good Sense, and
full of Words; so that though he cannot be said to be a deep Philosopher, he
may be considered as a flashy ROBINHOOD Orator.



Mr. P**E.
A MAN that, by his Oddity of Aspect, and Peculiarity of Expression, has
attracted the public attention in a considerable Degree; for he has been
frequently honored by being made the Subject of some Essays in our daily
Papers.

HE was born at Exeter about fiftyeight Years ago, of poor, but, as it is said,
honest Parents, who sent him to School, where he learnt both to read and write.
At the Age of thirteen he was apprenticed there to a Shoemaker, and during his
Apprenticeship, took great Delight in reading the delectable Poems of WITHERS,
QUARLES, HERBERT, CLEVELAND, and other very great Authors, and read them so
frequently, that he got many of them by Heart. At the Expiration of his
Apprenticeship, he came to London, and having received some small Pittance from
his Friends, set up for himself in the Strand, took unto him a Wife, and had
four or five Children by her. So far we see the bright View of his Life's
History. But the World soon frowned on him; and though he was continually
"supplying his Knowledge-Box with Furniture," as himself elegantly expresses
it, by reading the beforementioned Authors, and attending constantly at Mr.
Orator HENLEY'S Chapel, to whom he was Mouth-Piece, running on his Errands,
praising his Oratory, and doing him other Services, yet his Stock in Trade, his
Household Goods, his Customers, and his Reputation, were decreasing daily.
Although Poverty now not only stared our Orator in the Face, but was his constant
Companion, yet was he indefatigable in the Improvement of his Mind, and bore
his Misery with great Patience. But his Rib possessed not the same Fortitude.
She lamented her Infelicity in very pathetic Terms, and Tears ran from her Eyes
in copious Streams. P*** beheld her Distress with the Apathy of a Stoic; he
answered her Complaints and Remonstrances with some Verses of QUARLES, and her
Tears he endeavored to dry up with some Sentiments from HERBERT or CLEVELAND:
but all would not avail; her Tongue still ran on, and her Tears still flowed.
She wanted more substantial Food, than dull Lines of Jingle; and had rather see
some Bread and Cheese, and small Beer on the Table, for herself and Children,
than hear the best Arguments in the World, to prove that whatever is, is right.
Upbraidings and severe Reproaches followed, and the Wife insisted, that the
Husband was an idle Fellow, who neglected his Business, and the most important
Concerns, merely to prate about Things he did not understand, and to attend the
Atheistical Orator, whose Discourses he could never be benefitted by. After
living some Years in this uncomfortable State, the Wife and Children left the
Husband to his Fate, and pursued their own. The Wife took decent Lodgings,
sought out for Business in Washing and Plain-Work, and succeeded so well, that
she bred up her Children properly, wanted for nothing, and lived happily. As to
our Son of CRISPIN, he took a paltry Lodging, and went on in the same idle
Manner as before, getting what Work he could, and putting it out to be
performed. In this Manner he has continued for some Years.

As to the Oratory of this Poetical Cobbler, as he is usually called, it is, --
Rudis, indigestaque moles,
Non been junctarum discordia semina rerum.


HIS Speeches do not consist of his own Sentiments on the Question, but only of
an Application of the Sentiments of those polite Authors he is most conversant
with. He is, indeed, a mere Retailer of other Men's Opinions, and his Orations
are like an Harlequin's patched Coat; and yet he has Vanity enough to think
himself a Man of great Knowledge; and takes the Laugh of Contempt, which he
frequently hears at the Society, for a Proof of their Approbation.

HIS Speech on this Question, Whether Eloquence is of Use to Society? CICERO.
exhibits a very ample and striking Specimen of his Oratory. Mr. PRESIDENT!
THAT there Gentleman, on this Side of the Way, seems to want a Light to be
struck into his Knowledge-Box: If he had opened the Trap-Doors of his Mind, it
might have entered in. But I find it has not; and therefore, his Understanding
wants snuffing. He has really spoke like a Crabb-Lantern, and a Snap-Jack; so I
have done with him. Howsumdever, I shall now take Notice of the other rum
Gentleman, who thought I was a Man of Fortune, in his speaking to the last rum
Question, in so rum a Manner. But though I in this Scarlet Coat appear,
I am not worth a single Groat a Year.
So much for him -- As to the Question, Mr. President, I think it is no
Question at all; for every one that has not Detraction in the Head, and
Prejudice in the Heart, must own and confess, That Words alone can Harmony
impart,
To charm the Attention, and command the Heart
And that is Eloquence, Mr. President, and such as must be admitted by all who
do not seek the Indulgence of their voracious Appetites: And Which Heads
refined alone by Reason know,
Where Sense and Judgment do together flow.
Reason, Mr. President, is King Nature's Privy Counselor; and Eloquence is to
teach us To reason down the Fever of the Blood,
And sooth with Words the Tumult of the Soul.
I wish the Gentleman in his own Hair, yonder, who is now picking his Teeth,
and who looks with three Eyes at me, had marshalled up his Thoughts, harmonized
his Understanding, regulated his Ideas, and informed his Judgment; then he
might Blow away, and speak at large,
And with a holy Violence ram down the Charge.
Instead of which he has taken hold of the Muzzle instead of the But-End of the
Doctrine, and hurried a half-formed Production on the Public. He has launched
forth quite into wild Extremes,
Of senseless Noise, and undistinguished Themes.
Howsumdever, Mr. President, I forgive him for his Fun-Dawsit on me;
especially, as his Thoughts is stagnated, and an Embargo laid on his
Understanding: For, Forgiveness to the Injured does belong;
They never pardon that have done the Wrong.
Eloquence, Mr. President, may be defined to be, as it were, as when a Man is
eloquent; and to be so, he ought to do as I do; that is, drink a good deal of
Gin, and avoid eating Onions. A great Poet says; Immortal Gin! since I have
sung thy Praise,
Crown me with Juniper instead of Bays,
And that is Eloquence itself, Mr. President; and no one will dispute it that
has poised their Understanding, and not violated the Dignity of human Nature.
Those who dispute it, like my Wife's Relations, May the Curse of G -- then
light on one and all,
To d -- their Bodies, but preserve their Soul.
As to that Gentleman that said Eloquence is hurtful to Society, because Poets
are eloquent, and, in consequence of it, poor, it by no Means follows;
howsumdever, If Thought alone the Appetite can clay,
Could Poets live, Camelion-like, on Air;
If neither Thirst or Hunger could annoy,
The poorest Poet never need despair.
So that this Gentleman's Speech was a false Motion, Mr. President, and the
Question topped his Understanding; howsumdever, he chose to speak to it, lest
he should over-gorge himself, and burst at the Touchhole. Another Gentleman,
who said as how Eloquence was pernicious, seems to have contracted all his
Senses into his Bowsprit, to have loaded his Head with Argument, and then to
have primed, cocked, and fired away; howsumdever, I excuse him, because I find
he is one of the cross-legged Knights of the Steel-Bar, and a Wit. But Mr. POPE
says, A Wit's a Feather, and a Chief's a Rod;
An honest Man's the noblest Work of GOD.
Eloquence, Mr. President, is the Gift of the SUPREME; and we often not to
despise any of his Gifts: Now, if I had the Wisdom of ULYSSES, the Arms of
ACHILLES, the Riches of CROESUS, and the Wisdom of SOLOMON, I Would scower the
Universe from Folly and from Vice,
And make this World a second Paradise.
But I fear it is impossible for me to do this, though, with Eloquence, one
might almost do any Thing, even if one were attacked both in Front and Flank,
and knocked down in the Rear. But I think that those should, Who strive to
discompose the exalted Mind,
Be to eternal Banishment confined.
And some of these there are in this Society, who are for interrupting me in my
Discourse very often; but they had better open the Casements of their Bodies to
let in Light to their Minds, as I do; for I always Do much desire and long to
know,
The Wit that from Choice Spirits flow.
Mr. President! I see your all-silencing Hammer is lifted up to knock me down;
but I shall just desire to relate a Fact, which I know to be true, of the
public Crier at Topsham in Devonshire, which I consider as a very good Piece of
Eloquence. He had no less than ten Children; and they becoming chargeable to
the Parish, he was required by the Churchwardens to get no more, and used
barbarously for those he had; whereupon he went into the Marketplace, took his
Bell in his Hand, rung it, and then said, O Yes! -- O Yes! -- O Yes! -- This is
to give Notice, That when Breeches and Petticoats do come near,
Flesh and Blood cannot forbear.
This was wielding the sacred Weapon, and making the Muse to flow, and I think
he acted right in all Respects; for Mr. POPE says, The Goods of Fortune
variously are given;
A Wife is the peculiar Gift of Heaven.
He does not say two, Mr. President. But I see the uplifted, all-silencing
Hammer again fills your Hand, and threatens my Head; and therefore I must
conclude. But, Mr. President, give me Leave to mention a bad Custom in this
Society, which is to show Marks of their Approbration or Disapprobration: Now,
Mr. President, I never clap the Speakers, for fear of p*x**g their
Understandings; and yet, I Will work, walk, or talk, as much for a Shilling, as
any Lawyer or Parson in England will for a Guinea.





WITH this Character we shall close our Account of the principal Speakers of
the ROBINHOOD SOCIETY; an Account, that though written without Embellishment,
is not destitute of Fidelity and Candor. Uninfluenced by any private Views, we
have neither indulged Resentment by wanton Censure, nor, for the Sake of
personal Attachments, prostituted Praise.

OF the general Character of the Society, and its Influence on the Minds of
young Persons, little has been said: And while we were lately ruminating on the
Manner in which we should conclude this great Work, a Friend, who had perused
our Manuscript, came in; and, after knowing the Subject of our Meditations,
thus warmly expostulated upon it.

THERE can be no Doubt in what Light the Society must appear to every Mind,
whose Judgment is not determined by Fancy and Passion, but by the Nature and
Tendency of Principles and Actions demonstrated by Facts. From the History you
have given of the Society, it is evident, that it maintained its Usefulness and
Honor no longer, than while it faithfully adhered to that fundamental Law of
its Institution, by which all religious Questions were excluded from the
Subjects of Debate.

WHEN, for the Diffusion of useful Knowledge, it was thought expedient to admit
every Person that chose to come, and, for that Purpose, to assemble at a
Public-House; if two or three Hours had been set apart for the Business of the
Night, and no eating drinking or smoking had been permitted in that Interval;
and, if the Subjects of Debate had been confined to the Trade and Manufactures
of Great Britain, to Natural History, the Mathematics, and the Liberal Arts;
how poorly would the Meetings of the Society have been attended! Though its
Credit might have remained, its Number would not have been much increased. But,
as soon as it was known, that the Drunkard and the Glutton might regale
themselves at the Expense of the Temperate, and that every illiterate Prater
might display his Oratory, and signalize himself as the Champion of Deism or
Christianity; the Society was immediately crowded with noisy Butchers, Tinkers,
and Cobblers; with self-conceited and frontless Infidels; with those not less
profane, though more inconsistent, Arians and Socinians; and with the most
contentious, and yet the worst Disputers about Christianity, Calvinists and
Antinomians. The first Principles of Religion, and the essential Doctrines of
the Gospel, were called in Question every Night in the Presence of young
People, who unhappily deviating in their Search after Truth and Goodness, were
here betrayed into Error, and shut up from the Sight of That, by which alone
Sin can be destroyed and Holiness restored.

THE Book of Questions, as you have represented it, is itself a sufficient
Proof of the licentious and even wanton Levity, with which the most sacred
Doctrines and Characters have been treated: In the Specimen of Religious
Questions which, you say, you have selected from that Book, there were two,
which I was compelled to strike out, to save myself from being a Partaker in
the Guilt of the most horrid Blasphemy. And he, who, by his Presence, has
contributed to support a Society, in which such Questions are suffered to be
proposed, registered, and debated, has so far contributed to the Support of
Profaneness and Impiety. From this Charge I exempt not even THE BAKER himself,
who is entitled to no higher Honor from his long Presidentship, than that of
keeping a rude Multitude in some external Order, and preserving the Regularity
of an Infidel-Disputation.

MANY Things, indeed, are called Religion that do not belong to it; but that
which is essential in Religion, is private and personal, subsisting not in
disputable Notions and refined Arguments, but in the Sensibilities and
Perceptions of the Heart: For who, in his Senses, can dispute a Moment whether
he is a Sinner? and who, that feels himself a Sinner, can dispute a Moment
whether he should receive or reject the Pardon that is offered him? and who can
depend upon the Pardon of Sin, any further than he feels in his Heart a
Principle disapproving, disowning, resisting and subduing the Power of Sin? And
yet what is more prevalent in all our Societies for Free Debate and Inquiry,
than the Folly and Madness of attempting to destroy these Sensibilities, to
stifle these Convictions, and to prove, by Logical Disputation, that Man is now
as he was originally made; that he is, therefore, no Sinner; and that,
consequently, he needs no Redeemer. But he, who abandons that penitential and
humbling Sense of Sin, and that endearing Sense of pardoning Mercy, which the
Christian Redemption awakens in every Heart; and endeavors to persuade
himself, that he can be set free from his Evil and Misery, and made good and
happy, by Definitions, or Axioms, or Forms, or Systems, or any Thing less than
the Renovation of a Divine Life; abandons that for which the whole Creation
cannot yield him a Recompense.

OF the Nature and Tendency of all these Societies for free Debate and Inquiry,
the Writer of THE ADVENTURER has expressed his Sentiments with just Indignation.

NOTHING (says he) has offended me more, than the Manner in which Subjects of
eternal Moment are often treated. To dispute on Moral and Theological Topics,
is become a Fashion; and it is usual with Persons, of whom it is no Reproach to
say they are ignorant, because their Opportunities of gaining Knowledge have
been few, to determine with the utmost confidence upon Questions to which no
human Intellect is equal. In almost every Tavern and every Alehouse, illiterate
Petulance prates of Fitness and Virtue, of Freedom and Fate; and it is common
to hear Disputes concerning everlasting Happiness and Misery, the Mysteries of
Religion and the Attributes of GOD, intermingled with Lewdness and Blasphemy,
or at least treated with wanton Negligence and absurd Merriment.

FOR Lewdness and Blasphemy, it is hoped no Apology will seriously be offered:
And it is probable, that if the Question in Debate was, which of the Disputants
should be hanged on the Morrow, it would be conducted with Decency and Gravity,
as a Matter of some Importance: That visible good Humor, and that noble
Freedom, of which they appear to be so fond, would be thought not well to agree
with their Subject; nor would either of the Gentlemen be much delighted, if an
Argument intended to demonstrate that he would, within a few Hours, be
suspended on a Gibbet, should be embellished with a witty Allusion to a Button
and Loop, or a jocular Remark, that it would effectually secure him from future
Accidents, either by Land or Water: And yet the Justice and Mercy of
OMNIPOTENCE, the Life and Death of the Soul, are treated with Ridicule and
Sport; and it is contended, that with Ridicule and Sport, they ought always to
be treated.

BUT the Effect, as well as the Manner of those fashionable Disputes, is always
ill: They tend to establish what is called Natural Religion, upon the Ruins of
CHRISTIANITY; and a Man has no sooner styled himself a Moral Philosopher, than
he finds that his Duty both to GOD and Man, is contracted into a very small
Compass, and may be practiced with the greatest Facility. Yet, as this Effect
is not always apparent, the Unwary are frequently deluded into fatal Error, and
imagine they are attaining the highest Degree of Moral Excellence, while they
are insensibly losing the Principles upon which alone Temptation can be
resisted, and a steady Perseverance in well-doing, secured.

AMONG other favorite and unsuspected Topics, is the EXCELLENCY OF VIRTUE.
Virtue is said necessarily to produce its own Happiness, and to be constantly
and adequately its own Reward; as Vice, on the contrary, never fails to produce
Misery, and inflict upon itself the Punishment it deserves; Propositions, of
which every one is ready to affirm, that they may be admitted without Scruple,
and believed without Danger. But from hence it is inferred, that future Rewards
and Punishments are not necessary, either to furnish adequate Motives to the
Practice of Virtue, or to justify the Ways of GOD: In Consequence of their
being not necessary, they become doubtful; the DEITY is less and less the
Object of Fear and Hope; and as Virtue is said to be that which produces
ultimate Good below, whatever is supposed to produce ultimate Good below, is
said to be Virtue: Right and wrong are confounded, because remote Consequences
cannot perfectly be known; the principal Barrier by which Appetite and Passion
are restrained, is broken down. The Remonstrances of Conscience are overborne
by Sophistry; and the acquired and habitual Shame of Vice is subdued by the
perpetual Efforts of vigorous Resistance.

THE Paper which contains this Passage, seems to have been written as an
Introduction to the Story of poor DICK FREEMAN, related by himself under the
assumed Name of OPSINOUS. And as that Story is a forcible Instance of the
unhappy Influence of Disputing-Clubs, and may strike those whom Persuasion will
not reach, I think you cannot do better than print it as a Conclusion to your
History of the ROBINHOOD SOCIETY.

THUS ended my Friend, whose Opinion upon this Matter I have made public, as
the best Reason for my taking his Advice. The Story he recommends, is as
follows.

To the ADVENTURER.
SIR,
OF all the Expedients that have been found out to alleviate the Miseries of
Life, none is left to despair but Complaint: And though Complaint, without Hope
of Relief, may be thought rather to increase than mitigate Anguish, as it
recollects every Circumstance of Distress, and imbitters the Memory of past
Sufferings by the Anticipation of future; yet, like weeping, it is an
Indulgence of that which it is Pain to suppress, and sooths with the Hope of
Pity the Wretch who despairs of Comfort. Of this Number is he who now addresses
you: Yet the Solace of Complaint and the Hope of Pity, are not the only Motives
that have induced me to communicate the Series of Events, by which I have been
led on in an insensible Deviation from Felicity, and at last plunged in
irremediable Calamity: I wish that others may escape Perdition; and am,
therefore, solicitous to warn them of the Path, that leads to the Precipice
from which I have fallen.

I AM the only Child of a wealthy Farmer, who, as he was himself illiterate,
was the more zealous to make his Son a Scholar, imagining, that there was in
the Knowledge of Greek and Latin, some secret Charm of perpetual Influence,
which, as I passed through Life, would smooth the Way before me, establish the
Happiness of Success, and supply new Resources to Disappointment. But not being
able to deny himself the Pleasure he found in having me about him, instead of
sending me out to a Boarding-School, he offered the Curate of the Parish ten
Pounds a Year and his Board, to become my Tutor.

THIS Gentleman, who was in Years, and had lately buried his Wife, accepted the
Employment, but refused the Salary: The Work of Education, he said, would
agreeably fill his Intervals of Leisure, and happily coincide with the Duties
of his Function: But he observed that his Curacy, which was thirty Pounds a
Year, and had long subsisted him when he had a Family, would make him wealthy
now he was a single Man; and therefore he insisted to pay for his Board: To
this my Father, with whatever Reluctance, was obliged to consent. At the Age of
six Years I began to read my Accidence under my Preceptor, and at fifteen had
gone through the Latin and Greek Classics. But the Languages were not all that
I learned of this Gentleman; besides other Science of less Importance, he
taught me the Theory of CHRISTIANITY by his Precepts, and the Practice by his
Example.

AS his Temper was calm and steady, the Influence which he had acquired over
me, was unlimited: He was never caprieiously severe; so that I regarded his
Displeasure not as an Effect of his Infirmity, but of my own Fault: He
discovered so much Affection in the Pleasure with which he commended, and in
the tender concern with which he reproved me, that I loved him as a Father; and
his Devotion, though rational and manly, was yet so habitual and fervent, that I
reverenced him as a Saint. I found even my Passions controuled by an Awe which
his Presence impressed; and, by a constant Attention to his Doctrine and Life,
I acquired such a Sense of my Connection with the invisible World, and such a
Conviction of the Consciousness of DEITY to all my Thoughts, that every
inordinate Wish was secretly suppressed, and my Conduct regulated by the most
scrupulous circumspection.

MY Father thought he had now taken sufficient Care of my Education, and
therefore began to expect that I should assist in overlooking his Servants, and
managing his Farm, in which he intended I should succeed him: But my Preceptor,
whose principal View was not my temporal Advantage, told him, that, as a
Farmer, great Part of my Learning would be totally useless; and that the only
Way to make me serviceable to Mankind, in Proportion to the Knowledge I had
acquired, would be to send me to the University, that at a proper Time I might
take Orders. But my Father, besides that he was still unwilling to part with
me, had probably many Reasons against my entering the World in a Cassock: Such,
however, was the Deference which he paid to my Tutor, that he had almost
implicitly submitted to his Determination; when a Relation of my Mother's, who
was an Attorney of great Practice in the Temple, came to spend part of the long
Vacation at our House, in consequence of Invitations which had been often
repeated during an Absence of many Years.

MY Father thought that an Opportunity of consulting how to dispose of me with
a man so well acquainted with Life, was not to be lost; and perhaps he secretly
hoped, that my Preceptor would give up his Opinion as indefensible, if a Person
of the Lawyer's Experience should declare against it. My Cousin was accordingly
made Umpire in the Debate; and after he had heard the Arguments on both Sides,
he declared against my becoming a Farmer: He said it would be an Act of
Injustice to bury my Parts and Learning in the Obscurity of Rural Life;
because, if produced to the World, they would probably be rewarded with Wealth
and Distinction. My Preceptor imagined the Question was now finally determined
in his Favor; and being obliged to visit one of his Parishioners that was
sick, he gave me a Look of Congratulation as he went out, and I perceived his
Cheek glow with a Flush of Triumph, and his Eye sparkle with Tears of Delight.

BUT he had no sooner left the Room, than my Cousin gave the Conversation
another Turn: He told my Father, that though he had opposed his making me a
Farmer, he was not an Advocate for my becoming a Parson; for that, to make a
young Fellow a Parson, without being able to procure him a Living, was to make
him a Beggar. He then made some witty Reflections on the old Gentleman who was
just gone out: "Nobody (he said) could question his having been put to a bad
Trade, who considered his Circumstances now he had followed it forty Years."
And after some other sprightly Sallies, which, though they made my Father
laugh, made me tremble, he clapped him upon the Shoulder, "If you have a Mind
your Boy should make a Figure in Life, old Gentleman, (says he) put him Clerk
to me: My Lord Chancellor King was no better than the Son of a Country Shop
keeper; and my Master gave a Person of much greater Eminence many a Half-crown,
when he was an Attorney's Clerk in the next Chambers to mine. What say you?
Shall I take him up with me or no?" My Father, who had listened to this
Proposal with great Eagerness, as soon as my Cousin had done speaking, cried,
"A Match;" and immediately gave him his Hand in Token of his Consent. Thus the
Bargain was struck, and my Fate determined before my Tutor came back.

IT was in vain that he afterward objected to the Character of my new Master,
and expressed the most dreadful Apprehensions at my becoming an Attorney's
Clerk, and entering into the Society of Wretches who had been represented to
him, and perhaps not unjustly, as the most Profligate upon Earth: They do not,
indeed, become worse than others, merely as Clerks; but as Persons who, with
more Money to spend in the Gratification of Appetite, are sooner than others
abandoned to their own Conduct: For, though they are taken from under the
Protection of a Parent, yet, being scarce considered as in a State of
Servitude, they are not sufficiently restrained by the Authority of a Master.

MY Father had conceived of my Cousin as the best natured Man in the World,
and, probably, was intoxicated with the Romantic Hope of living to see me upon
the Bench in Westminster Hall, or of meeting me upon the Circuit, lolling in my
own Coach, and attended by a Crowd of the inferior Instruments of Justice. He
was not therefore to be moved, either by Expostulation or Entreaty; and I set
out with my Cousin on Horseback, to meet the Stage at a Town within a few
Miles, after having taken Leave of my Father, with a Tenderness that melted us
both; and received from the hoary Saint his last Instructions and Benediction,
and at length the parting Embrace, which was given with the silent Ardour of
unutterable Wishes, and repeated with Tears that could no longer be suppressed
or concealed.

WHEN we were seated in the Coach, my Cousin began to make himself merry with
the Regret and Discontent that he perceived in my Countenance, at leaving a
Cow-house, a Hog-stye, and two old Grey-pates, who were contending whether I
should be buried in a Farm or a College. I, who had never heard either my
Father or my Tutor treated with Irreverence, could not conceal my Displeasure
and my Resentment: But he still continued to rally my Country Simplicity with
many Allusions, which I did not then understand, but which greatly delighted
the rest of the Company. The fourth Day brought us to our Journey's End; and my
Master, as soon as we reached his Chambers, shook me by the Hand, and bid me
welcome to the Temple.

HE had been some Years a Widower, and his only Child, a Daughter, being still
at a Boarding-school, his Family consisted only of a Man and Maid Servant, and
myself; for, though he had two hired Clerks, yet they lodged and boarded
themselves. The horrid Lewdness and Profaneness of these Fellows terrified and
disgusted me; nor could I believe that my Master's Property and Interest could
be safely entrusted with Men who, in every Respect, appeared to be so destitute
of Virtue and Religion: I therefore thought it my Duty to apprise him of his
Danger; and accordingly one Day, when we were at Dinner, I communicated my
Suspicion, and the Reason upon which it was founded. The formal Solemnity with
which I introduced this Conversation, and the Air of importance which I gave to
my Discovery, threw him into a violent Fit of Laughter, which struck me dumb
with Confusion and Astonishment. As soon as he recovered himself, he told me,
that though his Clerks might use some Expressions that I had not been
accustomed to hear, yet he believed them to be very honest; and that he placed
more Confidence in them, than he would in a formal Prig, of whom he knew
nothing but that he went every Morning and Evening to Prayers, and said Grace
before and after Meat; that, as to swearing, they meant no Harm; and, as he did
not doubt but that every young Fellow liked a Girl, it was better they should
joke about it than be hypocritical and sly: not that he would be thought to
suspect my Integrity, or to blame me for Practices which he knew to be merely
Effects of the Bigotry and Superstition, in which I had been educated, and not
the Disguises of Cunning, or the Subterfuges of Guilt.

I WAS greatly mortified at my Cousin's Behavior on this Occasion, and
wondered from what Cause it could proceed, and why he should so lightly pass
over those Vices in others, from which he abstained himself; for I had never
heard him swear; and as his Expressions were not obscene, I imagined his
Conversation was chaste; in which, however, my Ignorance deceived me, and it
was not long before I had Reason to change my Opinion of his Character.

THERE came one Morning to enquire for him at his Chambers, a Lady, who had
something in her Manner which caught my Attention, and excited my Curiosity:
Her Clothes were fine, but the Manner in which they were put on, was rather
flaunting than elegant; her Address was not easy nor polite, but seemed to be a
strange Mixture of affected State and licentious Familiarity: She looked in the
Glass while she was speaking to me, and without any Confusion adjusted her
Tucker; she seemed rather pleased than disconcerted, at being regarded with
Earnestness; and being told, that my Cousin was abroad, she asked some trifling
Questions, and then making a light Curtsey, took up the Side of her Hoop with a
Jerk, that discovered at least half her Leg, and hurried down Stairs.

I COULD not help enquiring of the Clerks, if they knew this Lady; and was
greatly confounded when they told me, with an Air of Secrecy, that she was my
Cousin's Mistress, whom he had kept almost two Years in Lodgings near
Covent Garden. At first I suspected this Information; but it was soon confirmed
by so many Circumstances, that I could no longer doubt of its Truth.

AS my Principles were yet untainted, and the Influence of my Education was
still strong, I regarded my Cousin's Sentiments as impious and detestable; and
his Example rather struck me with Horror, than seduced me to Imitation. I
flattered myself with Hopes of effecting his Reformation, and took every
Opportunity to hint the Wickedness of allowed Incontinence; for which I was
always rallied when he was disposed to be merry, and answered with the
contemptuous Sneer of Self-sufficiency, when he was sullen.

NEAR four Years of my Clerkship were now expired, and I had never yet entered
the Lists as a Disputant with my Cousin: For though I conceived myself to be much
his Superior in Moral and Theological Learning; and though he often admitted me
to familiar Conversation, yet I still regarded the Subordination of a Servant
to a Master, as one of the Duties of my Station, and preserved it with such
exactness, that I never exceeded a Question or a Hint, when we were alone, and
was always silent when he had Company; though I frequently heard such Prositions
advanced, as made me wonder that no tremendous Token of the Divine Displeasure
immediately followed: But coming one Night from the Tavern, warm with Wine,
and, as I imagined, flushed with Polemic Success, he insisted upon my taking
one Glass with him before he went to Bed; and almost as soon as we were seated,
he gave me a formal Challenge, by denying all DIVINE REVELATION, and defying me
to prove it.

I NOW considered every Distinction as thrown down, and stood forth as the
Champion of Religion, with that Elation of Mind which the Hero always feels at
the Approach of Danger. I thought myself secure of Victory; and rejoicing that
he had now compelled me to do what I had often wished he would permit, I
obliged him to declare that he would dispute upon equal Terms, and we began the
Debate. But it was not long before I was astonished to find myself confounded
by a Man, whom I saw half drunk, and whose Learning and Abilities I despised
when he was sober; for as I had but very lately discovered, that any of the
Principles of Religion, from the Immortality of the Soul to the deepest
Mystery, had been so much as questioned, all his Objections were new. I was
assaulted where I had made no Preparation for Defense; and having not been so
much accustomed to Disputation, as to consider, that in the present Weakness of
Human Intellects, it is much easier to object than to answer, and that in every
Disquisition, Difficulties are found which cannot be resolved, I was overborne
by the sudden Onset, and in the Tumult of my Search after Answers to his
Cavils, forgot to press the positive Arguments on which Religion is
established: He took Advantage of my Confusion, proclaimed his own Triumph,
and, because I was depressed, treated me as vanquished.

As the Event which had thus mortified my Pride, was perpetually revolved in my
Mind, the same Mistake still continued: I enquired for Solutions instead of
Proofs, and found myself more and more entangled in the Snares of Sophistry. In
some other Conversations which my Cousin was now eager to begin, new
Difficulties were started, the Labyrinth of Doubt grew more intricate, and as
the Question was of infinite Moment, my Mind was brought into the most
distressful Anxiety. I ruminated incessantly on the Subjects of our Debate,
sometimes chiding myself for my Doubts, and sometimes applauding the Courage
and Freedom of my Enquiry.

WHILE my Mind was in this State, I heard by Accident that there was a Club at
an Alehouse in the Neighborhood, where such Subjects were freely debated, to
which every Body was admitted without Scruple or Formality: To this Club in an
evil Hour I resolved to go, that I might learn how knotty Points were to be
discussed, and Truth distinguished from Error.

ACCORDINGLY, on the next Club-Night, I mingled with the Multitude that was
assembled in this School of Folly and Infidelity: I was at first disgusted at
the gross Ignorance of some, and shocked at the horrid Blasphemy of others; but
Curiosity prevailed, and my Sensibility by Degrees wore off. I found that
almost every Speaker had a different Opinion, which some of them supported by
Arguments, that to me, who was utterly unacquainted with Disputation, appeared
to hold opposite Probabilities in exact Equipoise; so that, instead of being
confirmed in any Principle, I was divested of all; the Perplexity of my Mind
was increased, and I contracted such a Habit of questioning whatever offered to
my Imagination, that I almost doubted of my own Existence.

IN Proportion as I was less assured in my Principles, I was less circumspect
in my Conduct: But such was still the Force of Education, that any gross
Violence offered to that which I had held sacred, and every Act which I had
been used to regard as incurring the Forfeiture of the DIVINE FAVOR, stung me
with Remorse. I was, indeed, still restrained from flagitious Immorality, by
the Power of Habit: But this Power grew weaker and weaker, and the natural
Propensity to Ill gradually took Place, as the Motion that is communicated to a
Ball which is struck up into the Air, becomes every Moment less and less, 'till
at Length it recoils by its own Weight.

FEAR and Hope, the great Springs of Human Action, had now lost their principal
Objects, as I doubted whether the Enjoyment of the present Moment was not all
that I could secure; my Power to resist Temptation diminished with my
Dependence upon the GRACE OF GOD, and Regard to the Sanction of his Law; and I
was first seduced by a Prostitute, in my Return from a Declamation on the
BEAUTY of Virtue, and the Strength of the MORAL SENSE.

I BEGAN now to give myself up entirely to Sensuality, and the Gratification of
Appetite terminated my Prospects of Felicity. That Peace of Mind, which is the
Sunshine of the Soul, was exchanged for the Gloom of Doubt, and the Storm of
Passion; and my Confidence in GOD, and Hope of everlasting Joy, for sudden
Terrors and vain Wishes, the Loathings of Satiety, and the Anguish of
Disappointment.

I WAS, indeed, impatient under this Fluctuation of Opinion, and therefore I
applied to a Gentleman, who was a principal Speaker at the Club, and deemed a
profound Philosopher, to assist the Labors of my own Mind in the Investigation
of Truth, and relieve me from Distraction by removing my Doubts: But this
Gentleman, instead of administering Relief, lamented the Prejudice of Education,
which he said hindered me from yielding without Reserve to the Force of Truth,
and might perhaps always keep my mind anxious, though my Judgment should be
convinced. But as the most effectual Remedy for this deplorable Evil, he
recommended to me the Works of CHUBB, MORGAN, and many others, which I procured
and read with great Eagerness; and though I was not at last a sound Deist, yet
I perceived with some Pleasure, that my Stock of Polemic Knowledge was greatly
increased; so that, instead of being an Auditor, I commenced a Speaker at the
Club: And though to stand up and babble to a Crowd at an Alehouse, 'till
Silence is commanded by the Stroke of a Hammer, is as low an Ambition as can
taint the human Mind; yet I was much elevated by my new Distinction, and
pleased with the Deference that was paid to my Judgment. I sometimes, indeed,
reflected, that I was propagating Opinions, by which I had myself become
vicious and wretched: But it immediately occurred, that though my Conduct was
changed, it could not be proved that my Virtue was less, because many Things
which I avoided as vicious upon my old Principles, were innocent upon my new. I
therefore went on in my Career, and was perpetually racking my Invention for
new Topics and Illustrations; and among other Expedients, as well to advance my
reputation, as to quiet my Conscience, and deliver me from the Torment of
Remorse, I thought of the following.

HAVING learned that all Error is innocent, because it is involuntary, I
concluded that nothing more was necessary to quiet the Mind, than to prove that
all Vice was Error: I therefore formed the following Argument: "No Man becomes
vicious, but from a Belief that Vice will confer Happiness: He may, indeed,
have been told the contrary; but implicit Faith is not required of reasonable
Beings: Therefore, as every Man ought to seek Happiness, every Man may lawfully
make the Experiment: If he is disappointed, it is plain that he did not intend
that which has happened; so that every Vice is an Error, and therefore no Vice
will be punished."

I COMMUNICATED this ingenious Contrivance to my Friend the Philosopher, who,
instead of detecting the Difference between Ignorance and Perverseness, or
stating the Limitations within which we are bound to seek our own Happiness,
applauded the Acuteness of my Penetration, and the Force of my Reasoning. I was
impatient to display so novel and important a Discovery to the Club, and the
Attention that it drew upon me, gratified my Ambition to the utmost of my
Expectation. I had, indeed, some Opponents; but they were so little skilled in
Argumentation, and so ignorant of the Subject, that it only rendered my
Conquest more signal and important; for the Chairman summed up the Arguments on
both Sides, with so exact and scrupulous an Impartiality, that as I appeared
not to have been confuted, those who could not discover the Weakness of my
Antagonists, thought that to confute me was impossible; my Sophistry was taken
for Demonstration, and the Number of Proselytes was incredible. The Assembly
consisted chiefly of Clerks and Apprentices, young Persons who had received a
religious, though not a liberal Education; for those who were totally ignorant,
or wholly abandoned, troubled not themselves with such Disputations as were
carried on at our Club: And these unhappy Boys, the Impetuosity of whose
Passions was restrained chiefly by Fear, as Virtue had not yet become a Habit,
were glad to have the Shackles struck off, which they were told Priestcraft had
put on.

BUT however I might satisfy others, I was not yet satisfied myself; my Torment
returned, and new Opiates became necessary: They were not, indeed, easily to be
found; but such was my good Fortune, that an illiterate Mechanic afforded me a
most seasonable Relief, "by discussing the important Question, and
demonstrating that the Soul was not, nor could be immortal." I was, indeed,
disposed to believe without the severest Scrutiny, what I now began secretly to
wish; for such was the State of my Mind, that I was willing to give up the Hope
of everlasting Happiness, to be delivered from the Dread of perpetual Misery;
and as I thought of dying as a remote Event, the Apprehension of losing my
Existence with my Life, did not much interrupt the Pleasures of the Bagnio and
the Tavern.

THEY were, however, interrupted by another Cause; for I contracted a
Distemper, which alarmed and terrified me, in Proportion as its Progress was
swift, and its Consequences were dreadful. In this Distress, I applied to a
young Surgeon, who was a Speaker at the Club, and gained a genteel Subsistence
by keeping it in Repair: He treated my Complaint as a Trifle; and to prevent
any serious Reflections in this Interval of Pain and Solitude, he rallied the
deplorable Length of my Countenance, and exhorted me to behave like a Man.

MY Pride, rather than my Fear, made me very solicitous to conceal this
Disorder from my Cousin; but he soon discovered it rather with Pleasure than
Anger, as it completed his Triumph, and afforded him a new Subject of Raillery
and Merriment. By the Spiritual and Corporeal Assistance of my Surgeon, I was
at Length restored to my Health, with the same dissolute Morals, and a
Resolution to pursue my pleasures with more Caution: Instead, therefore, of
hiring a Prostitute, I now endeavored to seduce the Virgin, and corrupt the
Wife.

IN these Attempts my new Principles afforded me great Assistance: For I found
that those whom I could convert, I could easily debauch; and that to convert
many, nothing more was necessary than to advance my Principles, and allege
something in Defense of them, by which I appeared to be convinced myself; for
not being able to dispute, they thought that the Argument which had convinced
me, would, if they could understand it, convince them: So that, by yielding an
implicit Assent, they at once paid a Compliment to their own Judgment, and
smoothed the Way to the Indulgence of Appetite.

WHILE I was thus gratifying every inordinate Desire, and passing from one
Degree of Guilt to another, my Cousin determined to take his Daughter, who was
now in her nineteenth Year, from School; and as he intended to make her
Mistress of his Family, he quitted his Chambers, and took a House.

THIS young Lady I had frequently seen, and always admired; she was therefore
no sooner come home, than I endeavored to recommend myself by a thousand
Assiduities, and rejoiced in the many Opportunities that were afforded me to
entertain her alone, and perceived that she was not displeased with my Company,
nor insensible to my Complaisance.

MY Cousin, though he had seen the Effects of his Documents of Infidelity in
the Corruption of my Morals, yet could not forbear to sneer at Religion in the
Presence of his Daughter; a Practice in which I now always concurred, as it
facilitated the Execution of a Design that I had formed of rendering her
subservient to my Pleasures. I might, indeed, have married her, and, perhaps,
my Cousin secretly intended that I should: But I knew Women too well to think
that Marriage would confine my Wishes to a single Object; and I was utterly
averse to a State in which the Pleasure of Variety must be sacrificed to
domestic Quiet, or domestic Quiet to the Pleasure of Variety; for I neither
imagined that I could long indulge myself in an unlawful Familiarity with many
Women, before it would by some Accident be discovered to my Wife; nor that she
would be so very courteous or philosophical, as to suffer this Indulgence
without Expostulation and Clamor; and besides, I had no Liking to a Brood of
Children, whose Wants would soon become importunate, and whose Claim to my
Industry and Frugality, would be universally acknowledged; though the Offspring
of a Mistress might be abandoned to Beggary, without Breach of the Law, or
Offense to Society.

THE young Lady, on the contrary, as she perceived that my Addresses exceeded
common Civilities, did not question but that my View was to obtain her for a
Wife; and I could discern that she often expected such a Declaration, and
seemed disappointed that I had not yet proposed an Application to her Father:
But imagining, I suppose, that these Circumstances were only delayed 'till the
fittest Opportunity, she did not scruple to admit all the Freedoms that were
consistent with Modesty; and I drew every Day nearer to the Accomplishment of
my Design by insensible Approaches, without alarming her Fear, or confirming
her Hopes.

I KNEW that only two Things were necessary; her Passions were to be inflamed,
and the Motives from which they were to be suppressed, removed. I was therefore
perpetually insinuating, that nothing which was natural, could be ill; I
complained of the Impositions and Restraints of Priestcraft and Superstition;
and, as if these Hints were casual and accidental, I would immediately
afterward sing a tender Song, repeat some seducing Verses, or read a Novel.

BUT, henceforward, let never insulted Beauty admit a second Time into her
Presence the Wretch, who has once attempted to ridicule Religion, and
substitute other Aids to human Frailty, for that "Love of GOD which is better
than Life," and that Fear "which is the Beginning of Wisdom:" For whoever makes
such an Attempt, intends to betray; the contrary Conduct being without Question
the Interest of every one whose Intentions are good, because even those who
profanely deny Religion to be of DIVINE Origin, do yet acknowledge that it is a
Political Institution, well calculated to strengthen the Band of Society, and
to keep out the Ravager, by intrenching Innocence and arming Virtue. To oppose
these Corrupters by Argument rather than Contempt, is to parley with a
Murderer, who may be excluded by shutting a Door.

MY Cousin's Daughter used frequently to dispute with me, and these Disputes
always favored the Execution of my Project: Though, lest I should alarm her
too much, I often affected to appear half in Jest; and when I ventured to take
any Liberty, by which the Bounds of Modesty were somewhat invaded, I suddenly
desisted with an Air of easy Negligence; and as the Attempt was not pursued,
and nothing farther seemed to be intended than was done, it was regarded but as
Waggery, and punished only with a Slap or a Frown. Thus she became familiar
with Infidelity and Indecency by Degrees.

I ONCE subtily engaged her in a Debate, whether the Gratification of natural
Appetites was in itself innocent, and whether, if so, the Want of external
Ceremony could in any Case render it criminal. I insisted that Virtue and Vice
were not influenced by external Ceremonies, nor founded upon human Laws, which
were arbitrary, temporary, and local: And that as a young Lady's shutting
herself up in a Nunnery, was still evil, though enjoined by such Laws; so the
transmitting her Beauty to Posterity was still good, though under certain
Circumstances it had by such Laws been forbidden. This she affected utterly to
deny, and I proposed that the Question should be referred to her Papa, without
informing him of our Debate, and that it should be determined by his Opinion; a
Proposal to which she readily agreed. I immediately adverted to other Subjects,
as if I had no Interest in the Issue of the Debate; but I could perceive that
it sunk deeply into her Mind, and that she continued more thoughtful than usual.

I DID not fail, however, to introduce a suitable Topic of Discourse the next
Time my Cousin was present, and having stated the Question in general Terms, he
gave it in my Favor, without suspecting that he was Judge in his own Cause;
and the next Time I was alone with his Daughter, without mentioning his
Decision, I renewed my Familiarity; I found her Resistance less resolute,
pursued my Advantage, and completed her Ruin.

WITHIN a few Months she perceived that she was with Child; a Circumstance that
she communicated to me with Expressions of the most piercing Distress: But
instead of consenting to marry her, to which she had often urged me with all
the little Arts of Persuasion that she could practice, I made Light of the
Affair, chid her for being so much alarmed for so trivial an Accident, and
proposed a Medicine which I told her would effectually prevent the Discovery of
our Intercourse, by destroying the Effect of it before it could appear. At this
Proposition she fainted, and when she recovered, opposed it with Terror and
Regret, with Tears, Trembling and Entreaty: But I continued inflexible, and at
Length either removed or overruled her Scruples, by the same Arguments that
had first seduced her to Guilt.

THE long Vacation was now commenced, and my Clerkship was just expired: I
therefore proposed to my Cousin, that we should all make a Visit to my Father,
hoping that the Fatigue of the Journey would favor my Purpose, by increasing
the Effect of the Medicine, and accounting for an Indisposition which it might
be supposed to cause.

THE Plan being thus concerted, and my Cousin's Concurrence being obtained, it
was immediately put in Execution. I applied to my old Friend the Club Surgeon,
to whom I made no Secret of such Affairs, and he immediately furnished me with
Medicaments, which he assured me would answer my Purpose; but either by a
Mistake in the Preparation, or in the Quantity, they produced a Disorder,
which, soon after the dear injured unhappy Girl arrived at her Journey's End,
terminated in her Death.

MY Confusion and Remorse at this Event, are not to be expressed: but Confusion
and Remorse were suddenly changed into Astonishment and Terror; for she was
scarce dead before I was taken into Custody, upon Suspicion of Murder. Her
Father had deposed, that just before she died, she desired to speak with him in
private; and that then, taking his Hand, and entreating his Forgiveness, she
told him that she was with Child by me, and that I had poisoned her, under
Pretense of preserving her Reputation.

WHETHER she made this Declaration, or only confessed the Truth, and her
Father, to revenge the Injury, had forged the rest, cannot now be known; but
the Coroner having been summoned, the Body viewed, and found to have been
pregnant, with many Marks of a violent and uncommon Disorder, a Verdict of
Wilful Murder was brought in against me, and I was committed to the County Gaol.

AS the Judges were then upon the Circuit, I was within less than a Fortnight
convicted and condemned by the Zeal of the Jury, whose Passions had been so
greatly inflamed by the Enormity of the Crime with which I had been charged,
that they were rather willing that I should suffer being innocent, than that I
should escape being guilty; but it appearing to the Judge, in the Course of the
Trial, that Murder was not intended, he reprieved me before he left the Town.

I MIGHT now have redeemed the Time, and, awakened to a Sense of my Folly and
my Guilt, might have made some Reparation to Mankind for the Injury which I had
done to Society; and endeavored to rekindle some Spark of Hope in my own
Breast, by Repentance and Devotion. But, alas! in the first Transports of my
Mind, upon so sudden and unexpected a Calamity, the Fear of Death yielded to
the Fear of Infamy, and I swallowed Poison: The Excess of my Desperation
hindered its immediate Effect; for, as I took too much, great Part of it was
thrown up, and only such a Quantity remained behind, as was sufficient to
insure my Destruction, and yet leave me Time to contemplate the Horrors of the
Gulf into which I am sinking.

IN this deplorable Situation I have been visited by the Surgeon, who was the
immediate Instrument of my Misfortune, and the Philosopher who directed my
Studies: But these are Friends who only rouse me to keener Sensibility, and
inflict upon me more exquisite Torment. They reproach me with Folly, and
upbraid me with Cowardice; they tell me too, that the Fear of Death has made me
regret the Errors of Superstition; but what would I now give for those
erroneous Hopes, and that credulous Simplicity, which, though I have been
taught to despise them, would sustain me in the tremendous Hour that
approaches, and avert from my last Agony the Horrors of Despair.

I HAVE, indeed, a Visiter of another Kind, the good old Man who first taught
me to frame a Prayer, and first animated me with the Hope of Heaven; but he can
only lament with me, that this Hope will not return, and that I can pray with
Confidence no more: He cannot, by a sudden Miracle, re-establish the Principles
which I have subverted. My Mind is all Doubt, and Terror, and Confusion; I know
nothing but that I have rendered ineffectual the Clemency of my JUDGE, that the
Approach of Death is swift and inevitable, and that either the Shades of
Everlasting Night, or the Gleams of unquenchable Fire are at Hand. My Soul, in
vain, shrinks backwards: I grow giddy with the Thought: The next Moment is
Distraction! Farewell.

OPSINOUS.

FINIS.
Lately published, Printed for H. PAIN, at Dryden's Head in Paternoster Row.
1. A New Translation of the Three Books of Thomas a Kempis, OF THE IMITATION
OF CHRIST; and the Book of the Sacrament. With a Preface on the Ground and
Nature of Christian Redemption. In one Volume Octavo, Price 3 s. 6 d. sewed. 2.
Evangelical Discourses. In one Volume Octavo, Price 2 s. 6 d. sewed. 3. A
Letter occasioned by "The Lord Bishop of Gloucester's Doctrine of Grace:"
Containing, A Defense of the Writing and Character of the late Reverend Mr.
William Law, and of the Office and Operations of The HOLY SPIRIT. In one Volume
Octavo, Price 3 s. sewed. By JOHN PAIN.

These three Pieces may be had together in two Volumes, Price 8 s. sewed.

* A few Copies are printed on fine Paper, and may be had of the Author, at the
Herald's-Office, or at the Bank, Price 10 s. sewed in Marble Paper.

4. NEW TABLES of INTEREST: Designed to answer, in the easiest and most
expeditious Manner, the common Purposes of Business, particularly the Business
of the PUBLIC FUNDS. By the Author of the above Tracts. 5. A new Edition of The
TATLER: or, Lucubrations of Isaac Bickerstaff, Esquire with a Frontispiece to each
Volume; designed by Hayman, and engraved by Grignion.

