HENRY; IN FOUR VOLUMES.

BY THE AUTHOR OF ARUNDEL.

VOL. IV.

Ficta voluptatis causa sint proxima veris,
Nec quodcunque volet poscat sibi fabula credi.
LONDON: PRINTED FOR CHARLES DILLY, IN THE POULTRY. 1795.

CONTENTS.
BOOK THE TENTH.
CHAP. I. In which the Author confutes himself Page 1 CHAP. II. A Peep behind
the Curtain at Crowbery Castle Page 8 CHAP. III. An Excursion from Crowbery
Castle Page 17 CHAP. IV. There are more Ways than One of interpreting a
doubtful Text Page 25 CHAP. V. Our History shifts the Scene Page 33 CHAP. VI. A
short Excursion leads to an important Interview Page 42 CHAP. VII. The
Interview is brought to a Conclusion Page 51 CHAP. VIII. The Discovery of a
posthumous Paper causes great Sensations Page 59 CHAP. IX. The Counsel of a
Friend in a Dilemma. More Secrets an brought to light Page 72 CHAP. X. Our
History records a dreadful Incident Page 81 CHAP. XI. Which describes the
Effects of that Incident, and concludes the Tenth Book of our History Page 95
BOOK THE ELEVENTH.
CHAP. I. Describes what our Heroine is, and what we wish our Virgin Readers to
be Page 101 CHAP. II. A modest Suitor does not hurt his Cause Page 105 CHAP.
III. Love is the grand Specific Page 118 CHAP. IV. Rash Enterprises an apt to
miscarry Page 128 CHAP. V. Bellum -- Pax rursum Page 137 CHAP. VI. An humble
Visitor meets a haughty Reception Page 145 CHAP. VII. First Love sinks deep
into the human Heart Page 156 CHAP. VIII. When Parties understand each other
rightly, Business advances rapidly Page 163 CHAP. IX. Some People preach over
their Liquor Page 171 CHAP. X. Four Parties fairly matched at a round Game of
Hypocrisy Page 180 CHAP. XI. Breakfast Table-talk Page 190
BOOK THE TWELFTH.
CHAP. I. The Author's last Address to his Readers Page 199 CHAP. II. The
History goes back to the Hero Page 203 CHAP. III. A singular Instance of a
Journey performed by our Hero and Heroine, without one Casualty by the Way Page
213 CHAP. IV. When Marriages are making, it is a Sign the Drama is drawing nigh
to its Catastrophe Page 223 CHAP. V. Some of the principal Characters in this
History are winding up their Parts Page 231 CHAP. VI. When the Judge is in
league with the Advocate, it is easy to predict the Issue of the Suit Page 240
CHAP. VII. Occurrences upon a Visit at Manstock House Page 248 CHAP. VIII. A
certain Gentleman repeats his Visit Page 258 CHAP. IX. Why is Earth and Ashes
proud? Page 272 CHAP. X. Pride meets its Punishment and Love its Reward Page
284 CHAP. XI. The Drama closes, and the Curtain falls Page 293
HENRY.
BOOK THE TENTH.
CHAPTER I. In which the Author confutes himself.
HAVING been so long employed in finding words, according to rule and method,
for others, I begin to think I have a right to bestow some according to my own
fancy, and that just now prompts me to write without any rule or method
whatsoever.

In the first place then, permit me to say, that I do not allow any man can
have a fair excuse for not reading these volumes once at least in his life,
provided he can read at all. For what is the plea, I would fain know, that he
can set up for refusing them a perusal? Is he too wise to be taught any thing
new? -- they do not pretend to have any new thing in them or about them; they
boast themselves to be as old as nature; and as for instruction, if he is too
wise to want it, they are not so foolish as to force it upon him against his
wishes.

Is he too lazy to be amused by any reading? then let him employ a toad-eater
to recite them in his ears till he falls asleep; he cannot purchase a cheaper
or more harmless narcotic in his apothecary's shop.

Is he too proud to stoop his genius to the perusal of a trivial novel? my life
upon it, his genius is oftentimes more trivially employed. Is truth his
constant study and pursuit? and has he not yet found out that there is truth in
fiction; that by the device of fable (as the philosopher Saint Pierre well
observes) the soul gradually opens itself to truth? I am vain enough to think
there may be many more truths in this poor fable, than he will discover or
comprehend in all his metaphysics.

But some may plead business, and business must be followed. -- True! and so
must hounds; but the man who follows either, be it ever so closely, will still
find that he has gone many miles out of his way. Let the man of business
recollect how much of his life is spent in being busy about nothing, and he
cannot but acknowledge he has had time to bestow upon the reading of these
little books, and a hundred others. But all this while he has been accumulating
money; if he dies tomorrow, he will die worth one hundred thousand pounds; and
if he does, is he any whit wiser, (I put the question in the words of the
inimitable author of The Serious Call) is he any whit wiser, I demand, than he
who has taken the same pains to have a hundred thousand pair of boots and spurs
when he leaves the world?

But harkye, Mr. Novelist, the fastidious philosopher will say, my studies do
not lie your way. To him I could answer -- then are my studies, learned Sir,
more complaisant than yours; for as far as you yourself participate of human
nature, so far you come within the scope of my researches; why then may not you
deign to read me, though I do not aspire to copy you? Though your proud castle
is barred against my approach, my humble cottage is the seat of general
hospitality, and open to you in common with the rest of my fellow creatures.
The simple goose-quill, that can fan one spark of pure benevolence into
activity by the playfulness of its motion, has done more for mankind than the
full-plumed philosopher, who, with the strut of the goose itself, cackles out
his despicable spleen, and hisses at each passenger as he goes regardless by
him.

If but one of all my readers has felt the sympathy of a generous sentiment, if
another has experienced the conscious sense of self-reproaching turpitude, and
blushed at the discovery, I think I have thrown more light into the world, than
the philosopher can dig out of the bowels of the earth, though he may thereby
affect to decide upon the world's age, as jockies do upon horses by looking in
their mouths. What if philosophers have now found out that water is no element?
they have neither added to its uses, nor taken any away; and as for me, though,
for peace sake, I will forbear to say it is an element, I will not promise them
to rest my faith so far upon their dogma, as to say, that it is not. The Author
of Nature seems graciously to have ordained, that in searching after things
without use, our enquiries should be pursued without success, so that no labor
might be wasted upon things that cannot profit us: but it is only after these
curious nothings that our philosopher is ever on the quest; and yet he pretends
to say, that he has no leisure to bestow upon my men and women. Why will he not
rather study to be informed of what would profit him to know, and submit to be
ignorant of what the Great Disposer of the Universe has, in tender
consideration of his short-lived creatures, buried out of sight? As much truth
as man's intellects can admit, is accessible to man's enquiries, but ignorance
is given to the soul, as the lid is bestowed upon the eye; it lets in all the
light it can usefully dispense with, and shuts out what it cannot bear. And
now, no more of the philosopher; whilst I am contemplating the statue, let him
hunt after the beetle that crawls at the base of it.

There is, notwithstanding, more for me to do; and as these volumes are my
clients, so am I their advocate, and must be prepared for all that may oppose
me: the next, however, is a gentle caviller, and approaches in a form that
challenges my respect; it is a reader I would not offend and shock for all that
fame could give me; she comes with modest blushes on her cheeks, and points to
certain pages doubled down in my offending work, too highly colored for her
chaste revolting eye to rest upon. What shall I reply to this appellant? How
defend myself from one, who comes into the lists with all the virtues armed in
her support? Where now is my impure Jemima? where is Fanny Claypole? where even
my benevolent Susan May? -- Fled out of sight, abashed and self condemned! What
avails it me to say that they are Nature's children? My reproving critic does
not wish to make acquaintance with the profligates of her family. In vain I
urge, that contrast is the soul of composition; that joy and sorrow, health and
sickness, good and evil, chequer life itself through every stage; that even
virtue wants an opposite to give its luster full display: she does not think
that scenes, which address themselves to the passions, can be defended by
arguments that apply to the judgment: I may be justified by the rules of
composition; she is trying me by those of decorum. If I shelter myself in the
plea, that temptations are the test of an heroic spirit; that I cannot make
bricks without straw; and that although the said straw be of an inflammable
quality, yet I must work with such materials as I have: she will not hesitate
to admit the necessity of temptations, but she will resolutely condemn the too
profuse and prominent display of them; she would work her shades more tender;
mine are too bold: if I say, wait for the moral, she replies, that it is the
nature of susceptibility not to wait; the mischief is in the front, the moral
is in the rear; the remedy cannot always overtake the disease; and she asks,
where is the wit in voluntarily provoking the fang of the viper, because,
forsooth, we have a medicine in our closet that will staunch the poison, if we
do not slip the time of applying it?

Mark now, candid reader, if I have not wove a hedge about myself, which I have
neither cunning to creep through, nor agility to climb; but it is ever thus
when I argue with the ladies. If their modesty is of so touchy a temper, as to
accuse me of impudence, I know no better way to convince them of their mistake,
than by copying that modesty, and making no defense; and sure I am, that such
would be their conduct in the case of real attack, when the relation of it only
stirs them into such tremors and palpitations: I fear, therefore, that their
extreme susceptibility proves too much; those must ride their palfreys with a
very loose rein, who are so soon thrown out of their seat upon every little
start or stumble that they make.

What I have written, I have written in the hope of recommending virtue by the
fiction of a virtuous character, which, to render amiable, I made natural, and
to render natural, I made subject to temptations, though resolute in
withstanding them: in one instance only my hero owes his victory to chance, and
not to his own fortitude: if virtue therefore cannot read her own encomium,
without catching fire at the allurements of her antagonist, she is not that
pure and perfect virtue I was studious to pay court to, but some hypocrite, who
has basely tricked herself out in the uniform of the corpse, for the opportunity
of deserting over to the enemy with her arms and accoutrements.

CHAPTER II. A Peep behind the Curtain at Crowbery Castle.
WHILST the gentle bosom of Isabella was rent with a thousand perplexing
inquietudes, the proud exulting heart of Fanny Claypole was anticipating the
fancied joys of rank and splendor, and already practicing the stately airs of
a Viscountess elect. Her uncle now began to pass his time not quite so much to
his satisfaction as he had done: though his niece still continued to treat him
with external civility, yet there was a gracious manner in it, that conveyed
the idea of condescension and protection, rather than of cordiality or respect.
The restraint which she and her noble paramour submitted to in his company,
though as little as decency could dispense with, was still something more than
they could willingly spare on certain occasions, and he then began to discover,
that all his accommodating complacency did not quite answer their purposes, and
that his absence began to be wished for by both parties. This indeed was more
than insinuated to him by dumb show; for my Lord took frequent occasions of
enquiring, whether Sir Roger Manstock would not be uneasy at his parish being
left without a resident minister, and once or twice asked him, in a natural
manner, if he was doing any thing at the parsonage, and whether it would
require any repairs before it was made fit for his reception, intimating, with
much seeming kindness, that if there was any thing wanting for his comfort, he
would send his own workmen over, and fit it to his wishes; adding, that it
would ever give him the most supreme delight to show any mark of his respect to
the uncle of his amiable friend Miss Claypole. These hints that sagacious
gentleman was not slow to comprehend; but it did not just now suit him to put
them into practice.

When lawyer Ferret returned from Manstock, and the copy of Lady Crowbery's
will, which he had there taken, had been perused by his Lordship, that noble
personage, in a manner suitable to his high dignity, expressed a most sovereign
contempt for the good things of this world, which it had conveyed in such ample
proportion to the fair Isabella, and so sparingly to himself; in fact, it is
reasonable to suppose, that as his Lordship's expectations were extremely
moderate, his disappointment could not be very great, so that he bore the event
without any great exercise of his virtues; one thing, however, he remarked with
a considerable degree of satisfaction, and this was, the unexpected omission of
any legacy to our hero Henry: this circumstance he communicated, without loss
of time, to Mr. Claypole and Miss Fanny, commenting upon it in a style that
sufficiently disclosed to them the gratification he secretly derived to himself
in talking of it. -- "You see," cried his Lordship, in his usual style of
pleasantry, "what sort of stuff her ladyship's liking to that young fellow was
made of! no longer pipe, no longer pay, was her maxim. He must now sink into
his primitive obscurity; all his golden hopes are blasted, and, I dare engage,
he is at this moment venting execrations against her deceit and his own
credulity. But he is rightly served; may such ever be the fate of all upstart
favorites of married ladies!" -- Here Claypole chimed in, with an inference or
two in the way of retort upon Henry for his refusal of Blachford's bequest,
observing, that the man, who, from an affectation of disinterestedness,
withstood the favors of fortune when they were tendered to him, generally
lived long enough to find himself the dupe of his own vanity, and to bewail his
folly in the bitterness of self-reproach and vexation. "I see but one chance
that remains for this silly fellow," added he, "which is, to betake himself
with all humility to Blachford's leavings, and pay his court, without loss of
time, to Mrs. Susan May of meretricious memory, by whose favor he may still
subsist upon the bread of infamy, and sing psalms with Ezekiel Daw to some
godly tune, whilst the old dame scums the pot. So ends the history of Henry the
Foundling, whose adventures, with the help of a little modern garnish, may
furnish matter to some paltry novelist for a scurvy tale, to fill a gap in the
shelves of a circulating library; and, if the writer has the wit to make the
most of it, he may find out a moral in the catastrophe of his hero, and entitle
it, The Rise and Fall of Vanity; for such in fact it is."

Miss Fanny threw a different light upon the subject; she confessed he well
deserved the disappointment he had met with; but she did not think that was
excuse sufficient for the person who disappointed him. "I own," said that
candid young lady, "I have always accustomed myself to consider a promise as a
sacred thing: where I give hopes I think myself in conscience bound to make
them good; and on the other hand, where they are given to me, I should hold the
person base in the extreme, abandoned to all sense of honor, and a wretch,
whom, without a crime, we might treat as an outlaw and assassin, who violated
the faith he had pledged, and the word of promise he had given. Now I do not
mean to impute this baseness to any person in particular, much less to the
respectable object of our present conversation; I only beg leave to observe,
that in all connections between man and woman, where favors have been
interchang'd, and promises grafted upon those pledges of affection, they are
binding in the most sacred sense, and he or she, who breaks from them,
abandoned in the extremest degree."

"Certainly," interposed my Lord, "without all doubt you speak what every
person of honor must admit to be true, and what I, permit me to say, feel,
and, I hope, practice, in its strictest sense. Put the case, by way of
elucidation only, that I profess myself the admirer of a lady of reputation; I
am smitten with her charms; in short, I am in love with her. Very well.
Believing me to be a man of honor, she allows me to make suit to her; I gain
her confidence, we'll suppose, and she begins to favor my suit; she smiles on
my humble addresses." -- Here a soft glance from the bright eyes of Miss Fanny
brought his Lordship's eloquence to a pause. He gently took her hand, and in a
whisper tenderly murmured -- "Lovely creature, if you look upon me with those
eyes, I shall forget every word I was saying, every sense will be lost in
ecstacy and rapture." -- "Go on, go on," said Fanny, smiling, "I am much
interested in what you are saying, and should be sorry to interrupt you in the
most important part of it." -- "Put me in then," said the peer, "for I protest
to you I am lost." -- "Why, you had just gained the lady's affections," replied
Fanny; "nay, I believe of my conscience you was going on too prosperously for
her repose, unless you was upon the strictest honor." -- "There you are rather
beforehand with me," resumed my Lord, "though, I confess I was coming to the
point: be it so then! Let us for a moment suppose that this lady, in pity to my
sufferings, or, if you will, in kind compliance with my importunate and
empassion'd solicitations, generously concedes those favors, which are the
greatest woman can bestow or man receive, can it for a moment be doubted that I
am bound by all the ties of honor, gratitude and justice, to indemnify the
reputation of my benefactress? Heavens! I were the vilest wretch that ever
breathed, could I do less than tender her my heart, my hand, my name, rank,
fortune, every thing that I possess on earth, as soon as ever opportunity and
circumstances would permit. These are my principles, my dear Miss Claypole, and
they are such as, I trust, your worthy uncle, if he has listened to our
discourse, will give me credit for, and approve."

"Certainly, my Lord," replied that reverend personage; "there cannot be two
opinions on the subject; were the case to happen as you put it, every man of
honor's conduct must be such as you state it; but I must take the liberty to
observe, that no woman of honor, who was wise, would put him to the trial."

"Ah! my good Sir," said my Lord, "you speak exactly within the line of your
profession, and so far you speak right. It Is as natural for you, who are a
parson, to preach up self denial, as it is for an apothecary to recommend
physic, though nature, in both cases, nauseates the dose, and the finest
gratification of the senses is sacrificed by the prescription. That rigid
morality, that would strip life of all its best enjoyments, would also divest
our hearts of all their most exalted sensations. What would become of those
glowing effusions of love and gratitude, if there was no trust, no confidence,
no mutual interchange of honor and good faith? The lawyer, who furnishes my
occasions with a loan, and binds me down by the fetters of a mortgage, is a
trader in money, who confers no favor on me by the accommodation I derive from
it; whereas the friend, who confidentially supplies my wants, and rests upon my
promise for indemnification, leaves me under an obligation, that convinces me I
was in his esteem, and fixes him in mine. Favors in love are like favors in
friendship; the same rule applies to both; to trust is the test of friendship,
to be trusted is the triumph of love."

"I believe, my Lord," said Miss Claypole, "we are talking upon a subject, that
my uncle has not made his study, therefore we may as well drop it for the
present."

This being said, a sullen silence ensued; the advocates for the tender passion
no longer deigned to maintain an argument with so unequal an opponent, but
contented themselves with giving him to understand, by certain plain-speaking
looks, that if he had any private studies to pursue, which might occupy an hour
or two of his time, they had resources within themselves for filling up the
interval. The intelligent observer read their meaning in their looks, and
placidly withdrew.

Doubtful as I am, whether some of my readers might not think that there was
one dialogue too many in my history, were I to record what now ensued between
Miss Fanny and the Viscount, I shall omit the recital, and conclude this
chapter.

CHAPTER III. An Excursion from Crowbery Castle.
THE next morning both Phoebus and Sir Roger Manstock had harnessed their
steeds, and advanced upon their journey before the beauteous Miss Fanny broke
the soft bands of sleep asunder, and arose to renew her charms at the toilette.
Her protracted slumbers had so far exceeded the accustomed hour of breakfast,
that she gave orders to her attendant to serve her in her own apartment: polite
enquiries were sent up more than once by his Lordship, to which excuses were
returned of a slight indisposition; in the mean time the following reflections
arose in that gentle fair one's mind, upon a review of past occurrences.

"Well, to be sure, there is something very captivating in a title, else this
same Lord Crowbery would be insupportable; I perceive I shall be most heartily
sick of him before the honey-moon is half out; I shall never have the patience
of his former lady; let him beware how he treats me in the manner he behaved to
her; I Will soon show him that my spirit is at least as good as his own; he
shall not shut me up in this dismal castle, and nauseate me with his surfeiting
fondness: sure, of all visitations under heaven, that of a stale doting
husband would be the most intolerable. Oh! Henry! Henry! why would you reject
me? Still, still your image haunts me; my fond heart still doats upon you, and
would spurn this odious creature and his titles with disdain, could I but gain
your love. But hold! perhaps your disappointment may have humbled you; all
hopes now blasted, and Isabella thrown by fortune beyond the reach even of your
meditations, who can tell but you are now regretting your own obstinacy, and
wishing to recall that fatal hour, when mad with love, and fired with resentment
-- Oh! horrible! I cannot name the rest." -- Here she threw herself back in her
chair, and, bursting into tears, fortunately found vent for a gust of passion,
that would else have thrown her into violent hysterics. Again she resumed her
soliloquy -- "What did my provoking uncle mean by saying you must marry Susan
May? No; that my Henry will never do. His spirit never will stoop to that; it
never shall, if I have influence to prevent it. I Will sacrifice ambition,
fortune, every thing to love. I have befooled myself enough, too much, with
this detested lord; I sicken at his name; I Will cast him off for ever. -- Stop!
where is my fancy carrying me? There are some charms in title, rank and
splendor; they gratify ambition, and do not exclude love. I have gone much too
far now to recede; I were a fool indeed to pay the purchase, and not reap the
profit: I have him sure, and I Will not let him loose. Viscountess Crowbery will
pique the pride of plain Miss Manstock. Oh! 'twill be bitterness and gall to
that old Baronet to see his niece's coronet upon my head; delicious triumph!
glorious revenge!"

Thus whilst her mind was fluctuating betwixt contending passions, my Lord
announced himself with a gentle tap at the door, and humbly asked admittance.
It was granted, and as he approached her, he said -- "I venture to assume the
privileges of a husband, and come to ask, if you have any orders for the
carriages or servants this morning, as I think the day is fine, and promises
you a pleasant airing. Henceforward, Madam, you command in this house, and the
humblest of your servants is now in your presence." This was an address, that
merited what it received, a gracious smile, and threw a turning weight into the
scale of the addresser and his peerage, that made poverty and Henry kick the
beam. This fair beginning was still further advanced by a very seasonable
auxiliary, in the shape of a handsome brilliant, set in a ring, which his
Lordship with great gallantry put upon her wedding finger. The heart of Fanny
Claypole was amenable to so many passions, besides that of love in its common
acceptance, that the donor of the ring could not fail to be delighted with the
impression it had made; and as that young lady was a better actress than Lord
Crowbery was a critic, it is not much to be wondered at, if, upon this
occasion, he mistook artifice for sincerity.

After a few indispensible arrangements at the toilette, which my Lord was
graciously permitted to be a spectator of, and which were not ill calculated to
display her charms in the most alluring attitudes, Fanny signified her
intention of taking the air in a little cabriole, drawn by one horse of gentle
condition, having been long in the habit of obeying the hand of a less daring
driver, and order was given accordingly. Fanny had a scheme in meditation, of
paying a visit to Susan May in the course of her circuit, and for that reason
chose it should be solitary; she therefore set out, followed by a servant,
leaving my Lord at home to meditate on his felicity, or discuss new topics of
edification with his reverend guest, as they strolled through the plantations
and gardens.

Miss Claypole, after a tour about the park, came upon the village green, and
stopped at the gate of Susan's mansion, who soon presented herself, and very
respectfully invited her into the house. This was graciously accepted by the
Viscountess elect, and after a few common questions had passed and repassed,
they fell upon the subject of Lady Crowbery's death, and then Miss Fanny
demanded of Susan, if she had been informed of the circumstances of her will:
upon her answering in the negative, she related to her the leading particulars,
and observed, with much assumed concern, that it was a matter most surprising
to her, how it came to pass Henry should be so totally forgotten, that even his
name was not once mentioned, nor any thing that could allude to a provision for
him recommended to the heiress, even by the most distant hint.

Susan gazed with astonishment upon her, as if in doubt whether she was to
yield credit to the account she was giving of an event so unexpected. "If it is
so," she said, "and if my young lady is in possession of the estate, and has it
at her own disposal, I can only presume to say she has a noble opportunity of
being generous to the most deserving man upon earth; and I cannot doubt but she
will avail herself of it." -- "I think of him as you do," replied Miss Fanny;
"but our sentiments, my good friend, may not be every body's sentiments; they
may not be Miss Manstock's; and they certainly are not likely to be Sir
Roger's. Refunding is a pitch of generous self-denial, that is hardly to be
found in any other breast, than one of such superior magnanimity as your
liberal friend's: if you had such a fortune dropped into your lap, I can readily
believe that you would be generous enough to invite Henry to a share of it;
nay, I can tell you, Mrs. Susan, there are some friends of yours, not far from
hence, who credit you for that generosity, even upon your present
establishment."

"They may safely credit me," replied Susan, "so far as to suppose I never can
forget to whom I am indebted for every thing I possess; I hope, therefore, I am
capable of the gratitude they ascribe to me, though not so presumptuous as to
annex to it the conditions which they seem to allude to. No, Madam, be assured
I know him and myself too well, not to know that poverty can never so depress
him as to level him with me; the woman Mr. Henry marries must not only be pure
from guilt of her own contracting, but even from involuntary stains, which you
well know I am not. I believe, Madam, even levity of behavior, and a forward
carriage in the person he might else have admired, would change his liking into
disgust, though she had every other charm that could attract him."

Here it is supposed that Miss Fanny would have blushed, if art had not been
beforehand with nature, and dipped her pencil in the counterfeited tint of
modesty and shame. But though nature was barred from one avenue, she found vent
at another; and whilst conscious recollection smote her heart, her tongue
betrayed how justly she applied the observation to herself. "I can readily
understand," she said, "where your remark points, and what person I am to thank
as the founder of it; for servants are very apt to retail the scandal that
their mistresses propagate. I know there have been very impertinent stories
circulated about me; but I would have you, and every one else concerned with
you, to be assured, that my reputation is not to be slandered with impunity: I
have friends, Mrs. Susan, that will make those tremble who attempt it; and, I
believe, you will soon be convinced, that if it is your wish to live here, and
enjoy your newly acquired fortune in peace and quiet, you will be extremely
cautious how you suffer any expressions to escape you, that can be construed to
impute the smallest indiscretion to my conduct."

With these words, the lady elect made her exit with all due dignity, and
without vouchsafing a word more, or even a look to Susan, who attended her to
the step of her cabriole, where she replaced herself in her seat, and pursued
her way toward the castle.

At that instant Ezekiel Daw came forth from his cottage, and turning into the
house with Susan began a conversation, which we shall reserve for the ensuing
chapter.

CHAPTER IV. There are more Ways than one of interpreting a doubtful Text.
"SO, daughter Susan! I perceive you have had a visit from that young madam of
the castle. You did right to receive her with respect, for that is due to our
superiors in condition; but if she came with the purpose of enticing you into
conversation about our absent friend Henry, it is to be hoped you had
discretion to keep a watch upon the door of your lips, and not to satisfy an
importunate curiosity. I have here a letter from our friend Henry, which
announces the death of our respected Lady Crowbery. It is dated from Falmouth,
which I understand to be the port from whence she was to have embarked for
Lisbon. It pleased the Supreme Disposer of all events to call her to himself
from this world of sorrow by a swift messenger. Be it so! we must all obey the
summons, some sooner, some later: it is in vain to lament. She was a pious and
a charitable lady, and the poor have lost a friend, which, I fear, will not be
replaced to them by that young madam at least, who, as common fame reports, is
destined to be her successor at the castle. As the Lady Crowbery died in
possession of a very ample patrimony in her own right, we may now expect to
hear that our beloved Henry is rewarded for his disinterestedness, and made
independent for his life: of this I am sure, that the deceased lady was much
too just to disappoint the hopes she had inspired him with, and far too
discerning to overlook his merits, and therefore, child, take notice, I predict
a very ample provision for our absent friend."

"That is a very natural prediction for you to make," cried Susan; "I wish I
could say it was a true one; but alas, alas, my good Mr. Daw, our poor friend
has got nothing; Miss Claypole just now informs me, that he is not so much as
named in Lady Crowbery's will." -- "It is a lie," cried Ezekiel, starting from
his seat, "it is a false aspersion; Miss Claypole is a slut and a hussy for
her pains; a defamer of the dead, and that is a foul and heinous misdemeanor. I
pronounce it impossible for the Lady Crowbery to be a deceiver, a dealer in
false promises, and a hypocrite at the hour of death, and therefore I reject
your information, and abide by my prediction. What, child, will you tell me
that I don't know what is in human nature, that I should be made the bubble and
the dupe of such a prating minx as that Miss Claypole, who never yet uttered
one truth of Henry since she knew him? Don't we know enough of her dark
dealings, not to take her word in any case where he is concerned? Did not I
tell you that she came for no good purpose? and now you see I did not speak
lightly and without good reason; learn from this, child, I exhort you, not to
trust too confidently to your own rash opinions, but listen to those who have
more knowledge and experience than yourself."

Whilst Ezekiel was uttering these words in an elevated voice and upright
attitude, a letter was delivered to Susan, which one of Sir Roger's servants
had brought over from Manstock. It was from the fair hand of Isabella, and
written on that very morning early before she set out upon her journey. Susan
cast her eye over it, and then read aloud to Ezekiel as follows: --

Dear Susan,
I cannot leave the country without giving you a few lines on the subject of a
melancholy event, of which, as far as your friend and benefactor is interested,
I am persuaded you will be anxious to be informed.


-- "Right!" cried Ezekiel, "now you will find my prediction verified." -- "The
sad news of my poor cousin's death will probably have reached you before this
comes to hand, and if so, you will be told at the same time, that he is in no
respect benefited by Lady Crowbery in her will." -- "There, there!" repeated
the exulting prophet, "you perceive the falsehood had got wind." Susan made no
answer, but resumed her reading. -- "It is true," -- "It is false," cried
Ezekiel, "I will not believe it." Susan repeated -- "It is true that his name is
not to be found in the will; but lest you should be tempted in your zeal for
his interest to make false conclusions, that would be injurious to the memory
of the excellent lady, I recommend to you to wait the event, in the full
persuasion, that neither she will be found regardless of her promises, nor your
most amiable friend unworthy of her affection."

No sooner had Susan read these concluding words, than Ezekiel, in an ecstacy
of joy, struck the staff in his hand with vehemence on the floor, crying out --
"I told thee so, I told thee so: now will thou believe me, silly child, that
art drawn away with every breath and vapor of false doctrine. Dostn't hear?
dostn't understand that all is well and as we wish it, and that your prattling
companion, and her politic uncle, will be confuted in their false sayings? Did
not I truly pronounce of the Lady Crowbery that she would not be found
regardless of her promises; and do not thou mark those very words repeated,
as it were, from my prophetic lips in the young lady's letter? And now, child,
why am I right in my judgment, and these wrong in their's? I Will tell thee why,
it is because I draw my inferences from a clear and perfect insight into human
nature, whilst they form their's upon crude conjecture, upon vain imaginations,
with which they deceive themselves. And now I will read thee Henry's own
letter; listen."

Death has deprived the world of a most excellent being, and me of a friend,
whose loss I must ever deplore: Lady Crowbery is dead. Wherever it shall please
Lord Crowbery to deposit her remains, I shall take measures so as to be present
at her interment, though it may be prudent to disguise my person. When that last
duty is performed, I propose making you a visit at the cottage. I have much to
say to you, and something for the private ear of your fair neighbor, my valued
friend Susan.


What were the precise sensations that these last words stirred in the gentle
bosom of the attentive hearer, we do not pretend to divine, but something there
was either in the found or in the sense of them that suffused her face with
blushes, which Doctor Daw, notwithstanding his prodigious skill and
penetration, just then happened to overlook, so that there was time for them to
fade away into a deadly pale, which succeeded without attracting the notice of
the aforesaid sagacious critic in the human character. How he was employed
whilst these changes were in transition, we are not minutely informed; but
surely not in the contemplation of one of the most expressive countenances in
nature, else the scenery there displayed could hardly have escaped him, though
the secret spring that gave movement to it, might have puzzled him to find out.

Now it had so happened in the reading of Miss Manstock's letter, as it has
happened in the cases of many other readings, that her two commentators,
Ezekiel Daw and Susan May, had two different methods of interpreting the same
text; the preacher making it conform to his own prediction, and Susan
construing it according to her own first impression of the fact: whilst the one
therefore believed Henry very richly provided for, the other persuaded herself
he was not worth a doit. Now the reader perhaps may recollect that Miss Fanny,
who communicated the intelligence of his being left out of Lady Crowbery's
will, threw out a hint at a report, which saddled him upon Susan for a moiety
of her means; and though Susan instantly returned an answer, which, we hope,
was proper for the occasion, and well becoming her to make, yet it is not
unnatural to suppose that it might raise some ideas in her mind, which she did
not hold herself bound to communicate, either to Miss Fanny, or even to Doctor
Daw himself. Combining, therefore, these ideas with the concluding paragraph in
Henry's letter, that he had something for her private ear, we may find a clue
to the sensations that occasioned Susan's change of countenance at the hearing
of that paragraph. As to the consequences which this abstraction of thought on
her part had with respect to Ezekiel, they were only those of affording him
free scope for talking upon any subject he thought fit, whilst she meditated
upon another, a privilege he frequently enjoyed in the company of his friends
without finding it out.

CHAPTER V. Our History shifts the Scene.
WE now turn our attention to the lovely Isabella, who, on the second day from
her leaving Manstock, arrived with her father at the ancient seat of the
Adamants, called Hagley Hall. It was a stately though irregular pile of
building, in the Gothic style but in perfect repair, with a handsome park about
it and a fine command of water. Lady Crowbery had always kept up a sufficient
establishment of servants, by whose care every thing was in good order to
receive their expected visitants, though the melancholy occasion that brought
them there, kept the neighbors and tenants, whom curiosity or respect would
else have assembled, from intruding on their privacy. One old gentleman, the
rector of the parish and well known to Sir Roger, presented himself on their
arrival, of which he had been apprised by letter from the Baronet. He had been
long the administrator of all affairs at Hagley Hall, and the appearance of the
place bore testimony to his care. This worthy person (by name and title Doctor
Sandford) was greatly affected at the meeting with Sir Roger and the heiress,
whose tears kept pace with his on the occasion: he informed them that a
messenger had arrived to apprise him that the body might be expected the next
day; whereupon the day following was settled between him and Sir Roger for the
ceremony of interment.

It was about the hour of dinner when Sir Roger arrived at Hagley Hall, and
Doctor Sandford had provided for their entertainment. His company was a
seasonable relief to the worthy Baronet, who, to his great concern, saw his
beloved Isabella much depressed in spirits; and though he did his best to
comfort her, yet whilst the painful secret of her lover's birth hung on her
mind, it cannot be wondered at if all his kind endeavors failed of their
effect.

After dinner, however, she kept her seat at the table with her father and
Doctor Sandford, with whose company she was greatly pleased; and in truth he
was an amiable and excellent man. In the course of their conversation, they
fell upon the subject of Mr. Ratcliffe's death, whose parish adjoined to
Hagley, and whose preferment was yet undisposed of. His parsonage house was
still unoccupied, bur the duty of the church was executed for the time by
Doctor Sandford's son, a young man educated at the university of Cambridge, and
lately admitted into priest's orders. In speaking of the melancholy event of
poor Ratcliffe's sudden death, the good Doctor expatiated on the virtuous and
amiable qualities of his late neighbor and friend with great sensibility,
bewailing the irreparable loss which his parishioners had suffered, but
avoiding with great delicacy the most distant hint of any expectation for his
son. The strongest solicitation would probably have been less efficacious than
this very delicacy, which did by no means escape the observation of his
hearers. Isabella expressed a desire ^f visiting the deserted mansion of Mr.
Ratcliffe before she left the country; the contemplation of it, as the
residence of so good a man, would impress her mind with melancholy awe and
veneration. Sir Roger combined other impressions in his interpretation of this
desire; but Doctor Sandford, who did not dive quite so deep into her motives,
proceeded to say, that much as he lamented the loss of his friend Ratcliffe,
there was yet another reason with him, that made it a most gloomy spectacle in
his sight; "I allude," said he, "to the sudden and unaccountable disappearance
of a youth called Henry, who, under very mysterious circumstances, was reared
and educated from infancy to manhood by that excellent man." A look of marked
attention from Isabella, caused him to apply his discourse more immediately to
her, and he proceeded to say -- "Ah! Madam, to me, who knew this young man, and
regarded him as a creature little short of perfection in mind, person and
manners, the loss of him without any tidings of his fate, is one of the
heaviest reflections which my heart can muse upon. He was devoted to his patron
and preceptor, and at his death seemed to have vanished like a ghost: whither
he went, and what may have befallen him, Heaven only knows; but if human virtue
merits a peculiar Providence, surely that youth, so lost to us, will be the
object of Heaven's care."

"Your prediction is verified," cried Sir Roger, and immediately turning to
Isabella, who was pale as ashes, tendered a glass of water, which perhaps was
seldom if ever more critically applied.

Dr. Sandford, surprised at this alarm, gazed upon Isabella and her father,
like a man who perceives he has done mischief, and neither knows what nor how.
-- "I hope," he said, "I have given no offense, it is purely unintentional, if
I have." -- "Not the least," cried Sir Roger, "not the least offense, good sir,
but quite the contrary; we think of this young man as highly as you do; we know
him well, and we love him much." -- "I rejoice to hear it," cried Sandford,
"from my heart, I rejoice to hear that the young man is under your protection:
Heaven has indeed been bountiful in granting him so good a friend!"

It was at this very moment that Isabella, though agitated by a variety of
thoughts, conceived the resolution of suggesting to her father the nomination
of young Sandford to Mr. Ratcliffe's vacancy, and to back it with all her
influence. No sooner had she rallied her spirits, than her eyes directed such a
glowing beam of gratitude and benevolence toward those of the good old Doctor,
that he must have been blind indeed if he had not seen, and dull as death if he
had not understood the language of that look. He was neither void of sight or
sense, but sufficiently quick in both, to perceive that he had given pleasure
by his praise of Henry, to one of the most beautiful and not the least
sensitive objects in creation; and he was not slow to conclude, that where so
much joy was caused some affection must exist; he therefore ventured to enquire
where his favorite was to be found. To this Isabella replied, by giving a
short narrative of his story, which left him at Falmouth, beyond which her
information did not enable her to proceed, -- "Then I Will engage we shall see
him here," said the Doctor, "and I hope, if he comes, he will gratify me so far
as to make my house his home, which will be matter of peculiar joy to my poor
son, who has beat the whole country round in search of him, till despair has
driven him from the attempt." -- "I hope then," cried Isabella, "you will lose
no time in giving Mr. Sandford the information so agreeable to him." -- Here
she was joined by Sir Roger, who so cordially desi^ed a servant might be
instantly sent off to invite him, that the old man, who confessed he was hard
by at the parsonage, consented with no small pleasure to the summons; and if
that fatherly pleasure needed a justification, the appearance of young
Sandford, which a few minutes produced, very effectually afforded it, for he
was in person, manners and address, a son to be proud of.

Isabella's warm heart immediately accorded to him; he was the friend of Henry;
that was enough: the blaze of beauty, that good humor threw upon her
enchanting countenance as she welcomed him with smiles, so dazzled him upon his
first introduction to her, that his admiration resembled awkwardness, and he
scarce knew how to address himself to her; the charms of her voice, and the
encouraging sweetness of her manner, soon put him at his ease, without
diminishing his respect. The company now naturally classed themselves according
to their ages, and whilst the fathers fell into discourse upon matters of
business, the young people entertained each other upon topics more suitable to
their taste.

Friendship for Henry on one part, and love on the other, were not long in
agreeing upon what that topic should be, and it soon became manifest that the
history of our hero's adventures was reciprocally the most interesting subject
they could talk upon. Isabella again went over the account, enlarging upon it
with many more particulars than she had thought necessary to recite in her
first narration; but there was now only one hearer, and to him every
circumstance was new; to say that he heard her with delight, is to do justice
to but one of his senses, when there was another at least in full occupation,
which filled his heart with rapture, and would have made the dullest tale of
sorrow pleasing. -- "What voice do I hear?" said he, within himself; "what
vision do I behold? She breathes through rows of pearls over beds of roses.
It Is an enchantment! she will vanish presently, and I shall start out of my
trance."

When Isabella had brought her history to a close, young Sandford remained
silent for some time, as if unwilling to take the discourse from one whom he
had listened to with such delight; at last, perceiving that she expected a
reply, he thanked her for the entertainment she had vouchsafed him, every
circumstance of which had been very highly interesting to him, whose mind had
been so long kept in anxious suspense about the fate of a friend, who was
deservedly so dear to him. "I always loved Henry," said he, "from a boy, and
though there were some years between us, yet his manly character, his command
of temper, and excellent understanding, gave him advantages which my greater
maturity of age and experience could not compensate for: on many occasions I
have profited by his better judgment, not unfrequently by his friendly reproof,
and more than once have been very seriously indebted to his zealous spirit and
undaunted gallantry: I hear therefore of his behavior in the fight at sea with
much more pleasure than surprise; for I believe nothing braver lives on earth;
but there is withal a tenderness and candor in his nature, that endear him to
our hearts, as much as his more brilliant qualities entitle him to our
admiration. If ever that day shall come to pass, when the clouds that obscure
his birth shall disperse, I am persuaded it will be found that he is of noble
descent, and should the same good fortune raise him to affluence and an
elevated situation, I am certain there is no sphere in life so extended which
his virtues will not adorn and fill.

CHAPTER VI. A short Excursion leads to an important Interview.
AT the expected time arrived the body of the deceased Lady Crowbery, properly
attended, and followed by a numerous company of the tenants and peasants
appertaining to the estate. There is no need for us to describe the solemn
pageantry of a funeral, it will suffice to say, that the mortal remains of one
of the meekest and most benevolent of God's creatures were committed to the
vault of her ancestors, with every ceremonious rite that could mark the respect
of her surviving friends, and every tribute of unfeigned sorrow that could
testify their affection. The service was performed by the reverend Dr.
Sandford, assisted by his son, and the body was followed by Sir Roger Manstock
and Isabella chief mourners: a great concourse of spectators were assembled,
amongst whom two strangers in horsemens' loose coats, were conspicuous for the
eagerness with which they pressed forwards at the interment of the body, as
well as for the interest they appeared to take in that affecting ceremony: deep
affliction seemed to possess them wholly, and as they held their handkerchiefs
to their faces all the while the service was performing, none of those whose
attention was drawn toward them (and they were not a few) could get a sight of
their faces, or learn by any enquiry who they were. After the service was over
they separated themselves from the crowd, mounted their horses, and rode off
with speed.

There was one however in that mournful assembly, whose attention had not been
so totally engrossed by his share in it, as not to catch a sudden glimpse of
these strangers, which led him to a pretty confident conjecture as to the
person of one of them. It was young Sandford who had made this observation, and
upon the first opportunity which offered of his speaking to Isabella apart, he
communicated to her his persuasion that he had discovered his friend Henry
amongst the crowd, disguised in a clownish dress, and accompanied by another
person in the like habit. The probability immediately struck her, though she
herself had not made any observation upon the spectators, general or particular.

We forgot to mention in its proper place, that we had a friend amongst the
mourners, Zachary Cawdle by name, who had accompanied the hearse all the way
from Falmouth in an attendant coach: he was now lodged in Hagley Hall, and it
is hardly to be supposed that our fair heroine had failed to make certain
enquiries of him, which might now have made any further questions about Henry's
appearance at the funeral unnecessary; but the fact was, that these enquiries
had not produced any other information from honest Zachary, except that Henry,
accompanied by a gentleman who called himself Smith, had parted from him at
Falmouth, disclosing nothing more of his future plan, than that he would be at
Crowbery within such a time, and hoped to meet him there upon a certain
business; to this Zachary added, under the seal of secrecy, that the se^amed
Mr. Smith was veritably that identical Mr. Delapoer, from whom Lady Crowbery
was rescued by her father within a stage of Gretna Green, and who had been ever
since in the East Indies, from whence he was lately returned with an affluent
fortune. Here Zachary stopped, and with a sagacious look eyed the young lady,
whose knowledge of the secret in his keeping supplied all the rest, which he in
justice to his trust suppressed.

All this Isabella had gained from Zachary within a few hours after his
arrival, so that when Mr. Sandford imparted to her his supposed discovery of
Henry, in company with a person unknown, her own suggestions readily found a
name for that person, without resorting to Zachary for any further
intelligence. There was one reflection Isabella drew from this account, that
was consolatory to her mind in its present state of anxious suspense -- Henry
had found a father, and under all events was probably secured against any
future danger of experiencing distress of circumstances: this consideration
also helped her to account in some degree for her cousin's silence in her will,
an omission otherwise both inexplicable, and in her sense of it inexcuseable.

It had occurred to Sandford, and he suggested it to Isabella, that it was
likely Henry would be found somewhere in or about the house of his deceased
benefactor Ratcliffe; and the probability of this so struck that young lady, as
to determine her upon putting her projected visit to that mansion into
immediate execution. She accordingly, with her father's consent, obtained his
chaise for an airing, and immediately directed it to the point she had in view;
fortunately for her purpose she was alone, and whilst her heart throbbed with
the hopes of meeting the dearest object of its thoughts, reflecting upon the
difficulties that darkened all her views of happiness, she trembled as she
approached the spot, and dreaded what she most desired, an interview with
Henry. At the bottom of a little hanging garden, in front of a neat but humble
mansion, her carriage stopped and she got out. A little wicket in a low shorn
hedge-row of hornbeam was open, and admitted her into the garden; the slope was
rather steep, and she slowly sauntered up it gazing about her on each side, and
surveying the small but interesting scene with a pensive sensibility. She was
noticed by an old woman, who presented herself at the house door, and asked her
commands: Isabella said she wished to see the rooms, and that it was not idle
curiosity, but respect for the memory of the late inhabitant had brought her
thither. -- "Then pray, madam, walk in and welcome, perhaps you belong to the
dear young gentleman who is now in the house, and sure enough I am the happiest
creature living to see him safe and once more amongst us, after being lost so
long: he is in the little back parlour, which was my late master's study, all
alone, and there he has been these two long hours, forbidding me to interrupt
him, though I would fain have come in and kept him company, in hopes to have
cheered him a bit, for I know he must be melancholy to think of the days he
passed in that room with my dear good dead master, who loved him as if he had
been the father of him."

This intelligence so agitated the tender spirits of Isabella, that she paused
in suspense, and for a while stood musing what to do. At length, having
resolved to proceed, she desired to be shown the room where the gentleman was;
the old woman conducted her through a little vestibule into a plain neat
parlour, and there pointing to a door that was opposite to the windows, she
said, "That is my late master's study; there Mr. Henry is."

Isabella desired to be left, and when the dame had disappeared she approached
the door, and with a trembling hand turned the lock, and presented to the sight
of Henry an object so welcome and so unexpected, that starting with ecstasy
from his seat he exclaimed, "Good Heavens! do I behold Miss Manstock? May I
believe my eyes? Are you alone?"

"I am here alone," she replied, whilst blushes overspread her face; "and I
confess my purpose was to find you out. I heard you was present at a mournful
meeting: you was discovered, Henry, but not by me."

He approached her respectfully; took her hand, and tenderly pressed his lips
upon it. It was visible that he had been in tears, his eyes were red with
weeping. He fixed them on her with a look so full of love and transport, as
caused the timid sensibility of Isabella to shrink back and retire a few steps,
which instantly observing he recollected himself, and in the mildest accent
beseeched her to believe he knew the distance he should keep in presence of
such purity. "But if I had the power," said he, "by words to paint to you how
beautiful you are, how exquisitely charming you appear, thus breaking forth
upon me by surprise, and overpowering all my faculties with unexpected joy, you
would in candor own I had some struggles to subdue: yet fear me not; if it
were possible to lose myself through an excess of love, it is not here, within
the mansion of virtue, you could be a witness to my disorder."

"I have no fears," she replied, "I commit myself to you with perfect
confidence; and gladly seize the opportunity of conversing with you in private,
anxious to assure you that my heart remains unaltered, that it sympathizes with
you in your sorrows, in your joys; for if you have lost a mother, Henry, I am
told you have found a father, and that I hope, in some degree, will balance
your affliction. As to this estate, which I consider myself as holding in trust
for your use, I have only conjecture to assist me in my interpretation of my
cousin's will, having received no private instructions from her before her
death; therefore I conjure you, Henry, if you know her wishes, impart them to
me fully and without reserve: I am confident it could not be her purpose to
pass you over, and heap an useless fortune in your wrong on me."

"Ah! loveliest of women," cried Henry, "of what use is all this world can give
to me, without the hope, on which alone I live? If I am bereft of that, I have
more than misery can want already; what matters it how a solitary being
languishes out an irksome life? Let me sink into obscurity without a name,
which only can disgrace the memory of my unhappy mother, and give cause of
triumph to her cruel pesecutor, who survives her: perhaps my Isabella's father
would be wounded in his pride of family, if I were published to the world the
heir of Lady Crowbery and the son of Delapoer."

"Henry," cried Isabella, eagerly interrupting him, "you strike upon the very
circumstance that causes all my terror and distress: my father's feelings are
exactly what you suppose them to be; and all the opposition he ever gave to
your pretensions, arose from the suspicion he entertained of your being the son
of his niece. He now, from the nature of my cousin's will, is persuaded to the
contrary of that suspicion, and is become your cordial friend: knowing,
therefore, that he is now acting toward you under the impression of a mistaken
conclusion, what a situation am I in! To avail myself of his delusion, and
carry on a deceit against him, is what my nature revolts from; to undeceive him
and reveal a secret I have pledged myself to keep, is what I cannot do: hard
indeed is that dilemma which puts me under equal difficulties, whether I resort
to silence or confession. Nothing can extricate me from it, unless you are so
fully possessed of Lady Crowbery's mind, or have such written instructions in
charge, as may either direct me how to act toward my father, or leave me to
make use of my own discretion by releasing me from my engagement. If you have
any such therefore to report or to produce, impart them to me, I beseech you,
for both our sakes."

CHAPTER VII. The Interview is brought to a Conclusion.
WHEN our hero heard himself thus earnestly called upon to produce the letter
he was encharged with, though his delicacy would have been better gratified,
could he have been absent whilst Isabella read it, yet he no longer hesitated
to deliver it to her, telling her at the same time that it was written by his
mother three days only before her death, and that the contents had never been
imparted to him, nor in any respect suggested by him. To this she made answer,
by assuring him, she gave perfect credit to his delicacy in the business, and
that her only apology for reading it in his presence was her wish to be
instructed in her cousin's pleasure touching an affair, on which their mutual
happiness depended. "I am fettered," added she, "till this letter sets me free,
if indeed it shall do that: without some clue to guide me, how shall I ever
extricate myself from this labyrinth of difficulties, in which I am lost? Oh
Henry! before I open this important paper, let me confess to you that I
perceive all which is dear to me in life may be decided by it; and I feel a
thousand anxious fears, lest fidelity to a fatal promise, and duty to a
respected father, should seal me down to silence, and separate us perhaps for
ever."

"And would that sad necessity," he demanded, "so terrible to me, cause a
regret in you? Does my beloved, my adored Isabella wish to reward her Henry's
faithful love? Have I an interest in her heart?" -- "You should know that," she
tenderly replied, "for you possess it wholly; that fond heart is yours."

Language is nothing; words can give no picture of those soft emotions which a
sincere and virtuous passion, when alarmed by dangers, can in the crisis of its
sat excite within a feeling bosom. It is then the soul looks through the eyes,
and by its own intelligible emanation intimates to the beloved object thoughts
and sensations, which no eloquence can so describe. Such was the look that in
this interesting moment glanced from Isabella's eyes to Henry's. He had been
more or less than man, had he remained unmoved and master of himself. Our hero
was a man, one of the bravest and the best of Nature's family; but still he was
her son, and by inheritance made subject to those sallies and alarms of
passion, which mere mortality cannot at all times conquer and repress.
Temperance he had, we have given it upon proof recorded in his history; respect
he never wanted in the presence of virtue, and virtue was present in the person
of Isabella; yet impetuous love hurried him on, and as her fond eyes glanced
upon him, he threw his arms in rapture round her beauteous waist, and pressed
her ardently in his presumptuous embrace.

I am but Nature's copyist, her scribe, and dare not add or take away without
her leave: it is Nature therefore, and not I, that must explain why Isabella,
pure as the untouched lily, did not shrink away and sever her sweet form from
Henry's arms: yet so it was, and so I write it down as my responsible
directress dictates. The letter was yet unopened, and now the blushing
Isabella, having mildly reproved her too ardent lover, and taken her seat at
some little distance from him, read as follows:

Fully sensible that my last hour of life is close at hand, I write to you, my
beloved Isabella, whilst it is yet in my power, a few lines, to be delivered
into your hands by my son, when I shall be no more. An unexpected meeting with
his father, under most peculiar circumstances, having providentially taken
place, I have at their joint instance been prevailed upon to bequeath my whole
fortune to you, making no mention whatever of my Henry in my will. Their motive
for this generous sacrifice has been extreme delicacy toward my memory; and
mine for complying with it has been confidence in your justice, and a perfect
conviction that my Henry lives but in the hope of sharing life and all its
interests with you. If this happy union takes place all will be well, and my
spirit shall rest in peace: if not, alas! no wealth can profit him; nothing
that I can give will save him from despair. Duplicity never was my Isabella's
character; I therefore die in the persuasion that you love my son: that love
will inspire you with the means of reconciling your connection with him to the
feelings of your father, be they of what sort they may. I leave this to your
conduct and discretion, and for that purpose totally release you from all past
promises respecting what in secresy I have imparted to you: I only think Lord
Crowbery should not know it, as his insulting temper may in that case provoke
events that might disturb your future peace, and plunge you into serious
distress. May Providence direct you in it is wisdom, and preserve you in it is
mercy! Think of me with the candor that belongs to you, pardon my errors,
protect my memory, remember my last wishes: You and my Henry will have my dying
prayers! Farewell for ever!

CECILIA.


Isabella having perused this letter with silent attention, delivered it to
Henry for his reading, which, when he had done, he said, as he returned it to
her -- "My fate is in your hands; whether I am or am not avowed to Sir Roger
Manstock, depends on your pleasure; and so entirely am I resigned to it, that
if your commands shall be for my immediate departure, painful as obedience in
that case will be, yet I will obey, provided I am not banished without hope,
but may be permitted to believe that there is one conclusion in that letter, on
which all my happiness depends, not falsely drawn, and that the fond
persuasion, in which my lamented mother died, has some foundation in your
heart. There, whilst I hold a place, life must be dear to me, and my ambition
to deserve at distance some remembrance in your thoughts, will animate me to
such efforts, as may happily, in time to come, obtain your father's favor.
Behold me then, loveliest of women, your devoted creature, and pronounce my
doom."

Here Isabella raised her eyes, and turning them upon him, with a look that
smiled through tears, replied, -- "If 'twas with me to pronounce upon your
fate, your happiness would be complete; for why should I affect to disguise
what your own observation must have discovered, that you have all the interest
in my heart, which this letter gives you? Well might the dear lamented writer
be persuaded of a truth too obvious to escape her, nor doubt of an attachment
which I, so far from striving to conceal, hold it my point of honor to avow.
Hypocrisy has ever been my scorn; I trust that modesty does not need it, and I
am certain that your character will ever grace the woman that admires it."

"Then I am blessed indeed!" exclaimed the enraptured lover; "thus honored by
your approbation, I am fortified against all difficulties: direct me what to
do, for I am ready" -- "There I am still to seek," said Isabella, "and time
does not allow for our debating this important point with the deliberation it
requires. One thing is certain, whilst you are undiscovered you will be sure to
find a welcome from my father: come to us then with all your former mystery
about you; make your own observations on the spot, we shall have opportunities
of further conversation on the subject, and those opportunities perhaps will
not be totally unpleasant, though they may not produce all the effects that our
uncertainty might wish for. We may renew our walks at least, and you may amuse
your fancy with projecting future alterations and embellishments in a place
that must at all events become your property. We shall remain a few days in
this spot, and though we cannot cheer your spirits with amusing scenes or
lively company, my best endeavors shall not be wanting to dispel the gloom of
sadness, or to share it with you in bewailing our lost friend, and soothing you
with all the tender sympathy that a fond faithful heart can feel."

Saying this, she leant her hand on his, and gently pressed it; the sweet
manner of it was so modest, and withal so captivating, that all his senses were
absorbed in love. -- "Now we must part," she said, "my time is out, and these
are moments, Henry, that will never stay: but come to us, I charge you come; I
shall prepare my father to expect you, and let it be this evening." This said,
the lovers separated; Isabella returned to Hagley Hall, and Henry to his father.

CHAPTER VIII. The Discovery of a posthumous Paper causes great Sensations.
THE death of Lady Crowbery had so deeply affected Delapoer, that Henry saw
with concern a very visible alteration in his state of health, and a fixed
melancholy that seemed to take possession of him wholly. Balancing between duty
and inclination, he scarce knew how to decide with respect to Isabella's
tempting invitation. Upon discoursing with his father, however, he found him so
resolved to take up his abode in the neighborhood of Hagley, that he
immediately began to cast about in his thoughts for some fit place for him to
reside in; and it soon occurred to him that the very house, where his late
happy interview with Isabella had taken place, would be of all situations most
desirable, if that preferment should devolve upon any person unencumbered with
a family: this idea, by a very natural transition, suggested to him the
probability of his friend young Sandford's being thought of for that
succession; and as he entertained a very high opinion of his merit, he
determined to employ his interest with Isabella in his behalf.

This idea Henry communicated to his father, and found him so eager to embrace
it, and so pressing for him to lose no time in visiting Sir Roger Manstock,
that he set out for Hagley Hall without delay; here he received a very cordial
welcome from the worthy Baronet, whom he found alone, and already apprised of
his coming by Isabella. Speaking of his niece's death, Sir Roger took notice to
Henry of his being overlooked in her will as a matter that caused some
surprise, and which he could not well account for, having heard the deceased
more than once declare her intentions of providing for him at her death;
adding, that he considered himself as heir to those intentions, and telling him
not to be cast down, for in his friendship he should find a resource against
all disappointments.

To this Henry made answer, that the excellent Lady alluded to, who always
acted from the best and purest motives, had faithfully fulfilled all promises
she had ever made him, and that his grateful respect for her memory would never
cease but with life itself. He thanked Sir Roger for the offer of his
friendship, which he accepted as the highest honor he could aspire to, and
which he would study to merit and preserve by every effort in his power;
favors of any other sort, he flattered himself he should not stand in need of.

Here their conversation was cut short by the arrival of Doctor Sandford, who
had not been many minutes in the room, before Henry had the satisfaction to
hear Sir Roger Manstock acquaint him, that, with his daughter's concurrence, he
had determined to nominate his son to the living late enjoyed by the Reverend
Mr. Ratcliffe. The good man expressed a lively sense of gratitude on this
occasion, and his happiness seemed complete.

Henry, in a private conversation with his friend Zachary Cawdle, revived the
subject of Billy Williams; and as Zachary was now determined upon retiring from
business on his annuity bequeathed to him by Lady Crowbery, he very readily
engaged to make over his shop and effects to Williams, upon fair and equitable
terms, which should be adjusted when that gentleman should obtain a discharge
from his ship, and make his appearance at Crowbery, for which place Zachary
intended to set out the next morning. This matter being settled to Henry's
entire content, for he was much attached to Williams, Zachary began to speak of
matters more immediately interesting; and turning to our hero, he said -- "In
this very room where we are now sitting, I brought you into the world; and
surely it is now full time you should assume some proper name and station in
society. Life is uncertain; and though, thank God, I feel myself stout and
hearty at this present moment, yet we are all liable to casualties, and nobody
can say how long it may be before I follow your good mother, in which case you
would lose a witness to your birth, whose testimony is most material. You have
a father, it is true, whose fortune can in some respect indemnify you for the
disinterested, and give me leave to call it, the wanton sacrifice you have made
of this noble property, which had else been yours; but that father a^, if I
have any skill in my professsion, is in a very precarious state of health; his
spirits sink, and his constitution threatens swift decay. It behooves you
therefore, my dear Henry, to look about you: if you have put aside your
inheritance, in the hope of sharing it with the amiable young lady who now
possesses it, methinks you would do well to lose no time in bringing that
expectancy to bear; and why you should persist in concealing yourself from Sir
Roger Manstock, who seems to be so favorably disposed, and entertains you with
such kindness and regard, is what I cannot understand. You Will pardon me for the
freedom I take in talking to you on a subject, in which I am no otherwise
concerned, but as my friendship and good wishes interest me in every thing that
relates to you; for in truth, dear Henry, I have a very warm and tender heart
toward you, and ever had from the first moment fortune threw you in my way."

"Your zeal," said Henry, "can stand in need of no apology; and I am free to
confess to you, that my situation with respect to Sir Roger Manstock bec^mes
every hour more and more irksome to me, as every species of disguise must be.
When I know that I am indebted to a misconception for the kindness he shows me,
I cannot enjoy the fruits of it with content. It blights the happiness I should
else receive in the society of the loveliest of women; and though I have every
reason to fear that the discovery of my birth would be instantly followed by my
dismission from every hope that points toward an alliance with his amiable
daughter, yet my conscience so revolts against deceit, that I will sooner meet
the worst of misfortunes, and embrace despair, than persist to act the
counterfeit, as I have hitherto been compelled to do. You therefore see, my
worthy friend, how entirely my feelings coincide with your counsel; and I am
resolved, with Isabella's leave, tomorrow shall not pass without an
explanation on my part: let me then request, that you will not set out upon
your journey, till that event is over, as it cannot fail to happen that we
shall appeal to you."

Zachary signified his perfect compliance with this request, and Henry declared
his resolution accordingly. An occurrence in the mean time had come to pass,
which anticipated all the consequences incidental to that resolution. Sir Roger
Manstock, whilst discoursing with Doctor Sandford upon some particulars
relative to the living intended for his son, had occasion to refer to some
papers of the late Mr. Ratcliffe, which the Doctor told him were to be found in
a certain old-fashioned cabinet, where he himself had deposited them upon the
death of that gentleman, and of which he kept the key. The papers were easily
found; but in taking them out, it appeared to Sir Roger, that there was some
secret machinery at the bottom of the cell, in which they laid, for hiding
money or valuables in a small compass; and upon a closer scrutiny, a joint was
discovered, which, upon the insertion of a penknife, was made to slide back,
and in it was found a small packet folded in the form of a letter unsealed.
Upon opening this packet, Sir Roger immediately recognized the handwriting of
his brother-in-law Sir Stephen Adamant, and read as follows:

Particulars relative to my daughter Cecilia, to be communicated to her uncle,
Sir Roger Manstock, after my decease. This title he read aloud, and here he
paused, closing the paper, and observing to his companion, that it was a very
extraordinary and to him a very interesting discovery. "I confess to you,"
added he, "my curiosity is highly agitated, nay so much am I affected by the
suddenness of the surprise, that I can scarce command myself enough to proceed
with the perusal of it. It seems to have been my brother's purpose that I
should be made acquainted with the contents, yet no such communication was ever
made to me, so that in honor I am hardly satisfied that I ought to read any
further. Have you, Doctor Sandford, any knowledge of this paper? You was most
in the confidence of Sir Stephen: if you have any information on the subject,
give it me; if not, advise me what to do."

"I have nothing to guide me but conjecture," replied the Doctor; "but I should
presume there need be no hesitation on your part to read what professes to have
been written for your information. The early attachment of our dear lamented
lady is well known to every friend of the family; and I should guess the paper
may refer to that: there has ever been a mystery consequential of that
transaction; and as it is probably develop'd in that posthumous packet, I will
with your permission retire, whilst you examine it in private." So saying, he
left the room, and Sir Roger read as follows: --

Particulars relative to my daughter Cecilia, to be communicated to her uncle,
Sir Roger Manstock, after my decease. Upon the 14th day of August, 1761, my
daughter, then of the age of sixteen and upwards, secretly escaped from
Hagley-house, in company with a young cornet, the honorable Henry Delapoer,
purposing to effect a stolen marriage at Gretna Green.

The young man, I confess, had made fair and open proposals for my daughter;
but I had other views, and positively prohibited the connection. He was formed
to engage a heart like Cecilia's; his person was fine, his manners and address
were captivating in the extreme. Alas! mistaken man that I am, I knew not to
what extremes her passion was capable of hurrying her, and foolishly expected
that my authority could extinguish it. Love and nature set my power at naught,
and my child, (in every other instance of her life the most dutiful creature
breathing) broke those from every filial tie, and elop'd with her admirer.
Furious in my wrath, and equally exasperated against both parties, I pursued
them along the road with such unremitted exertion, that upon their very last
post I overtook and surpised them in a public inn, where they were changing
horses.

Here I forced them (Oh! fatal violence!) from each other's arms, in spite of
prayers, entreaties, and even confession, on Cecilia's part, of an anticipated
consummation, that took from innocence its virgin gloss, and, in the course of
time, to the dishonor of my house and the ruin of my mind's future peace,
occasioned my poor child to be an unmarried mother, whilst her disconsolate
lover had left his native country, and embarked for the East Indies.

Early in the month of May ensuing, Cecilia was secretly delivered in my own
house of a male infant. Zachary Cawdle, a faithful man, and skilful in his
profession, assisted her in that painful extremity. -- Heaven and earth! can I
describe my anguish, my remorse, my terrors, in those moments! What would I
then have given could I have recalled the banished father of my wretched
grandson! How did my conscience rack me with remorse for having torn two hearts
asunder, pledged to each other by every sacred vow, and virtually though not
legally married! Oh! had I then had mercy in my wrath, had I allowed for
nature, for affection, for the weakness of a fond doting girl at sixteen years
of age, what misery had I prevented! what shame had I avoided! Let no father
henceforth tread in my unwary steps -- they will but lead him to remorse and
agony.

And now ten years are past, whilst I have seen my daughter married to a
despicable lord, who is her tyrant rather than her husband. In her my
generation legitimately stops; no fruit can spring from such a stock; her bed
is barren, and her heart is broken. Thank Heaven, my grandson Henry still
survives; protected, reared and educated by the best of men, and of friends the
most faithful, I see him fostered into early virtues by the forming hand of
Ratcliffe. God of all mercies, bless and prosper the mysterious issue of my
hapless child! Whilst my sad daughter lives and is Lord Crowbery's wife, I dare
not venture to avow the son of indiscretion. Hard fate for him, poor innocent,
for my Cecilia, for myself!

Is there a friend now left to me on earth, in whose humane and honest heart I
can repose my sorrows and my secret? Let me still hope there is; surely Sir
Roger Manstock is that candid, that trust-worthy friend.

To Sir Roger Manstock, to the uncle of my child, in confidence I bequeath this
mournful narrative of my errors and misfortunes, imploring him, by all that he
holds sacred, to protect and father the last relict of my house, my nameless
unacknowledged child, to whom I trust a mother's love and justice will bequeath
that property, which in this firm persuasion I Have devised to her, and put
into her free and absolute disposal, without limitation or restraint. Let Henry
then take his father's name; I would not leave a stigma on my daughter's
memory. May Crowbery never have to say he took the refuse of a favored lover!

Sensible that I am hastening to the close of life, I would fain dedicate my
short abiding time to atonement and repentance. To you therefore, Sir, my
brother and my friend, I address this paper, avowing a full sense of my past
errors, and a deep contrition for that haughty spirit of revenge, which
prompted me to blast the happiness of two persons formed for each other, wedded
in spirit and in heart; and who, but for my fatal interference, would have
blessed the remnant of my days. To you, Sir, my brother and my friend, I once
more solemnly bequeath my grandson Henry: you are yourself a father; you have a
lovely daughter two years younger than my boy; nature has taught you how to
judge of my sensations by your own. To your family my fortune would have
devolved had not this son of my Cecilia stood between us: may I not form a
distant hope that time and education may hereafter so adorn and grace the work
of nature, as to make him worthy your regard and love? The outset is
auspicious; the promise of his infant years is flattering in the extreme.
Should this fair blossom ripen into that perfection, which its early bloom
gives hope of, and should your sweet child, my pretty god-daughter, when time
with lenient hand has molded her soft beauties into womanhood, be touched with
tender pity and esteem for my adopted Henry, need I despair of your candor; or
must the want of that last form, that my precipitancy interrupted, haunt him
through life, and cast him off from happiness without his fault? May Heaven
inspire your heart with sentiments more generous! and may he, who mixes blood
from no ignoble source with that which he derives from me, merit a blessing
great as my fond fancy has devised. Farewell!

CHAPTER IX. The Counsel of a Friend in a Dilemma. More Secrets are brought to
Light.
THE perusal of this paper, which pointed out to Sir Roger Manstock the son of
his niece, in the person of Henry, the admirer of his daughter, threw him into
deep meditation, and exceedingly perplexed him how to act in a case, where
decision on either side militated against his feelings. The appeal was solemn,
that pleaded in favor of the youth, the objection to his illegitimacy, and
even to his proximity of blood, was no slight one, and Sir Roger's mind was
long time balanced between difficulties. One point his conscience saw in the
clearest light -- the equity of Henry's claim to the property of his
grandfather; and, according to the high sense of honor natural to him, he
interpreted the paper he had just been reading: but how to act with respect to
his daughter, whether to oppose or to countenance her attachment, was the
question that embarrassed him. On the opposing side, there was a strong
repugnance, arising from his habits of thinking, and from a certain pride of
family, which revolted from the stain of illegitimacy; on the favorable side,
there was much occurred to mitigate the rigor of these thoughts. The character
of Henry pre-eminently pleaded in his behalf; the fatal consequences of
paternal obduracy, so forcibly set forth in the recital of Sir Stephen, was a
striking example before his eyes; and the pathetic adjuration, at the close of
that recital, was an affecting appeal to his heart, which was sensibly felt.

It Is in a crisis like this, when the mind is fluctuating between doubt and
decision, that the voice of a friend is most welcome, and then it is that new
reasons, or reasons differently expressed and dilated, seldom fail to cut the
knot that puzzles us to unravel. Sir Roger rung his bell, and requested the
company of Doctor Sandford.

A better arbitrator could not be chosen; he read the paper attentively, and
when called upon for his sentiments upon it, deliberately replied as follows:
"I am not surprised at the discovery, which this paper gives; for though I was
not a party to the secret of this young man's birth, I was ever in my private
opinion persuaded of his being the son of those very parents now disclosed to
us. Well may the unhappy writer bewail his own obduracy; I knew the party
rejected, and thought him every way deserving of the alliance he courted; Sir
Stephen knew my sentiments, for he drew them from me, and I honestly committed
my opinion to his consideration; it did not tally with his own, and I lost his
confidence by the sincerity with which I gave it. Mr. Ratcliffe, in consequence
of this, had charge of the infant -- a better choice could not be made, a
worthier, wiser, more enlightened mind no man possessed -- to an education so
excellent, the son of your niece did ample justice. Nature never formed a more
engaging person, instruction never cultivated a more accomplished mind."

Here Sir Roger interposed, declaring his entire concurrence in this testimony
to his merits -- "But with what face," he demanded, "can I hold up to the world
the spurious issue of my deluded niece? What will Lord Crowbery say? What will
the world at large say to an adoption like this? I should be glad to hear your
sentiments on this point of difficulty."

"With this paper in my hand," replied the Doctor, "I cannot resist the appeal
it contains, nor refuse being advocate for the feelings of the writer of it.
When I see a father taking on himself the reproach of being sole author of his
daughter's errors and misfortunes, and weigh the circumstances that attended
their elopement and arrest upon the way, I can hardly be induced to call their
issue illegitimate. I should go too far, if I was to deny the right of a parent
to restrain, or to direct, the passions of his child; but Sir Stephen went
farther, and exerted more authority than belonged to him, when he compelled a
marriage with the Lord Viscount Crowbery; that is an act of tyranny over the
human heart, which I hold in abhorrence. What vows were interchang'd between
your niece and her first lover we cannot know, but we can well conjecture they
were solemn and sincere on both sides. Their hearts were married, though the
blacksmith was not found that would have clinch'd the chain. Shall then the son
of love and promise be disclaimed, because a few hours intervened, and force
was employed to tear their hands asunder, and compel them to a separation? Mark
how the parent suffers in his conscience for this act of cruelty! So would not
I for all this world can give me. Henry is a virtuous youth: affix what
criminality you please to the authors of his birth, we cannot so pervert all
sense of justice, as to attach their stain to his character, however much we
may wish to cover the memory of his mother from the malevolent attacks of Lord
Crowbery and others, who may be basely disposed to blast it. This, I confess,
should be avoided as much as possible; and surely it will be no impossible
thing to do that by proper precautions, with respect to Lord Crowbery at least,
so long as he survives, which seems to have been the clear intention of the
deceased lady, when she forebore to name her son in her will; and as you have
told me Henry himself was the chief promoter of this omission, I cannot doubt
but he was fully acknowledged by his mother before she died."

"I don't doubt that," resumed Sir Roger, "and I hold my daughter bound to
restore him to his inheritance upon every principle of honor and justice; but
I am not bound to give him my daughter also." -- "Far be it from me," replied
the Doctor, "to say that; your daughter's inclination must precede a step so
essential to her own happiness as that." -- "But am I bound to follow, with my
consent, her inclinations, if they should point to him?" -- "I must decline an
answer to that question, being so partial as I am to Henry." -- "Why that is
answering it," replied Sir Roger, "to the fullest extent." Here their
conference was interrupted by a servant, who announced a gentleman of the name
of Smith, that requested a few minutes conversation in private with Sir Roger
Manstock. Order being given for the gentleman's admittance, and Doctor Sandford
having withdrawn, the father of our hero presented himself to the worthy
Baronet, and addressed him to the following effect: --

"I am personally unknown to you, Sir Roger Manstock, but am no stranger to
your character, and hold it in the most perfect respect: I have therefore
solicited a few minutes of your leisure, and you have politely granted it, for
which I thank you, and will study not to abuse your patience. I have sent in a
name by your servant, which, in your presence, I should be ashamed to wear,
being only an assumed one, for reasons that, I trust, you will think not
unworthy of a gentleman. My real name is Henry Delapoer, which, in times past,
you may have heard attached to that of the loveliest, and by me the most
lamented, of her sex; pardon me, if for the present I can proceed no further."

Sir Roger started with amaze; he smote his hands together with more than usual
energy, and gazed upon the stranger with intense curiosity -- "May I believe
what I hear!" he cried; "Are you really Mr. Delapoer, the honorable Henry
Delapoer, father -- " There he stopped short, and checked the words that were
upon his lips. -- "Sir," interjected the visitor, "you was proceeding with your
speech; may I request you to fill up the sentence?"

"You may," replied Sir Roger, after a short pause; "the words I was about to
add were, the father of my niece's son." -- "My conscience then is clear," said
Delapoer; "you are possessed of the secret, and I have broke no trust. Yes,
Sir, I am that very person; miserable in the recollection of the bitterest
disappointment that ever blasted human happiness, but honored in the virtues
of that son, who is at once the memorial of our misfortune and the relict of
our love. I may now say to Sir Roger Manstock all that a wounded heart
suggests; I may speak of my sorrows, of my affection, of my despair, which is
now hurrying me to the grave, where my betrothed, my ever-lov'd Cecilia
sleeps." Here a gust of tears interrupted his speech for a few instants; he
wiped them away, and proceeded -- "It is now my request, and I hope your
charity will grant it, that my remains may be allowed to rest in the vault
beside those of that sainted being, who was by every obligation sacred in the
eye of Heaven my true and all but legal wife. Sir, we were bound together by
the holiest ties. Accursed be the breath that dares to contaminate the purity
of my Cecilia's fame! If there was crime in our precipitancy, that crime be on
my head, I will embrace the whole of the offense; let her unfeeling father take
on himself the responsibility of our separation! Sir, I have held it matter of
the strictest conscience, ever since that fatal moment, to keep unviolated the
marriage bed, and I have religiously fulfilled that sacred duty. One melancholy
consolation Heaven vouchsafed; Providence employed the arm of my son to rescue
me from death, when I was a prisoner on board a ship of the enemy, and at the
last stage of existence; he brought me to the port of Falmouth; his piety and
care preserved my life; fortune directed Cecilia to the same spot; I passed
some days by the couch of that dying martyr, and she expired in the arms of me
and of my son. Grant me then, I beseech you, my last earnest prayer, and let my
corpse repose by here is."

The Baronet, whose long silence had been the effect of his sympathy in the
feelings of the speaker, now found himself called upon for a reply at a time,
when he was much more inclined to give a loose to tears than to words. He
commanded himself notwithstanding so far as to assure his visitor, that his
suit was granted, and to add withal, that he hoped it would be many years
before that promise could be claimed. To this Delapoer replied, with many
acknowledgments, that nothing but his conviction that no time was to be lost
could have excused to himself the rude intrusion of so unseasonable a visit.

Here he paused, and seemed preparing to take his leave, when it occurred to
Sir Roger as proper to apprise him, that he had possessed himself by chance of
a posthumous paper, written by his niece's father, which had thrown great light
on his state of mind, and which at the same time devolved a duty upon him, on
the part of his daughter, of reinstating Henry in the whole of his
grandfather's estate. "This," added he, "is an act of justice which I think I
can take upon myself to say will be infallibly performed on our part; and I
shall now put the paper into your hands for your perusal, and very highly
interesting it is to you, Mr. Delapoer, and your representative."

CHAPTER X. Our History records a dreadful Incident.
DELAPOER having read the paper, returned it to Sir Roger, observing, that
although the writer's change of sentiments came too late for redress, it was to
be hoped they were in time for the full purposes of repentance. He then
proceeded to disclose to Sir Roger the state of his own circumstances in point
of fortune, which, being settled upon Henry, would at all events make him an
affluent man. "There is but one object in life," added he, "can make him a
happy one. If I know his thoughts rightly, it is the person, not the property,
of the present heiress of this estate, which he would receive as the greatest
bounty she could bestow upon him."

To this Sir Roger simply replied, that Henry was certainly a very amiable
young man; and Delapoer, too delicate to press his wishes any further, politely
took his leave and departed. In fact, the mind of the worthy Baronet was by no
means made up to any determined measure, and as the recent death of Lady
Crowbery secured him from any present call from either of the parties, he very
gladly availed himself of the excuse for holding back his opinion, till it was
more matured by experience and reflection.

Henry now wished to throw aside a mask he was no longer compelled to wear, and
to declare himself to Sir Roger Manstock; but as it was necessary, in the first
place, to consult Isabella's opinion in the case, he followed her into the
park, where he understood she was gone to take her evening walk. When he had
mounted the hill that rose from the house, he caught a distant glimpse of her,
as she was entering a grove of oaks, and immediately set out toward the spot
with all the speed he could. He was yet at some distance, when a female shriek
was heard as coming from some one in the grove, which struck him to the heart
with the apprehension that his lovely Isabella was in danger or alarm. Already
nearly breathless with his exertions, terror gave him all but wings upon a call
so pressing, and he sprung forwards toward the voice with an impetuosity
undescribable.

Swift as his motion was, our history demands a pause before we bring him to
the rescue of the affrighted Isabella, whilst we account for the cause of that
shriek so terrible to the ears of love.

In the near neighborhood of Hagley House, without the enclosure of the park,
there was a lonely mansion, tenanted by a person whose melancholy profession it
was to take charge of those unhappy beings, who are deprived of reason. One of
these distracted objects, and probably the most pitiable in the whole wretched
fraternity, was a young man of the name of Saunders, only son of a respectable
clergyman, who had bred him in the line of his own profession, and given him an
excellent education with that view, both at school and university. The youth,
whom nature had endowed with uncommon talents, had more than equalled all the
warmest expectations of a fond exulting father. Every honor that moral conduct
could merit, every prize that successful genius could contend for, had been
fairly gained, and worthily possessed, by this young student; but strong
imagination and a feeling heart, the natural concomitants of superior genius,
had conspired against the peace of poor Saunders, and by a disappointment in
love, had made wreck of a mind full freighted with science, and richly endowed
with every noble quality. The object of his passion was unfortunately one, to
whom, in point of rank and circumstances, he could not aspire; and though she
felt his merits, and was flattered by his attentions, yet his suit was
peremptorily and proudly rejected by her father, who had higher views, and
overruled the affections of his child with absolute authority. The same fine
taste that taught him to select and admire the purest models of classical
composition, inspired him with a passion for the elegant and beautiful Louisa
Beaufort: his opportunities of conversing with her were not frequent; for Sir
Ferdinand her father was not easy of access from one so much his inferior, and
Saunders was reduced to a variety of humble shifts to make known to Louisa the
flame that was consuming him, and gradually undermining the foundations of a
solid understanding. The smile, which at some stolen moment she could bestow
upon him, was his only hope; on these reflections he fed, and, by the help of a
vivid fancy, sketched out dreams and visions of happiness, which in one fatal
moment were for ever blasted, by the intelligence of her being married to a
titled lover. From this instant his deportment became irregular and capricious:
at first he was loud and vehement in his complaints; he talked of the affair to
all his friends, professed to treat it with contempt, and railed against the
sex in general, venting upon them all the invectives, which his memory or
imagination could suggest: he ransacked the poets ancient and modern for
epigrams and lampoons, and had by heart every tag and fragment of satire, which
made for his purpose, and which Greek, Latin, or English could supply. If any
one of his acquaintance spoke in praise of a woman, or even toasted the health
of his mistress, he was ready with a dash at his folly, which oftentimes would
have brought on serious discussions, had he not been very generally considered
as a licensed railer, or had his companions been as prompt for quarrel as
himself.

This humor being spent, his mind took a sudden turn to the contrary extreme,
and poor Saunders was no more to be found in society; sullen and inaccessible,
he shut himself into his college room, and centering all his ideas, heretofore
so wild and excursive, in one single point, and dwelling invariably upon that
with pertinacious melancholy, the vigor of his intellect began to melt away,
whilst his constitution, partaking of the same debility, and attenuated by long
fasting, was hastening to decay by actual inanition. A student, late so regular
in his duties, could not absent himself from college hours without drawing the
attention of his tutor and other members of the society upon him; the former of
these one day took means of surprising him in his room, where he discovered him
on his knees, employed in loud and fervent prayer, to which his presence gave
not the smallest interruption, whilst the poor supplicant continued to deplore
his wretched state of mind in terms truly piteous and disconsolate, intermixed
with petitions most earnest and devout for the preservation of his reason. His
pitying visitor was melted at the scene of such distress, and having waited for
a proper interval, applied such consolation as his charity could suggest upon
the emergency, and instantly dispatched a letter to the father, apprising him
of the dangerous condition to which his pupil was reduced. This sad
intelligence soon brought the afflicted parent to be a witness of the total
ruin of his hopes; he took the poor distracted creature with him to his own
house, where, finding no relief to his disorder, but, on the contrary, an
increase of every symptom to an extravagance, that kept him under hourly alarm,
he at last resolved to resign him wholly into the hands of a keeper, and in
this house, before described, he placed him, where, for some months, he had
been confined under proper regimen, though without any progress toward cure,
of which his wretched parent now began to lose all hope.

It had so chanced this very evening, that with a cunning peculiar to his
distemper, he had contrived to elope from his keeper, and running out of the
house at random, had made his way into Hagley Park, escaping the sight of his
pursuers by hiding himself in the grove, where he was lying buried under the
thickest of the underwood, when chance brought the beauteous Isabella, in her
solitary ramble, to the very spot where he was concealed. A glimpse of her fair
form, which his quick eye caught through the bushes, roused him instantly from
his lair, and springing on her like a couchant tiger on the unwary passenger,
he seized the trembling victim in his arms, roaring out in a yell of transport
-- "Have I caught you then at last, vile perjured woman! traitress to my love!
murderer of my peace! false, faithless Louisa, you have driven me to
desperation; you have made me what I am, mad as the fires of Hecla, wild as the
waves that swallow navigation up; and now, siren, I Will be revenged upon you for
my transformation; a beast of your own creation shall devour you; I Will pluck
asunder those fine limbs, and scatter them to all the points of heaven. Come,
come, no struggling; hence with all this frippery! away with it! you are but
Nature's counterfeit; we'll have her full in sight, and then --."

Upon the instant, in that saving momentary crisis on which humanity will not
admit of speculation's pause, our hero Henry, breathless, aghast, led thither
by that unseen clue, which Providence had graciously bestowed for virtue's
timely rescue, sprung upon the lunatic, and with a phrensy equal to his own,
grasping him in his arms, hurled him violently to the ground, never quitting
his hold, but accompanying him in his fall: in the same moment, the dishevelled
Isabella, her cloak, handkerchief, and clothes torn from her, dropped inanimate
at his side, without uttering even a sigh that showed signs of life. Distracted
with the sight, still he did not venture to let loose his desperate antagonist,
who raved and foamed in all the furious excess of phrensy, yelling and gnashing
with his teeth, a spectacle too horrible for contemplation. Emaciated as he
was, the very spectre of famine, still his madness gave him nerves almost
supernatural, and in their grappling all the vigor Henry's active limbs could
furnish, sometimes scarce sufficed to keep him under, and hold him down
extended on his back; at length the wretched creature gave one desperate
struggle, then uttered a direful groan, and swooned upon the spot, stretching
his limbs as if in the last pang of life.

Happily at this moment the keeper and his follower, guided to the spot by the
yells and howlings of their patient, made their appearance, to the unspeakable
relief of our exhausted hero, whose terrors for the beloved object, lying
breathless by his side, were now become too agonizing to endure. Instantly he
raised her in his arms, replaced the scattered fragments of her dress with
tenderest attention, arranging it in a manner as decorous as her situation and
his own distraction would admit, and calling out to the keeper for assistance
in recovering her from her swoon. The man had skill, and was not wanting in
humanity; he knew withal the quality of the lady who stood in need of his
assistance, and was terrified, not less on his own account than on here is, for
the consequences of what had happened: bidding his servant take charge of the
lunatic, by tying up his hands, he applied himself directly to the recovery of
the lady, and drawing out a case of lancets, recommended the immediate opening
of a vein; this was eagerly acceded to by Henry, and in a few seconds the pure
blood that fed the veins of the fairest form in nature sprung forth from the
lancet, and at the same time the brightest eyes that ever lover looked upon,
unveiled their lids, and fixed their sight on Henry, who, whilst assisting the
operation just performed, had received upon his person the full gushing tribute
of that sanguine stream so much dearer to him than what fed his own fond heart.
The sight of this, to which in his confusion he had not adverted, so terrified
the reviving Isabella, that the first sign she gave of recollection was a
scream of terror on the discovery, crying out to the operator -- "Leave, leave
me, and staunch his wounds; he is bleeding to death, and do not think I will
survive him."

Joy seized the heart of Henry to hear the voice of his beloved Isabella, and
to hear it first employed in anxious concern for him; he eagerly assured her he
was not wounded; that the blood which alarmed her was her own: and upon these
assurances, the stream that had stopped began to flow again, and her senses
grew clear by the revulsion. When her arm was bound up, and her mind became
composed, her attention was attracted by the disorder of her dress; surveying
the confusion and derangement which her person had undergone, she perceived
that certain articles had been replaced by hands not practiced in those
offices, and the sensation covered her with blushes: the emotion was not lost
upon Henry; he could interpret what was passing in her thoughts, and took
occasion, with a delicacy peculiar to himself, to allay and soothe her
inquietude. She turned a look upon him that beggars all description; love
beamed in her eyes, gratitude filled them with tears; then having caught a
glimpse of Saunders, as he was under custody of his keeper, turned away with
shuddering from the sight, and fell upon Henry's neck, crying out -- "Oh my
Henry! my preserver! from what horrors have you rescued me!" -- Let those that
have the powers of description paint his transports if they can; I sink beneath
the task, and recommend it to the reader's fancy, if ever he experienced joy
like this; if not, I wish he may deserve it, and obtain it.

The wretched object that had occasioned all this terror now engaged their
attention; he had recovered from his swoon, but so wan and woe-begone as would
have extracted pity from a heart of a stone; he was sitting on the ground, his
hands confined with a bandage swathed round his wrists; he rolled his eyes
about in wild disorder, and at last fixing them on his keeper, drooped his
head, gave a deep sigh, and burst into tears. He was now at once become as meek
and humble as he had been outrageous, and reason seemed to have revisited his
mind with the return of temperance. -- "I am a very wretched creature," he
cried, "and sensible of my misfortunes, that sometimes drive me into
extravagancies I never fail to repent of: I know it is for my good that this
worthy gentleman ties up my hands; but if he would have the charity to set me
at liberty, I would convince him that I am not unfit to be trusted with the use
of them; if he will not grant me this favor, I should be much beholden to him,
would he have the kindness to remove a few paces out of sight, whilst I speak a
word in the way of atonement to the gentleman I have offended. I have a secret
on my mind, which I am desirous of imparting to him, and I can assure him, on
my honor, I am this moment as perfectly in my senses as any man in England."

Here the keeper turned a look upon him, which he quickly understood as a sign
for silence, and obeyed: a look no less intelligent was passing at the same
moment in another quarter, for Henry, fixing his eyes upon the keeper's
follower, recognized the person of the assassin O'Rourke, and perceiving
certain indications in the fellow's countenance, which convinced him he was
right, he said to him in a whisper -- "Don't be alarmed, O'Rourke, for I shall
not betray you: if you execute this melancholy office faithfully and humanely,
you are in a way to atone to society for the crime you have committed."

CHAPTER XI. Which describes the Effects of that Incident, and concludes the
Tenth Book of our History.
POOR Saunders being now removed, and the operation of the bleeding having
succeeded in restoring Isabella to the full possession of her senses, and in
some degree of her strength, she declared herself able to walk to the house,
and forbade the proposal of sending for a carriage, as it would create an alarm
which could hardly fail of finding its way to her father. With her natural
grace and good humor she accepted the apologies of the keeper of the lunatics,
Gordon by name, who was very anxious to exculpate himself to the heiress of
Hagley, and to tender his further services, if occasion required. In accounting
for the escape of his patient, through the negligence of his servant, he took
occasion to observe by the way, that a derangement of the reason, proceeding
from disappointed love, was universally experienced to be the very worst
species of madness that human nature was subject to; this, he said, was
unhappily the case of Mr. Saunders, whom he despaired of as perfectly incurable.

"Alas!" cried Henry, "I pity him from my soul: I dare say his story is a
melancholy one, but we will not trouble you to relate it." -- This he said as a
hint to Gordon, that any farther discourse on the subject, in Isabella's
hearing, should be avoided; and it might be in part from the same motive that
she declined his offer to attend upon her home, relying solely on the arm of
her protector for her support by the way, and leaving Gordon to resume his
melancholy vocation in the mansion of misery, on the skirts of the common,
adjoining to the park.

Henry now, for the first time in his life, regretted the length of way he had
to measure with his lovely but languid charge, and proceeded slowly and
cautiously, regardful of every motion that might disturb her, and directing
every step for her security and ease. With hearts full of gratitude to
Providence, and glowing with the tenderest affection for each other, they
walked silently on till they reached the boundary of the grove, where they came
in view of the house, upon an open lawn, that sloped with a gradual descent for
the rest of their way. Here they were descried by Sir Roger and Doctor
Sandford, as they were walking and conversing together within a few paces of
the house: the Baronet observing that Isabella walked slowly, and seemed
supported by Henry, on whose arm she was leaning, instantly took alarm, and
calling out to the servants, who happened then to be out of the way, was heard
by young Sandford, who, bolting out of the hall-door, flew to the call. --
"Run, I beseech you," said Sir Roger, pointing to the spot, "run to Isabella
yonder, and tell me what has happened, for I greatly fear some accident has
befallen, or some illness seized her!" -- Whilst these words were on his lips,
the eager messenger caught sight of the object they referred to, and, seized
with the like terror, sprung forwards with his utmost speed, whilst Sir Roger,
trembling with apprehension, caught hold of his friend hy the arm, and stood
motionless on the spot, in dreadful expectation of the event. In the same
moment, whilst Sandford was straining every nerve against the hill, Isabella,
taken suddenly with a giddiness and loss of sight, had come to a stop, and
unable to keep her feet, had fallen into Henry's arms, who, with one knee upon
the ground, was supporting her whole weight on his breast and shoulder, himself
pale as ashes, and oppressed with such agony of soul, as to be almost in the
very act of fainting, when Sandford came most critically to his assistance. The
house-servants mean time had seen what was going on, and taken the alarm; a
pair of horses had fortunately been put to the chaise, and were ready in the
stable-yard; one of the servants had presence of mind to order them to the spot
immediately, which was as instantly obeyed. During this operation, Sir Roger
remained immovable, a spectacle of pity: Sandford saw his distress, and as
soon as ever the chaise and servants came to the assistance of Isabella, ran
back with all haste to Sir Roger, making signs, and calling out by the way that
he had good news, all was well, and no danger. Two servants had very
considerately mounted behind the carriage, and by their help the faint and
languid Isabella was lifted to the seat, and placed upon it as much at her
length as it admitted of: she now opened her eyes, and cast them round in
search for her preserver; he was sitting on the ground totally exhausted, and
in a situation, as it seemed, more piteably helpless than her own. She would
not move without him, and he could not stir without help toward her. -- "Lay
me on the floor of the chaise," he cried, "and let me expire at her feet." --
She heard his voice, but luckily the words did not reach her ear: at that
instant she started into life, and recovered as one out of a trance; the mist
vanished from before her eyes, and seeing Henry on the ground, she conjured him
to arise and come to her in the chaise. Her father and Doctor Sandford now
approached: Sir Roger's agitation, though much assuaged by what had been told
him, was still very great, and as he came up to the chaise, the door of which
was held open, she cried out -- "Oh! my beloved father, be in no alarm on my
account; dismiss your fears for me, and exert all your care for the recovery of
my heroic preserver, to whose courage, under Providence, I am indebted for my
life." -- Henry was now on his legs, and re-animated with the sound of her
voice, seemed to have lost his debility with the terror that had created it: as
he presented himself to her sight, Isabella exclaimed, -- "Oh! blessed be
Heaven, my protector lives!" -- Upon these words, Sir Roger turned a look upon
him, in which that excess of gratitude, which will not admit of language, was
so strikingly depicted, that, as he threw his arms about our hero's neck, he
seemed to give him his whole heart with the embrace. His cheeks were wet with
tears, he trembled and was faint; but nothing could persuade him to avail
himself of the chaise; he peremptorily insisted upon Henry's taking his seat by
Isabella -- "Go, go," he cried, "I will not rob you of the honor you have
earned; with you the darling of my soul is safe; take the place you so well
merit, and let the same arm that saved my child, support her."

END OF BOOK THE TENTH.
BOOK THE ELEVENTH.
CHAPTER I. Describes what our Heroine is, and what we wish our Virgin Readers
to be.
THE time is so nearly approaching, when I must close this history, that I am
now in the situation of a man, who, being on the point of parting from friends,
in whose company he has taken a long and pleasant tour, is anxious to call to
mind any faults or omissions he may have fallen into, that he may explain such
as will bear a justification, and ask pardon for what demands an apology.

To enter on a review of all my errors, is a task above my hands; but there is
one, I apprehend, apparently too gross to be overlooked by any of my readers; I
mean that of neglecting to describe the person of my heroine. If this is a
crime, it is the more unpardonable, forasmuch as I cannot plead oversight and
inadvertency in excuse of it; I have kept her portrait wilfully in its case,
and not disclosed even the color of her eyes, or set to view a single locket
of her hair. Fielding's Sophia had locks of glossy black, more modern novels
give their heroines flaxen tresses and azure eyes; there is a fashion in
beauty; perhaps my Isabella had neither the jet of the raven, nor the ivory of
the swan: I would prefix to these volumes an engraving from her portrait, but
Henry would not let it out of his hands; and our great artists are so fully
employed, that not one was at leisure to go down to Manstock-house to take the
copy.

Now, as I have not the vanity to attempt an undertaking, which I believe no
author has yet succeeded in, I will not aim to describe what will not bear a
description: singularity or deformity may be delineated by the vehicle of
words; perfect beauty eludes the power of language. Let it suffice for me to
say, upon the faith of an historian, that my heroine was all the most doting
lover, when dreaming of his mistress, fancies her to be, and something more
than the self-admiring beauty beholds, when she examines herself in the glass.
Yet in many things she fell short of some, whom I have heard extolled above the
modesty of praise: her eyes could not express what their's excel in; when they
sparkled, it was with benevolence; when they languished, it was with pity; they
were not repulsive enough to look a modest man out of countenance, nor
attractive enough to inspire an impudent man with hope; good nature dimpled
round her lips, that encased two rows of purest pearls, but scorn never pouted
in the one, and the grin of folly never was put on to disclose the other: her
voice was melody that kept the middle tones, for it could neither sound the
pitch of an affected scream, nor grumble in the base note of a sullen murmur:
her motions were the expressive marks that charactered her mind; composed and
temperate, rage never agitated them; pride never distorted them; light and
elastic when she hastened to the succor of the wretched, she neither aped the
languor of sickliness, nor the mincing step of affectation: she danced
gracefully, but not like a professor; loved music, but was no performer; had an
eye for nature, but never libelled a single feature of it by pen or pencil: she
had read sufficiently for her years, and profitably for her instruction; she
could express her thoughts in speaking or in writing elegantly, and without
embarrassment; but she possessed in its perfection, the still happier gift of a
patient ear whilst others were speaking, and of a polite attention to what they
spoke. Being the only child of her parents, the little bickerings of brothers
and sisters never irritated her temper, nor did the triumphs of a rival ever
fan one spark of envy in her breast: educated entirely by an excellent mother,
she had no communication with governesses and servants, nor any friendships
with caballing misses. That she was deceived in supposing her heart so
pre-occupied by filial affection, as to be unassailable by love, these sheets
have sufficiently evinced; but when she found herself surprised into a tender
attachment, and fully understood the merits of the person who inspired it, she
scorned to masque herself in false appearances, played off no vain coquetries
to teaze and tantalize her lover by affected scruples and counterfeited fears,
but with a candor, that resulted from her purity of thought, gave him to know
the interest he had gained, justly conceiving artifice need not be used to
smother a confession, which honor dictated, and delicacy might avow.

If I offend against refinement, by describing an ingenuous nature, I make no
other answer but by an appeal to the hearts of my readers, as in like cases I
have done to those of my spectators: let them decree! when men of doubtful
characters, for doubtful purposes, approach the fair, let the fair resort to
their defenses; I am no casuist in a case of cunning, nor am I fond of working
to my point by crooked paths, or describing the base properties of degenerated
nature. If any of my female readers has been taught to think hypocrisy a
virtue, by the necessity she has been under of resorting to it, I will not
argue against her prejudices for a friend that has been so useful to her, I can
only say it is not a virtue I am studious to bestow upon the character of
Isabella.

CHAPTER II. A modest Suitor does not hurt his Cause.
WE left our heroine in distress, we therefore seize the first instant that our
history admits of to resort to her again, and now we find her with Henry at her
side, under escort to Hagley House, where we commit her to the care of her
assembled friends, with every anxious wish for her speedy and entire recovery.

As soon as the superintendant of the insane patients had seen poor Saunders
securely cased in a straight waistcoat, and lodged in proper hands, he hastened
to make his enquiries after the lady, who had suffered so severely by the
negligence of his people, who had let a creature so wild as Saunders escape out
of their charge. Interest and humanity conjointly prompted him to pay this mark
of respect and atonement to a person who was now become proprietor of the house
and land he lived in. Sir Roger Manstock was accessible to every body, and of
course Gordon was admitted: from him he received the whole melancholy detail of
Saunders's case, and the providential rescue of his beloved Isabella from the
clutches of a raving maniac, inflamed with revenge against the sex, and
probably bent both upon violation and murder. What were his obligations then to
the courage and vigor of her defender, when he heard, with horror thrilling
through his veins, this awful narrative of the danger she had been snatched
from! His heart ran over with gratitude to Heaven, and acknowledgments to Henry.

No sooner was Gordon departed, than Sir Roger sent a summons to our hero,
determined to discharge himself in some degree of the weight of obligations
which pressed upon his mind, by an instant acknowledgment of him as the son of
his niece, and every offer of an unreserved friendship in future. -- "If then
he demands my daughter," he said within himself, "can I refuse him the
possession of what he has preserved? Could I hold out against a claim so just,
and drive him who has given her life a second time, into the like condition
with that wretched maniac?" -- Whilst these reflections occupied his mind, the
servant he had sent for Henry, made report that he was not to be found, and
indeed as he had not ventured upon an intrusion into Isabella's apartment, it
is not to be wondered at that his search was fruitless. Here his presence was
still indispensible, for nothing but the chearing sight of her defender, and
his persuasive voice, could yet allay the tumult of her mind. Constitutions
less strong than Isabella's might have sunk entirely under such a shock; the
ravage it made in her nerves was not inconsiderable, and great attention was
necessary to prevent further derangement. Zachary, whose services were now in
demand, of course postponed his journey, and paid close attendance upon his
lovely patient. Silence and repose were the great and only restoratives in
request; with this view a couch was provided in her dressing room, and on this
was displayed the fairest form in creation, whilst at her side, in pensive mute
attention to each breath she drew, fate Henry, whilst a servant, posted without
the chamber door, kept watch against disturbers of her slumbers. And now the
gentle power of sleep had visited her senses, descending like the dove of peace
with downy pinions on her troubled spirit; one glimmering ray of evening light
scarcely sufficed to shadow out her form, and on this the eyes of Henry
invariably were fixed, whilst he held her hand fast locked in his, careful to
prevent the slightest movement, if it were possible, even of a fiber to awaken
her.

In the mean time, the news had reached Doctor Sandford, who, in company with
his son, instantly resorted to Hagley House: even Delapoer himself, in the
adjoining village, had received the alarming intelligence, magnified as usual
in its passage, and he had also joined the anxious groupe of visitors to Sir
Roger. Whilst strict order of silence was observed through all that region of
the house, which was dedicated to Isabella, this groupe of friends waited the
issue of her present repose with anxious hope, and Henry's praises were in the
mean time the general topic of their discourse: even the modest diffidence of
young Saunders was overcome by the warmth of their applauses, and he gave his
voice to the chorus with peculiar glee; for he loved our young hero, and was
beloved by him; he also, at humble distance, adored his lovely patroness, whose
grace of giving had the power of doubling every bounty she bestowed, and
Sandford's was the very heart to feel that grace in its full compass and extent.

Honest Zachary also joined the company; he communicated to them with cordial
delight the favorable situation of his patient above stairs, wrapped in soft
repose and guarded by the preserver of her life. He then expatiated very
learnedly upon the dismal effects of sudden frights and perturbations, with the
different modes of treating them, arguing with great display of reason, that no
one process was so efficacious as the sooting attention of some affectionate
person best beloved by the suffering object. In the course of this discussion,
the learned lecturer got himself so completely entangled amongst the fibrous
ramifications of the nervous system, that after many fruitless struggles, and
as many plunges into deeper difficulties, Zachary left nothing clear to the
edification of his hearers, except that love was one of the strongest of the
human passions, that the person best beloved was decidedly the most welcome to
the person loving; that sleep was a grand restorer of exhausted nature; and
finally, that it was his opinion, the young lady up stairs would sleep the
better for Henry's sitting by her, and of course that his society would forward
her recovery. To all these conclusions, there was not amongst the company
present one single opponent, though Sir Roger, whilst he acquiesced in these
general deductions, chose to make use of the word gratitude on the part of his
daughter, in place of the broader, and, perhaps, more apposite term which
Zachary had employed on the same subject.

There was indeed one person in company, whom long experience of the fatal
power of love, deep sensibility of its effects, and sufficient eloquence to
have descanted on that topic, qualified to speak what would have been worth the
attention of the hearers, had he been so disposed; but silence and sorrow
seemed to have entire possession of poor Delapoer; still one ray of hope
cheared the gloom of his ideas, and that was derived from the prospect now
given him, by the declared attachment of Isabella to his son.

Doctor Sandford observed to Zachary with a smile, that he did not wonder if he
had found some difficulty, in treating upon love, to preserve a due distinction
of ideas, since it was an affection that showed itself under so many symptoms
and descriptions, being in some cases an actual disease, in others an effectual
remedy. The medicines commonly applied for the cure of it, were too often
ignorantly administered, and few fathers, he believed, were good physicians in
their own families. "Very true," cried Zachary, "they deal too much in strong
repellants." A deep sigh which escaped from Delapoer, not unperceived by the
company, reminded them they were touching upon too tender a subject, and at
this moment, to their general joy, Henry entered with a cheerful air,
announcing the good news of Isabella's amendment; she had waked from sleep so
recovered and composed, that he hoped all effects from her fright would now be
done away -- "Hold, hold," cried Zachary, interrupting him, "young physicians
are apt to be too sanguine; old ones proceed with caution: we must not
pronounce upon the cure as perfect, because the symptoms intermit." -- Sir
Roger submitted to this doctrine, and though impatient to see his daughter,
suffered Zachary to visit her without him.

Delapoer now saw a fair opportunity of sounding the parties present, with
regard to his wish of inhabiting the parsonage devolved upon young Sandford; he
expressed his intention, with leave of the incumbent, to purchase the furniture
and effects of the late Mr. Ratcliffe, reserving an apartment to the use of the
said Mr. Sandford, assuring him that whatever he laid out, either in that or
any other way upon the premises, should remain to his use and benefit; and as
his life would be retired and single for the rest of his ^ays, there would not
fail to be house enough for them both, whilst circumstances remained as they
were at present. -- "My motives," said he, "for wishing to end my days in this
spot of earth which covers all that was dear and valuable to me in life, are
known to Sir Roger Manstock, and I believe I may add, that any promises I
engage for with Mr. Sandford, will be guaranteed by this young gentleman now
sitting beside me, who, by deed of gift, is heir irrevocable of all that I am
worth. To the head of my house, who, with the title, inherits every thing that
appertains to it, I shall bequeath to the full amount of what I have received,
my sword and my honor, both untainted and no worse for the wear. Of my great
and early disappointment in life I will not speak, for the author of it is gone
to his account, and the object of it, alas! is now no more. One wish remains at
my heart, which, if I am indulged in, I shall pray for so much life as may
suffice for the completion of it; if it is refused to me, death cannot come too
suddenly. This I will now explain before the present company, hoping they will
second my most earnest suit to Sir Roger Manstock; it is, that I may be
permitted to raise some monument of affection and respect, to the memory of
that beloved person whom we have lately followed to the grave. I would have it
a mausoleum separate and select, and in some degree resembling certain edifices
of that description, which I have contemplated with awful veneration in the
East. I have marked in my walks about this place, a location, as I think,
peculiarly apposite; and I have worked upon a plan, (for architecture has been
my favorite study) which I shall be prepared to exhibit to Sir Roger Manstock,
when I have his permission for so doing. The workmen and materials are within
my reach, the superintendance of the work will be my task, the last melancholy
gratification that my sorrows will admit of."

A request so new and unexpected coming upon the worthy Baronet in this manner,
embarrassed him not a little; he was at no time very quick at a reply, but now
was more than ordinarily deliberate in arranging his thoughts. Indeed a
suspicion had haunted him ever since his last conversation with Delapoer, that
grief and disappointment had in some degree deranged his intellects, and this
proposal of the mausoleum very much confirmed him in that notion; he therefore
sought rather to evade the suit than to satisfy it, observing to him, that the
manners of the East were different from those of Europe; that in some few
instances edifices of the sort he described had been erected in certain parts
of England, but with an effect that did not much recommend them to his taste; a
monument attached to a church he had no objection to, it had a local solemnity,
and was seldom visited by the observer but at religious seasons, whereas a
mausoleum built upon unconsecrated ground became, like other ornamental
buildings in parks and gardens, a mere spectacle to the curious, and was rarely
found to impress the visitor with any portion of that mournful respect, with
which the founder of it might be supposed to have been inspired. Besides this,
it was to be considered, that Lord Crowbery was still living; and though his
insensibility toward the deceased, had been such as to devolve upon her
kindred those duties and decent attentions toward her remains which properly
belonged to himself, yet this would be an affront that could not fail to
provoke his utmost rancour, and expose her memory to the worst insinuations.
Upon the whole, he thought it a matter of no small moment, and therefore should
not wish to decide upon it hastily. As for Mr. Sandford's parsonage house, it
was a question entirely for the parties concerned to settle between themselves,
he could have no objection to oppose to a tender of so generous a sort.

The project of the mausoleum being thus adjourned, Delapoer retired with Dr.
Sandford and his son, to negociate the treaty for the parsonage, when Sir
Roger, finding himself left with Henry, addressed him as follows: --

"The service you have this day rendered me is of such magnitude, as no return
of thanks on my part can sufficiently express, since there is no object in this
world so precious to me as the life, which, under Providence, you have been the
means of saving. You cannot therefore tax my gratitude above the value which I
put upon your merits, and of course I must refer it to your own choice and
arbitration, to name that favor within my power to grant, which will make you
happy to obtain, if any such there is: consult your wishes, Henry, and let me
know what it is I can do to recompense the preserver of my daughter."

"The first and greatest favor you can bestow upon me," replied Henry, "is the
assurance of your pardon for the seeming duplicity of my conduct, in keeping
secret the affinity I have the honor to bear to you, and the presumptuous love
that I have harbored in my heart for your adorable daughter. Obedience to the
injunctions of a tender parent, compelled me to silence in the first case, and
nature overruled the consciousness of my own unworthiness in the latter; for
how could I approach Miss Manstock, and be insensible to her perfections? how
could I see her and converse with her without surrendering myself up to love
and admiration?"

"If my pardon," said Sir Roger, "be all you have to ask, you would indeed name
a very slight return for a very weighty obligation: but let us talk in plainer
terms; by pardon, I presume you mean consent and approbation; when you desire
me to pardon you for loving my daughter, I suppose I am to understand it as a
modest way of asking me to give you my daughter."

Henry blushed and was silent. -- "Why, truly," resumed the Baronet, "your
diffidence makes a stop without discovering an excuse for it, for whilst you
scruple to demand my daughter, you do not hesitate to secure her affections,"
-- "If such is my happy fortune," replied Henry, "the interest I may have with
her is all the merit I can claim with you: to her then I refer my cause, in her
is all my hope."

Here a message from Isabella to her father called him suddenly away, and cut
short a conference that was becoming very critically interesting to our
agitated hero.

CHAPTER III. Love is the grand Specific.
WHILST Sir Roger Manstock attended the summons of his beloved daughter,
Delapoer had brought his business to a conclusion with the Sandfords, and had
set out on his return to the parsonage: damped and deprest in spirit by the
chilling reception he had met with from Sir Roger, in the matter of his
projected mausoleum, he turned in his thoughts every mode his imagination could
suggest for combating the objections he had heard, and as appearances toward
the noble but unworthy widower, seemed the strongest and best founded bars to
his proposal, he brought himself, after long debate and meditation, to the
romantic resolution of setting out forthwith upon a secret expedition to
Crowbery Castle, there to demand an interview with the Viscount, and either by
reasoning or other means, if reasoning would not serve, to return with such
authority for commencing his operations, as should satisfy the delicacy of Sir
Roger Manstock with respect to opposition from that quarter. Thus determined,
he put himself in order of march with all possible dispatch, and taking with
him a faithful servant in his post-chaise, left a note for Henry, simply
informing him that he should he absent for a few days upon particular business,
which he would explain to him at his return.

In the mean time Sir Roger visited his lovely daughter, and had the happiness
to find her in a state of such convalescence as promised him a speedy and
complete recovery. His conversation with her was tender and gratifying in the
extreme, for he talked of Henry in terms of the highest approbation,
acknowledging his obligations to him with a warmth of gratitude and affection,
that encouraged her to throw off all reserve in speaking of her attachment. To
this, in the same strain of candor, he replied, that he had seen enough to
certify the fact, which she confessed to, and therefore any attempt to vary
from it would be highly disingenuous. It was natural, he owned, that she should
be thus partial to a man so amiable in mind and person, and what must that
heart be, he said, which was not sensible of obligations so important as those
she owed to Henry? Far be it then from him to oppose her inclinations: with two
such melancholy instances freshly impressed upon his mind, he should not risk
the fatal consequences of exerting his parental authority to prevent her union
with the man of her heart, so long as nothing could be urged to the impeachment
of his character. But as time, which was both the friend of prudence and the
test of truth, must now of necessity intervene before their connection could
take place, he flattered himself, that in decency to the deceased, neither
Henry nor herself would take means to shorten it by any abrupt determination:
let the season of mourning run out its full date, during which he should impose
no illiberal restraint upon either of them, no less confiding in Henry's honor
than in her discretion. -- "My doors," he added, "will never be shut against
the preserver of my Isabella, till I see, what I hope and trust will never
occur, sufficient reasons for so harsh a measure."

To this Isabella made answer, that her recollection did not serve as to all
that had passed, but she well remembered, in the midst of her terrors, clinging
to the breast of her defender. "In his arms I sought for safety, and I found
it; in that terrible moment, the impression of whose horrors will never be
effaced from my memory, he opposed himself to the raging phrensy of my
assailant, and snatched me from a fate too terrible to think of. Even now my
imagination is haunted by visions, which nothing but his presence can dispel;
when he is absent darkness falls upon my senses, with his appearance light
returns; and should he leave us, I shall never know happiness or health again."

The agitation which accompanied these words so alarmed her father, that he
beseeched her to entertain no such desponding thoughts, but assure herself that
Henry would continue where he was till she was in a state to travel, and should
attend her even to Manstock House, if she wished it. With these assurances she
seemed pacified, and Sir Roger, willing to prevent any further irritation, took
the opportunity of Zachary's coming into the room quietly to slip out of it,
and retire in good time. Zachary soon perceived that her spirits had been
disturbed, and wished to prescribe something in his own way to allay them,
advising her at the same time to solicit sleep, and exclude all company from
her chamber. -- "Ah! my good Sir," she cried, "how widely you mistake my case:
solitude is my terror; I know not when I shall be able to encounter it; I have
a horrid image continually before my eyes, and no one but he, who rescued me
from the reality, can fortify me against the shadow. Till I am satisfied that
Henry is in the house, and that he will not leave it, I can never rest." --
Zachary assured her that he was in the house, and would have been ere now at
the side of her couch if he had not in the most peremptory manner protested
against it. -- "It is not to be told," he added, "what difficulty I had to
persuade him to stay away from you." -- "I hope then," she replied, "you will
for my sake, as well as your own, never attempt that difficulty any more: why
should I resort to art, when nature tenders me a ready cure? What I may be
brought to in time I know not, but I have not yet lost my senses, and therefore
dark rooms and soporific doses do not apply to my case."

Whilst she was yet speaking, the room door was gently opened, and a ray of
light from one glimmering taper striking on the person of Henry, presented an
object to her sight worth all the recipes on Zachary's file. The Doctor saw the
change that instantly took place in the countenance of his patient; joy now
illuminated her lovely features, the blood once more glowed in her cheeks, and
Zachary exclaimed -- "Well, my fair Lady, if such cures can be performed
without the Doctor's help, it is time for me to leave off the profession; I
shall begin to think that physic is mere quackery, and a dose of what the heart
loves best worth all the compounds in the chymist's shop." -- This said, he
retired, whilst Henry approached with cautious steps to the lovely
convalescent, gently taking her hand, which was held out to him, whilst she
said -- "Don't be any longer alarmed about me, I shall soon recover all the
unpleasant effects of this day's misadventure, and remember none but such as
gratitude to my preserver have implanted in my heart for ever. Oh! Henry, sure
it was my guardian angel brought you to my rescue at that dreadful moment, and
endowed you with nerves to combat a creature, whose phrensy seemed to furnish
him with supernatural strength. How lost beyond redemption I had been but for
you! Surely you will not leave me in this dismal place, where I can look on
nothing but what revives the scene of my terrors: surely you will return with
us to Manstock; it is my father's wish; it is my request: what says my Henry?"

To this tender petition Henry replied with equal tenderness, that he was
here is, his whole heart was devoted to her, and that he was prepared to obey
every wish of here is, though it should impose upon him the severest trial, and,
not like the present one, flatter him with a prospect of the highest happiness
he could receive, that of being allowed to attend upon her in whose presence
only he could be said to live. Whilst he repeated this, he gently pressed her
hand, which he still held to his breast, fondly regarding her with a look of
softest pity and affection; a sympathetic glow of chaste delight beamed on her
blushing face; her eyes witnessed the animating pleasure which these
endearments gave her; and when she saw him watchful of her emotions, and
preparing as she thought to withdraw himself through fear of discomposing her
tranquillity, she smiled, and said -- "I perceive you have been tutored by our
Doctor; Zachary has persuaded you that you ought not to be here; but he is no
physician for the mind; and you, (Oh Henry! why should I blush to own it!) you
are the master of those springs which feed my heart with life and health; at
your touch they move; in your presence I revive; when you absent yourself, they
stop and relapse into despair."

Whilst she was uttering this, Henry was struggling to repress his transports;
with difficulty he refrained from throwing himself at her feet; but
recollecting in the instant all the danger of her situation, he checked the
ardour of his passion, and with as much composure as he could summon on the
sudden, reassured her of his inviolable attachment, promising to be ever ready
at her call, attentive to all her wishes, and resolute to devote his whole life
to her service. -- "Only be composed," he cried; "let me but see this gentle
bosom reassume its peace, and all these tremors vanish, who then will be so
blessed as I?" -- "I perceive," she replied, "that you regard me with pity, as a
being deprived of reason, and one who, according to Zachary's regimen, should
be kept in solitude and silence; it may be so, I am sensible I wander in my
thoughts beyond the bounds of reason or discretion, for gratitude perhaps
betrays me into too much warmth of language, and sensibility in the excess
resembles madness; if so, I must submit, and you must treat me as my malady
requires; still I will hope that your compassion sometimes will prevail with
you to visit me in my affliction, and if you find that by your process my
disorder is aggravated, not relieved, perhaps you then will think it time to
try what contraries may do, and favor me with more indulgencies."

A deep drawn sigh, accompanied by tears, succeeded to this speech; her head
sunk upon her breast, and she seemed surrendering herself up to an agony of
grief, when Henry, no longer master of himself, and cut to the heart with her
construction of his reserve, cast himself on his knees, and enfolding her in
his arms, gave vent to all those fond and ardent protestations, which with
difficulty he had hitherto suppressed: the act and the effect, like those of
electricity, were instantaneous; so quick she caught the sympathy of his
transports, it seemed as if one soul had animated both, the gloom that hung
upon her spirits vanished in a moment, her mind became collected, and joy
diffused smiles over her beauteous countenance. Such was the magical
transmutation love wrought in the mind and person of our fair heroine! To
follow them in their conversation any further is a task we shall not undertake;
the language of lovers is apt to be too broken and desultory for regular
detail, and their imaginations a little too volatile for sober history; there
is also more of action in these scenes than can well be brought into
description, and if attempted to be described, are they not open to
misconstruction, which might wound the purity so characteristic of those
persons, for whose honor we are truly zealous? Let it suffice to say, that
though love reigned in both their hearts, honor kept guard over one, and
innocence was inherent in the other; respect tempered the passion of Henry,
virtue herself might have acknowledged the sensations of Isabella.

CHAPTER IV. Rash Enterprises are apt to miscarry.
WHILST Henry and Isabella were thus enjoying the blessings of a virtuous
mutual passion, Delapoer, the melancholy martyr of an unfortunate attachment,
like a wounded veteran worn out in the service of an ungrateful master, was
pursuing his pensive progress toward the habitation of the Viscount. Deep and
dreary were his meditations by the way, and not one word escaped him to the
humble companion of his journey: his mind continually pondered upon the object
of his expedition, and various were the speeches he compounded and decompounded
for the event of their meeting. In all these resentment was a prevalent
ingredient, and the bitter drug of an inveterate aversion to the worthless
possessor of his lost and lamented treasure, tainted every composition he
devised. Nature had given him, together with a fair and comely person, a most
kind and courteous disposition, but the cruel stings of disappointed love had
festered in his bosom, whilst his travels and campaigns in an unhealthy climate
had hastened on a premature old age, and rendered him feeble and decrepid at a
time of life when many others enjoy themselves in full health and vigor of
constitution. We have already stated the condition he was found in on board the
prize by Henry, and his rescue from that dangerous crisis: grief for the loss
of Lady Crowbery had since preyed upon him in such a manner, as not only to
reduce his feeble constitution in an alarming degree, but in some measure to
impair his mental faculties, of which this chimera of the mausoleum, and the
journey he was taking in consequence of it, were no slight symptoms: his
thoughts, by dwelling perpetually upon one single object, rendered him strange
and insensible to all other matters, and withal so vehement and pertinacious in
the pursuit of his favorite meditation, that neither rest, nor food, nor the
calls of health, could awaken his attention; and in spite of all the
remonstrances of his faithful servant, he pressed forward on his journey,
though he was evidently sinking under fatigue, and at the same time exhibited
strong symptoms of a fever hastily coming on.

These indications were no longer dubious at the conclusion of his journey, and
as his chaise entered the village of Crowbery, the delirium had gained upon him
to such a degree, that he was no longer capable of giving orders to the drivers
where to go, much less of executing the purposes of his expedition. The reader
may recollect a certain public house on the village green, under the sign of
the George and Dragon; this being the only house of entertainment in the place,
thither the drivers conducted our travelers, and there they stopped. It so
chanced that Ezekiel Daw was at this instant perambulating the aforesaid green,
enjoying the fresh breeze of the evening, and his customary pipe, when
curiosity led him to the alehouse door to enquire who the strangers might be;
and probably the idea that his friend Henry would be found in the chaise had a
share in that curiosity, for sure enough the thoughts of that good creature
were at that very time employed in meditating upon our hero, whose absence his
kind heart very seriously regretted.

Delapoer was still in the chaise, and Martin his servant in great distress how
to dispose of him, when Ezekiel coming up to the door, discovered the person of
the reputed Mr. Smith, and no sooner heard, and indeed saw, the sad state he
was in, than with the compassion natural to him, he claimed acquaintance with
the wretched invalid, and immediately directed the drivers to conduct him to
the house of Susan May, where he promised him a kind reception, and all
possible care and attention proper for his situation. This was gladly accepted
by Martin on the part of his master, and executed without delay. Ezekiel strode
across the green with such speed, that he was at Susan's door, and had warned
her of what was coming, before the carriage got round and drove up to the gate.
Benevolence, that glowed in Ezekiel's bosom, was no less warm in those of Susan
and her mother; at the call of pity both parties turned out upon the instant,
and as the chaise stopped, both with the same hospitable voice welcomed the
arrival of their distressed and sickly guest. Whilst the women prepared a bed
for him, Martin and Ezekiel lifted him out of the chaise, and with the aid of a
proper cordial from the store-closet of Dame May, saved him from a fainting fit.

As soon as they had got him into bed, and provided all things necessary for
his comfort and accommodation, Ezekiel advanced to the bed side, and having
felt his pulse with due solemnity and deliberation, drew Martin aside, and in a
low voice said -- "Of a truth, friend, I discover very ugly tokens of a febrile
quality in the pulse of this poor gentleman, to whom I presume you stand in
near degree of friendship or affinity, seeing you have exhibited proofs of so
much care and solicitude about his person." -- Martin replied, that he was the
gentleman's servant, but no less attached to him than if he had the honor of
being his relation. -- "Be it so! be it so!" quoth Ezekiel, "there is honor
due unto all men, who fulfill the duties of the station they are in, however
humble it may be; and I perceive thou art not one that contenteth himself with
eye-service only, as some are too apt to render. Let that pass therefore, and
to the point, which being no less important than that of the life or death of a
fellow creature, demands brevity and quick dispatch. I have myself a
smattering in the medical art (I speak humbly as becomes me) having been early
trained to wield the pestle, and compound the drugs of a country practitioner
of no mean note; but I presume not to undertake a case of such danger and
difficulty, as I much fear this will be attended with; at the same time I know
not whither to resort for better advice in this pressing emergency, for the
Aesculapius of our parish is absent at this present, and the substitute, who
officiates in his stead, Alexander Kinloch by name, warrants not any great
eulogium from me, seeing I cannot witness to the success of his practice in
general; in candor I would say more, if in conscience I was not checked from
uttering an untruth; had Alexander Kinloch been a cobbler or a butcher, I would
perhaps strain a point to recommend a neighbor, but in the skill of the
physician depends the safety of the patient, and therefore it is that I speak
not in his praise: to be short, he is a very self-conceited shallow fellow,
wilful as a mule, and ignorant as an ass, and woe betide the sick that comes
under his care; where he enters, death is at the door!"

"What then is to become of my poor master," replied Martin, "if this is all he
is to look to? Have you no physician within reach?" -- "We have had Doctors in
the neighborhood," said Ezekiel, "but our country is so healthful, that it has
starved them all out: in fact, there is little or no employ for any but
bone-setters and man-midwives. Therefore, if I may advise, we will let nature
have her course for this night, which with good nursing, and the attention of
these kind women, we may hope will pass well with our patient, and to morrow we
will consult what more may be done for Mr. Smith's relief and accommodation."
-- "Smith, did you say?" demanded Martin, "my master's name is Delapoer, the
Honorable Henry Delapoer, son of the late Lord Pendennis, and brother to the
present; a gentleman of noble family and great fortune, acquired with high
reputation and long services in the East Indies." -- "Say you so! say you so!"
interposed Ezekiel. -- "And be assured," added Martin, "he is not a man to let
these your kind offices go unrewarded, if he lives to come to a sense of them:
my master (Heaven preserve him!) is of a noble spirit, and lets nobody serve
him for nothing," -- "What tell you me of his spirit," cried the preacher,
drawing himself up into the stiffest of all human attitudes; "there be others,
who have as much spirit as your master, and who will not allow of any
recompense to be made for the common offices of hospitality and humanity, which
they have both the mind and the means to deal to those who stand in need of
their assistance; but I excuse these sentiments in you, which, had they been
sooner made known to me, I should not have mistaken your condition as I did."
-- Here Martin finding he had roused the pride of his host, began to make
apologies, which he had no sooner done, than the spirit of the good creature
was instantly allayed, and with many friendly expressions, and a hearty shake
by the hand, he assured him every idea of offense was totally done away; and as
he felt, perhaps, that more resentment had been shown than the occasion
warranted, he set about to qualify appearances, by telling Martin that there
was not a man in the kingdom less irritable or captious than himself; every
body that knew him could witness that his patience and forbearance were
notorious to a proverb, so long as his motives were rightly understood; but as
to them, he presumed every well-meaning man was naturally and laudably
sensitive; for to do eye-service to God, and take wages of Mammon, was to make
a stalking-horse of religion, and, in his opinion, a a most heinous and
despicable piece of hypocrisy.

Ezekiel Daw had now sufficiently developed his own character for Martin no
longer to mistake it, so that having heard this harangue without returning any
answer, peace was effectually re-established, and the features of the apostle
relaxed from their rigidity. He then proceeded to enquire what friends or
relations Mr. Delapoer might have in those parts, whom it might be proper to
apprise of his situation, or if none such were at hand, what particular call he
might have to the village of Crowbery, which caused him to travel with such
speed and perseverance, to the sensible neglect of his health. To this Martin
replied, that he concluded it was business of no small importance, which
brought his master to that place; but the particular nature of it he was not
informed of; however, he understood so much from what had escaped him by the
way, as to believe it had reference to the Lord Crowbery in person, with whom
his master seemed very eager to have an interview. -- "Enough said," quoth
Ezekiel; "his business lies with the Lord Viscount at the castle, and his
speed betokens the momentous nature of that business: I do recognize his
person heretofore in these parts, when he passed himself upon me under the name
of Smith: there is a mystery at the bottom, that I am not curious to pry into:
nevertheless, friend, it seems right unto me, that the Lord Viscount should
be appris'd of his arrival, and also of the malady, with which it has pleased
God to visit him, that so the aforesaid Lord Viscount may aid and assist us in
this extremity with his counsel, and thereby lighten our responsibility in case
your master should die, which truly I do greatly fear will be the case."

Having so said, and no opposition being made on the part of Martin, Ezekiel
stalked away, and with hasty strides bent his course toward the castle.

CHAPTER V. Bellum, Pax rursum.
THE party we left at the castle, consisting of Claypole and his niece, with
the Lord of the mansion, had passed their time in their accustomed retirement,
and received no addition to their number from the curiosity or civility of
their neighbors, for the unsocial qualities of the Viscount were well known to
all the gentry round about him, and none of them loved or respected him
sufficiently to pay him an uninvited visit. Amongst the various causes in
nature, which tend to corroborate or impair an attachment, we are not curious
to search for that particular motive which had operated to the evident
abatement of his Lordship's passion for Miss Fanny, but so it was, that his
ardour had considerably cooled of late, so as to excite some uneasy sensations
in the mind of the sagacious uncle, and at certain times emotions of
indignation and resentment in the tender bosom even of the lady herself.
Perhaps it would have been prudent in this fair creature, whose personal charms
were her chief, if not her only, recommendation, to have husbanded that
resource with a little more economy; but as her uncle had on his part been as
prodigal of advice; as she had been of favors, it may be presumed he overacted
his part, so as to force her into measures directly contrary to what he
recommended. Certain it is, that she did not love the Lord Crowbery, and
therefore we may conclude some passion stood proxy for inclination in her
connection with that personage; whatever this was, she followed it as a guide
to matrimony, though by so doing she very much dissented from her uncle's
policy, who frequently objected to her in the vulgar phrase of the common
saying, that she had put the cart before the horse.

It so happened, that whilst Ezekiel was on his way to the castle, meditating
as he walked on the address with which he purposed to introduce himself and his
business to the noble Viscount, a tete-a-tete between his Lordship and Miss
Fanny had taken place, in which some little asperity had mixed with matters of a
sweeter quality, that young lady having taken occasion to inquire of his
Lordship, what precise time he had fixed for making good his promises, by
presenting her with a coronet, hinting in modest terms, that this was
reasonably to be looked for before she returned the favor, by presenting him
with an heir. Amongst various excuses which the Peer had ready at hand to
palliate his delay, the recent death of his lady was insisted on in a manner
that provoked Miss Fanny to advance a few truths upon the meanness of
hypocrisy; after so public a breach, she observed, between him and Lady
Crowbery, the world could not expect even the semblance of sorrow on his part;
that if he had meant to treat her memory with respect, how came it to pass that
he failed to show it to her remains, but consigned them to her uncle for
burial? She could not therefore regard his plea of her recent death in any
other light than as a palpable pretense to evade an act of honor and justice,
which it would be more manly in him to disavow at once, and boldly face the
consequences of his breach of faith, than meanly fritter away both her time and
patience with apologies and excuses that were as frivolous as they were false.
And what was this Lady Crowbery, for whom he held himself thus bound to
sacrifice to appearances? Upon what terms did they live? In what temper did
they part? Did he stir one foot from his door to accompany her on her way, when
she departed from his house a dying woman? Had he any love, or respect, or even
pity in his heart toward her, then was the time to show it; but it was
notorious he had not; and it was also as well known who had; it was no secret
to her at least, that Henry the adventurer was the object of her fondest
affection; that he embarked on board Captain Cary's ship for no other purpose
but to give her the meeting at Lisbon; that when that undertaking failed, and
illness stopped her short at Falmouth, there he joined her, there he renewed
those uninterrupted attentions, which cheered her dying moments, and in his
arms she fondly breathed out her last expiring sigh. -- "Damnation! Madam," he
exclaimed, "do you think I have no feelings, that you sport with them so
unmercifully? Do you think I have no sense of honor, of revenge? Can you
suppose that villain shall escape my vengeance? And is this a time to talk of
marriage?" -- "Say, rather," she replied, "is this a wife to mourn for? As for
revenging yourself upon her favorite, if that be your serious pursuit, no fear
but you will find it; Henry is not a man to avoid an open enemy; if your
Lordship has the spirit, he will give you the opportunity." -- "'Sblood! Madam,
do you doubt my spirit?" -- "Till I have better proof of your honor, I do
doubt your spirit; but as I am persuaded Henry will soon return to these parts,
your Lordship may soon put that matter out of question, though I should rather
think your first discussion ought to be with your Lady's first love, Mr.
Delapoer, who I understand to be returned to England, fraught with the
treasures of the East, and loud in his invectives against you."

"Against me," cried the Peer, sensibly alarmed: "what has Mr. Delapoer to do
with me? Because he thought fit to run away with her before marriage, am I to
be called to account by him after her death? If I am to fight my way through
all her lovers, I had need have more lives than one for the undertaking. By the
alacrity you express in numbering up my opponents, I should almost suspect you
took pleasure in my danger." -- To this she calmly replied, "I only warn you of
your danger, my Lord, which is the office of a friend, and trusting to your
courage, take an early opportunity of putting you upon your guard. I have a
correspondent who has informed me of some particulars that perhaps you are
unappris'd of; I am told that Mr. Delapoer had a meeting with your Lady at
Falmouth, and that he paid the closest and fondest attendance upon her in her
last illness; I hear also that he was present at her funeral, and remains
inconsolable for her death; I further understand, that he speaks of you with
less respect than any man of spirit will permit his character to be spoken of;
in short, my Lord, I should not wonder if a man, whose blood is fired with the
heats of India, and who avowedly imputes to you the death of the object so
dearly loved, and so deeply lamented, shall be sound capable of any measures,
how violent soever, or how rash: nay, truly it would not much surprise me to
hear his name announc'd to you this very evening, as my servant tells me there
has been a chaise and four posthorses arrived in the village not an hour ago,
and that the travelers were received into the house of Susan May, which, in
your late friend Blachford's time, would hardly have been opened to visitors at
that hour, and of that description." -- Whilst Miss Fanny was thus speaking,
the visage of Lord Crowbery became ruefully aghast; he struggled for words, but
passion and pride stopped what fear and cowardice would have dictated. At last,
after many efforts and much ridiculous gesticulation, he made shift to mutter
out a few broken sentences, by which nothing was to be understood, but that he
believed she was in a league with these assassins to attempt his life. With a
smile of ineffable contempt, she replied, "I am not in any league against your
life, for if I am injured, I know how to redress myself against the villain who
betrays my confidence and violates those promises he has employed to seduce my
virtue. Let such a faithless wretch tremble at my vengeance; defenseless as I
may seem to be, I have a spirit that will not stoop to infamy, and a hand that
can execute the merited punishment on the defiler of my virgin honor."

This ranting menace, uttered with all the emphasis of a tragedy-heroine, might
have lost its effect at any other time than the present, when his Lordship's
nerves were very much deranged from various causes; but now it was heard with
terror; and when she rose from her seat with becoming dignity to make her exit,
the spiritless and quivering lover earnestly requested her not to leave him in
anger, for that he was ready to obey her wishes, and give her every possible
proof of his love, honor, and good faith. This atonement made her features
soften into kindness, and whilst she tendered him her hand in token of
forgiveness, she declared herself ready to stand by him in all difficulties and
dangers, and make common cause against every impertinent that should offer to
annoy him.

CHAPTER VI. An humble Visitor meets a haughty Reception.
THE terms that fear extorts, cunning commonly finds means to evade. Lord
Crowbery had all the disposition in life to extricate himself from his
embarrassments with Miss Fanny, and all the regret that heart could feel for
having rashly involved himself in them. The peace he had patched up was of
course a dubious one, but at the present moment it was convenient.

A servant how entered the room, and reported to his Lord, that Ezekiel Daw was
in waiting, and requested to be admitted upon business of importance. It was
one of those ill-timed strokes that take a man in the moment of his weakness.
My Lord might certainly have refused admission to a poor neighbor of Daw's
condition, but Miss Fanny had instantly given her voice in the affirmative, and
for him to revoke it was to subject himself to greater inconveniences than his
confirming it might lead to. It is probable that the idea of Delapoer rushed
upon his mind, when he heard the name of Ezekiel Daw; but a thousand other
trifling matters might occur to bring that good apostle to his door, who was
ever busy in the interests of his poor neighbors, and forward to stand forth
as their advocate with the rich and mighty. Having therefore put the previous
question of "What does the fellow want with me?" and received for answer from
the servant, that Daw would not communicate his business; the cautious Peer
directed his message first to Mr. Claypole, desiring the favor of his
attendance, and then permitted him to tell Ezekiel that he would see him for a
few moments. In consequence of these orders, the Reverend Mr. Claypole and the
untitled field-preacher entered the audience-chamber, where sat the lord of
the castle and his lady elect, nearly at the same moment.

Ezekiel made his reverence, and was told to deliver himself of his business in
as few words as possible. "I doubt not," replied the preacher, "that time is
precious to your Lordship, who so well knows the uses of it; and I shall
therefore intrude no further on your patience, than a brief recital of my
motives for soliciting the honor of this audience will of necessity involve.
Benevolence, my Lord, as this Reverend Divine can testify, is a virtue which --
" -- "We do not wish to hear you expatiate upon," said Claypole, interrupting
him; "let brevity for once be your virtue, Ezekiel Daw, or patience will not be
our's, and you will be dismissed without a hearing." -- "Reverend Sir," replied
Ezekiel, "I will be brief, and not put any virtue of yours to a trial, that
might perchance be too hard for it. This is my business -- A traveller has
this evening arrived in our village, who now sojourneth at the house of
Susannah May, of whose coming I held it as my duty to advertise the Lord
Viscount Crowbery." -- "And what is that to me?" cried the Peer, sensibly
alarmed. -- "My Lord," replied Daw, "I humbly conceive it is so far forth
appertaining to you, forasmuch as the gentleman, whose name is Delapoer, a
person as it seems of high birth and noble family, incontinently seeks your
Lordship, upon business peradventure of no slight importance, seeing he has
traveled with unremitting speed, to the great detriment of his health, and at
the imminent peril of his life; which, if I have any skill in prognostics, now
draws fast to a conclusion."

At the name of Delapoer my Lord turned pale, and was visibly in great
perturbation: the information with which Ezekiel concluded his speech, was of a
more welcome sort. Rallying his spirits, he assumed a haughty tone, and
demanded of the preacher, if he knew the nature of the business that Delapoer
pretended to have with him. To this it was replied, that he knew it not, nor
was the poor gentleman himself in a condition to make it known, having arrived
in a high state of fever, which had seized his brain, and deprived him of his
senses. -- "And where are your senses," said Claypole, who knew enough of
Delapoer's story to unravel the whole mystery, "to come on such an errand? What
has my Lord Crowbery to do with Mr. Delapoer and his delirium? Let Kinloch, or
Dame May, or any other old woman of the place (yourself for instance) put a
blister on his head, or nurse your patient after any other fashion you think
fit; we have neither doctors, surgeons, nor apothecaries in this family: I am
astonished you have the assurance to intrude yourself upon his Lordship and the
company present with such a tale." -- "If I am guilty of an indecorum in coming
hither," said Ezekiel, "I should expect your Reverence would be the first to
find pardon for my error, seeing it can spring from none but Christian motives
of benevolence and charity. The stranger, who now languishes on the bed of
sickness, might draw comfort from the presence of a noble person, whom he has
sought with such avidity; and that noble person (pardon the presumption with
which I speak it in his hearing) might seize the joyful opportunity of
succouring a fellow creature in the hour of distress."

This said, and no answer given, Ezekiel made his humble obedience and retired.
Claypole, who bore him an ancient grudge, did not spare him on the occasion,
calling him an officious, canting, methodistical rascal. Miss Fanny, who saw
her prediction verified so unexpectedly, kept her eyes upon the Peer, secretly
enjoying his confusion, whilst he maintained a sullen silence, persuaded that
the whole had been a plot of her devising, and more than ever determined to
escape out of her hands: for this purpose, he soon retired to his library for
meditation, where it occurred to him to write to his cousin Captain Crowbery,
whose assistance he foresaw would be necessary to him on many accounts, and on
whose courage and counsel he could firmly rely. A short letter, requiring his
instant presence, being written and dispatched, he found his mind considerably
more at ease; and to cover his designs, carried himself toward Miss Fanny and
her uncle with more than ordinary cordiality and good humor. Claypole, though
a cunning man in the general, was so effectually blinded by this finesse, and
by the report his niece made of the result of her last altercation with his
Lordship, that he considered her as Viscountess elect, and his labors crowned
with success. He commended her very highly for her spirit, and observed, that
fear operated on her lover's nature as the more powerful passion of the two;
but no matter for that, so long as the object was attained, he would not
quarrel with the means. He hoped Delapoer was not absolutely in a dying state,
but of that he was determined to satisfy himself very speedily, for he regarded
him, under the present circumstances, as a very lucky instrument for quickening
his Lordship's measures, which he should take the first fair opportunity of
promoting, by suggesting a temporary secession from Crowbery, during which the
knot might be secretly tied, and not only the appearances of precipitation
avoided, but also the interview with Delapoer, that he seemed so much to dread:
to these ideas Miss Fanny on her part very cordially assented,

When Ezekiel arrived at Susan May's, he had the satisfaction to hear that Mr.
Williams, the surgeon, had surprised them with a visit, and was then in
attendance upon the sick person. He had obtained his discharge from his ship,
and was now come, upon Zachary's invitation, to give him the meeting upon the
spot, and adjust the preliminaries of their treaty for the shop and trade.
Nothing could be more critically fortunate for poor Delapoer, than the arrival
of this intelligent young man, who had already rendered him such services, and
made himself so acceptable to his patient. As for Daw, who esteemed Williams,
and despised Kinloch, his joy was excessive; and it was with some difficulty
Susan May prevented him from rushing into the sick man's room to tell him so.
In the mean time, a bed was appropriated to Williams in her house, that he
might be near at hand and within call at all hours, for he had already
pronounced upon the case of his patient as extremely dangerous. His
applications however had such effect, that before the night was past, Williams
had the satisfaction to see a change of symptoms, that augured favorably, and
was recognized by Delapoer, with marks of joyful surprise and satisfaction. The
meeting between Williams and Ezekiel was very affectionate, nor did his friend
Susan fail to give him a reception perfectly kind and cordial. When he stated
to them the object of his coming, they were rejoiced to hear there was so fair
a chance of his settling amongst them, to the exclusion of Kinloch; and in
truth Williams was deservedly beloved by all that knew him, being a young man
of most gentle and engaging manners, in person very agreeable, and of a
well-informed understanding, with every thing that could recommend him in the
line of his profession: at such times and seasons as his patient did not need
his attendance, he gave the whole detail of his adventures by land and sea,
since he had quitted Crowbery; but in a more particular manner he recited every
thing that had passed from the time that Henry had joined the frigate. This was
the most interesting part of his story to Ezekiel and Susan, who listened with
admiration and delight to the animated picture Williams drew of their heroic
friend, and which he colored to the height, with every warm tint that truth
could give, or valor and humanity deserve. Whilst this was in relation,
Ezekiel's glowing spirit would break forth into rapture and exultation; ever
and anon he would spring from his seat, erect himself into a martial attitude,
and thunder forth his applauses, forgetting sometimes his accustomed sobriety
of speech, and launching forth into apostrophes of triumph, which, if they did
not absolutely amount to a breach of the statute against swearing, were yet but
hair-breadth escapes from the penal letter of the law. Susan's fine eyes
meanwhile expressed the tenderest sensibility of soul, now dropping tears of
sympathy, now glistening bright with transport, emotions that cannot be thought
to have escaped the penetrating observation of the narrator. -- "I knew,"
exclaimed Ezekiel, in one of his rhapsodies, "that my boy was brave. It was I,
and I alone, who first discovered the innate integrity of his heart; albeit, he
was then oppressed under a cloud of accusations and appearances of guilt: it
was I, and I alone, who stepped forth in the defense of innocence, and opposed my
single voice in arrest of condemnation, against a torrent of overbearing
witnesses: this good dame, I confess, took pity on his corporal sufferings,
and, like the charitable Samaritan, poured oil and wine into his wounds: I do
not aver, take notice, that it was identically oil and wine which she
administered, but it was something as good, and served the purpose she intended
by it; the allusion is not less apposite, because it is not literal; Heaven
will consider the mind, and not scrutinize the medicine. He was guiltless, and
we rescued him; friendless, and we protected him; hungry, and we fed him; had
he been in prison, I would have come unto him even there, for my bowels yearned
toward him in christian charity and compassion: and now, behold he is brave,
he wieldeth the sword against the enemies and blasphemers of his faith; he
fights valiantly in the righteous cause of his king, his country, and his
God. Who would not do the same? who would not die in such a glorious contest? I
would for one. -- But out upon it! whither does my passion hurry me? Do I not
forget myself? have I not a calling that warns me from deeds like these? Am I
not a preacher of peace?"

Here Ezekiel sunk down in his chair, confounded and abashed, whilst his lips
moved and his eyes were turned upwards in secret ejaculation; which Williams
observing, kept silence for some few minutes, and then, watching his
opportunity, threw in a few consolatory remarks, by way of qualifying his
self-reproach, which will be found, by those who think it worth their while to
search for them, in the succeeding chapter.

CHAPTER VII. First Love sinks deep into the human Heart.
"I AM sorry, friend Daw, that you should seem for a moment to retract the
sentiments and expressions which my recital drew from you. What is so natural
as to exult in the heroism of a friend? I protest to you, though my profession
has no more to do with the actual operations of the battle than yours has, yet
my heart glows for my countrymen, when I hear them applauded for their valor;
and as to this action which I have been relating to you, though our victory was
not great in its consequences to the nation at large, yet none could be more
glorious to the brave hearts who obtained it; in which, let me tell you, our
gallant young friend distinguished himself in a most conspicuous manner. Had
you but seen him, as I did, when he brought Tom Weevil to the cockpit to be
dressed, you would have owned you had beheld the perfect model of a real hero;
such a countenance," (here he turned to Susan) "never in my life did I look
upon the like; why, 'twas what we may form to our fancies for the picture of
Achilles; such fire in his eyes, but then it was tempered with so much pity and
consideration for the wounded object, who had indeed a most desperate cut
across the cheek, that he had got in the boarding --."

At these words Susan shrunk back in her chair, and put her hand before her
eyes, whilst Dame May eagerly demanded if poor Tom Weevil was killed, to which
Williams answered, that it was a mere flesh wound, in no degree dangerous, and
which was just sufficient to leave an honorable scar upon his skin: he then,
addressing himself to Ezekiel, proceeded to say -- "You, Mr. Daw, and the good
Dame here present, have some experience of these matters, but you can have
little if any conception of the horrid cases we have to deal with during the
carnage of an action. Of this, however, we will not speak in the presence of
Mrs. Susan, whose tender heart is ill suited to such descriptions: the virtues
of Mr. Henry will be a more pleasing subject to her ears, and of these the
catalogue would be in a manner inexhaustible." Whilst he proceeded to recount a
variety of anecdotes to the credit of Henry, particularly his humane exertions
for Mr. Delapoer, who was found a prisoner on board the enemy's ship, and also
his kindnesses to himself in the negotiation with Doctor Cawdle, he read the
heart of Susan in her countenance, and perceived, that whilst he was praising
Henry, he was recommending himself, for this her eyes declared with a
sensibility that could not be mistaken. First impressions are not easily
obliterated; Williams's soft heart had felt those impressions early in life for
Susan, then in the first bud of beauty: time, that had matured her form, had
improved her charms, and though there was something for delicacy to stumble at
in the history of her adventures with Blachford, yet there were such mitigating
circumstances to set against it, that he began to feel in himself a strong
propensity to wave all refinements, and revert with ardour to his first
passion. We have already said, that a more alluring person than Susan's was
hardly to be met with; we may now add, that a more susceptible heart than
Williams's must have been a rare discovery in nature; if therefore he was not
easily revolted by small dangers, it was a consequence of his being operated
upon by strong attractions. When they were boy and girl under the same roof,
every minute they could rescue from the duties of their service they devoted to
each other; at a playful age their love was merely sport and playfulness; as
time advanced, opportunities were more greedily sought, and more ingeniously
improved; inexperienced youth is prone to curiosity, and the dalliance of the
sexes is sure to be progressive; in the path of pleasure there is no
pausing-place, upon which the foot of the novice can rest even for a moment's
recollection. So was it with this fond pair; they had no Mentor at hand to
break the spell; Jemima was herself no edifying example to Susan; Zachary was
no rigid moral master to Williams; prudence was not the reigning virtue in
Susan's character; self-denial was not the best attribute that Williams had to
boast of: as their meetings became more delicious, so they contrived to make
them more secret; still they were subjected to repeated interruptions, and the
innocence of Susan was frequently indebted to the petulance of her mistress for
its timely rescue: but fortune is not such a friend to virtue, as to work
miracles for its sake; and if there is nothing but chance to save a poor damsel
from a false step, I am afraid there is but little chance of her being saved at
all. In a soft and yielding moment, Susan's protecting genius being asleep on
his post, and love alert and wakeful, Williams stole unheeded to her chamber,
and, without the church's sanction, was admitted to all the privileges of a
husband.

Furtive enjoyments are seldom less fleeting than they ought to be. Our lovers
were soon discovered in their meetings, and the consequence was their instant
separation. Williams went to seek his fortune at sea, and Susan staid on shore
to bewail his absence: not that he left her like a man, who runs away from the
mischief he has committed; on the contrary, he tendered to her every recompense
in his power, but nothing cannot be divided, and the proferred indemnification
was of course postponed till better days should enable him to invite her to a
better situation. During the whole of his peregrinations, no rival ever
detached his heart from its first love; he kept in faithful remembrance all his
own promises and Susan's favors, anxious to seize the first moment his good
fortune might present to him for fulfilling his engagements. Three years had
now passed away whilst he had been beating the round of service, with little
other gain than of experience in his profession. He was now at the age of
twenty-three, and Susan had scarce completed her nineteenth year, and within
that period events had occurred, which stand recorded in this history, that in
one sense favored their union, and in another discouraged it; but the
explanation Henry had given him of Blachford's treachery in the case of usan's
seduction, had qualified his repugnance, and converted into pity what would
else have been aversion and contempt. In the mean time, her personal
attractions were improved by years, and his sensibility not abated by absence;
the only struggle he had now to suffer was his dread of being thought a
mercenary suitor (for the balance of worldly wealth was strongly on the side of
Susan) and his discovery of an impression in Henry's favor, which seemed to
him to be paramount to all things else in her remembrance. Of this, however,
time and future observation could alone give him the necessary assurance; and
in the mean while his attendance upon Mr. Delapoer would in a manner occupy his
whole time, and be a sufficient excuse for his delay in entering into any
conversation with her, that might draw him into a premature discussion of what
was passing in his thoughts.

Whilst matters hung in this suspense, the Reverend Mr. Claypole, impatient to
be informed of Delapoer's real situation, and, if possible, to gain some light
into his business, called at Susan May's, and meeting with Williams, was not
sorry to hear that his patient was no longer in so desperate a state as was at
first apprehended. As to the derangement of his senses, concerning which he was
particularly inquisitive, Williams naturally told him that there was no mental
debility in Mr. Delapoer, except what was incidental to his fever, and even
that was considerably abated. Did he know, Claypole asked, what particular
concern he had with the Lord Crowbery, that had brought him in such haste into
those parts? -- To this Williams replied, properly enough, that it was out of
his line to pry into those matters; but heartily confessed, that he could
collect enough from the rambling discourse that his patient would at times
start into, that there was something on his mind of a very irritative as well
as interesting nature; and it was much to be wished that some common friend of
the parties could seasonably interpose for the prevention of extremities.
Claypole, rightly conceiving this to be pointed at himself, said, that for his
own part he had no commission to enter upon the business; and being a perfect
stranger to the gentleman above stairs, as well as to the motives of his
discontent, he should by no means choose to thrust himself officiously into an
unwelcome office, but wait till he should be called upon, when his best
endeavors, as a friend of peace, would not fail to be forthcoming. With this
profession he broke up the conference, and returned to the castle.

CHAPTER VIII. When Parties understand each other rightly, Business advances
rapidly.
IT was in the evening of this day, whilst Ezekiel was engaged with his pipe,
and Dame May employed in affairs of the family, that chance threw Williams and
his friend Susan together in a moment, and after a manner so pointedly
commodious for a tete-a-tete, that they must have been ingenious indeed to have
found means of avoiding it, without betraying more disinclination toward each
other's company, than either of them in reality possessed. The sick man was
asleep; Susan had taken up her work; Williams was seated beside her; the
parlour-door was shut, and the hour was sacred from interruption.

Susan kept her eyes upon her work; Williams directed his upon her; both
parties were embarrassed, and neither could at once find courage to break
silence. A kind of preparatory hum, like the tuning of an instrument, bespoke
an effort on the part of Williams, this produced a responsive note in unison
from Susan, who at the same time raised her eyes from the object they had been
fixed upon, and guided them in that direction, as to clash with his by the way;
a soft and almost imperceptible relaxation of the muscles, which none but a
lover's sensibility of perception could have construed into a smile, struck
courage into his heart, as an invitation to hope, and the words found way: --
"'It Is along age, in my account of time, since we parted," said Williams. --
"And I doubt you have suffered a great many hardships in that period," replied
Susan. -- "Many people would have thought them such," he rejoined; "but where
the whole soul is engrossed by one overruling affliction, lesser evils are
scarcely felt." -- "That is true, indeed," she replied; "if such was the state
of your mind, Mr. Williams, you might well be indifferent to small
inconveniences, when so great a sorrow possessed you altogether." -- "What
could be more afflicting," he said, "than the cruel necessity I was under of
flying from one I so dearly loved? Trust me, my dear Susan, it was a
heartbreaking separation, and that nothing but the hopes of establishing
myself in some such way of business as might enable me to fulfill those
engagements toward you, which I ever held as sacred, could have supported my
spirits through such a length of time; and suffer me to assure you, my sweet
girl, that my heart has been steady to its first love through all changes and
chances; it has been ever yours; and if I hesitate at this moment to convince
you of its sincerity, it is because fortune has made your scale so much heavier
than mine, that I might perhaps be thought to act from mercenary motives, an
imputation which I disdain and disavow from my very soul."

"That is an imputation," said Susan, "I shall never make against you. But
alas! those very advantages I have gained in point of fortune must be regarded
by you, who know my history, as insuperable objections to any views you might
otherwise have had. An unmarried mother will never be your object in an
honorable light; and neither you nor I have any longer the plea of
inexperienc'd youth to excuse our frailties, as once we had." -- Here she cast
down her eyes, and yielded to a suffusion of blushes, that so captivated the
enamoured heart of Williams, that by an irresistible impulse he caught her in
his arms, and, in a transport of love, smothered her with caresses. A
negotiation conducted upon these terms was not likely to be very tedious
between parties so tempered as Williams and Susan May. -- "I protest to truth,"
he cried, "that the wrongs you have suffered from that villainous seducer only
render you more dear to my heart, and more lovely in my eyes, inasmuch as they
add pity to affection, and inspire me with the most ardent desire to stand
forth as your defender against all the world, who shall dare to breathe a word
against your reputation. By my soul, Susan, if I could flatter myself that your
heart was untoucht by any other passion, than that which I first planted in it;
if I could believe that no happier lover, superior to me in every point, had
effaced the impression I once made on that dear bosom, it is not all the
injuries that Blachford, or a hundred such as Blachford, could accumulate upon
you would hold me back one moment from your arms. No, no, I have no such
principles by nature, nor have I learnt any such amongst my country's brave
defenders on the sea, as should induce me to desert the girl that has favored
me with her confidence, because I found her either plunged in the extremest
poverty, or suffering under undeserved disgrace."

One of the kindest glances which Susan's fascinating eyes could bestow,
witnessed the effect, which this gallant declaration had upon her heart: it was
a signal of something more than hope to her happy lover, and produced no common
returns of gratitude from him -- but it has been more than once made known to
the readers of this history, that we are no dealers in description; to recite
what is said, so far, at least, as it refers to the elucidation of events, is
all that we undertake for; it must be left to imagination to fill up the scenes
with action and dumb-shew. After an interval, in which, though the parties were
silent, the business did not sleep, Susan heartily explained to Williams the
nature of her attachment to Henry, giving him a brief but fair account how it
arose, to what length it reached, and where it stopped; and this account had a
farther claim to his entire belief, inasmuch as it perfectly accorded in all
points with what our hero himself had told him in their conversation on the
subject. It was natural that such a person as Henry's should attract attention;
it was impossible that a nature so animated as Susan's should overlook it. But
as honor forbade her to accept his hand, when the humility of his fortune
might have tempted him to offer it, so the change in his circumstances, and the
attachment he had formed, were now become such insuperable bars to hope of any
sort, that all danger and delusion were totally at an end: it was clear that
nothing had occurred which Susan had cause to regret, and that nothing could
occur which Williams had any reason to fear. Doubt and mistrust being thus
removed, and a mutual good understanding established with absolute confidence
in each other's honor, Williams renewed his former vows, and Susan scrupled
not to confess her former liking: if we had the privilege of the comic poet,
who makes marriages a momentary business, we would couple these lovers in those
holy bands without loss of time, and the rather because we are not perfectly
sure but that they ought to have been married, or acted as if they had been
married; but alas! we historians are tied down to forms, and dare not do them
violence, though they might not be so scupulously regarded by those, whom we
have at this moment found occasion to bring together on the scene. Let it be
remembered, however, in the way of palliation, that there is no moment so
dangerous to female discretion, none so favorable to an ardent suitor, as that
in which first love is renewed.

O Nature, whom alone it is my destiny to follow, when I attempt to paint the
characters of my fellow creatures, why will thou not always lead me through
pure and unsoiled paths, in the way that I most wish to go, setting up a mark
at every resting place for morality to steer by, and presenting no one object
to my view but what throws a luster on the history of man, and reflects a
bright example to that portion of posterity that shall chance to read it? Why
will thou compel me to record the frailties of thy fairest works, thou mother
of all nations? How often have I combated thy obstinate authority to the length
almost of rebellion itself, whilst I have been persuading thee to acknowledge
some unfriended outcasts from society as children of thine own! What is it I
have not attempted, in my zeal to reconcile thee to the sufferers by prejudice?
But thou art capriciously ingenious in devising models for thy academy, which
are dashed with blemishes so cunningly interwoven into the very essence of the
work, that he who aims to mend a part mars the whole. In copying thy
productions, so faithful must be the hand of the imitator, that every blot in
the original must be reflected in the transcript.

CHAPTER IX. Some People preach over their Liquor.
WHILST sleep was refreshing the exhausted faculties of Delapoer, and love in
possession of the whole soul of Williams, Ezekiel's pipe was out, and his
meditations at an end; the fire he had kept up in both quarters was burnt down
to the embers; and as he was coming from the next door, Susan, who kept a good
look-out against a surprise, adjusted her apartment, and put herself in proper
trim to receive him.

O woman! woman! thou art a curious compound of sincerity and finesse, of
candor and cunning; alert in thy resources when discovery threatens, feeble in
thy defenses when temptation assails thee! Love, thou art a traitor, an
incendiary, a thief, on whom the hardest name I could bestow would be a term
too gentle for thy unutterable wickedness: all the world knows thee, yet more
than half of it trusts thee to their cost: though they call thee a god, it
would disgrace the very devil himself to claim kindred with thee. There is
Susan, for instance, to whose virtues I would else have consecrated the fairest
page in this immortal history, would have been a mirror of all human excellence
but for thee, thou insinuating imp!

"Heyday!" exclaimed the preacher, looking her in the face as she met him at
the parlour door, "what a change is here in thy countenance, daughter of mine!
I should guess thou have some extraordinary good news to tell me by the
liveliness of thine eye, and the luster of thy complexion. Is thy sick guest on
the recovery? Has our friend Williams cheered thee with the glad tidings of
his convalescence? And truly he also does appear very sensibly exhilerated. Why
this is well, my children; this is as it should be; this is the feast of the
soul, which conscience serves up to us when it brings into review the good
deeds we have been doing. This is the fruit of love, my girl, of that love I
have often recommended to thee, as yielding the most rapturous gratification to
the senses; joys, in which thou may indulge without stint or remorse: no
fear, my good child, that thou should be satiated with these enjoyments, for
they are congenial to thy nature, they flow from thy benevolence, and in
sharing them with thy fellow creatures thou fulfillest the great purpose of thy
creation. And thou, friend Williams, art a young man of goodly parts and
endowments; thou have done well in thy vocation, working the good work of love
in conjunction with this hospitable damsel, and comforting her kind heart with
the timely efforts of thy successful skill and experience in the secret powers
and energies of nature, with which gift I do pronounce thee to be in no
ordinary degree furnished and endowed; and happy is it not only for the
stranger above stairs, but for all our neighbors, that thou art come to reside
and practice in these parts. Now then we will sit down and rejoice over the
reflection of a well-spent day, whilst the good dame, our willing caterer,
shall provide us a temperate refreshment, with a can of that mild wholesome
beverage which our own fields afford: I envy not the vineyards of France,
Portugal or Spain, I covet not their intoxicating, their adulterated draughts;
a tankard of my own native ale, fresh, smiling in my face, and mantling to my
lips, whilst both the senses of taste and smell sympathize in the joint
delight, is to me a treat which all the vats of the wine press cannot compare
with. Come, my child, let thy good mother replenish the pitcher, and we will
pledge each other to the health of the poor stranger above stairs, and to the
many and happy repetitions of this gladsome moment."

Thus having predicated, Ezekiel deposited his hat and staff in a corner of the
room, whilst Susan glanced a smile at Williams so expressive and withal so
sweet, that the muse of comedy, or thou her second self, inimitable Eliza!
might have deigned to acknowledge it; then springing nimbly from her seat, she
hastened to obey the social proposal.

Reader, to thy heart I dedicate this humble scene! Let thy fancy fill it up
with all those pleasing images that creative genius can supply. Call forth thy
benevolence, let every joyous particle that warms thy veins and sets thy heart
in motion toward mankind animate the composition, and then thou shall paint
the dame with glowing philanthropy in her countenance, and the foaming goblet
in her hand, entering the room, followed by the jocund miller, father of the
brave Tom Weevil, and welcomed by all voices with the glorious all-hail of
neighbourly love and cordiality: see them assembled round the board, hand
clasped by hand, lip succeeding lip in their salutations to the spirit-stirring
tankard, whilst the triumphs of old England, and libations to the health of her
brave defenders, circulated round the table, and whilst Williams recounted to
the exulting father the gallant actions of his boy, not omitting to relate the
circumstance of his wound, and the honorable scar he would bring home as a
trophy of his victory and fame.

A flood of thanks to Williams poured from the hopper of old Weevil's lips,
backed with hearty invitations to the mill, and congratulations upon his
settling amongst them, garnished with many oaths and protestations of good will
and zeal for his success. -- "'Sblood! my dear Billy," he vociferated in his
loudest key, "I would not only be contented to fall sick to bring you custom,
but damn me if I would not even die to do you credit."

"Hold, hold!" cried Ezekiel, interposing, "swear not at all, friend Thomas,
neither believe that the death of the patient can bring credit to his doctor.
Die, if it be required of thee, for thy country's sake; die for thy religion,
for thy faith, for the defense of thy family, but in the mean time live for
thyself and thy friends here present, and drink about for good fellowship."

"Aye, by my soul," quoth old Tom, "I shall be glad to stop a bit longer
amongst you, for I have a heart for my friends, and thou art a true one,
Zekiel, I will say for thee, and so is my dear Billy and the good dame, and my
pretty pretty Mrs. Susan; damn it -- " -- ("Hush," cried Ezekiel) "I would fain
see the scoundrel that dares wag his tongue to her disparagement in my hearing.
Zooks! I would soon clap a stopper upon his clack; and I hope I shall live to
see the day very shortly when she shall be married to her deserts: a fair
creature, friend Williams, and a dainty one, though I say it to her face, as
ever the blessed sun shone light upon; is she not?" Here Williams nodded
assent, and shook him by the hand, whilst Susan tittered and looked archly
under her eyelids. -- "What!" continued the miller, "she must not live in this
lone house, like a mope, when some good fellow may be blessed in her arms, and
have corn, wine and oil in abundance: why, it is against nature, and so the good
mother will say, and so says friend Zekiel, for all he looks so grave upon it.
Come, Doctor, I Will give you a text, and you shall give us a preachment upon it.
Increase and multiply."

Though levity of conversation seldom passed unreproved by Ezekiel, especially
when it glanced upon sacred topics, yet it so happened that just then Ezekiel
was in no disposition for reproof. The exhilerating tankard had given him a
flow of soul, that would not suffer him to chill the gaiety of his companions;
yet as far as Weevil's challenge went for a preachment, as he termed it, the
good apostle was no flincher, and perhaps never found himself in a much better
cue to take up the gauntlet.

Planting himself therefore in his oratorical attitude, with his thumbs tucked
into his waistcoat pockets, and his fingers expanded like the claws of a bird,
he gave two or three folemn hums to bespeak attention, and began as follows; --
"When I revolve in my thoughts the wide-wasting ravages of death, I cannot but
regard with gratitude and respect those prolific matrons, by whose labor of
love the gaps and chasms in creation are filled up and replenished, which
sword, pestilence, and famine are hourly making. Praise be to their patriotic
endeavors in an honest way, and much are they to be preferred to those
solitary and sequestered damsels, who, shutting themselves up in nunneries and
convents, keep their natural faculties inert and lifeless, leaving to others of
their sex to struggle under heavy burdens, whilst they go free and partake not
of the toil. If all women were of their persuasion, the world must wear out
like an annuity, and cease with the present generation; for I believe I may
boldly assert, that no way has yet been discovered by the curious in all ages,
how such a consequence could be prevented, if the fair sex were one and all to
stand out, and no longer lend a helping hand to the work. Again, when I call to
recollection, that before a single babe can be produced in the world, two
rational free agents must be in the same mind to give it life; I am astonished
there can have been through so many ages such a coincidence of sentiment and
good will between the sexes, as to keep the work going; and more praise of
course must be due to that party, on whom the weight bears hardest, which, if I
rightly guess, is the woman. I speak under correction, my worthy neighbors;
for having no positive experience to guide me in either case, I will not take
upon myself to pronounce from my own knowledge on the point in question. Tell
me who can, for I profess it is past my finding out, to what secret cause it is
owing that the population of this globe of earth is upheld. How comes it to
pass, that there is no drawing back, no renegation in that quarter where the
whole pain and peril of the task falls with such partial preponderance? When I
reflect on this, I own to you I have sometimes trembled for the fate of
posterity, fearing it should be cut off at once, and the world dock'd of it is
entail at a stroke: but when I look round me, and perceive how vain these
apprehensions are, and that my fair countrywomen, for whom I have such fears,
fear nothing for themselves, but carry the world merrily on, (and indeed in
many instances with more haste than good speed, as the saying is) I take heart
and believe, that as the hand of heaven set it a going, nothing but the same
hand will stop it, concluding within myself, that when the commandment was
given to increase and multiply, there was something given with it that makes up
to those who are at the pains to obey it."

"You need not doubt it," said old Weevil; and immediately Williams, who pretty
well guessed how Susan thought upon the subject, started some other topic and
changed the discourse.

CHAPTER X. Four Parties fairly matched at a round Game of Hypocrisy.
AT the castle, in the mean time, all parties were busily employed in plots
upon each other. The Reverend Mr. Claypole made his best use of the
intelligence he had picked up from Williams for alarming the Lord Crowbery, and
grounding upon his fears his favorite proposal of a temporary retirement and a
speedy marriage. His lordship gave him the hearing with all due courtesy and
good breeding, but with no inclination to follow it in any other point but what
suited his own purpose; as to quitting Crowbery they were both of a mind, but
so far from turning it to Claypole's views of hastening the marriage, his
intention was to employ it as the means of totally avoiding it. Miss Fanny
entertained her fancy in devising projects for post-matrimonial amusements; and
in these it may well be doubted if his Lordship's honor and repose were the
ruling objects of her meditation. Privileges of rank, extension of authority,
and indulgence of propensities, attached to her constitution, had certainly
some share of her attention, and had her system taken place, the wrongs her
predecessor suffered might have been amply avenged.

Captain Crowbery, whom my Lord had summoned to his assistance, obeyed the
call, and, having heard the case, acted as gentlemen in his predicament mostly
act, and recommended those very measures which he found his principal
predisposed to pursue. It was therefore resolved upon with joint consent, that
it would be advisable for his Lordship to take a tour upon the continent,
whilst the Captain kept guard upon the castle, with full powers at discretion
to get rid of Miss Fanny and her uncle, upon the best terms he could make; and
here let it be remarked for the edification of my female readers, that those
very steps, which Miss Fanny took to secure her conquest, were urged against
her as the first and strongest impediments to the completion of it.

This commission, it may well be supposed, was not in all respects the most
pleasant to the undertaker of it, but it was attended with no small bribe to
his diligence, inasmuch as in the event of his Lordship's death without heirs,
the Captain was next in succession to his title and estate, and it was
something more than probable, on the supposition of Miss Fanny's marriage
taking place, that my Lord would not long be childless. The Captain was a man
of spirit and address, not naturally disposed to put his hand to every mean
unworthy job, but too good a politician to oppose his cousin's will, and not so
much his own enemy as to have an unconquerable repugnance against serving him
in a case like the present.

It is not to be expected that his coming at this crisis was the most welcome
of all events to the uncle and niece, and it certainly required some management
to mask the plot he had concerted against them. To Mr. Claypole he talked
freely on the reasons of his invitation, ascribing them to the alarm that
Delapoer's arrival had given to his noble cousin, hinting in no very distant
terms at his want of spirit, and acknowledging in conformity to his ideas, that
the best thing his Lordship could do, would be to step aside for a time, and
leave the matter, whatever it might be, to be made up in his absence by
deputation, which, he observed, was indeed an unpleasant office, though he was
ready to undertake it for the good of all parties, and the rescue of his
kinsman's reputation.

This passed tolerably well upon Claypole, who knew enough of Lord Crowbery's
want of spirit, to think it perfectly natural that he should wish to have the
Captain about him, and as this gentleman agreed with his wishes in advising the
same measures for a change of place, he saw no immediate danger of his schemes
being traversed, and therefore continued to flatter himself that the promised
marriage was in a fair train to take place.

Captain Crowbery had a part also to act with Miss Fanny, and upon this he
entered with considerable advantages; for besides that her character was too
open to be mistaken, and her foibles well known to him, he had the requisites
of an agreeable manner, a good person, great powers of flattery, and a facility
of assuming any species of disguise that might suit his purposes. With her he
put on a gay and careless air of a mere soldier of fortune, who considered her
as the lady elect of the head of his house, and paid court to her accordingly.
This so effectually flattered her vanity, that she seemed never weary of
encouraging his humility with the smile of protection, nor was he deficient in
humouring her with opportunities for the display of those graces so
condescendingly bestowed. He had enough of that faculty of small talk to be
sufficiently eloquent upon insignificant topics; he could point a compliment,
or envelope a double meaning with all the readiness of a practitioner in that
commodious art, and indeed he was not behindhand with any man of modern honor
in the true principles of the sect; for he had courage to justify seduction,
and gallantry to despise friendship, whenever the charms of a wife, of a
daughter, or (which is more than either) of a mistress came in contact with his
passions, and with opportunity to profit by: with these accomplishments we need
not wonder that he succeeded in his efforts to lull the suspicion of a lady not
over incredulous; and had his ambition prompted him to higher objects than a
little inglorious deceit, we may presume he would have been no less fortunate,
for Miss Fanny seemed in a very likely train to overlook both his situation and
her own.

His Lordship's preparations in the mean time, were put forward with unremitted
diligence: as it was necessary for him to provide himself for his tour, and
settle his remittances with his banker before he set forward, a journey to town
became indispensible, and for this he had only to pretend the customary
occasions of consulting his conveyancer upon the marriage settlement, and
providing a license, together with all other necessary appendages to a noble
bride: These were pleasant tidings to the parties interested, and his
Lordship's preparations were cordially seconded by the reverend uncle of the
young Lady, whose interest was so much concerned in quickening his departure,
that she seemed to have forgot the obvious compliment of lamenting it. There
was a concurrence of circumstances, that made it in a manner unavoidable for
his Lordship to invite Mr. Claypole to bear him company on this jaunt; it had
its pro and con in point of convenience, but as it was no difficult matter for
him to give that reverend gentleman the slip in such a town as London, the
offer was made of a place in the chaise with all seeming sincerity, and
accepted with no other hesitation, but as to the point of decorum toward his
niece, who in that case would be left to keep house with Captain Crowbery
alone; but as this scruple was with himself singly, and not admitted by my Lord
himself, or the Lady elect, who indeed treated all such out-of-date ideas with
the contempt they merited, it was withdrawn almost as soon as it was advanced,
and the engagement was made.

"I think," said my Lord to the Captain on the eve before his departure, "this
business will be better managed between you and my Madam in the absence of the
parson, than if he was to stay where he is, and make third-fellow in the fray:
two to one is odds in argument, and Claypole is a plaguey proser, as I shall
find to my cost, but I Will keep the wheels going till I have him safe in London,
and then I Will soon bequeath him to his meditations: a fellow that has treated
his own patron with such ingratitude, deserves no mercy. As to Miss Fanny, I
don't expect you will find much difficulty in qualifying her anger, for as love
is out of the question, which of all passions is the most turbulent, you will
have only to contend with a little dogged disappointment, and when she has
spent her fire in abusing me, in which I give you free leave to join her, I
predict that you will find her as reasonable and as flexible as you can wish;
only let me escape from her talons, and I have little care what becomes of her
afterward."

"That Is a happy indifference," cried the Captain, smiling, "and I can only
promise you I will do my best to pacify her by every means but marrying her in
your stead, which I suspect would not altogether suit her purpose, and mine not
at all."

"Ladies of her sort," resumed the Peer, "are not entitled to much delicacy,
and in my opinion, merit little pity; so that you have full powers from me to
use your own discretion, which, if it deserves the name, will never suffer you
to fall into that snare she had spread for me. She has ten thousand charms as a
mistress, but not one recommendation as a wife: the devil of a temper, and an
unbounded propensity to play the devil with it; for whatever she may say to the
contrary, I am in my own mind perfectly persuaded that she dealt a foul blow to
your antagonist Henry in the vengeance of her disappointment, and then
pretended he had hurt himself with a knife by accident: therefore have a care
of your ribs, George, for if you should fall into the same fault as he did,
it is a chance but you meet the fame fate."

"'It Is not just the death I should choose," said the Captain, "nor am I the man
in the world to stand out like that young Joseph, against ladies who make love
with weapons in their hands; I would rather of the two, meet the favor than
the punishment." -- "Be prepared then," replied the Peer, "for if I have any
guess, you are not unlikely to encounter the alternative: for my own part, I am
clear in conscience, and shall die in the persuasion that I am neither the
first, nor shall be the last in her good graces."

Here a gentle tap at the door announced the fair subject of their discourse in
person. His Lordship in a moment dressed his face in its best trim, to welcome
her with looks of love, and with all due regard to truth, declared that it was
of her and her alone they were conversing, and that he flattered himself the
tender instructions he had been giving to his cousin would be punctually
observed. -- "He will tell you, fairest of creatures," said he, fondly taking
her hand in his, "for he knows what place you hold in my affections: it is on
your account only I submit to be a stranger to my own home for a time, but they
will be heavy hours of absence from my charmer; and Oh! when we meet again -- "
Here his Lordship thought proper to be much affected, and his voice faultered,
whilst the gentle Fanny acted all the ceremonials of a tender blush, which
wanted nothing but change of color to make it real, and artifice was thus
repaid with artifice: meanwhile, a wandering glance stole its way by a sideway
passage toward the Captain, who with infinite gravity of countenance
respectfully liberated her hand, that was then held captive by my Lord's,
murmuring in soft accents whilst he secretly pressed it in his own. -- "Come,
come, my lovely cousin, you must let me part these hands, so soon to be united
for ever: scenes like this will only agonize you both."

CHAPTER XI. Breakfast Table Talk.
THE next morning our travelers started with the sun, whilst sleep held the
bright eyes of Fanny Claypole in his downy fetters, and spared her the painful
task of squeezing out a parting tear. At the hour of breakfast, she issued
forth from her chamber, armed for conquest. We have already observed, that this
young votary of the graces was in the art of undress eminently successful: on
this occasion she had by no means forgot to employ that art in such a style of
studied negligence, as contrived to display her person in its most attractive
points, by a seeming carelessness in those articles on which most care was in
fact bestowed; and this we take to be the very first excellence, the grand
desideratum of the modern toilet.

A pensive look, that had an air of sorrow for the absence of her Lord, was
necessarily assumed, and the Captain could do no less than counterfeit a
sympathising face of pity on the meeting: now we have the experience of human
nature to inform us, that when an agreeable young gentleman takes upon him to
play the comforter to a tempting young woman in affliction, it is so much like
making love to her, that he seldom fails to run one office into the other. The
observation was not discredited by the case in point, for whilst Miss Fanny
acted her part to admiration, the Captain sustained his share in the farce of
hypocrisy with no less spirit and address: her sorrow was just enough to find
occupation for his attentions, and not so much as to discourage him from
persisting in them from a despair of their effects; in short, she was cheared,
and he was flattered by the discovery that his consolation was not lost. In
their conversation, which he took care to regulate according to the point he
had in view, he did not scruple to glance at the character of his noble
relation, in such particulars as might serve to pave the way for his purpose:
he stood in admiration at his good fortune, in gaining the affections of a lady
so beautiful, so young, and so worthy of a more accomplished lover: he was
sorry to confess, but truth could not be disguised, that his cousin did not
make the best husband in the world to his former lady; in fact, his temper was
not so good as he could wish, his heart was narrow, and his disposition
unsocial and morose: a soul like here is, he said, would find itself curbed and
confined by rules so rigid as he laid down: what were rank and title if they
did not bring happiness with them? and who was there in the kingdom she might
not aspire to? In short, if this was a matter of choice, he begged pardon for
what he had been saying; if it was a match of prudence, he wished it might not
deceive her expectations in the issue of it.

These insinuations, well timed and artfully introduced, had their desired
effect; they saved Miss Fanny all the pains which hypocrisy would have cost
her, inasmuch as they threw Captain Crowbery entirely on her mercy, and put his
fate in her hands: had he been guarded in his discourse, she would certainly
have been inexcusably imprudent to have trusted him with her real sentiments;
but when he had so far committed himself on the subject, she saw no danger in
meeting him with the like candor, and vindicating her taste at the expense of
her sincerity, for she was ashamed to be supposed guilty of a real liking for
so contemptible a person as Lord Crowbery. Not discerning what motive he could
have for reposing so much confidence in her, but that of good opinion and zeal
for her happiness, she felt greatly flattered by the turn of his discourse, and
knowing how absolutely dependant he was upon his cousin, and that he had been
uttering words, which if repeated against him would never be forgiven, she said
in a style of mock reproof -- "What a giddy thoughtless soul you are to talk
this language to me, and put it in my power to ruin you with my Lord."

"If ever I deserve to be so punished by you," he replied, "I should have no
right to complain of being betrayed; but if without my deserving you should
think fit to do it, the necessity I should be under of ceasing to esteem you,
would be the greatest misfortune I could suffer by the event."

"That is very gallant, on my word; but why do you suppose I am the one woman
in the world that can keep a secret; and what do you think you discover in me
to trust me with your whole fortune?"

"Shall I answer that question fully and sincerely?"

"No," she replied, "for that perhaps would not be to answer it favorably; and
women, you know, are naturally fond of flattery. Don't you see what mischief I
could make, if I was wickedly inclined to it?"

"Whatever your inclinations are," said the Captain, looking tenderly upon her,
"I would have you gratify them, though my insignificant self was made the
sacrifice; for after all, what am I but a soldier of fortune, and what is my
fortune but the sword by my side? There is my subsistence, and that my Lord
cannot take from me, or, if he could, he dare not use it."

"Fie upon you," smiling, she replied, "you cannot suppose but he would use his
sword in a good cause." -- "He would hardly be persuaded," rejoined the
Captain, "to think any cause was good enough for that, I believe. He will never
let it see the light in anger with his good will, else that young Henry would
have brought it out of its hiding place, for he spelt hard to get a sight of
it."

"That Is a brave lad after all," said Fanny. "I have a right to say so," quoth
the man of war; "and now this Delapoer, this man of mystery, hangs over us like
a cloud: what you may think of this journey to town, my sweet lady, I will not
pretend to say, but for my part I must think, if all his Lordships fears were
out of the question, there would not be much left for his love to boast of." --
"Oh! you mortifying creature," she exclaimed, "if I could believe this, he
deserves --." -- "What!" demanded the Captain interposing, "what does he
deserve? Not the handsomest woman in the creation, I will boldly say; not the
transport of being wrapped in those arms, which were never meant by nature to
embrace a coward." -- "Well, well," she rejoined, "perhaps it is not the best
use I could put them to." -- "What a pity then," he observed, "it should be the
only one." -- "The only one," she repeated, breaking into a loud laugh, "surely
you draw your inferences very nimbly, my good friend, but am I bound to make
them good? Do you think that every marriage presupposes liking? Can you find no
other motives for a connection between a simple Miss like me, and a titled
personage like your cousin, but a preference that would disgrace my judgment,
and a passion that has no interest in my heart?"

"None, so heaven help me," cried the Captain, "in your case I can find no plea
for the sacrifice, and I should think myself bound to congratulate you on your
escape, if you was never more to see his face." -- "Oh! you cruel monster!" she
exclaimed, rallying him, "would you break my heart with the very mention of it?
Do you suppose a married lady is without resources? is she therefore lost to
all the world, or all the world to her? Are there no happy wives but what are
in love with their husbands? Nay, let me put the question closer, are there no
wives in love with any but their husbands? Come, come, I Will talk with you no
longer." -- So saying, she rolled up a pellet of the bread on the
breakfast-table, and threw it at him in that pretty playful manner, as we have
often seen it done by many a fair hand with exquisite address and good aim.

If a man knows any thing of modern breeding, he knows how to answer all
attacks like this: the Captain made too much of it, for he swore it had wounded
him to the heart; there was a little too much of knight-errantry in this, and
he did better when he drew a rose from his button-hole, and gallantly tossed it
into her lap, declaring that no soldier ought to take a blow without returning
it: he had done better still, if he had said nothing, for at best this is but
the trick and pantomime of coquetry and wantonness. This is the time when wit
is not wanted, and action takes the whole scene upon itself.

Miss Fanny, with the sweetest grace in nature, took the rose and placed it in
her bosom, adjusting it with all that pretty difficulty of choice, that
rivetted the beholder's eyes upon the charming operation. -- "Blessed flower,"
the Captain cried, "to what a paradise have I promoted thee?" -- Then smiting
his hands together, sprung from his chair, and turned to the window, as if to
divert some emotion too violent for his control. -- "Come," cried the Lady,
rising also from her seat, "we have talked nonsense long enough, let us take a
grave walk in the garden, and drive nonsense out of our brains."

Her cloak was in the room, the Captain flew to reach it to her, and in
assisting to put it on made so many awkward blunders, and was treated with so
many pretty reprimands, that few cloaks perhaps have given room to more
raillery, or been less applied to the purposes which cloaks in general are
understood to be made for.

To the garden they went, and here we will leave them to ramble amidst shady
bowers and love-inspiring grots, not the most innocent pair that ever took
their solitary walk in garden or in grove, yet fairly matched in nature as in
art, and fitted for each other. Whither they went, and what they did, we are
not careful to recount; for though the justice of the historian should be equal
toward all characters he is concerned with, yet he must be allowed to dwell
with more delight, and expatiate with greater felicity upon the amiable than
upon the unamiable; as far as these prejudices may be deemed excusable, so far
I hope I may be indulged in them, and therefore I shall now drop the curtain
upon this scene, as I have upon others of the like description, and close the
eleventh book of this important history now hastening to its conclusion.

END OF BOOK THE ELEVENTH.
BOOK THE TWELFTH.
CHAPTER I. The Author's last Address to his Readers.
WE are now drawing nigh to the conclusion of our history, and if my kind
reader has found amusement in his task, I shall not regret the toil and labor
of mine. Great must be that author's mortification, who miscarries in a trivial
undertaking; and certain it is, that small matters should never be attempted
without strong presumption of success. Something there must be in every man's
view, who commits himself to the press; and as all speculations upon profit are
now becoming more and more precarious, there seems little left to animate the
adventurer but a disinterested passion for fame: I think it is therefore to the
credit of the corpse, that we still continue to volunteer it with such spirit,
that no abatement is yet discernible either in our numbers or exertions. When I
search my own heart for the motives that have operated with such activity upon
me for resorting to my pen, I find myself impelled by a principle I am not
ashamed of, since it has been uniformly that of doing every thing in my power
for keeping alive a general spirit of good humor, and endearing man to man, by
bringing characters under review, which prejudice has kept at distance from the
mass of society; I have never failed to lend my feeble hand to their's, who are
benevolently employed in recommending love and harmony to mankind: I love my
contemporaries, and detest that language so much in use, which tends to sink
the present age on a comparison with ages past; and as I hold this to be an
illiberal and ungenerous propensity, I thank God I have reached that time of
life when it is chiefly prevalent, and yet perceive myself more than ever
abhorrent from the practice of it.

I must now send my hero into the world to shift for himself; I have done what
I could for him whilst he was under my care, and have bequeathed him nature for
his guide at parting. The trials and temptations I have exposed him to, are
such as might befall any person in his situation, and not greater than every man
of steady principles, without any romantic strain of virtue or courage, may
resolutely meet. I have not set his character upon stilts for sentimental
enthusiasts to gaze at, but kept him on the plain ground with nature's common
stock, studying to endow him with the patient virtues rather than the proud.

To my heroine, I have given as many charms as the reader's imagination shall
be disposed to afford her, without being indebted to descriptions, which I
reject upon conscience, having so often read them in other novelists with
satiety and disgust; and I flatter myself, my Isabella will appear not the less
attractive for the very few and slight demands I have made upon her health and
constitution, not having been able to discover, amongst all the numerous
examples of sickly and tormented heroines, any peculiar delicacy in their
diseases, or much amusement in their casualties: in one instance only I have
fallen in with the fashion.

I have kept my narrative free from the perplexities of episode and digression,
and given the scene to my characters without any intrusion of my own person,
which I hold to be an unpardonable impertinence. Of poetry I have made no use,
and of quotation so very sparingly as scarce to be perceptible. The incidents,
I trust, are in no case improbable; and as to that combination of
circumstances, which appears to criminate my hero in the second book, I have,
since the writing of it, been told of a case upon record, which so nearly
resembles it as to give my narrative the air of being founded upon fact in that
particular, which in reality it was not. In point of style, I flatter myself
the critic will not find much to reprehend; but in that and every other
particular I am fairly before him; let him strike with justice, and I will not
murmur at the stroke.

And now, if this page shall meet the eyes of a certain lady, not less
distinguished for her many amiable qualities than for her exalted rank, she
will perceive that I have fulfilled her instructions, and composed a novel, to
the best of my ability, in the form she recommended and prescribed. Uncertain
of its fate, I forbear to make known whose commands I have been honored with,
content if she alone is satisfied with my obedience, and not entirely
disappointed with the execution of a work, which but for her I never should
have undertaken.

CHAPTER II. The History goes back to the Hero.
THE sudden disappearance of Delapoer, and the state of mind in which he had
departed, caused great uneasiness to Henry, and damped those joys he would else
have reaped in the unrestrained society of his beloved Isabella, to whom every
hour of his time was devoted. Her health was now so nearly reestablished, that
Sir Roger had named a day for his return to Manstock, and that was now so near
at hand, that Henry was alarmed lest the time should not allow for his father's
coming back, and till that event took place, or some intelligence was obtained,
duty fixed him to the spot he was in. He knew too well the resentful feelings
of his father, and the strong expressions he had repeatedly thrown out against
Lord Crowbery, to be at any loss to find a motive for the suddenness and
secrecy of his departure, and those conjectures were as painful as they were
plausible; not that he apprehended any danger to his father's person from a
supposed discussion with that unworthy Lord, for he had all possible contempt
for his want of spirit; but it was the impropriety of the thing itself, and the
unfitness of the undertaker, which struck him so forcibly, and presented so
many unpleasant thoughts upon reflection, that he debated very seriously within
himself whether he should not set out upon a venture, in the hopes of
overtaking his father, and dissuading him from the interview. The
practicability of this, however, was made more than doubtful by the time that
had elapsed, before he had intelligence of Mr. Delapoer's departure, so that
when he came to confer with Sir Roger upon the idea which had started in his
mind, that worthy gentleman had so many good reasons to oppose against it, and
his own maturer thoughts, prompted withal by an unseen advocate, suggested so
many more, that he resolved upon waiting the issue of his father's promised
return; till after some days anxious expectation, a letter from Williams to
Zachary, written after Delapoer's arrival at Crowbery, put an end to all
suspense as to the destination of the absentee, but gave at the same time so
alarming an account of the illness he had been seized with, that Henry,
apprehending him to be in the utmost degree of danger, no longer hesitated what
to do.

He had provided himself with two excellent riding horses, and Tom Weevil
received orders for making ready without delay. The distance was little more
than sixty miles, and it was his purpose, for expedition sake, to ride part of
the way, but there still remained the painful task of reconciling Isabella to
the necessity of an unexpected parting. This was a distressful moment, for
though a heart like here is could not scruple to admit the urgency of the call,
yet love and tender apprehension could not be made to accord, without anguish,
to the disappointment. Neither was Sir Roger himself a disinterested party in
the discussion of this unwelcome business; for when he saw the struggle it
occasioned to the fond, yet candid heart of Isabella, he offered to set out the
next morning with his whole family, if Henry would bear them company; but as
Sir Roger's equipage was in the style of ancient times, and bore not the least
similitude to a mail-coach, a distance of sixty miles was to him a journey of
two days, whilst our hero's impatience did not mean to appropriate more than
six hours to the road; a compromise was therefore struck upon by Henry, who
engaged to come back and give them the meeting at the inn where they rested for
the night, unless he found his father's situation such as to prevent it. This
was eagerly embraced by Isabella, who, at parting from him with eyes full of
tears, and a look of the tenderest affection, said to him, "Go, then, and may
success attend you! Remember only you have that in charge, which is infinitely
dearer to me than the life you have preserved."

His horses were at the door, duty pressed, time was on the wing, he snatched a
hasty adieu, and, light as Perseus, or the equestrian son of Leda, sprung into
the saddle, and was out of sight in an instant -- "He is gone," cried Zachary,
who, with Sir Roger and Isabella, had attended him to the door," he is off like
a shot; it is a rare thing to be young and nimble; but after all, I Am afraid his
labor will be lost, and he will come too late, for I augur ill from Williams's
account of Mr. Delapoer's case." -- "Heaven forbid!" cried Isabella, "that any
such unhappiness as you predict should befall him." -- "Come, come," said Sir
Roger, "we will not anticipate misfortunes." -- Then taking Isabella's arm
under his, walked forth to give his orders to the servants without doors for
the next day's journey.

"I perceive, my dear child," said he as they passed along, "though your life has
been saved by your friend who has just left us, your heart is irrecoverably
lost. It behooves us therefore to consider what you have substituted in its
place, that so we may compute and strike the balance between profit and loss.
If I did not think as highly of Henry's virtues, and predict as favorably of
his temper, as an old man like me ought in reason to do of a young one like
him, I should contemplate my lovely Isabella's situation with alarm and terror;
for though I should not despair but my authority might prevent imprudence, I fear
it would not serve to extinguish love: it demands therefore all the
prepossession that I entertain for Henry's character to bring me to acquiesce,
as you may now perceive I do, in your decided attachment to him. I own to you,
my Isabella, I once thought no circumstances could have induced me to favor a
connection with him or any person under his predicament; but it seems as if
Providence had decreed, that, in spite of all my prejudices, I should be
compelled by the force of facts to be the convert of his virtues, and renounce
my opposition to him. How strongly have events conspired to mark this out,
since fortune first made him known to us by throwing him in the last extremity
of distress upon the unexpected protection of a mysterious mother! What an
escape had he from the murderous designs af Blachford, and the desperate rage
of that infuriated wanton! What perils did he incur in the boarding of the
Frenchman! and what but the hand of Heaven itself could so critically conduct
him to your rescue in the last awful instant, that stood betwixt you and a
disaster too terrible to think upon! How singular was the chance by which I
discovered that posthumous and important writing of Sir Andrew Adamant,
addressed to me in his behalf, and which seemed to have lain concealed for the
sole purpose of bringing it to light in the happiest moment for his interest
and advantage! The very case of that wretched maniac, from whose hands he
snatched you, had a moral in the history of his madness, that applied itself to
my conviction: but when to these I add, the very striking circumstances that
attended his meeting with his father, and reflect upon his uncommon generosity
in the case of Blachford's will, and again in that of Lady Crowbery, how can I
say he is not deserving of your affection, or any longer interpose between him
and the happiness he seems destined to enjoy?"

Here Sir Roger concluded, whilst his attentive hearer still waited in
respectful silence; but perceiving after a pause that he now expected her
reply, she turned upon him the most lovely countenance in nature, and -- "Oh!
my dear father," she said, "think not that I have been silent because I wanted
gratitude for your goodness, but because I feel it to an excess that stifles my
expressions. I trust I never could act in opposition to your will; but I would
fain not entertain even a wish in contradiction to your judgment: had you
therefore interdicted my attachment to Henry, I must, and I would have strove
to have torn him from my heart, terrible although the struggle would have been;
but when I hear his praises from your lips, and receive your sanction to
confirm me in my choice, words cannot speak the happiness you bestow upon me,
and if I did not sooner make reply, it was because I was loath to interrupt you
on a subject I could listen to for ever."

In the mean time Henry, thus ever present to the thoughts of his Isabella,
proceeded briskly toward the destination where his duty called him. New
affections had been stirred within his bosom by the discovery of his parents;
but hard fortune, which had already bereft him of a mother, lost as soon as
known, and beloved only to be bewailed, seemed now in the cruel disposition to
deprive him of his father also. This and his meditations on the dear object he
had newly parted from, were his companions by the way, and honest Weevil, who
followed him, had full scope to indulge his own imagination without let or
hindrance, till our hero, having measured more than half the way, found himself
at the inn, where Sir Roger proposed to take up his rest. Here he left Tom and
his horses, and having delivered to the master of the house the necessary
instructions for the reception of his guests next day, he took post and
proceeded with all possible expedition toward Crowbery.

The day had closed when Henry arrived at Susan's hospitable door, and was
received by Williams with a cheerful countenance, that bespoke the happy report
he had to make of his patient's amendment. Delapoer had quitted his sick
chamber, and was sitting in the parlour; great was his joy at the sight of
Henry, clasping him in his arms and blessing his good providence, that he had
survived to see him once again: of his obligations to Williams, who had now for
the second time rescued him from death, he spoke in the warmest terms, and not
less gratefully of honest Ezekiel and the kind women, whose tender care and
solicitude had contributed to restore him. He confessed the object of his journey
had been a sudden resolution of seeking Lord Crowbery, in consequence of the
objection started by Sir Roger Manstock, with respect to his projected
mausoleum. "And what," added he, "might have been the consequence of our
meeting, had it taken place, I will not presume to say; certain it is, that
second thoughts and a calmer state of mind, have placed that project in another
light from what it first appeared in to me, when under the impression of a
recent disappointment: I have now renounced it, and think it a lucky
circumstance, that the wretch I came in search of is out of my reach, and gone
from home to prepare, as it is said, for a second marriage with the niece of
Mr. Claypole, now residing at the castle."

"Unfeeling, shameless profligate," exclaimed Henry, with indignation and
astonishment; "will he so grossly insult the virtuous memory of his injured
wife, as to plot a second marriage before she is scarce cold in her coffin; and
with the niece of Claypole would he marry? Is Fanny Claypole of all women
breathing to be the Lady Crowbery, that so hastily succeeds to my unhappy
mother? be it so! if he is so rank of soul as to set decency at defiance, let
him couple with a fury, and may his passion be his plague! I know her well, and
if Providence for his sins shall surrender him into her hands, you and I, my
good Sir, may let our vengeance sleep; his punishment is provided for, the task
is taken out of our hands, and the tyrant over others is his own executioner."

The evening was now in advance, and though Delapoer's spirits were greatly
exhilerated by the arrival of his son, yet, in consideration of his strength,
the conversation was not protracted beyond the time that Williams thought fit
to indulge him with; and nothing more occurred between them worth recording in
this history.

CHAPTER III. A singular instance of a Journey performed by our Hero and
Heroine, without one Casualty by the way.
AS soon as Delapoer had retired to his chamber, Susan May and her mother
presented themselves to Henry, and were met by him with all the warmth of
former affection. The good dame as usual was loquacious in her joy, and had
many questions and enquiries to be resolved: Susan's sensibility was of a more
silent sort, and whilst she greeted him with smiles of gratitude and love, the
tear glistened in her eye, and the blush glowed upon her cheek.

Henry saw her emotion, and perfectly understood the cause of it, making a plea
therefore of his impatience to see Ezekiel, he cut short the interview,
observing, that the evening just served him to snatch a sight of his friend,
over his concluding pipe, before he turned in to his cockloft. He proceeded to
the cottage, and opening the door without ceremony, discovered the rural
apostle seated in his chair of meditation, with his back toward him, and too
deep in thought to be roused by so quiet a visitor. Henry stopped and
contemplated him for a few moments, with a placid delight: "Kind soul," he said
within himself, "thy thoughts are occupied in benevolence, and thy
communications are with Heaven!" Then going up to him, and putting his hands
upon his shoulders over the back of his wicker throne, called upon him by name,
to wake from thought and welcome a friend. Ezekiel started at the well-known
voice, sprung from his chair, and threw himself upon Henry's neck: "Praised be
Heaven!" he exclaimed, "praised be Heaven! I am blessed above my hopes in
embracing thee once more, thou child of my affection." He then took two or
three strides across the room, rubbing his hands and crying out; "What wilt
eat? what wilt drink? I warrant thou art fasting, fresh from sea."

Henry smiled at Ezekiel's want of recollection, and stopping him as he was
posting to the store where he kept his provisions, told him that the pleasure
of seeing him was all the refreshment he stood in need of for the present. The
good man now became a little more collected, but still ran from subject to
subject, mistaking many things that he might have recollected, and repeating
others Henry was already informed of; such as the death of Jemima Cawdle, the
arrival of Williams, the reports about Lord Crowbery, and other anecdotes
neither quite new, nor over-interesting in his relation of them; yet our hero
had patience for them all, and in the end was repaid for that patience, by
hearing that the wretched Jemima had, by Ezekiel's assiduous remonstrances,
been brought to a due sense of her condition, and a better train of thoughts in
her latter moments: what money she had scraped together, she bequeathed to her
husband, and every thing in which Zachary was interested, had been faithfully
and discreetly administered by Daw himself, with the assistance of old Tom
Weevil the miller.

Ezekiel's spirits were now so thoroughly awake, that Henry would hardly have
prevailed with him to think it was time to go to rest, had he not pretended
that he stood in want of it himself. He found his friends at next door
expecting his return, and every thing set in order for his comfort and repose,
that Susan's hospitable care and attention could provide.

The next morning brought Williams to his bedside, with the chearing
intelligence, that he could now with confidence pronounce his patient to be out
of danger. His apprehensions thus allayed, he felt himself at liberty to make
good his conditional engagement to Isabella, for which he made the necessary
preparations. After devoting the whole forenoon to his father, and declining
his generous offers of an immediate establishment, suitable to the heir of an
ample fortune, he left him highly satisfied with the errand he was going upon,
and much delighted with the happy prospect it seemed to open on his future
hopes.

Relieved from his alarms about the friend he left behind him, and impatient to
meet the beloved object toward whom his course was now directed, our hero with
a joyful heart, whilst the chaise whirled him rapidly along, counted every mile
that diminished his distance from Isabella. Sir Roger with the punctuality that
governed all his motions, had calculated to a minuteness the time of his
arrival at the inn. It was a full hour before this given time, when Henry's
well-feed postilions drove their panting horses to the door. His first care was
to examine if the house was in a state of preparation for their expected
guests; and it was with satisfaction he saw, that all his instructions had been
punctually obeyed; when this was done, and the little derangements of his dress
repaired, he found himself at leisure to make the proper enquiries after Tom
and his cavalry: the brave lad soon appeared upon the summons, and gave a good
account of his charge; he also informed his master, that part of Sir Roger's
suite were arrived, and that the coach was near at hand with all well
within-side of it.

At length the much-wished-for moment arrived, that brought the cavalcade in
view, and Henry at the coach-door received a hand in his, whose touch inspired
him with delight. All inquiries made and resolved, Isabella now, with Henry
seated beside her, all her fond fears dismissed, and greeted with the smile of
approbation from her beloved father, felt that transcendent glow of soul, which
is the exclusive property of virtuous love, and Heaven's best gift to the
thrice-blessed few that merit it. No traces of her late disorder were any
longer to be seen; her animated countenance beamed with such lustrous beauty,
health and joy, as made it dazzling to behold. Henry gazed in speechless
rapture; Sir Roger himself sat in fixed contemplation, and the very people who
attended upon the guests, seemed to make errands into the room, for the purpose
of treating themselves with a glimpse of the lovely stranger. Unconscious of
her charms, until she saw them in the glass of Henry's face, she no sooner
perceived the transport they excited, than she dropped her eyes with modest
sensibility, and was covered with blushes.

Enraptured at the sight, Henry could no longer command himself, though in the
presence of Sir Roger: "Pardon me," he cried, "thou loveliest of women, for
oppressing thee with my admiration; and you my patron and protector, be my
advocate so far, as to confess that her beauty is irresistible." -- "Why in
very truth, Henry," said the Baronet, "if you could look upon that form without
rapture, I must think you would not be so worthy as you are of an interest in
her heart." -- "How generous is that apology!" exclaimed the happy youth; "how
flattering to my presumptuous hopes! by Heaven, I would go to death for the
father of my Isabella!" -- "You have done more than that for me," replied Sir
Roger, "when you preserved my child: she is, under Providence, your gift to me;
what can I do less than endow you with that blessing you so gallantly redeemed?"

The gratitude and joy which Henry now felt, were not to be expressed by words;
his first impulse was to throw himself at Sir Roger's feet: a motion on the
part of that gentleman, which forbade the attempt, and a certain look, which
reminded him of the place he was in, brought him to instant recollection; yet
he seized his hand with ardour, and pressed it to his lips: Isabella's
beauteous and blushing countenance in the mean while took a deeper tint; she
too like Henry was silent. The good Baronet understood enough of nature to
interpret rightly for both parties, and accordingly took an early occasion to
relieve their sensations, by starting some topic more apposite to the place
they were in; but a more effectual stop was soon put to all conversation on
this subject, by the preparations for supper, and the bustle those maneuvers
never fail to produce amongst the waiters of an inn. The joy, however, which
our hero now experienced, was too discoverable to be overlooked by her who was
the cause of it: how far her own sensations accorded with it, was only to be
guessed at by the sagacity of a lover; for modest timidity kept in check all
emotions that might lead to observation, and nature only showed herself in a
complacent smile, and now and then a tender glance, that escaped as it were
involuntarily and by surprise.

Sir Roger, meanwhile, was in high good humor with every body and every thing:
exercise had given him appetite, and he had a heart to partake of the happiness
he had bestowed; he declared his entertainment to be excellent, chatted
familiarly with the landlord, praised his house, and promised never to pass it
without a call. There is certainly something in an inn, which, by contrast with
other scenes, is oftentimes found highly pleasing; it gives an ease and
relaxation from those domestic attentions which, though they may not be irksome
in general, are sometimes interruptions to occupations more amusing. It may be
presumed Sir Roger felt it at this time, and we agree with him in the following
remark -- That the man, who cannot find contentment in a decent English inn, is
a four unpleasant fellow, and a companion no one would wish to travel with.

Moments, passed thus happily, pass quickly, and our lovers found themselves
summoned to their repose, before they were sensible of any wish for it. The
next morning they were early stirring, for Sir Roger proposed reaching home by
dinnertime, whilst Henry on, horseback took a circuit by Crowbery, under
promise of coming to Manstock House in the evening, if he found nothing to
prevent him on his visit to his father. As far as to the point where his road
branched off, he accompanied Sir Roger and his beloved mistress; whose look at
parting told him how unwelcome the moment was that carried him out of sight:
from this intimation he very naturally inferred, that the interval of absence
was not to be lengthened by his voluntary delay; no sooner, therefore, had he
uttered the word 'Farewell!' than, giving the reins to his horse, he put him to
a pace that made quick dispatch with the solitary remainder of his way.

He was welcomed by Williams on his return, with the same good news, and had
the happiness to find his father advancing fast in his recovery. Williams was
still sole manager in office, though Zachary was arrived. The good man was
certainly not apt to undervalue his own abilities, but in this case he made no
attempt to interpose his advice for any change of system, which probably would
not have been accepted by Delapoer, from the first authority in England. As for
Doctor Zachary Cawdle, Surgeon, Apothecary, and Man-Midwife, though his name
and titles still glittered on the sky-blue scroll, that bestrode the posterns
of his gate, yet had he now touched the happy period that closed his medical
career, and delivered him bodily over to ease, indolence, and the gout for the
rest of his days. The annuity devised by Lady Crowbery, and Jemima's bequest,
made up a comfortable independency; and it was for the purpose only of
introducing his successor into business with a better grace, that he kept his
name in the firm; as to all money arrangements for stock in hand, good will,
or any other description of particulars, Delapoer himself had so generously
stood forward in that essential part of the negotiation, that nothing was left
to the chance and uncertainty of any after-reckoning between the contracting
parties.

Having thus disposed of our honest Doctor, we shall probably find little other
occasion to call upon him, in the further progress of this history, except with
our hearty good wishes for health and long life, to enjoy the tranquillity and
repose, which his good fortune has provided for him.

As for Sawney Kinloch, he by his own choice seceded from the shop, and beat
his retreat to his beloved town of Aberdeen, with a fortune which, reduced into
Scotch pounds, made no contemptible display in his own country; -- an example,
amongst many others, of the very extraordinary things which close and
persevering economy can effect.

CHAPTER IV. When Marriages are making, it is a Sign the Drama is drawing nigh
to it is Catastrophe.
WILLIAMS now found himself in condition to think seriously of matrimony,
without the painful sensation of considering himself as the pensioner of a
wife: Susan on her part had all due partiality for him, and there can be little
doubt but he was satisfied with the proofs of it; yet the arrival of Henry was
an incident of some importance, and the effects of it had been watched by
Williams with all that attention, which wary lovers are apt to bestow upon a
new-comer, whom they suspect to be in greater favor than themselves. Susan's
deportment, however, had been such, that the result of this scrutiny had not
been unfavourable to her, or discouraging to her admirer: the same smile was
reserved for Williams when they met in private; and if occasionally a cloud was
seen to pass over her brow, or a sigh to escape from her bosom, the voice of
love soon restored her to peace; he was therefore firmly bent upon rivetting
the nuptial chain, yet a previous word or two with Henry, by way of preface to
the awful deed, was anxiously sought by him; and as our hero's visits to his
father were daily repeated, that opportunity soon offered itself; when the
following dialogue took place.

"I have fully reflected," said Williams, "upon our friend Susan's situation in
life, and I think I may say truly and without reserve, that my feelings are
entirely reconciled to put up with the consequences of her involuntary
connection with the father of her child. If my mind was not made up upon this
point to a perfect acquiescence for all time to come, I would not do her, as
well as myself, so base a wrong as to engage with her on any terms; but
represented as the transaction has been to me, (and I cannot doubt the truth of
it) she appears in heart so innocent, that I confess to you, Sir, I feel no
hesitation in resolving to propose to her, and I trust I never shall find cause
to blush at the connection."

"There is no ground to suspect you ever will," said Henry: "you was her first
love, my friend, and she, I understand, was yours: a thief indeed stole in,
and made some pillage of your treasure, but you yourself had first unlocked the
chest."

"That Is true, that is true," quoth Williams coloring; "I owe the debt of
honor, and will pay it: yet give me leave to say, I suspect there will be a
sort of blank in her heart for a while to come; but what of that? I must trust
to her good sense and my own attentions, to fill it up before long."

"And how can you doubt of either," rejoined Henry? -- "I will not doubt,"
replied Williams; "nay, I do not doubt, for she has conducted herself hitherto
in a manner to my perfect satisfaction, and it would be injustice to suppose
she will fail me in future; nevertheless, if I am not asking too great a
favor, and intruding on your kindness and condescension further than I ought,
I confess it would be a very singular gratification to me, to know the state of
her mind in these particulars from your examination and report of it."

To this Henry made answer, that he saw no reason to doubt of Susan's
sincerity, neither was he convinced the method he proposed of putting it to the
test was altogether advisable. -- "Nevertheless," added he, "if you are
resolved to put the probe in my hand, and insist upon my using it, as it is
your profession to understand the application, so it must be your business to
stand to the effects of it." -- Williams smiled, and replied he would abide by
the consequences.

These words were scarce out of his mouth, when Susan entered the room; and
Williams, glancing a significant look at Henry, left them together. A leading
kind of conversation was started by Henry on the subject of her little boy
under his charge, which he contrived to train toward the point he had in
purpose to discuss. -- "I think, Susan," he said, "as business will gather upon
your hands with the growth of your child, it might not be amiss to look out in
good time for some honest and well-tempered man to be your partner in the
task." Susan blushed, but at the same time had a certain arch intelligence in
her look, whilst she smiled upon him, that gave him to understand she was aware
at whom his introduction pointed. -- "I see you are beforehand with me," said
Henry, "but if I am touching upon an unwelcome topic, tell me so with
sincerity, and I Will say no more; but if I am still as much in your confidence
as I used to be, and you are not disinclin'd to open your mind to your friend,
why should we not discuss this subject together as naturally as any other? and
surely none can be more interesting and important."

"Certainly," replied Susan, "none can be so interesting to a person in my
circumstances, nor have I any friend on earth, to whose opinion I shall attach
so much attention and respect as to yours: yet I know not how, nor ought I
perhaps, if I knew how to describe the sensation it gives me, to find myself
addressed by you on this subject. In every matter I can lay my heart before you
without scruple or reserve, in this only I feel a backwardness and repugnance,
which ought not to be there, nor shall it be, if my utmost efforts can prevent
it; therefore I humbly pray you to proceed, and if I misbehave myself by any
sudden weakness I am not able to control, let me rather meet your pity than
incur your displeasure or contempt."

"Fear not," replied Henry, "that you can possibly be exposed to either one or
the other, nor suffer yourself to believe I have any motives but those of the
purest friendship for pressing this unwelcome explanation upon you. You and I,
Susan, have been in certain situations, for which I must remain your
everlasting debtor in gratitude, and in the course of which the benevolent
warmth and sensibility of your heart have been so far interested in my favor,
that I feel myself in such a degree responsible for your happiness and secure
establishment in life, as to make it a matter of conscience with me, to see you
settled and content, before I can enjoy with perfect peace of mind the
happiness I myself have so flattering a prospect of. You have known my friend
Williams longer than I have, and I need not speak to you of his worth; as
little need I say that he loves you to the length of marrying you."

Here Susan demanded if Williams had said that voluntarily, and of his own
accord, or if Henry had urged him to it, in consequence of any thing that had
been talked of in confidence between them. To this Henry replied, "I am free to
confess to you, that all I have to tell him he already knows; but as I have had
nothing to tell, except what makes for your credit and recommendation, he views
your character in its best and fairest light: a soft side perhaps toward the
tender passion he may credit you for, but of me he has no right to be jealous,
and for himself he has no reason either to glance at what has past, or
apprehend for what may be to come. A handsome fellow at all points as he is,
can have nothing to fear from an honest-hearted girl like you, whose very first
lesson of love was of his teaching." -- Susan cast her eyes down, and blushed.
Henry proceeded, "He is now established in a profession, where his diligence
and skill will ensure success: what can you better determine upon than to join
your means with his, and fix for life with an amiable and worthy man, who has a
heart to love you, an understanding to advise you, and a spirit that will
protect and uphold you under all events of life?"

"Thank you for your good counsel," replied Susan, keeping her eyes fixed on the
floor; "I have a great opinion of Mr. Williams, but -- "; here she paused, "if
you are so condescending as to be his advocate in this matter, you will advise
him not to talk to me on the subject for some two or three days to come."

"I understand you," said Henry; and rightly judging that a longer pleading
would not help his client, hastened out of the room.

CHAPTER V. Some of the principal Characters in this History are winding up
their Parts.
WHEN our hero had concluded his conference with Susan, he repaired to his
father, and had the satisfaction to hear him say he found himself so well
recovered, that he proposed, with Williams's permission, to accept Sir Roger
Manstock's kind invitation, and pay him a visit the very next day. If our
reader has not heard of this invitation, we have his pardon to solicit, as well
as that of the hospitable Baronet, for our neglect to record it. At the bottom
of the stairs, as he came down from his father's room, he was met by old
Weevil, who came to return thanks for his kindness to his son: Tom was now
returned home, to the great joy of his family, who contemplated his scars with
triumph, and heard his tale with rapture and delight. His father proposed to
him to take on with the trade of the mill, and Sir Roger Manstock had offered
to put him into a small farm, but Tom was a lad of an enterprising spirit, and
in his short cruize had contracted a passion for the sea. The cut in his skull
had not cooled the courage at his heart, and a seafaring life was so decidedly
his choice, that Captain Carey, at the suit of our hero, had promised him
employment: And as we are now more at leisure to attend to his particular
history than we shall probably be when nearer to the conclusion of our general
one, we shall take the opportunity of informing our readers by anticipation,
that Thomas Weevil, through Carey's interest, obtained the lucrative employ of
purser to his frigate; and in the course of a successful warfare, earned enough
to provide a comfortable retreat for himself in time of peace.

Henry's conversation with the Miller was now cut short by a more consequential
visitor; his late antagonist, Captain Crowbery, was in the parlour, and
requested a few words with him in private. He understood Mr. Delapoer had
intended his noble relation the honor of a visit, when he was taken suddenly
ill; that his Lordship was now from home, and in his absence he wished Mr.
Delapoer to be informed, that if the business was such as he could execute, or
was thought worthy to be entrusted with, he should gladly receive his commands.

Henry made answer, that from what he understood of Mr. Delapoer's mind on the
subject, he had no present wish of troubling Lord Crowbery or any of the family
upon the business in question; it simply related to a design which he had laid
aside: at all events, it did not apply to him, the Captain, and if it should be
taken up afresh, he presumed Lord Crowbery would be at home again in a few
days. To this the Captain replied, he was sorry to say that was not likely to
be the case, as he must confess it was not a very honorable way he had taken
of terminating a rash engagement, by running away from it: it could not be
denied that Miss Claypole was unfairly treated, for matters had gone great
lengths, and now my Lord had taken leave of her in a very abrupt fashion, by
going out of England without any warning, either to her or to her uncle, who
accompanied him to town upon the pretense of arranging matters for the
marriage: that Mr. Claypole was now come back, having had a letter put into his
hand after his Lordship's departure, in which he avows his resolution of
discharging himself from his engagements upon prudential reasons; and says he
has probably taken leave of England for some years to come. -- "I have sought
occasion of telling you this," added he, "because I would fain stand clear in
your opinion as to my part in the transaction, which is simply that of being
left here in a most unpleasant predicament; the nearest relation of a man,
whose conduct I cannot approve, but whose interests at the same time I must not
abandon. My situation will, I trust, apologize for this; and I protest to you,
upon my honor, I have not been his Lordship's adviser in the proceeding. I
should have expected that decency alone would have kept him out of an
engagement so unseemly and precipitate. Whilst that affair was carrying on, I
was banished from the castle, to which I am but just recalled, there to be left
in trust of his concerns, with the distressful aggravation of being made
witness to a scene, that beggars all description. And now, having trespassed on
your patience with a detail little interesting perhaps to you, I have only to
add, that if Mr. Delapoer, as your friend, has any thing to propose within the
compass of my power to gratify him in, I shall be happy in the opportunity of
showing my regard to you, by the attention I shall pay to his commands."

"Captain Crowbery," said our hero, "I am much beholden to you for the kindness
of this offer. The candor with which you mark a conduct, that cannot be
justified by any principle of honor, leaves me nothing to add to your comments
on that proceeding. I am sorry for the lady; but as I suspect no other passion
but ambition has part in the disappointment, I hope she will the sooner forget
it. With regard to her uncle, I am afraid it is not in my heart to find much
pity for his mortification: in the mean time, Sir, I shall impart to Mr.
Delapoer the very handsome manner you have expressed yourself in toward him,
and I doubt not but he will be duly sensible of your politeness."

This said, Captain Crowbery took his leave, and in a few minutes after, whilst
Henry was sitting alone pondering on these events, to his unspeakable surprise,
the door was thrown open, and Fanny Claypole herself, without any previous
ceremony, hastily and wildly burst into the room.

"I was resolved," she cried, "to see you once more for the last time; and if
you have any pity in your heart for an injured woman, you will not refuse to
hear me. That monster Crowbery, that murderer of his wife, has assassinated my
reputation; but I have found out his hiding place, and I am setting out this
moment in pursuit of him: villain as he is, he shall rue my vengeance. After
the most seducing promises, the most sacred vows to marry me, he has fled from
his engagements out of England; and before I follow him, persuaded it will
never be my fate to see you more, I cannot go in peace till I have declared to
you my contrition, and implored your forgiveness: Oh! Henry, there is one
moment of my life I must never cease to think upon without horror! Thank Heaven
you survived it! I was mad and desperate to destroy you."

"Say no more of it," replied our hero, "banish it from your memory, as I shall
bury it in silence; and be assured I cordially forgive you." -- "I know," said
she, "you are capable of every thing that is great and noble, and I implore of
Heaven to reward you in the arms of the best and most beautiful of her sex,
your beloved Isabella: I only loved you; she loves, approves and deserves you."
-- "I have heard," resumed he, "how basely you have been treated; but what else
could you expect from such a wretch? So far from allowing you ought to regret
his flight as a misfortune, it appears to me you should rejoice in it, as an
escape out of the hands of a villain, which, to a lady in your situation, is a
most providential rescue."

"Ah! Henry," she replied, "it is my situation that makes him a villain, and
the worst of villains; but I repeat to you that I will not be injured with
impunity; and when you hear of me again, you shall hear I am revenged. England
I shall never visit more; and now, before we part for ever, if you are sincere
in your forgiveness of me, you will hear with favor this my last request. My
uncle, poor deluded man, is brokenhearted on his own and my account; he
repents from his soul his ingratitude to Sir Roger Manstock, and his enmity to
you; he justly despairs of regaining your lost opinions; but as he has no where
to resort but to his residence at Manstock, he ardently solicits your good
offices to secure him such a reception on his return, as may encourage him to
resume his functions with some degree of comfort, and not entirely disgrace him
in the eyes of his parishioners. When I am gone, his situation will be sad
indeed; my indiscretion, and his own ambition, have destroyed his peace; your
benevolence may preserve him from absolute despair. Have you the magnanimity to
extend it to him, and return good for ill? -- I am satisfied you have."

"I hope," replied Henry, "we both are capable of returning good for ill. No
one, who ever tasted that sweet transport, can regret the sacrifice of such a
direful passion as revenge. The virtue of forgiveness is in its own nature so
lovely, so congenial to man, that if it had not been prescribed to us as a
duty, we should have practiced it as an indulgence. When we are instructed to
forgive our enemies, knowing them to be such, it is a precept, that does not
take away our sense of injuries, it only abridges us of the privilege of
revenging them; and you, who swell with rage against the wretch that has
betrayed you, who threaten to pursue him with your vengeance, tell me, is it a
pleasurable sensation you now nourish in your heart? Would it not be a happy
reformation, were it possible, to change the tempest into a calm with the word
of power? Religion has that power, mercy can speak that word; she can breathe
peace into your bosom, and purify the heart in which she dwells, till nothing
evil can approach it -- mercy is that virtue, which offers opportunity to all;
for who is there that has not something to forgive, although he may have
nothing to bestow? It Is general as the sun; no solitude can exclude its
emanation. Cast me upon a desert coast, an exile from society, where animated
nature does not draw the breath of life, still I can find some object to engage
my care; the plant that feebly vegetates for want of soil, the rill that
struggles for a clearer channel, will demand my help; and mercy, like heaven's
general dew, shall fall upon the naked earth, though not an insect that has
life be present to partake of it."

"I must not hear you on this subject," cried the relentless damsel; "my nerves
are braced to the undertaking; my wrongs will not be reasoned with, my heart
pants for revenge; the intercession of an angel could not shake me from my
purpose. Farewell for ever!" -- With this terrible denunciation, she sprung out
of the room, leaving our hero to pursue his fruitless meditations by himself.

CHAPTER VI. When the Judge is in League with the Advocate, it is easy to
predict the Issue of the Suit.
THE scene last recorded made so deep an impression on the sensibility of our
Henry, that when he returned to Manstock House in the evening, the effect was
so discoverable, that he found it necessary to impart to the enquiring Isabella
what had caused it. When he had finished his recital, which, though not
colored to the height, was sufficiently horrible to account for what she had
remarked, she produced a letter, that day received from the unhappy object of
their conversation, wherein she takes shame to herself for her conduct toward
Henry, and paints his character in the highest terms of praise: she speaks of
Lord Crowbery as a wretch too base to live, and takes a final leave of
Isabella, with the warmest wishes for her happiness; recommending, as her last
petition, her repentant uncle to pardon and protection, and entreating her to
employ her generous efforts for mitigating the just resentment of Sir Roger.
"There is justice, at least," said Isabella, "in this poor creature's heart,
though it is the slave of passion and revenge. Alas! I fear she is desperate
enough to execute any dreadful act she meditates; but what is to be done with
this poor deluded uncle of here is, whom she recommends to our pity? Methinks it
would be hard to refuse him that, now he has seen his error, and smarts for it
so severely. It cannot be expected my father should ever entertain the same
affection for him as before, nor is it, perhaps, to be wished he should; but I
think I may answer for it that he will never show him any marks of his
resentment. I am told he came early to the vicarage this morning, and no doubt
it is a heavy moment with him, whilst he is uncertain what reception he will
meet from this family, by whose notice or neglect all the parishioners will
govern themselves. Poor man! he wants a comforter: I know the tenderness of
your heart, Henry, and I wish you could prevail upon yourself to pay him a
charitable visit." -- "May all your wishes be as readily anticipated!" replied
Henry; "I have done that already." -- "Have you?" she exclaimed; "how like
yourself is such benevolence! I cannot tell you, Henry, what delight I take in
every thing that does you honor; but what is that but saying every action of
your life diffuses pleasure to your friends?" -- "That praise is more than I
deserve," said Henry; "for I really sought my own gratification in visiting Mr.
Claypole, who is so much an altered man, that I got rid of some unpleasant
impressions I had received in his disfavour; and when a man has the good sense
to see and heartily to confess his errors, so far from being lessened in my
opinion, he seems to me a more amiable character than before he had committed
them." -- "I dare say I should think as you do," replied Isabella, "if I did
not recollect there is one person in the world who has never taken that method
to increase my good opinion of him." -- "That only proves your partiality is
greater than your memory," rejoined Henry, looking tenderly upon her; "but
whilst my whole heart is yours, and every thought which it conceives is
inspired by the ambition of approving myself to you, following that impulse,
how is it possible I should err?" -- "Ah, flatterer!" she replied, "if my
approbation is your object, that is long since obtained." -- In saying this she
yielded him her hand, whilst her enraptured lover, pressing it to his lips,
dropped on his knee at her feet: "And may I not," he said, "presume, upon that
approbation, to solicit the surrender of this lovely hand for life? When will
the charming Isabella deign to bless her fond devoted supplicant, whom she has
condescended so to praise and honor above all that he can merit? Oh! when will
that soft heart, so full of pity, yield to my intercession, and consent to
shorten my suspense? How many anxious days have I to number betwixt hope and
happiness?" -- "Days!" she exclaimed, "what are you thinking of?" -- "Of you,
the first in all my thoughts, the fairest, loveliest object in creation; of
myself next, the wretchedest of beings, if, after a few weeks, I must be doomed
to bear the pangs of separation from all that is dear to me in life." -- "And
why of separation?" she demanded; "my father, it is true, will be called up to
town at the meeting of Parliament, but you will be with us, Henry; I am sure my
father does not mean to part with you: don't you perceive he is never happy
without you?"

"He is very good to me," he replied; "but still I cannot look forward to that
time without alarm. London is my terror: what can I do in it? I have never been
in the habits of a London life, nor can I accord to them. Adieu to the soft
shades of Manstock, and our delightful walks beneath them! Farewell our
peaceful evenings, undisturbed by noise, uninterrupted by intruders! No more
morning rides, amidst flocks and herds and cultivated farms, to visit the
improvements of the husbandman and the works of the labourer: no peaceful
cottager will be standing at her door to greet my Isabella with a blessing as
she passes; no infant children clothed by her bounty, no aged objects feeding
on her bread; all tranquil pleasures will vanish, and, perhaps, the very senses
themselves change with the scene that shifts before them: the eye may lose its
purity of speculation, the ear its chaste abhorrence of unmeaning folly or
insidious flattery; and the heart, surpised by novelty and sapp'd by
dissipation, may in time be perverted from its simplicity; and these venerable
towers, the seat of hospitality and peace, when visited again, may present
nothing to the imagination but the gloomy haunts of solitude and melancholy."

"Heavens! what a picture," she exclaimed; "but can these fearful predictions
be realiz'd? No, Henry, I have been trained to domestic habits, and to them I
will adhere. My duty leads me to attend upon my father, and to that alone I
will devote myself: you shall never have to seek me at public places and
assemblies: we will pass our evenings at home, and hold to the old fashions of
Manstock House, till it is our happy destiny to return to it again, and then
you shall witness if my spirits sink upon the sight of it!" -- "Would to Heaven
that day was come!" rejoined Henry, with a sigh; "or that my adorable Isabella
would be graciously disposed to save me from those agonies that parting must
inflict." -- "Again you talk of parting; where is the necessity for that?" --
"Because I am a son," he replied; "and have as yet no nearer, no superior, duty
to oppose to nature's call upon me. Can I desert my father in his declining
state? His melancholy station, as you know, is fixed, and nothing can allure him
from it: how then can I acquit myself to conscience, and be justified to him,
unless my lovely advocate will furnish me with a plea to put to silence all
opposing claims? Can the most generous of her sex reflect that she has power to
bless me with a word, and will she not pronounce it?"

He accompanied this appeal with a look so touching, and action so tender, that
the fond and unopposing Isabella was disarmed and vanquished. The dread of
separation on the one hand, and the impulse of all-powerful love on the other,
conspired to second and enforce his suit. As she meditated upon a reply, her
color came and went, as alternate emotions succeeded one another: delicacy
suggested some repelling thoughts; the recent death of Lady Crowbery opposed a
strong impediment to hasty measures; but then she called to mind two months
were yet to pass before her father would be called from home, and then the same
objections of decorum would not remain in the same force. She perceived that
every hour improved her lover's interest with Sir Roger, and in two long months
there were many hours to mature that interest, till what was Henry's wish might
be her father's also, and then her precipitation would not stand in need of an
excuse: in short, these same intervening months were such a resource in her
reasonings upon this petition, and love is so ingenious to avail himself of
every resource against hesitation and delay, that she did not feel herself
necessitated to quash his hopes by a peremptory refusal; but, on the contrary,
turning her eyes upon him with a smile that would have animated any heart which
had not totally forborne to beat, and blushing with a consciousness that she
was to speak upon a subject that awakened all her sensibility, she said, she
hoped he was more ingenious than sincere in stating an alternative to puzzle
her poor wits, and make a choice of difficulties, so artfully devised, that she
could only say he had found that one circumstance to alarm her with, more
terrible on reflection than all she had to dread by yielding to his
importunity. -- "Oh, Henry!" added she, her sweet voice trembling and sinking
into tones the most tender, "it is plain you know the power you have upon my
heart, when you menace me with a separation I have not fortitude to bear, and
represent yourself in affliction and distress of mind, which you tell me is in
my power to relieve you from with a single word, convinced, as you must be,
there is no sacrifice I would not make to purchase your release. If in this
straight, therefore, you are resolved to hem me in by terrors on both sides, I
freely own I have not the heart to make you wretched, and do not want the
courage to resort to that alternative, which takes the inquietude from you, and
fixes it on me alone."

Henry replied to this with such respectful, but impressive tenderness, and
though his heart overflowed with gratitude, he tempered it with such delicacy,
that before their interesting conversation was concluded, every objection
Isabella's timidity had opposed was removed, and her fond heart became so
complete a convert to the rhetoric of love, that when they broke up their
conference, it would have been hard to decide, could their secret thoughts have
been discovered, which of the two was most impatient for the happy moment that
was to unite them for life.

CHAPTER VII. Occurrences upon a Visit at Manstock House.
THE next morning Henry rode over to Crowbery, and found his father preparing
himself for his visit to Sir Roger Manstock. stock. It was a bold experiment,
but his heart was so much bent upon the undertaking, that Williams no longer
opposed it. At the hour appointed Sir Roger's horses came over, and Delapoer
stepped gaily into his chaise, after taking a most grateful leave of the
hospitable women and honest Ezekiel, who were assembled on the occasion, and
with many kind wishes attended him to the carriage. The day seemed to smile
upon his enterprise, and he arrived at the gates of the venerable mansion with
strength and spirits recruited by the freshness of the air and the gentle
exercise which the vehicle had given him. On the first step before the door the
worthy Baronet received his visitor, and welcomed him with that hospitable
grace which was peculiarly his own. As he entered the stately hall, through two
files of domestics ranged on each side, he was struck with a peculiar delight,
in contemplating a scene that so strongly contrasted every thing his eyes had
of late been accustomed to, and carried his imagination back through centuries
past to the times of feudal state and chivalry. He seemed never weary of
praising and admiring every thing he saw, nor was Sir Roger backward in
explaining every object of his curiosity; he knew the owners of each shield and
corselet, had the history of their battles by heart, could point out their
portraits in the picture-gallery, and elucidate every banner and bearing of the
family coat; to all which Delapoer, who was an adept in heraldry, gave a
willing and attentive ear.

In the midst of this discourse, when Sir Roger had brought down his narrative
so near to modern times as to be just then engaged in relating an anecdote of
his great grandmother, very much to the credit of her beauty, Delapoer's
attention was drawn off by the entrance of Isabella, in whose person he beheld
a living model of such exquisite perfection, that he could not resist
whispering to the Baronet, that whatever might have been the charms of the
ancestor, he was persuaded they were outdone by those of the descendant. Sir
Roger smiled, and probably was not displeased with the apostrophe, though he
still seemed unwilling to give up his great grandmother -- murmuring, in an
under voice, that he could assure him Lady Rachel was a famous woman in her
time. Isabella's manners were of that natural and engaging sort, that all the
graces which others gain by study, she seemed to possess to a superior degree
by the gift of nature: how then could she fail to charm a man of Delapoer's
sensibility, who at the same time recognized in her fine person a family
likeness of that beloved image which sad remembrance had indelibly impressed
upon his mind? His figure, though in decay, had still a grace and highborn
elegance about it, which neither lapse of years in a debilitating climate, nor
the more fatal inroads of corroding melancholy, could so efface, but that there
still remained the venerable ruin of a noble form. His address, though
certainly not that of the present era, was not so stiffened by oriental forms
as to be troublesomely ceremonious; it had all the gallantry and good-breeding
of the old court, with some slight tints, perhaps, of its pedantry and
precision: this, in Sir Roger's eye, was the very model of a fine gentleman,
and no instruments in unison ever harmonized more perfectly than the good host
and his guest.

Sir Roger's style, as we before observed, was, in point of open hospitality,
that of the feudal ages, and his return to Manstock brought a great resort of
the neighboring gentry to his house, where the board might literally be said
to groan with plenty; but the most interesting spectacle to Delapoer was that
of the domestics at their dinner, ranged at three distinct tables, according to
their gradations and degrees. "This is true magnificence," he cried; "this is a
princely manner of administering a great estate." Some venerable personages at
the head of the garrison particularly struck him; when a grey-headed senior,
who presided at the upper table, giving a signal for silence, rose from his
seat, and lifting a can to his lips, proclaimed aloud, " Prosperity to the
house of Manstock!" which was repeated by all with the like action, and in the
like posture; whereupon, the libation being finished, the whole company broke
up, and dispersed to their several occupations and employs.

In the great parlour, where Sir Roger entertained his guests, Delapoer was
much amused by the series of family portraits, exhibiting curious specimens of
characters and dresses in the several fashions of their times; whilst the
Gothic windows of painted glass reflected variegated gleams of the prismatic
colors, which played upon the faces of the company with a singular and
whimsical effect: Zachary Cawdle in particular, who was one at the table, sat
directly in the stream of so broad a glare of crimson light, that he exhibited
a most ferocious and resplendent mask of foil, that would not have discredited
the hue of Bacchus himself in the gayest of his frolics.

When the ladies had retired, after dinner, something was said of Lord Crowbery
by a gentleman who sat next to Henry. He might have known it was a topic not
very acceptable or polite at Sir Roger's table; and as he seemed going into an
account of his attachment to Miss Claypole, Henry, in a whisper, reminded him
that there were some present who would be thankful to him if he would change
the subject he was upon. The young man was proud, ill-mannered, and irritable;
he took Henry's hint as an affront, and turning to him with an indignant look,
said, in a tone that marked his purpose to be heard by every body round him, "I
don't know how I have deserved your reprimand, Sir, nor by what right I am
stopped in my speech, when I was neither addressing it to you, nor about to speak
disrespectfully of Lord Crowbery, to whom I have the honor of being related,
and for whom I entertain a very high regard and esteem."

All eyes were instantly upon the angry gentleman; Sir Roger was preparing to
interpose, and Delapoer had drawn himself up into a martial attitude, when our
hero with the most perfect composure, not elevating his voice, nor retorting
the acrimonious tone in which he had been addressed, replied, that he was not
aware of his connection with Lord Crowbery, but since that was the case, he
would compromise the matter without any further interruption to the company --
"For, if you, Sir," added he, "will be pleased to say nothing more as to your
opinion of his Lordship, I will be perfectly silent as to mine." -- "You will
do well, Sir," replied Mr. Hardham (for that was the name of the speaker) "to
be silent in this and every other company, where that noble Lord is named." --
Then rising from his seat, he said -- "With your leave, Sir Roger, we will
adjourn to the ladies." -- "Hold, Sir," cried Henry, "we are both at issue
before this good company, and if either of us has received an insult, let him
that gave it deliver an apology: if there is here one gentleman, that
pronounces me in fault, I am instantly prepared to make atonement on the spot."
-- "No, no, no!" was echoed by every voice; and one gentleman added, that he
dare say Mr. Hardham would apologize. -- "If that is your opinion," he replied,
"you will be pleased to tell me, in the first place, for what I am to
apologize, and next to whom, for to this moment I never heard what name the
gentleman chooses to be addressed by." -- "By mine," replied Delapoer, "by a
name which he inherits as my son, and by which he is entitled to exact
satisfaction from any gentleman that has the hardiness to insult him."

These words were calmly, though pointedly delivered; Mr. Hardham paused for a
few moments, then addressing himself to Mr. Delapoer, said -- "I am answered;
and from what I felt as a relation of Lord Crowbery, can allow for what you
must feel as so much nearer allied to this gentleman; to you therefore, as his
father, I refer myself implicitly, and whatever you in your candor think
proper to dictate, that I will repeat." -- "Then, Sir," replied Delapoer, "I
can be at no loss to pronounce; you have already said enough, and all I have
further to wish for my son is, that he may have the honor and happiness of
being better known to you."

Thus, by the timely application of a few patient words, an altercation was put
a stop to, which threatened fatal consequences, for Mr. Hardham was a young man
of a very forward spirit, and had more than once been engaged in what are
called affairs of honor; he had withal a full sense of his own consequence,
being a man of great property in the county, son of the lately deceased member,
and the very person whom his party meant to have set up as candidate, had not
Sir Roger met the wishes of the coalition, and prevented a contest. His
petulance nobody wondered at, for that was habitual to him; how he came to be
so right-headed in getting out of the quarrel, was matter of welcome surprise
to every body; but there was a latent motive, which operated upon him for
curbing his temper in the presence of Sir Roger; and it was not so much the
firm words of Delapoer, as the fair eyes of Isabella, that were the peacemakers
on this occasion: he had watched her during the entertainment; her manners
charmed him, her beauty enchanted him; but there was something in her looks at
times, that directed his suspicion toward the person of our hero; and this,
together with a report, that had reached his ears, of an attachment in that
quarter, threw a spark of jealousy upon the combustibles of his frame, which
accounts for the explosion that so suddenly took place: the event, however,
shows that this quarrelsome gentleman, like others of the like quality, had
temper at command, when it suited him to make use of it.

Few things could have given greater pain to the hospitable heart of Sir Roger
Manstock, than to have had the peace and good order of society disturbed
beneath the sacred protection of his roof: the harmony that now succeeded, was
of course grateful to him above all, and he spared no pains to convince Mr.
Hardham of this by repeated marks of the most pointed attention. After a few
cheerful and conciliatory glasses, it was again proposed to adjourn to the
drawing room: here the pacified gentleman had a fair opportunity of renewing
his attentions to the lovely Isabella, without any interruption from Henry, now
closeted with his friend Williams, who had galloped over from Crowbery, to
impart the glad tidings of his approaching nuptials with his fair betrothed,
who had consented to yield (what alone she had withheld) her hand in marriage
on the day but one next ensuing. Henry was truly rejoiced at the news, but put
as much gravity into his features as the felicity of the occasion would admit
of; all which Williams, who read his thoughts, understood without a comment.
Mr. Delapoer was likewise called into conference, not only for the purpose of
congratulation, but to undergo certain medical interrogatories, that Williams
had to put to him; all which were discussed to the mutual satisfaction of both
parties, for nothing was now wanting but gentle exercise and cautious regimen
on the patient's part to confirm his recovery, and thereby establish the
professional fame of the bridegroom elect.

CHAPTER VIII. A certain Gentleman repeats his Visit.
WHEN Henry returned to the drawing room, he found nobody there but the father
and daughter; the company were all gone, and Mr. Hardham the last. His
attention to Isabella had been so marked, that when, upon taking leave of Sir
Roger, he begged permission to wait on him the next morning, upon an affair of
consequence, there was little doubt to be made but that it had respect to
Isabella. This was conveyed to Sir Roger in a whisper, as he passed through the
hall to his carriage; and the Baronet had now been imparting it to his
daughter, with his comments upon it to the above effect: her own observations
also coincided with the same idea, and the point was not long in debate what
should be the nature of the answer to the proposal, if it came; for,
independent of all prior engagements, Mr. Hardham had not the happy faculty of
recommending himself to the good graces of either party: Sir Roger, indeed,
acknowledged that his pretensions were unexceptionable in point of fortune and
family, but he thought him of a proud imperious nature; and when he came to
reflect upon his behavior at table toward Henry, he thought he could discover
other motives for his acquiescence than what resulted from pure candor and
conviction. Isabella said, she had never found herself so embarrassed by the
attentions of any man in her life, his whole address seemed artificially put on
to cover a character and temper very different from what he assumed; but of all
the persecutions she ever suffered, by being looked out of countenance, none
was to be compared with what his eyes had the faculty of inflicting, when she
found them for ever fixed upon her; in short, throwing all comparisons out of
the question, Mr. Hardham was positively, in her opinion, the most unpleasant
man she had ever met with.

In this period of their discourse Henry entered the room; and related what had
passed between him and Williams. A new subject was now started, and of a
pleasanter nature: Henry spoke in the highest terms of Williams, and as his
father was now retired to his chamber for the night, he gave an account of all
he had done for Williams, and how he had adjusted matters with Zachary on his
behalf, by which he had set him out clear in the world, with a fair prospect of
success in his profession, and of a happy connection with the girl of his
heart, now comfortably established. Isabella asked if he was fully apprised of
Susan's history. Henry assured her, he was acquainted with every particular of
it, and had little difficulty in reconciling himself to circumstances, more
imputable to ill-treatment than misconduct. -- "And was Susan very readily
consenting (...) march? had she no sruples to overc^ (...) wholly and solely
attached to (...) smiled, and turning to Sir ^ appealed to the court if these
were questions he was bound to answer. -- "I can understand," replied the
worthy magistrate, "that they are questions you wish to evade; however, as
Susan was her own mistress, and under no control, we must suppose she had good
reasons for the choice she has made; and I think Isabella herself will allow
that is a fair conclusion."

Mr. Hardham was mentioned, and Henry, in a kind of whisper, asked Sir Roger if
he did not think it would be right for him to pay that gentleman the compliment
of a visit the next morning. Sir Roger answered that he should have thought so,
but that Mr. Hardham had signified his intention of coming over to Manstock;
and if he conjectured rightly of his business, the ceremony of a visit might
very well be dispensed with. Henry took the hint, cast a tender look upon
Isabella's blushing countenance, and immediately gave a turn to the
conversation, by speaking of Mr. Claypole: he had been with him that morning,
and found him in great affliction, on account of a letter he had received from
his niece, by which it appeared she had taken the desperate resolution, of
pursuing her base deceiver out of England, and was then on the point of
embarking in a packet for that purpose. "Is the girl mad," said Sir Roger, "to
run after a rascal that any other woman would think herself happy to be rid of?
what can she propose to gain by such a crazy expedition?" -- "Revenge," cried
Henry, "if I am to believe her own professions; and if I may judge from the
frantic menaces she vented against him, when she surpised me with a visit at
Susan May's, I would not ensure his Lordship's ribs from a stiletto, if once he
falls within her reach." -- "A wretched catastrophe truly," cried Sir Roger,
"that would be, but a striking moral for tyrants: Mr. Hardham will then have to
mourn the loss of his respected friend and relation, and this misguided this
unhappy man, poor Claypole, will bring his politics to a miserable end; it is
ever thus with over-cunning men." -- "But he has thoroughly repented of his
ingratitude," said Isabella, "and is now a real object for your pity and
forgiveness." -- "He is welcome to them both," rejoined Sir Roger, "and to
every thing that I can subscribe to his consolation and relief; but what I
cannot command, my affection and esteem, them I have not in my power to bestow;
when once ingratitude has chilled the heart that glowed with friendship, who
can kindle it afresh? I speak strongly and explicitly to you, my dear children,
upon this subject, because I know that both Henry upon this occasion, and you,
Isabella, upon others as well as this, have purposely introduced it with a kind
design of reinstating Claypole in my good opinion, by setting forth his
sufferings and contrition: the attempt does honor to your hearts; it is amiable
in the extreme, and I rejoice that you are capable of being advocates for one,
that was no advocate for you, but artfully abused my confidence, and turned
what interest he had in me (and that I own was not a little) insidiously
against you both. Baffled in this project, and disappointed of his malice, he
betook himself to a wretch, whose very name is poison to my ears, and there
began an infamous cabal, which having ended in miscarriage and disgrace, he now
repents of; but remember, children, it is repentance after punishment, and
therefore, when I say that I forgive him, I have said enough; -- I have nothing
more to do with Mr. Claypole."

To this no answer was attempted, and probably from this time till certain
circumstances, hereafter recorded, came to light, neither Henry nor Isabella
felt in themselves any disposition to revive the subject. Claypole in the mean
time kept himself retired from all society, except when Henry occasionally paid
him a charitable visit, or Sir Roger cheared him with a civil word, which every
Sunday he took care to address to him after divine service, in the sight of the
congregation.

The next morning came, and Sir Roger was observed to be more than ordinarily
thoughtful during breakfast: his mind was occupied with the expectation of his
unwelcome visitor. When he reflected upon what had fallen from him at table,
where he was interrupted by Henry, he called to mind so many unpleasant marks
of a purposed affront, so much arrogance in his manner, and such indications of
a suppressed resentment, even in the very act of atoning for his insult, that
he was not without suspicion that the flame of his temper would find some other
vent, if upon the presumption of his proposing for Miss Manstock, he was to
meet him with an instant and abrupt refusal. On this account he was not a
little perplexed how to deport himself in the conference, so as neither to
irritate him against Henry as a rival, nor encourage him to consider Isabella
as a lady he was warranted to pursue with his addresses; and the whole result
of Sir Roger's meditations amounted only to this, that he had a clearer sight
of his difficulty than of the way to lead him out of it. It was therefore not a
little to be regretted, that before he had gained any distinct perception of
the line he was to follow, Mr. Hardham was announced, and of course immediately
admitted to a private conference.

Mr. Hardham prefaced his more material business, by apologizing for words that
had escaped from him yesterday, in the heat of conversation, which, as far as
they alluded to Lord Crowbery, he feared might have conveyed an impression in
his disfavour, as seeming to imply that he approved of his Lordship's conduct
in general, when in fact he only alluded to that part of his character, which
was uppermost in his thoughts, the steady support which he had always given to
the county interests of his family: that he was not then apprised of the just
reasons Sir Roger had to resent his treatment of an amiable lady, unfortunately
lost to the world; neither was he informed of the late disgraceful step he had
taken, of flying from engagements, which though rashly made could not be
honorably abandoned; -- these circumstances, he confessed, had been heartily
explained to him that very morning by Captain Crowbery; and it was but fair to
say, that upon that statement he felt himself obliged to give up his noble
relation as indefensible on both accounts; and this he hoped would suffice to
set him strait in Sir Roger's good opinion, if he had unfortunately endangered
it from any thing he had inadvertently been led to say the day before. -- Here
he came to a stop, and seemed to expect some answer from Sir Roger.

Sir Roger replied, that it was a point with him to enter into no discussion of
Lord Crowbery's conduct, especially with Lord Crowbery's relations: his niece
was dead, and whatever were her sufferings in this life, they were now at an
end: as to Miss Claypole's case, he had nothing to do with it; it was a story
he did not wish to lend his ear to; in like manner he begged leave to say, that
with respect to any opinions Mr. Hardham might adopt, in favor or disfavour of
the Lord in question, he hoped he understood himself too well to interfere in
any shape with them, much less was he disposed to revive the mention of a
trifling altercation, which was so completely done away to the honor of both
parties, and for that reason should be buried in perpetual oblivion.

"Then if I may indulge the hope," he rejoined, "that my condescension in
accommodating myself to the gentleman's vivacity was acceptable to Sir Roger
Manstock, let me presume to draw one obvious conclusion from it, and take for
granted that he understood the sacrifice to have been, what it truly was, a
mark of my respect to him, and an ambition so to recommend myself to his
opinion, as to ground some title to his favor and protection in a suit which I
have now to make, and on the issue of which the happiness of my whole life
depends."

Mr. Hardham paused for a reply, but none being made, he proceeded to explain:
-- "I flatter myself I need not dwell upon particulars so much within your
knowledge, as my family or fortune; they are such, I trust, as will entitle me
to credit, when I assert that neither interest nor ambition have any share in
the sincere and pure attachment which I profess to have for your most amiable
daughter: no, Sir, it is by the heart alone I am attracted to Miss Manstock;
and as I hope my character may boldly face the light, and never need the veil
of mystery, I hold it fair and honorable to apprise you of my wishes, and
request your sanction to the tender of my most humble addresses to your lovely
daughter."

Sir Roger paused a while; and then with much gravity, and in a deliberate
tone, said, "Your pretensions, Mr. Hardham, in point of fortune and family,
are, as you say, too well known to stand in need of any explanation; they are
such as qualify you to propose for any lady in this kingdom; and certainly,
Sir, in the attachment you profess for my daughter I have every reason to
believe you guided by no other motives than those of free choice, and
disinterested inclination. When, therefore, you appeal to me, that I would
sanction the tender of your addresses to Miss Manstock, (I believe I use your
own expression) I can have but one answer to make, so long as your reference is
confined to but one point, and that simply to demand a passport to my daughter:
no father, I believe, whatever may be his views for his child, will refuse that
to Mr. Hardham."

To this he replied, "If I have explained no further to you on this interesting
subject, Sir, I hope you will consider it as a very natural wish on my part to
owe my success, if I am so blessed as to obtain it, wholly and solely to my own
interest in the lady's good opinion, who is to constitute my happiness; and as
I cannot doubt but Miss Manstock is incapable of condescending to bestow her
regards on any man of dubious character, or just emerg'd from meanness and
obscurity, I trust, if I am permitted to approach her, I shall at least not
have to combat with a heart pre-occupied by any rival, or, if by any, not by
one that will disgrace her preference, and make me feel myself degraded by the
competition."

"As you put no question to me in the matter," replied the Baronet briefly and
coldly, "I am not put to any answer. -- You have free access to Miss Manstock."

This brought the proud suitor to a pause: he perceived he had gone too far,
and carried his language too high; and he saw himself in the necessity of
qualifying what he had said with an apology, or throwing up the negotiation at
once: "I am afraid," said he, "that I have expressed myself too warmly and
unwarily; but I entreat Sir Roger Manstock will be assured, that I entertain a
most profound respect for his person and character, and if I spared to solicit
his good favor and protection to my suit, it was solely dictated by an
ambition, which I hope will be thought both natural and commendable."

Here he turned his eyes upon Sir Roger; -- a silent bow was all the answer he
obtained.

"I perceive," added he, "I am unfortunate in my manner, and deficient perhaps
in something, which in the character of a petitioner I ought to carry about
with me; but I am new in the predicament, and having failed to conciliate the
father's favor, I will not choose so unlucky a moment for requesting an
audience of the daughter. I am not quite prepared to receive two rebuffs in the
same breach." -- With these words he quitted his seat, and Sir Roger rising at
the same moment, they took a silent leave, and Mr. Hardham mounted his curricle
in waiting, highly out of humor with his reception, his proud heart swelling
with vexation to find his self-importance humbled; and prepared to vent his
spite upon two unoffending horses, whose tender skins soon smarted under the
ceaseless lash of their unfeeling tyrant.

Oh! what a wretch is man, when pride and self-importance seize upon his heart!
the scorn of every noble mind, the pest of all society, a monster amongst men!
Begone from me, thou self-swolen blockhead, who art at once too foolish for my
resentment, and too mischievous for my pity. In some bye turn and crossing of
my walk in life when I chance upon thee, (for nothing else but chance can throw
me in thy way) no sooner do I recognize thy staring owl-eyed visage, than I
post down a promise in my tablets, to sketch thy gloomy portrait from the life,
and hang thee up to public mockery as satire's lawful prize. But when I stretch
the canvas, and begin to daub it with thy ugliness, I soon perceive thou do
not own a single feature, that can furnish any thing but loathing and disgust;
too dull to help my fancy to a jest, too despicable to inspire it with a
serious thought, and too hardened to be mended by correction -- I cast thee
from my thoughts, discovering thee to be so mere a caput mortuum, that no
chemistry can extract so much virtue out of thee, as would even serve to give
physic to a dog.

CHAPTER IX. Why is Earth and Ashes proud?
MR. Hardham, instead of returning to his own house, drove to Crowbery Castle,
to make report to his friend the Captain, and consult him upon the posture of
affairs at Manstock. The advice he got here was on the whole very prudent, but
he was not just then in the best temper to receive it. Captain Crowbery, as we
have before observed, entertained a very high opinion of Henry, and ever since
his rencontre with him had taken all occasions of doing justice to his
behavior, not only in that affair, but in every other that had come to his
knowledge, particularly as to the share he had in Carey's action with the
frigate. When Hardham therefore spoke contemptuously of him as a rival, and
seemed to reproach himself for having stooped to any apology, Crowbery plainly
told him that he could by no means be a party in any steps for grafting a
serious quarrel on a silly altercation, that had been once fairly dismissed:
for his own part, he had been already flagrantly in the wrong toward Henry,
and had turned out with him in consequence of it; it must then be a very strong
case indeed that would call him out again, either as principal or second. --
"And was it not a strong case," Hardham demanded, "when the character of Lord
Crowbery was glanced at in such pointed terms, and in a public company, by a
fellow who had no right to use his name, in any place or on any occasion, but
with deference and respect?"

"I thought," replied Crowbery, "that I had opened enough to you in our
morning's conversation on this subject to justify the words that Henry used,
had they been even stronger than you state them. I can now truly say, that if
you and I, as relations of that unhappy man, have any ground left us to stand
upon in his defense, we owe it to the candor of the very person you complain
of. The melancholy news I received this day, led me to turn some papers over,
which, at Blachford's death, were honorably delivered up by Henry, that in
some hands would have been arms no mortal could have parried. If he opened
them, we are at the mercy of his honor for keeping them secret; if he returned
them unexamin'd, we are indebted to his delicacy for our possession of them.
You may believe me, Mr. Hardham, that those papers, which I have now destroyed,
would have brought to light very dark dealings, and made the title, that has
now by a most dreadful accident devolved on me, a title of disgrace and shame."

Hardham eagerly demanded what accident he alluded to? -- "The death of Lord
Crowbery," he replied. His Lordship had landed at Ostend, and, from the
position of the armies, had been stopped there for some days; in the mean time, a
villain found means to assassinate him in the streets, as he was coming home
late at night to his hotel: he was taken up by the patrole, mortally stabbed,
and incapable of giving any account of what had passed. Every means had been
taken by the commandant for discovering the murderer, but hitherto without
success, he had strong suspicions in his mind, which pointed to a certain
person, who had closely followed him out of England, but these he would not
make public, being determined to set out the next morning, and pursue his
enquiries on the spot. -- "I am shocked," replied Hardham, "at the account; and
whilst I congratulate your Lordship on your accession to the title of your
family, I must deplore the catastrophe, that has devolved it upon you under
circumstances of so melancholy a cast. If I can be of any service to you here
in your absence, or even by accompanying you in your journey, I am at your
command." -- "Your offer," said the new Lord Crowbery, "is most kind and
friendly, and in part I will accept it, as you may be of most essential use and
service to me here, if you will consent to put my mind at peace with respect to
a family, for whom I entertain the highest reverence and esteem; I mean the
house of Manstock. There is nothing lies so heavy on my heart as the treatment
they have met with from the unfortunate deceased; I am the last man living that
should speak too harshly of Lord Crowbery, my benefactor, but I have been made
a painful witness to such things, as make me shudder to reflect upon. I hold it
therefore my first duty to make all the atonement in my power to that
much-injur'd family; and in doing this I think I shall approve myself a real
friend to the memory of the deceased. And now, my dear Sir, suffer me to appeal
to you, and put it to your heart, if in honor you have any just cause of
animosity against that excellent young man, who, if I Am well informed, is
firmly engaged to the lady you proposed for. Is he in the fault of that, or are
you warranted to affront and decry him because he is approved of by Miss
Manstock, whom you hardly knew by sight, and never thought of before
yesterday?" -- "I don't know from authority that he is engaged to Miss
Manstock: Sir Roger did not tell me that." -- "You did not ask him, I believe,"
replied Lord Crowbery; "but the fact is easily ascertained, if you choose to
take the direct course of applying either to Sir Roger or to the lady herself."
-- "I confess to you," said Hardham, "it would not be very pleasing to me to be
so informed by either of them, though I should not be sorry to come at the truth
by any other channel. I am not ambitious to be marked as a rejected suitor to
any lady, who prefers Mr. Henry Delapoer."

Here a servant came in, and announced the gentleman last mentioned -- "Show
him into the saloon," said my Lord, "and say I will wait upon him immediately.
You have now an opportunity," said he, applying himself to Mr. Hardham, "of
granting me the favor I have requested, if you will condescend to remain here
a few minutes, whilst I step out to him, and will allow me to bring him when I
return, to take you by the hand, which I persuade myself he will gladly do: you
are both men of honor, and only need to be known to each other to be the best
of friends." -- "I know you to be such," replied Hardham, "therefore do by me
as you think right, and I will wait your pleasure." Lord Crowbery hastened to
his visitor -- "Am I beforehand with my information," said Henry, "or is it
known to you that I am now to address you as Lord Crowbery?" He was informed of
the event. -- "I should have to apologize for this visit," resumed our hero,
"if it was not purely on a case of conscience; but I cannot keep a circumstance
concealed, that may in any way affect the investigation of a crime so horrible
as murder." -- Here he recited the conversation of Fanny Claypole, when she
forced herself upon him; and concluded with expressing his regret that he had
suffered such menaces to pass without taking instant measures for preventing
their effect -- "If you have any thing to regret on that account," said my
Lord, "how much more cause have I to reproach myself, who was so immediately in
the way of her fury, and a witness to the whole torrent of it! but I considered
it as the impotent raving of a disappointed woman, and let it pass." -- He then
explained the measures he intended to pursue, for tracing it, if possible, to a
discovery, by resorting to the spot -- "But before I depart from this place,"
added he, "upon that mournful business, there is a matter of a most pressing
nature on my mind, which I earnestly request you will so far take charge of as
to pledge me to Sir Roger Manstock in the most respectful terms, for every
satisfaction in my power to make, not only with regard to the liquidation of
the funeral expenses by him defrayed, but also of my entire acquiescence in the
will of the Lady Crowbery, which I suspect there was a meditation of
contesting, and at the same time I shall give orders that every article
personally appertaining to that lady in this house, which I am sorry to say
were permitted to be put out of their places, shall be brought together and
collected for his revision and Miss Manstock's, whom I shall request to make
choice of any such things which they may put a value upon, as remembrancers of
one so worthily lamented and beloved; and this I desire you will tell them I
tender as the only atonement in my power to make, on the part of an unhappy
man, who, if life had been spared to him, would, I flatter myself, have seen
his error, and done what I now do in his name, and in honor to his memory."

"My Lord," cried Henry, rising from his chair, and taking his hand, "I thank
you; you have justified the high opinion I conceived of you, and have greatly
honored me by this commission." -- Here he stopped, for his voice faultered; and
glancing his eyes upon a picture of his mother, over the chimney, which gave a
striking character of her in youth and beauty, nature forced her way, and
putting his handkerchief to his eyes, he yielded to the irresistible emotion,
and said no more.

"We will adjourn to the library," said Lord Crowbery; "where a friend of mine
is waiting, who wishes to pay his compliments to you. Suffer me only to ask
you, before you go, if you think that picture will be an acceptable present to
Miss Manstock; and I name her in preference, because I consider it in effect
the same as giving it to you. I persuade myself," added he, "I am not premature
in supposing her interests and yours are one and the same." -- To this Henry
made a modest and grateful reply, neither affirming nor denying the assumption
above stated; but said he would report to Miss Manstock his most obliging
offer. Lord Crowbery then informed him who the person was that expected him in
the library; and, after a few words introductory to their meeting, took him by
the hand, and ushered him to Mr. Hardham, addressing himself to each in turn
with many civil speeches and professions of esteem, hoping it might be his good
fortune, as common friend to both, to bring forward such an explanation as
might have no grounds for future misunderstanding on the part of either. Mr.
Hardham said, he trusted the gentleman could not doubt his readiness to do away
affronts, whether justly or unjustly taken up; and he presumed it was no small
proof of his continuing in the same disposition, that he had waited his leisure
for the sole purpose of paying him his compliments in Lord Crowbery's presence.
Henry, on his part, assured him, that he had devoted that morning to the honor
of paying him a visit at his own house, but had been told he would be from
home. He hoped Mr. Hardham had carried with him no impressions from their last
meeting that made a second explanation necessary, respecting any thing which
had there occurred; if it was so, he was perfectly ready on his part to renew
the assurances he had then given him of his entire acquiescence in the manner
he had taken for terminating that trivial dispute.

Here the Lord Crowbery interposed; he hoped there was no intention on either
side of looking back to what was past, but, on the contrary, by looking
forward, to prevent occasion of disputes in future: "And this," he added, "may
be easily effected where two men of honor meet, mutually disposed to deal
heartily with each other, should they find themselves competitors in the same
pursuit." -- "I do not quite pledge myself to that," said Mr. Hardham; "as I
would not choose to engage in any pursuit where I did not see myself either
fairly pitted against any that might oppose me, or well assured of surmounting
competition. Much as I respect Miss Manstock, I have no ambition to be pointed
at as her discarded suitor; and great as my opinion may be of Mr. Delapoer's
extraordinary merits, I must own I do not covet the honor of being known as
his rival in a struggle for that lady's favor, if he has already secured her
affections, and been approved of by Sir Roger as his son-in-law."

"And does Mr. Hardham expect," said Henry, "that I should account to him for
my proceedings, having no desire to make enquiries into his? Would it become me
to speak out of Sir Roger Manstock's family of what I know or believe to be
passing in it? That I will never do; these lips shall never presumptuously
profane the name of Miss Manstock, nor will I suffer any others so to do in my
hearing with impunity."

"Then I must take the liberty to tell you -- " said Hardham; and was
proceeding, when Lord Crowbery, putting his hand upon his breast, said, "Stop,
I conjure you, Sir, if it be only for my sake, and let us argue calmly, or
dismiss the subject. I was the promoter of this interview, and am pledged for
the issue of it. Could I have supposed that you, my friend and relation, would
have expressed yourself in a style so lofty and so irritating, I would as soon
have burnt this house over my head as suffered it to have been made a scene of
quarrel and contention. What Mr. Delapoer has said is not one word too much for
the occasion that gave rise to it. How else could you expect a man of honor to
reply to such a speech, in which you seemed to make your own self-consequence
your whole concern? Methinks, of all men living, Mr. Hardham, you should keep a
guard upon yourself, and, being so quick to feel in your own person, should be
cautious how you wound the feelings of others. I speak plainly, Sir, but I have
the rights of hospitality to protect; and if you are offended with me for it, I
must meet the consequences."

All this while Hardham sat with a contemptuous smile upon his countenance,
affecting to receive every reproach as a compliment, bowing with an air of
counterfeited respect; when perceiving that Lord Crowbery had concluded, he
replied, "I am infinitely obliged to you, my Lord, for your extraordinary
politeness, and shall endeavor to convince you that I have not lost one word
of your edifying lecture, by the early opportunity I shall take of requesting
you to hear the comments I have made upon it." -- Lord Crowbery with quickness
replied, "Use your own pleasure, Sir; I shall be at home for the day: when you
are ready with your comments, I shall expect you; and for security's sake you
may bring a prompter with you."

CHAPTER X. Pride meets its Punishment, and Love its Reward.
"LET him go," said Lord Crowbery, as Hardham bounced out of the room; "he has
the pride of Lucifer." -- Henry expressed great uneasiness at what had passed,
and strongly contended that the affair was his own. This Lord Crowbery would
not admit, nor did he look to be farther troubled with his angry cousin; he had
had many such sparrings with him, which had passed off as he supposed this
would, for he never spared him when he was in that vaunting style; however, if
he should chance to be just then in one of his fighting fits (for his courage
came by starts, though his petulance was constitutional) it would not, he
owned, be amiss to be ready for him.

Henry hoped he would have no farther trouble with him, felt great
responsibility for the consequences, and would hold himself at his call, either
in his Lordship's house or at Williams the surgeon's, so long as there was any
chance of his services being wanted. -- "I will intrude upon you no longer than
for two hours of your time," he replied; "within which, if our angry gentleman
does not make his appearance, I shall think no more of him; if in that interval
you can amuse yourself in this library, or prefer going to Mr. Williams, I will
overhawl my artillery in the interim, and put my hand to a few papers not quite
so convenient to be left at the issue of chance and accident."

This said, they parted, Henry taking his course to his friend Susan's, where
he found Williams and his betrothed, this being the eve of their wedding day:
here he took the first opportunity of telling Williams, in a whisper, the
probability there was of an affair taking place, where his attendance would be
most acceptable, which he readily engaged for; he then, with as much gaiety as
he could assume, made his congratulations to Susan; and whilst this discourse
was going on, as he stood by the window, Sir Roger Manstock's chaise was
discovered coming across the green, and making directly for the house. It was
quickly at the door, when he heard himself joyfully greeted by his beloved
Isabella, who was seated at the side of her father. They quitted the carriage,
and after a most respectful welcome on the part of Susan, Williams having
modestly retired, they were at their own request left in private with our hero.

Sir Roger opened the business, by informing him of Mr. Hardham's proposal, and
the anxiety thereby occasioned not only to Isabella, but himself, from the
known impetuosity of that haughty suitor's temper, and the dread he had of
consequences thence resulting: he would not disguise from Henry that his sudden
disappearance that morning, so quickly following Hardham's unsuccessful visit,
had so alarmed his daughter, that at her desire he had come over thither with
her, in hopes of finding him, as fortunately they had done. -- "I let you into
this secret," said he, smiling, "though Isabella is here present, and hears
herself betrayed by me, because, to say the truth, there is now an end to all
reserve between us, and my only wish is to put a final stop to all
solicitations, by joining your hands without delay, and rendering my soul's
darling into your entire protection: and I pray God to bless you, my dear
children, in each other, and me in both!"

Henry, who was seated between them, took the hand of each, and pressed it to
his heart in speechless ecstacy. Isabella, suffused with blushes of the deepest
dye, and not venturing to raise her modest eyes, which sensibility had filled
with tears, kept still silence, which was not interrupted till Sir Roger,
resuming his discourse, and addressing himself to Henry, said, "Now if you are
questioned by that haughty interloper, tell him you have my authority to say
that Isabella Manstock is -- (what shall I bid you say?) tell him at once, and
stop his importunity -- she is your wife. -- Now ask her if I Have said a
syllable too much."

The reference was obeyed upon the instant; -- the enraptured lover was at the
feet of his mistress, the unopposing mistress was enfolded in the arms of her
lover.

After a proper portion of time had been devoted to joy and gratitude on the
part of our hero, Sir Roger began to comment on the circumstances of Lord
Crowbery's assassination. The deed was horrid, the suspicions it involved
afflicting, but the removal of such a worthless being out of life was
providential; he had seen that unhappy man, the uncle of a desperate creature,
stained, as he greatly feared, with the blood of the deceased; he comforted him
as well as he could, yet he perceived his mind was immersed in deep despair and
melancholy. -- "Whether he is informed," said Sir Roger, "of any circumstances
that fix the guilt upon his niece, I forbore to enquire, but I should fear he
knows more than he thinks proper to reveal." -- Henry perceived that Claypole
had been less communicative to Sir Roger than to him, for he had actually
exhibited to him in confidence a letter under his niece's hand, exulting in the
completion of her revenge, and boasting that she had found a hand to punish
perfidy; a Frenchman who had been lurking about London for evil purposes, and
had been warned out of England, took his passage in the same packet with her
to Ostend; she sounded him, and found him the fittest agent for her desperate
purpose, being deep in all the massacres that had deluged Paris with human
blood: he had made good his escape, and was safe amongst his brother
sansculottes; for her part she defied pursuit; she had lodged herself where no
search could follow her; -- let her uncle therefore set his mind at rest, she
should never be heard of more, and bade him everlastingly farewell.

Time had imperceptibly slipped away during this conversation, and Sir Roger had
just recollected to order his chaise, when Williams came into the room, and
whispered Henry that Lord Crowbery expected him at the castle; in spite of all
his self-command, he changed color at the summons, and Isabella instantly
caught alarm. Honor demanded instant obedience to the call, yet Henry's
ingenuity could hardly suggest an excuse sufficient to bear him out; the best
apology he could devise upon the sudden was, that Lord Crowbery being on the
point of setting out for Ostend, and understanding he had had an interview with
Fanny Claypole just before her leaving Crowbery, had requested him to come to
him without delay. -- "Tell me only," said Isabella, "that you are not going to
meet that hateful Hardham, and I shall be at peace." -- "I have nothing to say
to Mr. Hardham," replied Henry; "and I conjure you not to think about him." --
So saying, he hurried out of the room, and bidding Williams follow him as fast
as he could, made the best of his way to the place of assignation.

Isabella's apprehensions were by no means quieted, for his agitated looks and
impatient motions augured something on his mind more important and more
pressing than the cause he had assigned. She ran to Susan May, and asked for
Williams. -- He was gone with Henry. -- This was a circumstance to aggravate
her terrors: duels and wounds immediately occurred; why else should he take a
surgeon with him? Even Sir Roger's equanimity was not proof against this. At
one time he would go to the castle himself; -- this Isabella would not hear of
-- he would send a servant to spy what was going forward -- he would contrive a
message to Lord Crowbery himself; -- he could neither reconcile his mind to the
one, nor invent the other. The chaise was at the door, but Isabella could not
stir from the spot, her fears had rooted her; and Dame May, who foresaw there
would be a demand upon her closet, was busied in providing resources against
faintings and hysterics: Susan strove to administer the consolation of reason;
but no sooner did the apprehension of Henry's danger seize her fancy, than she
ceased to reason against imaginary fears, and, by subscribing her own to
Isabella's, aggravated both.

In the midst of this confusion, Zachary Cawdle came into the house. A
new-comer in such situations, let him come from whence he will, gives a spring
to curiosity, and awakens hope. -- "Did he know if Mr. Hardham was at the
castle?" -- "He saw him pass his door toward Lord Crowbery's not many minutes
ago." -- It was the sentence of temporary death to Isabella: she fell back in
her chair pale as ashes. -- "Hell and confusion!" exclaimed Zachary, "what
devil has bewitched my tongue, that it should stumble on this mischief?" -- He
then bestirred himself to retrieve the damage he had done, and Dame May was
dispatched for the requisites, whilst the father stood motionless and aghast.
Zachary had his fingers on her pulse: -- "Courage! worthy Sir," he cried; "the
defection is passing off; the pulsation of the artery is perceptible; we begin
to revive." -- "God be praised!" exclaimed the father, in a transport -- When,
in the same instant, a voice was heard from without, calling aloud upon Doctor
Cawdle, and in a few moments after, Susan, who had run out upon enquiry, came
back with the joyful tidings that Henry was perfectly safe: Zachary's
assistance was wanted for Mr. Hardham, who was shot by Lord Crowbery in a duel.
-- "Jump into my chaise," said Sir Roger, "and bid them drive to the wounded
man's relief as fast as they can gallop." -- "Fair and softly, worthy Sir,"
quoth Zachary; "I can neither jump nor gallop to his rescue: Williams is on the
spot, and is well used to gunshot wounds; he only wants me as surgeon's mate."
-- Zachary now with due deliberation seated himself in the chaise, and the
messenger, having mounted behind it, gave directions where to drive. Hardham
was found on the ground, and Williams had just then succeeded in staunching the
haemorrhage; the ball had entered a little above the knee, and had lodged
itself by a slanting course up his thigh, as he stood in a crouching posture
when he gave his own fire, and received that of his opponent almost at the same
moment. He fell, and fainted on the ground; when he came to himself he was
earnest with Williams to be taken to his own house, but in this he was not
indulged: when Zachary arrived they found means to convey him into Lord
Crowbery's house; and Henry now, at the earnest wish of his principal, took
Zachary's seat in the chaise, and hastened back to the party at Susan May's.
Great was their joy at his return, and every countenance (but chiefly that on
which his eyes were first fondly fixed) was brightened at his presence. To them
he related the particulars of the rencontre, in the event of which the
overweening pride and insolence of Hardham, who was obstinate against all
accommodation, was proportionably chastised.

CHAPTER XI. The Drama closes, and the Curtain falls.
HENRY accompanied the chaise to Manstock House, and to gratify Isabella no
less than himself, was hardly ever out of sight by the way. Hardham, in the
mean time, was deposited with all possible care in the house of his antagonist:
during six days Williams, who remained in the closest attention, found no
moment when the operation of extracting the ball could be undertaken with
safety to his life, which remained in so precarious a state, that Lord Crowbery
felt himself obliged to postpone his intended expedition; and sent his lawyer,
properly instructed, to pursue all necessary measures at Ostend on his behalf.

On the seventh morning Williams successfully extracted the ball, and symptoms
became so favorable as to flatter him with a cure. Some time after this,
Hardham was carried to his own house, and Lord Crowbery's mind was relieved
from its weight of anxious suspense: his journey, however, was now entirely
laid aside from the report of his agent, whose attempts to trace the murderer
had been entirely fruitless: the body of the deceased was brought over, and
committed to the vault of his ancestors.

Williams was in such favor with his patient, that no other surgeon was
permitted to approach him. One important business there was, in which the fair
Susan had a share, that suffered a postponement by his attendance upon Hardham;
the matrimonial knot was not yet tied: this indeed, in the present case, was
simply the delay of a ceremony; and the very first leisure morning Williams
could with a safe conscience avail himself of, that ceremony was effectually
performed; and Susan took possession of that honorable title, which her
fidelity and good conduct ever after maintained, through a series of many
prosperous and happy years.

In Manstock House, Love took his station undisturbed by any cares or
interruptions, save only those chaste tremors, which the gentle breast of
Isabella felt, whilst Time, for ever on the wing, was weaving the soft silken
fetters, now almost complete and ready for the hand of Hymen, that artist who
too often makes but blind and bungling work, coupling ill-sorted pairs with
coarse and clumsy tools. Not such our hero and his fair betrothed -- lovely in
person, lovelier in their virtues, their soft and tender hearts melted into
each other with a coalescence so entire, that soul with soul never more sweetly
harmonized: yet sometimes, when the ardour of his looks alarmed her, she would
chide him with her blushes; sometimes she would turn away and hide her face, or
bid him go from her and join the company; this had he done, he would have
misunderstood the spirit of the order totally, instead of which he had a way of
making peace, that nature pointed out, which gained him pardon by repeating the
offense.

"You are incurable," she would tell him at these times, "and I give you up;
another time I Will lock my door, and keep you out." -- The minutes still rolled
on, and yet the door was not locked; the offense was still committed, and the
menace, though repeated, was never executed. -- "What are you musing upon?" she
said one day, as he sat rapt in thought. -- "I am reducing days to hours," he
replied, "and hours to minutes, that I may calculate each fraction of the
interval 'twixt this and Monday." -- "Add to it another year," she cried, "and
you will be nearer to the sum. Don't talk of Monday, I Will not hear about it." --
At that moment the porter's bell announced an arrival. Isabella ran to the
window, and descried Doctor Sandford coming up to the door. -- "There, there!"
she cried, "you are all together in a plot against me: I Will not go down to
Doctor Sandford; much as I esteem him, I Will not quit my chamber this whole day;
I know for what he comes." -- "He comes to bless your Henry, by entitling him
to call the loveliest object in creation his; he comes to ratify the vows that
I have made, to honor, love, and serve you with my life; and what is there so
terrible in this, that should disturb my Isabella's gentle spirits? What does
the ruler of my passions discern in her devoted Henry, that she should shrink
from with affright? Command me, task me as you will, and I Will obey, so you do
not forbid me to adore you and to dote upon you as I do this moment, have done
ever, and to life's latest period ever must. -- Say, Isabella, are these arms,
thus pressing, thus encircling you, bonds that you wish to break, chains that
you fain would fever and cast from you? Question my heart, it is yours; ask if
there is mercy in it for my Isabella; mark if it does not throb with tender pity
and compassion for your virgin fears; and witness if the drops that fall from
it are half so dear as these which your soft eyes distill. Oh! my soul's
treasure, are you not at rest upon this faithful bosom? Do you not feel a
conscious satisfaction, thus to know yourself beloved, protected, cherished by
a friend, who lives but on your smiles, nor has a sense of earthly happiness,
but what the contemplation of your charms bestows upon him?"

"Oh! Henry," she replied, and sunk upon his breast, "I render you my heart,
and all that it contains; even my terrors are fled from me, and nothing now
remains but all-subduing love: your words, your looks, bespeak such mild
consideration for your poor trembling Isabella; and I well know there is such
mercy in your manly nature, that I am yours this day, this hour, this instant,
and for ever." -- Silence ensued, what else their thoughts supplied, love found
expressions for, more eloquent than words: the minutes were not few; but, rated
to their value, they had outweighed years of common price.

Isabella now was not averse to welcome her late dreaded visitor, the worthy
Doctor Sandford -- severed from the arms of her enraptured Henry, with love in
every glance, and grace in every motion, she came forth in beauty's richest
bloom, a form to charm all eyes, and captivate all hearts.

Every body was occupied in preparations for the approaching journey: great as
was the sacrifice Sir Roger made to the peace of the county, when he took upon
himself the painful duty of attending parliament, there were some circumstances
that qualified the disagreeable necessity at the present moment, as he had
affairs of great consequence on his hands with respect to Isabella's marriage,
which could only be adjusted in London. Mr. Delapoer, the father of our hero,
had also business not less important, and agreed to accompany him; and a house
large enough to receive the whole party, and perfectly commodious, had
fortunately been secured for Sir Roger, and was already well aired, and
occupied by part of his household, sent before him for that purpose. His plan
was to have the wedding on the morning of his departure, and as private as
possible. The Rev. Mr. Claypole, in a bad state of health, was gone to Bath,
and Dr. Sandford had been invited from Hagley to perform the ceremony. The
bride and bridegroom were to take their departure together, and reach town
that evening; Sir Roger, Delapoer, and Sandford were to follow in the family
coach by easy stages, and sleep by the way.

On the morning before these events were to take place, Henry rode over to
Crowbery, and took a friendly leave of the Lord of the Castle; he had also a
parting conversation with Mr. and Mrs. Williams and the good Dame; to Ezekiel
he devoted a full hour, which the good man filled up, after his manner, with
admonitory lessons for his conduct in the metropolis, that sink, as he
pronounced it, of infamy and corruption. Ejaculations, prayers and blessings in
abundance he cordially super-added; and at last let him depart with this
exhortation -- That if affluence and prosperity should await him, he would
never forget that he had felt the sorrows of poverty and distress; but, on the
contrary, if disappointments and misfortunes (which Heaven avert!) should prove
to be his lot, then let him take religion to his aid, and place his whole
reliance on that all-gracious Master, who never fails his servants in
affliction, when they piously resort to him.

The awful morning arrived, and Isabella, beautiful as an angel, and fresh as
the dew of Heaven, rose with the dawn; and having attired herself with a
simplicity pure as her thoughts, and elegant as her manners, came forth from
her chamber, and presented herself to the eyes of her expecting lover: he led
her down the stairs to the room where her friends were assembled, and the Rev.
Dr. Sandford was in readiness to perform the solemn office, and pronounce the
nuptial benediction; which service being closed, turning to her father, whilst
Henry yet held her trembling hand, she dropped on her knees at his feet, and
jointly with her husband, in the like reverential attitude, received his
fatherly blessing, accompanied with tears of joyful sensibility and tender
embraces: the same suit was preferred to the father of Henry, and the same
affectionate return was made to it by that amiable person, in a style
peculiarly impressive and affecting. A few old and faithful domestics were
admitted; and honest Zachary Cawdle, by claim derived from long attachment, and
services as old in date as the first breath that Henry drew, was present on the
occasion; and now, in his ardent manner, joy boiling over at his eyes,
pronounced them to be indisputably the most lovely couple that ever plighted
their faith to each other -- "And, by the blessing of Heaven," added he, "upon
their laudable endeavors, I predict they will give being to others as
beautiful as themselves."

They now sat down to a hasty breakfast, which being dispatched, Sir Roger
again embraced his daughter, and then resigning her hand to its happy
possessor, attended them to the door, where their chaise with posthorses was
in waiting, which whirled them in their rapid course to London; where they
arrived, with happy omens, as the evening closed, and found all things ready
for their reception.

The following day the worthy Baronet, punctual to his appointed hour, arrived
with his friends, Mr. Delapoer and Dr. Sandford, the latter of whom took up his
abode with a relation at the other end of the town. Sir Roger was well pleased
with the airy situation of his house, and still more delighted with the
unremitted attention of his son and daughter, who devoted to him and Delapoer
all those hours which some bestow on frivolous amusements, some on less
innocent occupations. In the course of their residence here every thing that
the sage provision of the law could do for them and their posterity was
completed; and, at Sir Roger's suit, our hero had a grant, by royal license, to
take the name and bear the arms of Manstock, thus becoming the adopted
representative of that ancient and opulent house.

When the session was closed, and they returned to the family seat at Manstock,
the festivities they had fled from were celebrated with becoming splendour, and
the hospitable doors were thrown open to their neighbors, both rich and poor.
Heaven blessed their days with prosperity, and crowned their wishes with a
beauteous offspring. Faithful to Ezekiel's charge, Henry never forgot the
lessons of adversity, nor those faithful friends whom his adversity had tried
and approved. -- To Zachary, to the house of Williams, and to Ezekiel, in his
humble cottage, he was ever the same grateful, cordial and unaltered friend.
The charge of young Blachford's affairs he devolved upon Ezekiel, with a proper
allowance, but still under his own superintendance; Lord Crowbery also put the
good apostle into certain offices of trust, which brought him some profit, and,
what was more grateful to his spirit, a situation of some respectability
amongst his neighbors. Williams throve in his profession, and Susan was not
wanting to provide him with those that served to keep his house aside and his
industry alert.

Delapoer retired to his mansion near Hagley, where he had every year the
pleasure of embracing his children, when they visited their maternal mansion
and property in those parts.

If perfect happiness was ever dealt to mortals, it was surely the peculiar lot
of Henry and Isabella. -- Domestic harmony that knew no interruption, hearts
fondly united, and tempers happily matched, the good will of all who knew them,
the abundant gifts of fortune, and the grateful blessings of the poor,
compounded their enjoyments. Meanwhile the beauteous form of Isabella never
yielded up one fleeting charm to the wide-wasting hand of Time, but Heaven
restored the loss by adding every hour fresh beauties to her mind.

FINIS.

