HENRY; IN FOUR VOLUMES.

BY THE AUTHOR OF ARUNDEL.

VOL. III.

Ficta voluptatis causa sint proxima veris,
Nec quodcunque volet poscat sibi fabula credi.
LONDON: PRINTED FOR CHARLES DILLY, IN THE POULTRY. 1795.

CONTENTS.
BOOK THE SEVENTH.
CHAP. I. An humble Apology for Authors in general, with some modest Hints at
their peculiar Usefulness Page 1 CHAP. II. Our Hero undergoes a strict
Examination by a certain Judge called Conscience Page 10 CHAP. III. Our Hero
undergoes a second Examination by a, certain Judge, with whom Conscience has no
concern Page 19 CHAP. IV. The Decree of the Judge without Conscience is
reversed Page 32 CHAP. V. Our Hero is admitted to an unexpected Conference Page
36 CHAP. VI. The Conference is interrupted, resumed, and concluded Page 47
CHAP. VII. The Penitent on his Deathbed atones to Justice Page 55 CHAP. VIII.
An Incident of the tragic Cast Page 71 CHAP. IX. Surgeon's Work Page 84 CHAP.
X. Our wounded Hero bleeds afresh Page 93
BOOK THE EIGHTH.
CHAP. I. An old Man's Prattle in a wintry Night Page 109 CHAP. II. The best
Friends must part Page 116 CHAP. III. Our Hero goes out to Sea Page 128 CHAP.
IV. A certain interested Gentleman meets with a Rebuff Page 142 CHAP. V. Let
Innocence beware! Spring-guns and Man-traps are laid in these Premises! Page
151 CHAP. VI. Cunning can hold off Detection for awhile Page 163 CHAP. VII. Let
the Man, who suspects, resort speedily to Explanation Page 173 CHAP. VIII. She,
who confesses less than the Whole, may save a Blush, but will incur a Danger
Page 181 CHAP. IX. A tempting Offer honorably withstood Page 195 CHAP. X.
Where is the Daughter, that may not take a Lesson from our Heroine? Page 205
CHAP. XI. A pious Mind resorts to Providence for its Support Page 212
BOOK THE NINTH.
CHAP. I. A short Interlude between the Acts Page 219 CHAP. II. An Adventure on
board a Frigate Page 223 CHAP. III. Our Hero makes an interesting Discovery
Page 232 CHAP. IV. First Love strikes deep Page 238 CHAP. V. Our Hero quits the
Sea Page 245 CHAP. VI. Friends long divided meet at last Page 254 CHAP. VII.
Our Hero is restored to both his Parents Page 267 CHAP. VIII. A gentle Being
drops into the Grave Page 276 CHAP. IX. Our History presents a Scene not very
flattering to human Nature Page 281 CHAP. X. The Scene is shifted to Manstock
House Page 291 CHAP. XI. A Gleam of Hope suddenly reversed Page 301
HENRY.
BOOK THE SEVENTH.
CHAPTER I. An Humble Apology for Authors in general, with some modest Hints at
their peculiar Usefulness.
I HOPE the candid reader now and then calls to mind how much more nimbly he
travels over these pages than the writer of them did. When our dullness is
complained of, it would be but charity in him to reflect how much pains that
same dullness has cost us; more, he may be assured, than our brighter
intervals, where we sprung nimbly forward with an easy weight, instead of
toiling like a carrier's horse, whose slow and heavy pace argues the load he
draws, and the labor he endures: alas! for us poor Novelists, if there was no
mercy for dull authors, and our countrymen, like the barbarous Libethrians of
old, should take it into their minds to banish music and the muses out of the
land, and murder every Orpheus that did not fiddle to their taste. They should
consider, that the man, who makes a book, makes a very pretty piece of
furniture; and if they will but consign us to a quiet station on a shelf, and
give us wherewithal to cover us in a decent trim, the worst amongst us will
serve to fill up the file, and stop a gap in the ranks.

It Is hard indeed to toil, as we sometimes do, to our own loss and
disappointment; to sweat in the field of fame, merely to reap a harvest of
chaff, and pile up reams of paper for the worm to dine upon. It is a cruel
thing to rack our brains for nothing, run our jaded fancies to a stand-still,
and then lie down at the conclusion of our race, a carcass for the critics. And
what is our crime all the while? A mere mistake between our readers and
ourselves, occasioned by a small miscalculation of our capacities and their
candor; all which would be avoided, if happily for us they had not the wit to
find out our blunders, or, happily for them, had all that good nature for us
that we generously exercise toward ourselves. If once they could bring their
tempers to this charming complacency, they might depend upon having books in
plenty; authors would multiply like polypusses, and the press would be the
happiest mother in the kingdom.

How many worthy gentlemen are there in this blessed island of our's, who have
so much time upon their hands, that they do not know what to do with it? I am
aware how large and respectable a portion of this enlightened nation center
their delights in the chase, and draw an elegant resource from the sagacity of
the hound and the vigor of the horse; but they cannot always be on the saddle;
the elements they cannot command; and frost and snow will lock them up within
their castle walls: there it is possible that solitude may surprise them, and
dismiss them for a time to the solace of their own lucubrations: now, with all
possible respect for these resources, I should think it may sometimes be worth
their while to make experiment of other people's lucubrations, when they have
worn out their own, for those must be but sorry thoughts, which are not better
than not thinking at all; and the least they can gain by an author is a nap.

The ingenuity of man has invented a thousand contrivances for innocently
disposing of idle time; let us, therefore, who write books, have only the
idlers on our side, in gratitude for the amusement we give them, and let the
rest of the world be as splenetic as they will, we may set their spleen at
naught; the majority will be with us.

If a querulous infant is stilled by a rattle, the maker of the rattle has
saved somebody's ears from pain and persecution; grant, therefore, that a novel
is nothing better than a toy for children of a larger growth and more unruly
age, society has some cause to thank the writer of it; it may have put an
aching head to rest; it may have cheered the debtor in his prison, or the
country squire in a hard frost. Traders will cry up the commodity they deal in,
therefore I do not greatly insist on the praises which some that write books
have bestowed on book-writing, but I do observe, that great respect is paid to
an author by those who cannot read him, wherefore I conclude, those who can
read, and do not praise him, are only silent because they want words to express
their admiration and gratitude; whilst those sanguine flatterers, who, in the
excess of their respect for our persons, cry down our performances, give
evident proof how much higher they had pitched their expectations of what our
talents would produce, than our productions could make good; but though in
their zeal for our reputations, they tell us how ill we write, they seldom
neglect at the same time to show us how we might have written still worse.

Some over-wise people have pretended to discover, that this altercation
between author and critic is nothing more than a mere plot and contrivance to
play into each others hands, like Mountebank and Zany; but this is over-acted
sagacity, and an affectation of finding more mysteries in the art of
authorship, than really belong to it; for my part, I believe it is a business
of a more simple nature than most which can be taken up, and that authors in
general require nothing more than pen, ink, and paper to set up with. In
ancient times, the trade was in few hands, and the work seems then to have been
composed with much pains and forethought; materials were collected with great
care, and put together with consummate accuracy and attention; every part was
fitted to its place, polished to the height, and finished to perfection; there
were inspectors on the part of the public, men of sound judgment, and fully
competent to the office, who brought the work to a standard of rule and
measure, and insisted upon it, that every whole should have a beginning, a
middle, and an end. Under these strict regulations the ancients wrote; but now
that practice has made us perfect, and the trade is got into so many hands,
these regulations are done away, and so far from requiring of us a beginning,
middle, and end, it is enough if we can show a head and a tail; and it is not
always that even these can be made out with any tolerable precision. As our
authors write with less labor, our critics review with less care, and for
every one fault that they mark in our productions, there probably might be
found one hundred that they overlook. It is an idle notion, however, to suppose
that therefore they are in league and concert with the authors they revise; for
where could that poor fraternity find a fund to compensate them for suffering a
vocation once so reputable to fall into such utter disgrace under their
management, as to be no longer the employ of a gentleman? As for our readers,
on whom we never fail to bestow the terms of candid, gentle, courteous, and
others of the like soothing cast, they certainly deserve all the fair words we
can give them, for it is not to be denied, but that we make occasionally very
great demands upon their candor, gentleness, and courtesy, exercising them
frequently and fully with such trials as require those several endowments in no
small proportion. The farther I advance therefore in this work, the civiller I
will be; and to those readers who shall follow me into this third volume, I may
with justice apply the epithets of patient, persevering, faithful, and so on,
with a crescendo in my strain, till the piece is concluded.

But are there not also fastidious, angry, querulential readers? readers with
full stomachs, who complain of being surfeited and overloaded with the
story-telling trash of our circulating libraries? It cannot be altogether
denied, but still they are readers: if the load is so heavy upon them as they
pretend it is, I will put them in the way of getting rid of it, by reviving the
law of the ancient Cecertaeans, who obliged their artists to hawk about their
several wares, carrying them on their backs, till they found purchasers to ease
them of the burden. Was this law put in force against authors, few of us, I
doubt, would be found able to stand under the weight of our own unpurchased
works.

But whilst the public is contented with things as they are, where is the
wonder if the reform is never made by us till they begin it in themselves? Let
their taste lead the fashion, and our productions must accord to it. Whilst the
Cookeries of Hannah Glass outcirculate the Commentaries of Blackstone, authors
will be found, who prefer the compilation of receipts to that of records, as
the easier and more profitable task of the two. If puerilities are pleasing,
men will write ut pueris placeant.

When Demosthenes was engaged in the defense of a certain citizen of Athens,
who was brought to trial upon a charge of a capital nature, neither the
importance of the cause, nor the eloquence of the pleader, could fix the
attention of the judges who were sitting on the trial: the orator, observing
their levity, on a sudden stopped short in the midst of his harangue, and
addressing himself to the court, -- "Listen to me," he cried, "ye venerable
judges, for a few moments, and I will tell you a merry tale: -- A certain young
man, having occasion to take a journey from this city of our's to Megara, hired
an ass for the job; but being extremely incommoded on the way by a scorching
sun, which smote him with intolerable heat at noon, he dismounted from his
beast, and made free to take post under the shade of his carcass: upon this the
ass-owner, who accompanied him, remonstrated with great vehemence, contending
that his ass was let for the journey simply and precisely, and that the service
now required of him was extra-conditional and illegal: the traveller with equal
vehemence maintained, that he was warranted in the use he made of him, and that
having hired the ass in substance, he was entitled to the benefit of his shadow
into the bargain: the question was open to controversy, and the parties went to
trial on the case." -- Here Demosthenes ceased, and taking up his brief,
prepared to leave the court: the judges seeing this, called out to him to
return and go on with his pleading. -- "For shame, ye men of Athens," cried the
indignant orator, "ye can lend your ears to the story of an ass, but will not
bestow your attention upon a trial that involves the life or death of a
fellow-citizen."

CHAPTER II. Our Hero undergoes a strict Examination by a certain Judge called
Conscience.
AS soon as our hero had brought Blachford to consent to his disinterested
proposal, he took immediate measures for securing the success of it. To bring
the infant and its mother to an interview with the dying penitent was his first
object. The woman, who had the child at nurse, did not live above two miles
off, so that a messenger would soon fetch her over: Susan, indeed, was at a
greater distance, but the day yet served for bringing her from Manstock; and
Henry immediately sat down and wrote the following note:

Dear Susan,
A business, in which you are greatly interested, requires your presence in
this place; Mr. Blachford's life is so precarious, that not an hour is to be
lost: I recommend it to you therefore to state this to your amiable lady, and,
with her permission, come away directly in the chaise, that will attend for
that purpose.

Yours sincerely, Henry.


Whilst Henry was writing this note, young Tom Weevil, who had got notice of
his arrival, opportunely called upon him, and no sooner understood that he
wanted a messenger to Manstock house, than he zealously tendered his services
for that errand, and by Henry was instructed to ride to the next market town,
which luckily was in the road, and there put himself into a post chaise for the
purpose of conveying Susan in the most speedy and commodious manner.

This business being thus adjusted, and another messenger dispatched for the
nurse and child, our hero returned to the cottage, and throwing himself into
Ezekiel's wicker chair, enjoyed for some minutes, in silent reflection, that
heartfelt satisfaction, that only can result from self-approving conscience.
As he meditated on the sacrifice he was now about to make, he felt a momentary
gleam of virtuous exultation, which tempted him to cry out -- "O Ratcliffe!
dear departed friend! thou wou'd'st have praised me for this deed, and if thy
sainted spirit holds communication with me still, I know thou will regard it as
a pledge of my obedience to thy fatherly instructions. But what is this I boast
of? Nothing, compared to the severer trial that awaits me, and demands an
effort strong indeed, a sacrifice from which my heart shrinks back with terror
and dismay. Oh! be my guardian still; let thy protecting spirit strengthen my
feeble nature, and inspire me with the resolution to fulfill the fatal promise I
have made, and pay the forfeit of my folly. -- Married to Fanny Claypole! --
All hopes of happiness for ever blasted to repair her reputation wantonly
exposed. -- Hard terms indeed, and heavy penalty I have exacted from myself in
an unguarded moment; but the word is passed, and I must honorably make it
good: and fit I should, if that is the atonement she requires; for what but
chance prevented the completion of my guilt? The meditation therefore in my
instance is the act itself, and I am virtually her debtor to no less amount
than for the loss of all that can be valuable to a modest woman. I know the
plea that some would make; her forwardness, her fondness, her allurements: if
this were good in any case, it would be so in mine; but the excuse is mean and
villainous; that and that only can be my acquittal, which acquits me to myself;
this cannot serve the turn; my conscience never will be quieted by evasions.
It Is true the act was frustrated; what then? I was not quite so abandoned as to
sin in presence of a warning angel: and can I ever lose the memory of that
rebuke, which the offended purity of that angel justly bestowed? Oh, Isabella!
how that frown made my heart sink within me! Never again shall I have
confidence to look upon that lovely face, which till that moment ever greeted
me with smiles. No more shall that sweet voice salute my ears like music, as it
was will not to do in the still hour of evening, when we walked together: those
happy hours are never to return again."

Zachary Cawdle now made his appearance, having returned from his visit to Lady
Crowbery -- "I bring you news," said he, "of our excellent lady, that will
please you; her disorder seems abated, and I flatter myself she will gain
strength and spirits to carry her through her journey both by land and sea: she
sets out tomorrow in the forenoon for Manstock-house, where she will repose
herself for that night. I have her express commands to desire you will not fail
to meet her there." -- "I know not how that can be," said Henry. "She is very
anxious it should be, I can assure you," rejoined the Doctor, "and I believe
she has very interesting matters to confer with you upon, for she said she must
positively see you, as she could not express all she had to say by letter;
neither indeed do I hold it fit she should exhaust herself in writing for any
length of time. If it is your business with Mr. Blachford that stands in the
way, I hope that may be dismissed before it will be necessary for you to set
out tomorrow from this place."

Henry asked if her ladyship had said any thing on that subject. "Not much,"
Zachary replied; "she had noticed it but slightly, seeming to intimate a doubt
whether it was matter of congratulation or not, which I confess," he added,
"rather puzzled me to account for, as her ladyship cannot fail to know that our
neighbor will, in the vulgar phrase, die fat; and let your expectations be
what they may, surely a good fortune in hand is a good thing at all events." --
"Most people are of that opinion," said Henry, "but her ladyship, perhaps, may
think otherwise." -- "Whatever she thinks," replied Zachary, "I dare say she
will keep it to herself, till she meets you, and converses with you at
Manstock."

To this our hero made no further answer, but turned the discourse, by
enquiring after Mrs. Cawdle. -- "Her health," said the Doctor, "is no better,
her temper much worse, and her enthusiasm more extravagant than ever.
Blachford's situation seems to trouble her much; she has lived with him as a
sinner, and would now fain part from him like a saint; but he has refused all
her tenders, and has given his conscience into Ezekiel's keeping: this
mortifies her in a double sense, for she not only meant to send him out of the
world in the true faith, but had an eye also to the good things he has to leave
behind him, of which she had no objection to come in for a share; but, thanks
to the fates! all that is otherwise disposed of. As to the state of her
constitution, that is in a rapid decline from bad to worse, being only held
together like a sinking vessel by the very elements that sap and undermine it.
When I take my leave of her, as I shall do tomorrow, great chance if our's is
not an everlasting farewell."

This said, Zachary took his leave, having many preparations to make for his
approaching departure.

Henry was not sorry to be left to his reflections, for his mind was greatly
embarrassed by the message he had received from Lady Crowbery. To present
himself once more at Manstock-house was painful in the extreme; to disobey the
commands of a mother on so interesting a summons was an alternative not to be
thought of: how to avoid the one without transgressing the other was a point of
difficulty that now engrossed his thoughts; and as for Zachary's concluding
account of Jemima's melancholy condition, from that it is more than probable he
had carried off very little, if any, information.

The great evil of all, that sunk deepest into his mind, was his engagement to
Miss Claypole, a lady very little to his taste, and the consequent loss of all
hope that had respect to Isabella, a lady, whom at his heart he most ardently
admired and loved. The disgrace he had incurred with himself, as well as with
her, in that fatal moment of his weakness, was a cutting recollection; till
then he had stood high in the good opinion of that excellent young lady; every
hour that he passed in Manstock-house, whilst she was present, made this more
and more manifest; even his natural humility of character could not overlook
it; he saw the advances he made in her good graces, and only trembled for her
danger lest they were too rapid; every look, every action that that was
directed toward him had an expression not to be mistaken; Susan's reports
confirmed the interest that he had established in the approving heart of her
lovely mistress, and the satisfaction which she took in her evening walks with
him, with the innocent contrivances she had to prolong and to repeat them, were
flattering indications of an attachment forming fast, if not already formed;
the greater therefore was his fall from hopes so elevated; and what could he
now expect from purity like here is, but absolute dismission and contempt?

As for the measures he was now to take toward his new discovered mother, they
seemed to offer nothing to his view but a maze of difficulties. To lay open to
her his embarassments, and make a full confession of his faults and
misfortunes, was a task his resolution was not equal to, neither did it seem a
fit subject to discourse with her upon in her present state of health and
spirits. But how to keep it from her was the question; how to stop so many
channels through which the disgraceful story might find its way to her, was a
point not easily to be determined; how far Miss Manstock might have spread her
discovery was matter of uncertainty; her delicacy would hardly be brought to
continue the same intimacy with Fanny Claypole as before, and every thing was
to be dreaded from that young lady's flippant style of talking, who would
naturally make public the engagement she had entered into with him as an
apology essential to her own defense; these, and many other apprehensions, that
pressed upon his thoughts, were rendered doubly alarming, when he took into his
consideration the character of Mr. Claypole; from him he had every thing to
expect that a jealous, deep-projecting spirit could devise; he saw to what
extent his influence over Sir Roger Manstock might be carried; and he had no
cause to doubt him well disposed to put it to the stretch for any object that
he had at heart: beset on all sides with such difficulties, and in a straight
from which he spied no honorable escape, it is not to be wondered at if his
thoughts wavered without any fixed resolve, embarrassed and distressed.

One small alleviation Fortune granted him by the occupation of Ezekiel at this
time with with his penitent at next door; he was not present to interpose and
aggravate with fruitless declamations against the incontinence of Susan May, or
the enormous crime of duelling, which Henry's affair with Captain Crowbery was
sure to draw upon him; when behold the whole matter brought to issue at once by
the arrival of Mr. Claypole himself now at the door of the cottage, and at this
very moment in the act of dismounting from his palfrey.

CHAPTER III. Our Hero undergoes a second Examination by a certain Judge, with
whom Conscience has no Concern.
THOUGH the reverend gentleman, who now visited our hero in his humble cottage,
was left by us, when last we attended upon him, in the mind to defer this visit
to the next morning, yet second thoughts had made him change that resolve, upon
the prudent recollection of the many interventions a procrastinated measure is
exposed to, especially when it hangs upon the single security of a verbal
promise, extorted as it were by surprise, and not deliberately given upon
judgment and inclination. He therefore thought it best to steal a march upon
disappointment, and without communicating his intentions to his niece, making
only a slight apology to Sir Roger, mounted his horse, and proceeded upon a
round trot to the village of Crowbery, pondering by the way upon the measures
he was to take, and the language he was to hold, for securing the important
purposes of his secret expedition.

There was an air of studied composure in his first approaches, with a degree
of obsequious ceremony, that did not escape the penetrating observation of our
hero Henry, who immediately assimilated his style of address to that of his
visitor, and kept himself on the reserve. After the usual salutations had
passed and repassed between them, Claypole began to open his commission in the
following manner:

"I wait upon you, Sir, on the behalf of an orphan niece, for whose happiness
and reputation I have all that tender interest, which, as a father, I could
entertain for an only child. Miss Claypole, give me leave to say, is a young
lady, on whose character not the slightest imputation hitherto has been known
to rest; judge therefore with what exquisite sensibility she feels the
consequences of last night's event, and with what poignant inquietude she is
now waiting the confirmation of that promise, which alone can heal those
feelings, and relieve her anxious mind from its suspense: she is by nature
endowed with the warmest affections; those affections you have gained; your
fine person, engaging attentions, and amiable character have made a conquest of
her heart, and love, which in colder bosoms ripens by degrees, in here is sprung
up at once to full maturity, and gave you unequivocal proofs how much you was
beloved and trusted: I will not give the name of prudence to a passion of this
cast; I must as a divine and moralist condemn excess in every shape; even our
most virtuous propensities must have bounds set to their exertions; and errors,
though arising from motives the most generous, merit some reproof; yet I will
confess to you, that if in any instance I could find excuse for an unbounded
confidence, it would be in yours, relying, as I do, with so much justice, on
your honor and integrity of principle; but, Sir, the virgin fame of an
untainted character is delicate in the extreme; it is a blossom shrinking at
the blast, withering and drooping with the touch. Those fond unguarded moments,
which the sensualist calls golden opportunities, the man of honor should
account as sacred, and hold the heart, which love commits into his hands, as an
inviolable trust. Now it has so happened, whether casually or providentially we
will not enquire, that those very proofs of confidence and affection, which
must have endeared her to you, have exposed her to reproach and shame, and
obliged her to fly from the society she was in to my solitary parsonage, where
she is now hiding herself in retirement and exclusion from all visitors but
yourself, anxiously awaiting the completion of your promise to restore her to
her reputation, her happiness, and friends. It is not therefore that I harbor
any doubt of your good faith; it is not that I can suppose you lost to honor,
or insensible to the beauty, fortune and good qualities of my niece, that I now
require a confirmation of your word of honor from your own lips, but simply
that I may be authorized not only to put her inquietude to rest, but also to
assure Sir Roger Manstock, whose delicacy suffers great alarm by what has
passed beneath his roof, that there is no call for his remonstrances, nor any
insult meditated to a lady under his protection, and for whose redress he holds
himself responsible."

Here Claypole ceased, and Henry replied as follows: -- "A very few words, Sir,
will suffice to answer all you have been pleased to say. I perfectly well
remember what I have promised to Miss Claypole; and I want neither menaces nor
persuasions to induce me to perform it."

"Give me leave then," cried Claypole, interposing, "to felicitate you on the
possession of a lady, whom I have the vanity to say, the best gentleman in the
kingdom might be proud to call his wife. I boast not of her fortune, Sir, that
is but a secondary consideration where so many admirable qualities conspire to
make the union happy; and fortune, perhaps, though with many the first object,
may have lost much of its weight, if any it ever had, in your esteem, since
this great accession has so luckily devolved upon you."

"Truly, Sir," said Henry in reply, "Miss Claypole's fortune never weighed with
me; and as for this extraordinary bequest of Mr. Blachford's, which was totally
unthought of, it is evident from the recency of the event, that it could never
be in contemplation of that lady at the moment of our engagement. It was, as
you observe, a lucky cast of chance, and therefore, I conceive, whether I may
or may not be benefited by it, it does not regularly come into question between
you and me."

"Not as a principal, perhaps, but collaterally it does; it gives you means
which you was unprovided with before, and therefore, as a friend soon to be
connected with you in a near degree, you cannot wonder if I feel a lively
interest in an event so calculated to promote your happiness."

"Right, Sir," resumed Henry;" it will promote my happiness, as all things must
that please me on reflection, and enable me to say within myself, I have
fulfilled the golden rule of doing as I would be done by."

"That is indeed," said Claypole, gravely, "the great rule of Christian equity;
but I must own I do not at this time exactly see your application of it, for I
should suppose the point of conscience rather lies with Blachford than with
you."

"I rather think it lies with both; an act of conscience which we share between
us."

"I comprehend you now less than I did before," quoth the baffled interrogator;
"will you be pleased to explain to me?"

"In one single word; Mr. Blachford has a son."

Claypole started, threw himself back in his chair, and striking his hands
together, after the fashion of his patron Sir Roger, exclaimed -- "Well, Sir, a
son! what then? some bastard we'll suppose."

"And if we do suppose it such, what then?" said Henry, retorting his words
rather acrimoniously, and pretty nearly in the same key and cadence.

Claypole paused; he recollected probably the point his question bore ad
hominem, and cooly answered, that the law did not acknowledge persons of that
description.

"But you and I are neither of us lawyers," replied our hero, softening his
manner: "You are a divine, a moralist professed, and as for me, poor although I am,
and probably in the very same predicament with this son of nature, yet I would
fain aspire to copy that great rule of Christian equity approved by you, and
show that I am not wanting in a sense of honor toward others, no less than
toward Miss Claypole."

"Still I am puzzled," rejoined Claypole, "to comprehend your meaning: you tell
me Blachford has a son. You have not told me that he means to leave him his
estate."

"Permit me first to ask what you would counsel him to do, had you his
conscience in your care."

"That is a question for myself, not him: I understood that you was made his
heir by will."

"And so I am," said Henry; "but my will must be consenting to the execution of
the deed."

"And what should hinder it? It Is an atonement for a murderous attempt: he
bestows upon you his fortune; he sought to take away your life."

"He gave life to this innocent."

"Some beggar's brat, perhaps: Blachford was very low in his amors: a small
provision may suffice for such an one."

"But I," said Henry, "am no son of Blachford's; I covet not his gold: I can
forgive my enemy without a bribe, but I cannot strip the child of its
inheritance to purchase the world's wealth; I cannot do it; and I think you do
not wish to see me rich on such conditions."

To this the reverend visitor replied, "I should have thought, young gentleman,
that you had felt the smart of poverty sufficiently to warn you from
encountering it afresh: an unconnected being in the world may be romantic at
his own expense, but you are not this being; you have claims upon you nearer, I
should suppose, and dearer to you, than this brat of Blachford, which possibly
some hussy fathers on him falsely; and I am unwilling to believe you seriously
intend to throw good fortune from you, when you so happily might share it with
a well-beloved wife."

"Had that lady ever had a share in it," replied Henry, "or had that fortune
ever been but hinted at as a contingency within the scope of speculation, I
should have something to account for; but you must be conscious how very
recently this thing has dropped upon me; and that it is an unlookt for
opportunity of being just at my own cost; no other person has a part in what I
sacrifice; and what is that man's honesty, which does not reach beyond his
interest? If we do well, and suffer for it, that service is acceptable. This
being a christian principle, I cannot doubt but it is yours."

At these words the reverend personage assumed a look of more than ordinary
gravity, in which it is possible some mixture of wrath might be discernible, and
thus made answer -- "It is not now a question what my principles may be, but
what yours are, and I suspect that, under a romantic idea of justice to
others, you forget the justice due to yourself and those connected with you. If
you can lavish Blachford's whole estate away at a stroke, what security have I
that you would not serve Miss Claypole's in the like manner, was it in your
power? Such principles as these are dangerous to the peace and prosperity of
families, and you cannot wonder if, in point of prudence, I am somewhat
staggered: he that enriches beggars may make rich folks poor. What will my Lady
Crowbery say to this proceeding?"

"I have not asked her."

"But it will much import you so to do. This fortune would have made you
independent: you have now nothing to look to but her favor; and how is it
certain, when this business shall be known, she may not think fit to withdraw
it? It Is right at least that her intentions should be understood before we
venture further. You have also been engaged in a duel with a relation of Lord
Crowbery's. These are altogether such proceedings as may cause a change of
sentiment in your patroness; and what then becomes of my poor niece? I must be
certified from that noble personage herself in what light she regards this most
extraordinary measure."

To this Henry replied -- "If you act solely for yourself in this affair, Mr.
Claypole, you will act solely from your own judgment; if for your niece, you
will probably consult her wishes before you take a step so totally subversive
of the whole transaction, as your reference to Lady Crowbery would be."

"I don't understand you, Sir; did you propose to marry without her consent?"

"I certainly had not pledged her consent in my promise, and did not therefore
engage more than myself to the performance of it. If Miss Claypole accepts that
promise, my honor is attached to it, and I hold it sacred: if it is referred
to Lady Crowbery, my responsibility is taken off, and I shall act by her
decision. I hold it as a point of honor to Miss Claypole, thus to state it to
you; the alternative is before you."

Mr. Claypole paused for reflection, and then demanded, "How would you advise
us to proceed, when it appears that you have nothing to depend upon but the
eventual bounty and protection of the Lady Crowbery? But there is yet another
thing," added he, "to be explained: you informed my friend Sir Roger Manstock
by a letter which I saw, that you was going out to sea with Captain Carry; I
trust you have no thoughts of that."

"Pardon me, Sir; such is my full intention."

"Is that consistent," cried Claypole, "with your promise to my niece?"

"Perfectly so; she will have no cause to complain of it."

"But will Sir Roger Manstock, think you, not oppose his nephew's taking you on
board his ship, under such circumstances?"

"I should much fear he will," replied Henry, "if you exert your influence to
dispose him so to do; in that case I must take some other means."

"Then you are resolved at all events to go."

"I am."

"And what to do, permit me to inquire?"

"I hope," said Henry, "you will not press me on that question, seeing we do
not treat entirely upon confidence; had we so done, I should hold nothing back.
The affair is now entirely with Miss Claypole; in her hands I deposit my honor
and my destiny; if she accepts them unconditionally as they, were pledged, she
has then a right to be informed of my intentions; if not, the secret dwells
with me."

Claypole foresaw that here the conference must end. "That secret," he replied,
"may easily be guessed at." -- Then added in conclusion -- "I shall make true
report of what you tell me to my niece."

CHAPTER IV. The Decree of the Judge without Conscience is reversed.
MR. Claypole had risen from his seat, and was upon the point of departing,
when Ezekiel bolted into the room with unaccustomed alacrity, and running up to
our young hero, threw his arms about his neck: curiosity, or some deeper
motive, fixed the reverend visitor to the spot, and the animated enthusiast,
who probably did not know there was a third person present, proceeded to cry
out in an ecstatic tone -- "Henry! my son! my child! my glorious generous boy!
may Heaven shower down its blessings on your head! Come to my heart, for it
runs over with affection for you. No, no, I cannot part from you; I never will;
I will work for you, pray for you, nay, by the Lord, I will fight for you." --
Having, whilst he uttered these last words, quitted his embrace, to put himself
in a martial attitude, correspondent with the sentiment, he cast his eyes upon
the person of the looker-on -- "Under favor, reverend Sir," he said, "I
protest I did not advert to your person being present: Mr. Claypole, or I am
mistaken."

"The same," cried Claypole, "at your service."

"Not so, worthy Sir," rejoined Ezekiel, "you serve no human master; and I hail
the happy chance that brings you hither to partake of that delight, that
christian joy and exultation, which your heart must feel, as preacher of the
word of truth and charity, to see this youth, a stripling in the race that is
set before us, outstep all competitors, and seize the glorious goal of victory
over Mammon, and all his sordid, lucre-loving, filthy worshippers, at an age
green in experience, gray, thank Heaven, in virtue, charity and every christian
grace! Yes, reverend Sir, you must surely rejoice and be glad, inasmuch as our
friend Henry now appertains to your flock; and report speaks loudly of you as
of a faithful pastor in Christ, and I your poor fellow servant and follower at
due distance, venerate you therefore. How then must your pious bosom glow to
see that this our friend has sacrificed a noble fortune to his love of justice,
rejected treasures poured into his lap; treasures that might have tempted
hermits from their cells, to save the sinner's soul, and clear his conscience
for the great account. 'There is that makes himself rich, yet has nothing;
there is that makes himself poor, yet has great riches,' faith the wise man.
Behold! this good deed has our young man done; and verily, he shall have great
riches in the true sense of the proverb: he has not taken away the inheritance
of the poor destitute; he has not robbed the children's children of their
bread, therefore he shall have an inheritance amongst the children of light. I
have this instant left the couch of the dying man; I pronounce him a true
penitent; the thorns, that lurked within his pillow, thy hand, my Henry, has
drawn; his death will be easy; his spirit will expire in blessings; his child
is now his heir; the will is closed, and he longs to clasp him in his arms: the
poor deluded wench, whom his base arts seduced, the widow's only child, will
now be comforted, and when I Have set before her eyes the loathsomeness of sin in
proper colors, I have good hope she will tread the paths of purity hereafter; at
least she shall not want for exhortations on my part; the daughter of our
friendly widow May shall not be lost for lack of spiritual assistance and
advice."

"How Is this?" exclaimed Claypole, turning himself toward Henry; "Is Susan May
the mother of a son by Blachford? and has the daughter of my friend Sir Roger
Manstock been harboring a strumpet in her service?"

"A strumpet do you call her?" cried Ezekiel. "Reverend Sir, I pray you be
advised more truly; I do pronounce Susan May to be no strumpet, albeit the
mother of this babe; for virtue undermined by artifice, or violated by force,
is virtue not the less, and charity will give it its true name, with pity and
compassion super-added. Your Master, reverend Sir, and mine, condemned not her
that was taken even in adultery itself; shall we, forgetting his divine
benevolence, condemn this damsel, sacrificed by treachery, divested of reason
by the operation of seducing and intoxicating potions, and then thrown
insensible and unresisting on the impure couch of the defiler? Forbid it,
charity! that you, or I, or any one of christian training, should call that
guiltless sufferer a strumpet."

Claypole had heard enough; confounded, vexed, indignant; he now started from
his seat, and snatching up his hat, whispered a few words to Henry; and then
darting an angry look at honest Daw, hastily departed.

CHAPTER V. Our Hero is admitted to an unexpected Conference.
WHILST this was passing in the cottage, Captain Crowbery, after his rencontre
with Henry, had returned to the castle, and in a conversation with his cousin
the Viscount had done justice to the spirited behavior of his antagonist,
relating the grounds of their quarrel, the words that had passed at their
meeting, and all the particulars consequential of it. Now it so happened, that
the peer was conscious of being as deep in the plot of the press-gang as his
kinsman, but he was not conscious of the same courage to face the resentment of
our hero: the story, therefore, caused certain perturbations in his Lordship's
mind not altogether agreeable, and he became extremely anxious to be assured
that the affair was made up so completely, that no after-reckonings could be
started, which he himself might be called upon to account for. Nothing humbles
some people's pride so much as fear; the pride of Lord Crowbery hardly stooped
to any other corrector. On the present occasion, it was thoroughly brought down
by more fears than one, for the Captain had brought the news of Henry's being
heir to Blachford, which not only cut up his Lordship's interested expectations
from that quarter, but brought to his recollection certain papers and
correspondences in the possession of the said testator, which would naturally
fall into the hands of his executor, and disclose matters very inconvenient to
his Lordship to have revealed. How to get these out of Henry's reach was now
the question; he had called frequently at the sick man's door for that purpose,
but had never been admitted; and to these documents, if they were yet in
existence, not only his reputation, but what was dearer to him still, his
personal safety, was committed.

It was now that he regretted his former haughty treatment of our hero; he felt
himself the dupe of Blachford, and perceived that he had practiced upon his
jealousy with no other view but to serve his own revengeful purposes, and
engage him as a party in his plots against an innocent man. Nay, it is to be
presumed, he was not quite proof against the many instances of Henry's
honorable conduct; and the impression Captain Crowbery had now received of our
hero's behavior was such, as had made a total change in his sentiments, and
that gentleman was now become as zealous an advocate and admirer, as before he
was an enemy and a persecutor of Henry. Lord Crowbery, who had motives not
quite so honorable, but not less cogent, for making his peace with our hero,
lent a willing ear to the commendations that his cousin bestowed upon him, and
declared himself so fully convinced that he had been betrayed by Blachford into
groundless jealousies and suspicions, that he proposed inviting him to his
house, and indulging him with a visit to his benefactress upon the eve of her
departure, as a token of his entire reconciliation, and to do away, by this
mark of his confidence, all those reports that had been circulated against the
reputation of his Lady.

This proposal being heartily seconded by the Captain, Lord Crowbery
immediately repaired to the chamber of his Lady, and approaching her with a
mild and gracious look, he began by assuring her that he had entirely and for
ever dismissed every relic of unkindness and suspicion from his mind; that he
was sensible he had been led into error, and alarmed without reason as to her
partiality for Henry; that he saw it now not only in the most innocent but most
amiable light, and he wished her to persist in the protection of one so well
deserving. Lest she should doubt the sincerity of his conversion to an opinion
so directly opposite to what he had lately held, he repeated, in short, the
substance of the conversation he had just had with his kinsman, and concluded
by saying, that as he was persuaded she must wish to see Henry, and to take
leave of him before her departure, he proposed, with her consent, to send for
him to his house, where she herself should be a witness of the reception he
would give him.

Lady Crowbery heard this proposal with a sensation of pleasure not entirely
clear from suspicion of its sincerity, yet as she could readily comprehend some
reasons that her Lord might have for altering his tone at least, if not his
temper, she was not backward to embrace it with as good a grace as she was
capable of assuming. Few favors could be less expected than that of her being
permitted to visit Manstock house; this was an indulgence far beyond all hope
or conjecture, yet, as she owed the first to the influence of Mr. L --, she
might also be indebted to him, jointly with Captain Crowbery, for this further
instance of a revolution, either real or affected, in the conduct and opinions
of her Lord: and now the Captain with much alacrity undertook to be the bearer
of a very civil invitation to our hero on the part of the Viscount, requesting
him forthwith to repair to the Castle, where Lady Crowbery was expecting his
arrival.

He obeyed the summons, and being prepared for a kind reception by the Captain,
who accompanied him from the cottage, he was ushered without delay to the
chamber of his mother, where my Lord was waiting, and with as much address as
he was master of, welcomed him to his house, saying, that he hoped all former
misunderstandings would be forgotten, and that they might be good friends and
neighbors in all future time. To this Henry made a proper reply in the same
style of civility, and approached toward Lady Crowbery, to pay her his
respects silently and cautiously, with a tender look of pity and attention. Her
languid but still lovely countenance cut him to the heart; the change her frame
and features had undergone since last he saw her was too visible. Turning from
a spectacle so affecting, he said, -- "It is very kind in you, my Lord, to
allow me to pay this melancholy duty to my benefactress; it is generous to have
this consideration for one, who, with all the purest sentiments of gratitude to
the only friend he has in life, is now at length permitted to approach her: I
humbly thank you for this great indulgence."

His voice could execute no more -- not a word was attempted by the mother. --
"I Will leave you to yourselves," said Lord Crowbery, "and give orders that you
shall not be disturbed; your time and privacy shall be your own."

The door was shut; his step was heard upon the stairs; nature was freed from
all restraint; Henry dropped on his knee, and bathed his mother's hand with
tears. -- "My son, my son!" was all that she could utter. To attempt the
recapitulation of this tender dialogue would be in vain, for words can ill
describe a scene like this; and he must be an actor rather than author, that
can give life to representatives of son and mother in such touching situations.
The matter, not the manner, lies within my powers. Henry imparted to her his
plan of meeting her at Lisbon, by the favor of Captain Carry, now upon the
point of sailing. -- "Did she approve of his so doing?" -- She most highly
approved of it, and warmly recommended it, for reasons interesting to him, no
less than to herself: she had received a verbal intimation, through a
confidential channel, from his father, Mr. Delapoer, avowing himself the person
who had sent her the ring as a token of his affectionate remembrance of her,
and faithful adherence to his first vows, through many years of absence, and a
long course of various adventures; that he still considered himself as her
husband in heart; and hearing with the deepest concern that her case was such
as made it necessary for her to resort to Lisbon, he had determined to hasten
thither himself, in the hope that he might be permitted there to devote his
honorable attentions to her service, and approve himself still gratefully
impressed with that pure but ardent attachment, which no absence had been able
to abate, and which to the last hour of life he should unalterably retain.

This intelligence was in all respects most satisfactory to Henry, who had now
a certainty of his father being living, and a fair prospect of retrieving his
late disappointment, by a speedy meeting. We shall not be minute in detailing
all that was said by the respective parties upon this interesting topic, nor
shall we be more particular in stating what passed between them on the subject
of Blachford's will; it may suffice to say, that Henry's disinterested
renunciation of the bequest, in favor of a natural heir, met with full
approbation and applause from his generous mother, who concluded her remarks
upon the transaction, by declaring, that from the first moment she had heard of
it, she had never cordially reconciled herself to the circumstance of her son's
being made heir to a fortune so amassed and so devised, which not only robbed
him of the credit of forgiving a repentant enemy, freely and unconditionally,
but which would probably involve him in trouble and perplexity, and set him
forth to the world under a suspicion of foul dealing, which she could not bear
to have his character exposed to, and be made a topic for detraction, for the
mere worldly advantages of stepping into a man's fortune, who bore no other
relation or alliance to him, than as one, who having been his enemy and
intentional assassin, had by a deathbed repentance been converted to a friend
and unexpected benefactor. It was therefore with the most heartfelt
satisfaction she saw him endowed with spirit to judge and act so consonantly to
her feelings, without any advice on her part, or any knowledge on his of the
extent of her intentions toward him, which, she would now inform him, were no
less than to bequeath him the whole and entire estate of her father, which by
will she was invested with; a property so ample, that the superfluous bequest
of Mr. Blachford was no longer worth a thought.

This led her to speak of Sir Roger, in whose hands she had lodged her will;
and after enquiring of her son how he had passed his time at Manstock House,
with a view to discover what the state of his heart was toward the fair
Isabella, turning to him with a look of maternal affection, she said -- "Ah! my
beloved Henry, would you know the first and warmest wish of your fond mother's
heart, it is that you may gain an interest with that lovely girl, so formed to
make you happy: I know her to be so devoted to her father, as to have professed
certain resolutions, which I hold to be romantic; and I can well believe it
must be a lover of no common qualities, that can induce her to forego them; but
as you cannot in your present unacknowledg'd character hope to engage the
consent of my uncle, nor honorably make known your real pretensions to
Isabella herself, I have that perfect trust in her honor, that I am ready to
confide to her alone the secret of your being my son, if you can give me hope
there is that disposition in her, which, upon this discovery, might be improved
to your advantage: tell me therefore with sincerity how you stand in her good
graces, and tomorrow, when she and I are alone at Manstock, I will be your
advocate, and throw myself upon her candor for your sake."

"Heaven bless you for your goodness!" cried Henry; "how can I ever thank you
as I ought? What can I say or do, or undertake for your sake, that may but in
the least degree demonstrate to you my gratitude for all your bounties? Let me
attempt some act of duty, which no son has ever yet aspired to! let me forbear
to think of love and Isabella, whilst your life, so dear to me above all
earthly blessings, hangs in this dangerous suspense. I will not suffer any
other thought to lodge within my heart: Oh! my beloved honored mother, let me
devote myself to you alone."

Here he again cast himself at her feet, whilst she threw her arms about his
neck and pressed him to her bosom; -- "My son! my soul!" she cried, "this
transport of affection is a cordial to your sick mother, that gives her a new
life: your love revives me, my dear child, and seems to animate my languid
frame with health and strength. Is it not fit that I should live for him that
gives me life? And now, my son, without more questioning, I have found you out;
your heart is in my sight; I see the lovely Isabella has possession of it. How
should it be otherwise? How should such beauty, modesty, good sense, and
sweetness fail to gain the affections of a soul congenial to her own? You love
her, Henry, and as it is not in your nature to prevaricate, it is not in your
nature to deny it."

At this moment Zachary Cawdle entered the apartment, bearing in his hand a
phial, which, although its contents were of a restorative quality, we doubt if
his patient was not more annoyed by his interruption, than profited by his
cordial.

CHAPTER VI. The Conference is interrupted, resumed, and concluded.
THOUGH Zachary was informed that Henry was with his patient, and knew, without
being informed, that the minutes of their privacy were extremely precious, yet
as he was fixed in the opinion that all things ought to give way to medicine and
method, he did not permit any scruples to stop him, as soon as ever the clock
gave notice that the four hours draught was in turn to be repeated. In this
instance however, the feelings of the son did not entirely correspond with
those of the mother, and the interruption that gave pain to her, was to him a
sensible relief, for in this interval of time he had so far recollected
himself, as to be prepared against the dilemma, to which he was now driven with
respect to Isabella. The first caution, that occurred to his thoughts, was to
divert Lady Crowbery from her proposal of divulging the secret of his birth to
Miss Manstock, or taking any measures with that young lady for interesting her
in his favor, esteeming it unfair that any attempt should be made on her
affections on his behalf, circumstanced as he was with respect to Fanny
Claypole: the next thing that struck him, was the propriety of holding back
from his mother the vexatious embarrassment he was involved in with the lady
last mentioned, at least till the result of her uncle's report, and her
resolutions thereupon, were made known to him. From the language lately held by
Mr. Claypole he still nourished a faint hope that it was possible he might be
set loose from his unfortunate engagement, an emancipation that he would have
thought cheaply purchased by the sacrifice of Blachford's legacy; and in this
interim, why was he to be the first to publish an affair not over delicate in
the recital, and certainly not very reputable to the lady in question? If he
was dismissed, the least he could do was to keep his own secret; if not, it
became his interest to uphold her reputation by all the means in his power: he
therefore prudently determined not to open himself on this painful and
afflicting subject.

No sooner had the punctual man of medicine left them at liberty to resume
their conversation, than Henry, taking up the subject where Lady Crowbery had
left it, addressed himself to her as follows: -- "I should be ashamed of
prevarication in your presence, more especially as you declare that my heart is
in your sight, which that it may deserve to be, both now and for ever, it
behooves me to keep it clear from dissimulation and hypocrisy: I am flattered
therefore, when you say that you discern in it affection and esteem for the
loveliest and most amiable of her sex, as I must own you would have reason to
turn away your eyes with loathing and aversion had you found it unempassion'd
by her charms or insensible to her perfections. Blessed indeed must be the man
who could boast of the possession of a heart like here is, and whose pretensions
might be sanction'd by her father's free consent; but as I hold myself excluded
from all chance of such a blessing, and am persuaded that my destiny is
otherwise directed, I do most earnestly implore my kind and generous mother,
not only not to let the secret of my birth, and the too liberal disposition of
her fortune, pass her lips, but also to refrain from moving the soft heart of
Isabella in my favor: let that sweet nature be at peace, nor stir her any
farther to a thought of me, than as of one who knows himself unworthy her
regards, and hopelessly admires and honors her. If I had ever any place in her
affections, let it wear out by absence; let me, like her, devote myself to
filial duty, and then, although our objects are alike, our destinations will be
widely apart: Lisbon and Manstock House will make a chasm between us, over
which I hope no sigh of here is will ever pass. That you believe me worthy such a
blessing is an honor above all merit; that you would risque your secret, and
engage yourself to plead for me to Isabella, is a mark of your benevolence, for
which I am ever bound to you; but I most solemnly implore you for the present
to withold it."

"Well, my dear Henry," the tender mother replied, "I Will not go counter to your
wishes, but give you credit for the principle on which you act, though I
confess you puzzle and surprise me: reasons I must suppose you have, more than
you think it needful to display; and as I have firm reliance on your rectitude
of thought and conduct, I will not embarrass you with any questions on this
point. Are we to meet at Manstock House?"

"With your permission, no: I look to join the ship tomorrow."

"I hope you have no farther differences to adjust with Captain Crowbery."

"None," replied Henry; "absolutely none, upon my honor; I am in perfect
reconciliation with that gentleman, and hold myself for ever bound to testify
to his most honorable and manly behavior in an affair, where I was much too
warm."

"Have you any thing in commission for me to say to my uncle?"

"Nothing, but my most grateful thanks for all his goodness."

"And what to Isabella?"

"Oh! my dear Madam," exclaimed Henry, "why that question? Let me conceive in
silence, but not vent those wishes even in a whisper: ask me not what to
Isabella; my whole soul is here is, yet would my tongue be the veriest traitor to
the cause of honor and humanity, were it to tell her how I dote upon her. By
the love you bear me, I conjure you do not let her know the insolent
confession, which your sudden question has drawn from me: 'twill ruin me for
ever in her thoughts, if she should hear that I presume so much as but to name
her, though it were in my prayers."

"What is this you tell me?" she cried. "Now, Henry, now I own you rouse my
curiosity to know what thought so dreadful harbors in your heart. What have
you done to ruin yourself with Isabella? Confess, for the alarm is terrible;
surely, my son, surely your passion has not mastered your respect."

"Just Heaven renounce me, if in thought I could offend against such purity!
No, Madam," he cried, "no, your son is not a savage; and if I were, her virtue
would restrain and awe the wildest and the worst of natures."

"What then," said she, "reduces you to hold this language? It Is not mere
respect that dictates to you words like those you uttered; the most humble
supplicant, nay, Henry, the most abject self-convicted offender would not so
address himself to any human being."

"What have I said?" resumed he: "Oh! that I could recall my words; but you will
not release them. What can I say? Must I confess to you I have offended
Isabella past redemption? Shocked her chaste eyes, revolted her pure nature;
not indeed in her own person; that were to sin as it were against Heaven; but
in the person of another, far, far different, alas! from her. There let me
stop; press me no farther I conjure you; let her divulge the rest; and if she
does, defend me not, dear mother, but tell her I am conscience-smitten,
self-condemned, and punished more than ever wretch was punished, in the loss of
her esteem."

"If I did not persuade myself," she replied, "that you are incapable of any
thing that is grossly wrong, I should be truly wretched; but as I am firm in
that persuasion, and satisfied by your assurance that the offense does not
personally affect my co^ Isabella, I will not believe that you need (...) to
despair of pardon: I guess it is some ^dy boyish scrape, which you have fallen
into, and I can also guess with whom, but lovers use strong language when they
speak of their quarrels, and I can allow a great deal for your extraordinary
sensibility; a frown, a pout, a pettish word can make strange havoc with a
heart feeling and fond as yours; but Isabella will forgive you; take my word
for it, Henry, I shall find a soft moment to make your peace, and send you a
full pardon, upon proper submission and atonement."

Henry had by this time collected his thoughts sufficiently to see the danger
into which he had been surprised, and how far he had outstept discretion in
this unguarded declaration of his passion; he was therefore eager to avail
himself of the opening, which his mother's temperate answer gave him, for
drawing back in time to save himself, without committing Fanny Claypole; and
though it was pretty clear that Lady Crowbery's suspicion pointed at Susan May,
yet as she was not directly named, and time would quickly serve for him to
clear her character, he acquiesced in the deception, and was silent.

It was now time to put an end to their conference; but before this took place,
he was fain to compound for a release from all further enquiries, by promising
to remain where he was during the whole of the next day, when he was to hold
himself amenable to any summons that his mother, after her arrival at Manstock
House, might think fit to send him. This compromise being acceded to on his
part, and sealed with a maternal embrace on that of Lady Crowbery, they
tenderly took leave of each other, and parted.

CHAPTER VII. The Penitent, on his Deathbed, atones to Justice.
WHEN Henry arrived at the cottage, he found the nurse with Susan May's child
waiting his return: in a few minutes after, the chaise with the mother herself
drove to the door. Ezekiel Daw was at this time in attendance upon his
penitent. Henry put the nurse and child into the inner chamber, and no third
person being present at his meeting with Susan, he proceeded without
interruption to explain to her the purposes for which he had called her from
Manstock House, and in speaking of her connection with Blachford, treated her
feelings with such delicacy (assuring her, that by the confession of her
seducer she would stand acquitted to all that heard the story) that his
consideration for her character, no less than the very extraordinary sacrifice
he had made to her interest, so affected her, as to leave her no other powers
of expressing her gratitude, except what her tears, which flowed in plenty,
could supply.

"Wonder not," he cried, "at what I have done, as if it was a case uncommon for
a man to be just and honest. What have I to do with Blachford and his money? If
he had bequeathed it to me, and died before I had made this discovery of the
claim you have upon him, I should have held myself obliged in conscience to
make over what he left me to your son and you. New I do not wish to make a
parade of my disinterestedness, and should hold it rather as an affront to be
complimented for an act of justice, regarding it as a hint, that they suspected
me to be a knave; I therefore think myself very happy to have found your secret
out in time, to make that an act of atonement on his part, which, had it
devolved upon me, would have put me to the trouble of a conveyance, and annoyed
me very probably with a great deal of that popularity and applause, which some
people are flattered with, but which I have no taste for."

When Henry, by this and other representations like this, perceived that he had
in some degree quieted the agitation of Susan's spirits, he put her in mind to
make ready for an interview with the father of her child, and having stepped into
the inner room, he presented to her sight the child itself, giving it into her
arms, and declaring it to be his ward, and the infant heir of Blachford. The
beauty of the child, the ecstacy of the mother, the astonishment of the nurse,
and the benevolence depicted in the features of our blooming hero, composed a
group of characters not totally unworthy the historic pencil of the painter of
the passions.

The generous heart of Henry, in the contemplation of this scene, enjoyed a
more luxurious banquet than the wealth of Blachford could have purchased. True
gratitude, like deep-felt woe, is not to be discharged by words; Susan was
mute, and once, if Henry had not stopped her, she was falling at his feet. --
"What are you about to do? he cried. "Remember, you once tendered me your all;
I Am only paying you with what is not my own." -- And now bidding her take heart
and follow him, he proceeded with her, the infant, and the nurse, to the sick
man's house: they were admitted without delay; Blachford was impatiently
expecting them, and Ezekiel Daw was in the chamber with him. Henry took the
child in his arms, and advancing to the couch, presented it to its father -- "I
have brought," he cried, "two comforters to visit you; the one, in the person
of this smiling cherub, seems the very emblem of peace; the other, (pointing to
Susan as he spoke) by your justice reinstated in her innocence, and indemnified
for her injuries, will heal those inward pains that agonize us more than all
our fleshly wounds: accept them, cherish them, embrace them; they will brighten
every moment of your life, and the last moment more than all; in this life,
they will be the witnesses and recorders of your penitence, in the life to come
your advocates and intercessors at the throne of mercy." -- Blachford took the
child in his arms, and listing up his eyes, exclaimed -- "The Lord of mercy
grant their intercessions may avail!" -- "Amen!" echoed the pious Ezekiel, from
a corner of the room, to which he had retreated, and where, dropping on his
knees, he silently put up a fervent and (let us hope) not ineffectual prayer.

Blachford, whose mind was now prepared for death, and felt the awful coming
on, was instant in his wishes to complete the last remaining task he had to do
on earth, whilst yet his senses were entire. The lawyer was in waiting, and
Zachary, with his sub-surgeon Kinloch, coming in most opportunely at the
instant, all things seemed to favor the important work, and nothing now was
wanting but the concluding forms to make it perfect. Blachford was raised upon
his couch to sign and seal; the materials were set before him, the witnesses
stood round him, when turning his eyes on Zachary first, and next on Kinloch,
he said, -- "I call upon you, gentlemen, to attest upon the faith of honest
men, and able judges of my situation, that I am now in mental faculties sound
and competent to execute this deed, declaring it my will and testament, by
which I make this infant, born of Susan May here present, and my son, of her
begotten out of wedlock, sole heir of all my property, save what is herein
given and bequeathed to her, the mother, by annuity charged on the estate; also
one small acknowledgment of five hundred pounds to this my executor, and
guardian of my son, Henry Fitzhenry, so called, at whose solicitation,
voluntarily and generously made, I have revoked the former disposition of my
affairs in his behalf. A most disinterested and conscientious act it was, and I
do pray him to accept this small bequest in token of my love and his
forgiveness, conscious as I am of his unequalled worth, and deeply penitent for
all that I have said, or done, or meditated in his wrong: and further, I enjoin
and strictly charge the mother of my child to be observant of his counsel and
advice, and firmly to impress upon the mind of this her infant, as he grows to
years of reason and reflection, what he owes to this his benefactor, by whose
special bounty he is now endowed with affluence, that else it never could have
been his fortune to enjoy."

Having said this, and the appeal he had made to Zachary and his attendant
being answered with assurances of their entire conviction of his being in
perfect possession of his senses (a point indeed which no one of his hearers
could be deceived in) he signed and sealed his will, and, after it was
witnessed, delivered it to Henry. Exhausted by these efforts, he began so
evidently to droop, that Doctor Cawdle, in virtue of his medical authority,
dismissed the whole company. The mother, child and nurse were by Blachford's
desire accommodated with beds in his house; Henry contented himself with his
quarters at the cottage; but having hitherto abstained from asking any
questions about a matter that was nearest to his heart, and the business to
which he had devoted his first attention being so happily concluded, he became
impatient for a few minutes in private with his friend Susan. Of this
wished-for opportunity he was soon put in possession; for Ezekiel, on whose
mind these events had made a powerful impression, had walked home in deep
meditation, without saying a word to any body; whereupon Susan, having given
her boy in charge to the nurse, retired with Henry into Blachford's parlour. It
was the very room where the one party had been arraigned for his life, and the
other despoiled of her innocence. What mighty revolutions can a few short days
effect! the offender at the point of death, the sufferers restored to their
character, and the property of the guilty, including the very scene of his
criminality, actually made over as an atonement to the guiltless.

Henry, to prevent interruption, made fast the door, and taking Susan by the
hand, led her to a chair: she was still trembling with agitation; tremors of
another sort would have possessed her, had Henry so done a while ago: she now
looked up to him with aweful admiration; love, tempered with respect, gave that
chaste expression to her eyes, which on some past occasions had exhibited
affections not so pure: passions as irresistible as that which now had command
of her more than once had impelled her to embrace him wantonly in her arms;
pure gratitude, unmixed with any grosser impulse, now threw her, bathed in
tears, upon his neck: he pressed her tenderly to his bosom, spoke of the
kindnesses she had so often shown him, and asserted obligations received on his
part, prior and superior to these conferred on her; when, having soothed her in
this generous manner for some minutes -- "Now tell me, I conjure you," he
cried, "and tell me truly, am I totally undone in the opinion of your lovely
mistress?" -- "Alas!" she replied, "what can I tell you, my dear friend and
benefactor? certain it is, that gentle heart is wounded through and through;
but whether more by displeasure than by sorrow I am yet to learn. She is very
silent on the subject, and it is not from her lips that the story has escaped;
it is Miss Claypole herself and her politic uncle (pardon me, if I cannot speak
of them with the respect that becomes me) who have made public what my young
lady's delicacy never would have spoken of, and what their's, one should have
thought, would have been interested to conceal. But when Miss thought fit to
blazon her own shame, by bouncing out of the house, and betaking herself to the
parsonage, as if she had been flying from her persecutors, the whole family
were up in arms, as I may say, and every mouth was opened to cry shame upon
her. It Is not to be told with what a confidence she has carried it off, venting
herself against my meek young lady in a manner that I am sure you would detest
her for. Ah! my beloved friend, where were your eyes, your heart, your
understanding, during that fatal gallery-adventure? I can no otherwise account
for it, than by supposing you was not in your senses at the moment; knowing how
temperate you are, and unaccustomed to excess, I must impute it to the effects
of the wine you drank upon the election meeting, and so I told my Lady." --
"You told her true," said Henry; "but what then? One bestiality cannot excuse
another."

"Pardon me," rejoined Susan, "her candor found a motive for excusing it; but
no candor can justify the sacrifice you are making of your happiness, if the
report be true, which that young madam circulates, that you are pledged to her
for marriage. Heaven forbid that I should see that day! Surely, surely you have
not madly made that promise; why, it is ruin, misery, disgrace inevitable! Stop
me, if I proceed too far; I should be sorry to offend you; but indeed, my dear
Sir, every body knows, and every body says, without scruple, what Miss Claypole
is."

"What is she? I am not offended -- speak."

"What is she! A coquette, a flirt, a wanton: one that will go great lengths,
if not all; but that perhaps you can best tell: be that however as it may, you
are not the only favored lover; others, and not a few, have been as kindly
treated as yourself: her uncle knows that well enough, and is indeed a generous
man to part with what he is tired of, and knows to be a property that hangs upon
his hands, and keeps him in alarm for every day that passes till he is rid of
her. Believe me, my dear Sir, that uncle is a deep one; not a servant in the
family but laments the influence he has over their good master; and though Miss
Manstock is too delicate to speak out, I can discover to a certainty that she
is not mistaken in his character; no, nor my Lady Crowbery neither, though it
is given out in the house that he is to succeed to your Mr. Ratcliffe's
living."

"Indeed!" cried Henry, "is that said? It Is time for me to counteract him in
those hopes. Claypole succeed my friend! my honored friend! Impossible! that
shall never take place." -- Observing Susan look at him with surprise, he
recollected himself, and in an humble tone added, -- "At least if I have any
interest with the lady patroness." -- Susan resumed her discourse -- "And now,"
said she, "Miss Claypole gives it out that she was frighted by the
thunder-storm, and fainted in your arms: if it were so, what then? I hope you
are not bound to marry the first lady that faints in your arms: but who
believes that she was frighted? Nobody; she is not of the sort to be so easily
frighted; you must have known, if you had been yourself, that it was all put on
to win you to her ways. The servants all declare that she was fit to eat you
up, as they describe it; every one saw that, and knew what she was driving at:
she dogged you to the gallery, and there the lucky storm helped forward her
determined scheme to take you in the very cue for mischief, heated with wine,
half tipsey, and less than half yourself. Oh, Henry, Henry! (suffer me this
once to address you thus familiarly) can I not speak in proof of your
forbearance; of your self-command? Have I not a right to say, though saying it,
I ought to blush at the recollection, that I have found you master of yourself,
when I have lost all government of reason in the excess of my love to you? How
often and how impetuously has passion hurried me into your arms, although no
lucky storm was there commodiously to favor my fond wishes? yet you have
withstood all trials; but perhaps nature has given her charms and powers to
tempt, which I am not possessed of; but this is true, as truth itself can
witness, that no concessions on my part, no promise on yours, should have
prevailed with me, even when your fortune was at the lowest ebb, to have
trepan'd you into marriage, conscious as I was that I had not that maiden
purity to give, which you had so much right to expect. You know, full well you
know, dearest and best of friends, there was a time, when in our sports and
frolics by the way, as we returned from making our purchases, that when you
glanced at marriage, I drew back at once, and oftentimes I Have been upon the
point of telling you this tale of my seduction, had you not always seized those
dangerous moments to cut short our conversation, and preserve my virtue and
your own: and now, what mighty obligation can you have to this seducing wanton,
though we'll suppose you have gone beyond that limit where discretion should
have stopped? Grant that you have; whose virtue suffered most by the surprise?
yours or the lady's? Because she throws away her reputation, must you marry
her?"

"Before I answer to that question," replied Henry, "let me clear up one error.
If Miss Claypole was inviolate before our meeting in that odious gallery, I
promise you she left it as she entered it for me: her favors did not go the
length you hint at. The vision of an angel scared me from her embrace; the
frown of purity itself subdued my guilty passions, and I fled from her
allurements: but as I hold it due from every man of honor to make atonement
for even the slightest stain he casts upon the fame of a woman of character, I
tendered her the only reparation in my power; my hand, if that could heal the
injury. She took my hand, alas! and broke my heart."

"Thank Heaven!" cried Susan, "you have taken one weight from my mind; the main
point was not carried; she has felt one disappointment, and I Will engage it was
a cutting one. Now I can understand the reason for her shifting to the
vicarage; it is all a trap to catch you, and make sure of you; she thinks your
honor then would seal the bargain, and surrender you for life the dupe of her
contrivances; but go not near her, I conjure you; let not that uncle, who is
her setter, draw you in to visit her alone; you are ruined if you do. As for a
word dropped in an unguarded moment, when you was not in clear possession of your
reason, that I persuade myself you will not think yourself obliged to abide by,
nor sacrifice the happiness of your whole life for a romantic punctilio."

Henry shook his head: she proceeded -- "Now I begin to have more than a dawn
of hope. Oh! let me once come to the ear of my dear young lady, and I Will pledge
myself that all will be set straight. She loves you at her heart; I know she
does; nay, she has owned it to me in so many words. Vexed as she was, and
mortified to the very soul at your proceeding, still, when she surprised me
reading your kind note on the morning of your leaving us, and saw the generous
gift that it enclosed, understanding it was a farewell token to my mother before
you left us and went out to sea, the color fled her cheeks, her eyes quiver'd
in their lids, and she dropped, sweet afflicted soul, like a blossom from the
stalk, lifeless into my arms. If this is not the very test of love, what is it?
Ah! my dear, dear friend, do but once shake off this flirting damsel, and Miss
Manstock is your own."

"And what can be so cutting as that thought?" said Henry. "What can afflict me
deeper than to reflect I had a chance of happiness, and threw it wantonly away?"

"Who says that it is thrown away," replied Susan? "I have conviction to the
contrary." -- (Here she drew a letter from her pocket.) "Does this appear like
anger?" she demanded. -- "Here is a note penned with her own fair hand; it is
entrusted to me on this condition, only to be delivered to you, if you are
disengaged from Fanny Claypole." -- "Stop then," cried Henry; "on these terms I
must not take it, blessed as I should be." -- "What am I to infer from this?"
said she. -- "That I will not permit you to break through conditions, which
Miss Manstock has imposed." -- "But what if I am privy to the contents?" --
"Let them be sacred," he rejoined; "breathe not a syllable, however delightful
to my ears: I am not disengaged from Miss Claypole, and therefore must not
violate the seal, nor secretly purloin the purport of that letter, entrusted to
you under those restrictions: remember, Susan, the same principle, which led me
to decline the bequest of Mr. Blachford, now obliges me to deny myself the
transport which the perusal of that angel's favor would bestow." -- "What do I
hear?" cried Susan. -- "Are you then --?" -- "Undone!" said Henry, and departed.

CHAPTER VIII. An Incident of the Tragic Cast.
IF there is not a secret joy in being strictly faithful to the rigid laws of
honor, our hero must have been at this moment of all men most miserable; for
he might well presume that Isabella's letter was a kind one; and what had this
world to give him comparable to a testimony of her kindness? Nothing but the
consciousness of acting right. Educated in the most correct adherence to truth
and rectitude, he had no sophistry to palliate the slightest deviation from
them, and shuddered at deceit however qualified. Stung to the quick by his
remorse for having been a party in the cause, if not the cause itself, of Fanny
Claypole's misbehaviour, he took her shame upon himself; and vexed at the
recollection of his own weak facility in falling in with her advances, he
determined to meet the consequences he had drawn upon himself, unless rescued
either by her voluntary release, or some such unequivocal proofs of her
misconduct as might justify him in renouncing the connection. Upon his return
to the cottage, he found Ezekiel in the act of consoling himself with his
afternoon's pipe, whilst his bible laid open on the table before him. The pious
creature was in profound meditation upon the book of Proverbs, on which he was
founding an admonitory discourse for the edification of Susan May, whom, though
he had exculpated in the face of her reverend accuser, yet it must be owned to
have been a slight stretch upon the truth of his opinion, extorted from him in
his zeal for saying the best of a friend, and for opposing any sentiment of
Claypole, who was just then in no high favor with him, or, more properly
speaking, in sovereign contempt. Occupied in this manner, he took so little
notice of Henry, on his coming into the room, that it might be doubted if he
saw him; and Henry, on his part, had his thoughts too much employed to solicit
his attention.

A messenger now rode up to the door, and being accosted by Henry, put a letter
into his hands, the contents of which were as follows: --

My uncle, who sees most things in a false light, thinks you have done very
unwisely in declining Blachford's fortune; but money is his god, and love is
mine. I build my happiness upon better things than riches, and admire your
spirit; though I must own it would not have been amiss had you taken the
fellow's dirty pelf, rather than it should fall into the hands of those low
creatures, who are in the way now to profit by it. I should like to live at
Crowbery, and have particular reasons for wishing you to reserve that place at
least to yourself, whatever becomes of the rest of the property. I have quitted
the old mansion and its formal inhabitants, and am now entirely alone in my
uncle's house; if you have any pity for a solitary damsel, you will come to me
without delay: here are no spirits to haunt us, nor any galleries in which they
walk by night. My house, my heart, my arms are open to receive you. What can my
teazing uncle mean by telling me you are going out of England without seeing
me? that I am sure is impossible; that I will not believe: the man of my choice
will never treat me so; he has too much honor, too much love, too much pity
for a fond doting heart, which such neglect would break. I shall look for you
this night, this happy night; if not, with the first dawn of day at farthest;
longer than till then I cannot live without you; think what I am suffering till
I see you; lost to all the world but you, I have nothing to regret so you are
faithful, and delay not to bless

Your fond expecting FRANCES CLAYPOLE.


This was a puzzling dilemma; Henry had promised his mother to obey her summons
if she called him to her at Manstock-house; he could not therefore tell Miss
Claypole he was going to his ship the next day, neither could he with any face
come to Manstock without visiting her; if therefore he was ever to see her,
better he should go before Lady Crowbery arrived at her uncle's; and whatever
was to be the result of his meeting, better he should bring it to a definitive
conclusion before he put himself in the way of Isabella, whose attentions to
him, whilst his fate was in suspense, would embarrass him beyond measure, as
not knowing how far he might be warranted in honor to receive them.

It was now about seven o'clock in an autumnal evening, the distance twelve
miles, and the messenger was well mounted: he was a country fellow, and no
domestic of Claypole's. Henry asked him if he would lend him his horse, and
take money for hiring another at the post town two miles off. This proposal,
backed with a piece of gold, was perfectly acceptable to the messenger, and
Henry stepped into the cottage to apprize his friend Ezekiel of his motions, and
to equip himself for the saddle. A very short apology satisfied Ezekiel, whose
thoughts were farther from home than Henry would be at the end of his stage; as
soon therefore as he had drawn on his boots, and signified his intentions of
sleeping at Dame May's, he set off at a smart rate, and within the hour arrived
safely at the vicarage gate.

Great was the transport of Fanny Claypole when the object of her anxious
expectation presented himself to her sight; she flung the book she was reading
from her, and ran with open arms, in an ecstacy, to embrace him: wild with
surprise and joy, she scarce knew what she did; with her hair loose and
flowing, she seemed a perfect Sybil in her phrenzy; her dress (if dress it
might be called, that totally obscured no charms which nature had endowed her
with) was so invitingly disposed as showed the effects of study and design
rather than of chance or negligence; for little was concealed that could
allure, yet not so much exposed as to leave nothing for imagination to supply;
and a fairer field for excursions of that sort could hardly be found than in
the form of Fanny.

When her flutter had in part subsided, she threw herself on the couch in a
careless attitude, and observing that Henry kept himself aloof, and did not
take her hint for seating himself by her, she demanded what was the matter with
him? had not he recovered his alarm in the gallery? or was he waiting for
another thunder storm before he could find in his heart any pity for a poor
disconsolate damsel, who had no soul in the house to protect her but one old
woman, who had neither eyes, ears, nor understanding? "Here we are," said she,
"without one soul that will come near us for the live-long night, and what will
become of me Heaven only knows, in this desolate mansion, unless you will
manfully undertake to guard me, and turn into the vicar's bed for the night."

Henry smiled, and shook his head. -- "Positively," resumed she, "I cannot part
from you; I would as soon sleep amongst the tombs as in this dreary solitude,
with no other sentinel than the snoring old dame in the garret. Now I know as
well as can be, by your looks, what is passing in your mind: my uncle has been
preaching to you in his canting strain; but I take no account of what he thinks
or what he says; I am independent of him and the whole world; and if you
suppose my peace of mind can be disturbed by their talk, you are mistaken;
where I have bestowed my heart I am not afraid to entrust my reputation:
surely, if I ask protection of you, you will not refuse it to me."

"Certainly I will not," said Henry; "but as no danger can accrue to your
person, though I should leave you, and much to your reputation if I should remain
with you, can there be a doubt what I ought to do?" -- "Ridiculous!" resumed
she, "this over-care of what the world may say, if you persist in it, will make
me doubt if I have formed a right opinion of your character. When you rejected
the temptations that fortune threw before you, it was a gallant resolution; but
it is no proof of spirit to decline the favors of a lady. What care I if the
whole world knew that you slept in this house? The thing speaks for itself; I
am mistress of my choice, and you the man I have chosen; let the world comment
upon that as it likes. I have quitted society, and put myself into solitude for
your sake; to whom then but to you am I to resort for protection, for
consolement, nay, for justification? Where else shall I go? To my uncle? Never;
I have done with him; I renounce him; I am yours and only yours. We have
interchang'd our hearts: what witnesses do we need of that? Not all the parsons
in the kingdom can do more, and without this their ceremonies are but
mockeries; therefore let us hear no more of this affected tenderness for
reputation, this hypocrisy of sentiment, which would refine away the noblest
passions of the soul; let our love be without canting, our confidence without
restraint; and to convince you of my sincerity in both respects, I am free to
confess that it is not to any real terrors I experienced in the storm that you
are indebted for the endearments I bestowed on you last night; they were the
free effusions of my heart, and you may tell your conscience to be quiet on
that score; for it was love, my Henry, not the elements, that threw me in your
power, and the same love now courts you to the same endearments, secret and
secure from all disturbers of our hours so precious. Come then, throw off that
cold reserve, those distant looks that have no sympathy with mine. My eyes are
honest and sincere; they speak a plain intelligible language; what ails yours,
that they cannot or will not understand it without compelling me, against the
practice of my sex, to help you to a comment?"

"It is because I do understand their language, and feel their power," replied
Henry, "that I avoid them. Either you think yourself less dangerous than you
are, or me more firm than I pretend to be, when you beckon me to that couch."
-- He was proceeding, when she stopped him, crying out -- "Come, come, there is
enough of this trifling; more than enough of this ridiculous, this unmanly
affectation. Beware how you provoke me; I shall become desperate if I am
insulted." Regardless of these menaces, Henry kept his post, and advanced not a
step toward her. She kept her eyes fixed upon him, and exclaimed -- "By all
the loves and graces, Henry, you have the form of an Apollo! would to heaven
you had his fire! Well, keep your pedestal, cold lifeless image, and let me
gaze upon you till my admiration warms into idolatry; 'twill gratify your
pride, perhaps, to see me kneeling at your feet and worshipping you: mark, how
naturally I Will act Pygmalion's part, and make love to a statue."

This said, she started from the couch, and was advancing toward him, when,
preventing her as she was in the act of dropping on her knees, he cried, "Pray,
do not laugh at me; I cannot stand your ridicule."

"Vittoria!" she cried, "I Have made the statue move and speak. Now, since your
marble majesty can bend, be pleased to sit beside me. Oh! all ye gods! it
smiles, it animates, it yields, it softens with the touch; happy change! it
lives! If the mere pressure of the hand does this, my arms, perhaps, may warm
it into love: I Will clasp it to my heart, I Will breathe my life into its lips,
and share my soul between us."

"Stop, Siren!" Henry exclaimed, "I Am not responsible for consequences thus
urged upon me, nor am I bound in honor to repair them: whilst I believed your
terrors in the storm had thrown you from your natural guard, and subjected you
to weaknesses, which in a more collected moment your virtue would have spurned
at, I felt myself a party in the treason, and tendered you the only reparation
in my power ('it was all I had to offer) my unworthy self; but when you openly
declare those fears were feigned, and freely take the blame upon yourself, you
quit me of the atonement; and now again, when you return to the attack, and
with such exquisite allurements tempt a man, who visits you with none but
honorable purposes, and combats against nature to preserve you in that purity
of character, which is your sex's ornament, I think it fair to warn you that my
sentiments respecting favors in anticipation differ so essentially from
yours, that she, who has been mistress to me with her own consent, shall never
be my wife. Beauty, and wit, and fortune, you possess more than my hopes aspire
to; but permit me to observe, that, flattered as I am by your attachment,
chastity is a virtue indispensible in the female character, and without that I
should consider marriage as a certain sacrifice of happiness."

"Marriage! I laugh at it! marriage was never made for souls like mine: my love
can never wait upon the lazy forms of plodding mercenary law; I scorn them all;
nor are you fit for the dull drudgery of that slavish state; too young, too
inexperienc'd, and too choice to be made daily use of, your beauty, like a
precious garment, should be reserved for feasts and holidays; 'twas never made
for the coarse wear-and-tear of wedlock; if you had thought of marriage you
would never have refused the fortune Blachford had bequeathed you: I see it
hangs upon you like a debt of honor, therefore I set you free; I Will not exact
it of you; marry ten years hence, and marry whom you will; of this and every
other obligation honor can impose I perfectly acquit you, only for this I
stipulate, I Will not be treated with contempt; of all engagements I acquit you,
but not of gratitude: Oh Henry! have a care how you insult a woman who has
broke through all reserve, and laid her heart before you: after this night you
are free; I resign you -- even to Isabella."

How quick and sudden are the shifts of passion! a word sometimes will call up
a new train of thoughts, and change our resolutions in an instant. It was not
virtue's self, but virtue's substitute that saved our hero; sunk into the arms
of the seducer, and resigned to the temptation, the name of Isabella roused him
like a spell; he started, sprung with horror from the couch, and cried, "You
have redeemed yourself and me: I leave you to your better recollection." --
"Stop," she exclaimed, "unless you are resolved to be my murderer." Then,
snatching up a sharp-pointed knife, with which she had been cutting open the
leaves of her book, "by the eternal Truth," she cried, "I Will plunge this weapon
in my heart if you desert me." Here she put herself into a menacing attitude,
with a look of so much desperation, that Henry on the instant sprung forward,
and seized her uplifted hand, to wrench the knife from her grasp: furious with
rage, she struggled to keep hold of it; and in the struggle, whether purposely
or accidentally we pretend not to say, lodged the point of it in his left arm,
below the elbow: in the same moment he got possession of the knife, and secured
it in his pocket: she probably perceived what she had done, for she stood
torpid with astonishment and terror: he rang the bell with violence; an elderly
woman came running to the call. "I charge you be attentive to your lady," he
cried, "for she is suddenly taken ill." Then, finding that the blood was
flowing apace from the wound, and would soon discover itself if he staid any
longer, he hastened out of doors, and stuffing his handkerchief up his sleeve,
ran as quick as he could to the house of Goody May, which luckily was near at
hand.

CHAPTER IX. Surgeon's Work.
IT was well for our hero that he had not many paces to measure before he found
an house to take shelter in; for though he held his hand close pressed upon the
wound, the sluice kept running apace, and his waste of blood would not have
suited a much longer march. The widow was at home, and her hospitable door
stood open. "Come, Mother," cried Henry, as he entered, "I have another case
for you; more work for the good Samaritan." This said, he began to strip off
his coat, which had no sooner displayed to her sight an arm covered with blood,
than she gave a loud shriek, started back with horror, and fell a-trembling
from head to foot. "Courage! my good friend," cried the undaunted youth, with a
cheering smile; "a good surgeon does not shrink at the sight of a wound," --
"Would to Heaven I was a good surgeon for your sake," replied she, "or any way
more able to assist you than I am. -- "Take heart," he cried; "give me a chair
to rest my arm upon in an horizontal posture, and fetch some lint to staunch
the blood; then, I warrant, all will be well in a few minutes." Cheered with
these words, the good dame bestirred herself, and presently returned from her
repository with a large pledget of lint steeped in friar's balsam, which she
laid over the wound, and bound it up with a swathe of linen in several folds.
"Here Is a piece of work," she cried; "Oh that Mr. L -- was here to dress you!
but let me send post haste for Doctor Cawdle; as for myself, God help me, it
pities me to the heart to see your fair flesh hacked and hewed in such a
barbarous manner: Oh the villain that has done this! I would I had him safe in
fetters of iron! some murderous wretch has stabbed you in the dark; as sure as
can be it is that bloody Captain you fought with in the morning; he has waylaid
you on the road at night; but we'll raise the neighbors, and have a
hue-and-cry after him, please God! Is there to be no end to the malice of these
accursed Crowberys?"

"There are no Crowberys in the case," replied Henry, "nor any malice, so put
yourself at peace, and say no more about it; it is an accident, and nothing
more; a mere casualty, owing to my own aukwardness." -- "But how did it
happen?" she still demanded; "I Am positive it has been the stab of a sword, or
a dagger, or a knife, or some wicked weapon or other, for it has gone in the
Lord knows how far." In this manner she persisted in pressing him with
enquiries, till he found no escape but by taking a little more liberty with the
truth than was his custom to do, and making up as plausible a story as he could
invent to account for the accident: however, she still remained incredulous,
crying out, "You are too forgiving; indeed, my dear young Sir, you are much too
forgiving in all conscience; and though to be sure humanity is very amiable, yet
after all it is an act of justice to bring the guilty to punishment, and you
may depend upon it they will be the death of you some time or other, though I
hope, with God's blessing, they have missed their aim for this turn."

"If you will go on in a mistake, my good friend," said Henry, "you must; so
there let us leave it: I have news to tell you of your daughter, whom you seem
to have forgotten." He then related to her briefly what had been passing at
Blachford's, and how he had diverted that dying man's great bequest from
himself to those whom he considered as having a better claim to it.

When this was disclosed to her, with the circumstance of her daughter's being
a mother, (of which, strange as it may seem, she had hitherto been kept in
ignorance) the variety of sensations which the discovery of facts so affecting
at once excited, seemed to deprive her of speech and recollection. Henry saw
the conflict of her thoughts, and perceiving that in speaking of her
grandchild he had opened an affair which till then he had no notion she could
be uninformed of, instantly began to explain to her, in the most consoling
manner, the whole plot which Blachford and his accomplice had put in practice
to obtain their wicked purposes, and entrap their innocent victim.

Here the good mother's passion broke in upon his narrative. "Monster!
villain!" she exclaimed; "Oh! that I had known his goings-on, that I might have
brought him to the gallows as he deserved. What could possess my child to
screen so vile a wretch?" -- "Be content," replied Henry; "he has met his doom
at last; and you have now the comfort to reflect, that by escaping the
punishment of the law, he has lived to repent, and, as far as human
circumstances will admit, to atone for the crime he has perpetrated: the son,
which that dark transaction brought into the world, now survives to inherit the
fortune of the father, and the injured mother is enabled to live easy and
independent for the rest of her days; and who shall arraign her character?" He
then concluded with what he knew would be the most healing reflection he could
suggest to her, assuring her that even Ezekiel Daw, with all his purity and
preciseness, absolutely and entirely acquitted Susan May, and had asserted her
innocence in the strongest terms to the Rev. Mr. Claypole, in a conversation on
the subject.

As he was thus discoursing, the cloud that had gathered upon her countenance
cleared away, and the shower it had been collecting began to vent itself at her
eyes. Words were no longer wanting, but, like a spring repressed, burst out
with increased volubility; they were the unpremeditated effusions of a heart
overcharged with its own feelings; gratitude, astonishment, joy, transported
her by turns from one to the other, yet she found expressions for them all, in
broken sentences, after her manner, so that it was some length of time whilst
Henry was fain to give patient hearing to her rhapsodies before he could
perceive her spirits to subside into any tolerable degree of calmness; and
perhaps it was more owing to her being exhausted, than to any efforts on his
part, when at last she became quiet and composed.

This interval, however, was but short; for soon the recollection of his wound
seized her afresh, and she began to moan and lament over him more piteously
than at first: her imagination painted him expiring under the stab of an
assassin; all his noble generous acts rose in review; accumulated obligations
pressed upon her memory with such overwhelming weight, that her grateful soul
sunk under it, and she cast herself prostrate at his feet, embracing them, and
crying out, in broken accents, "The Lord of mercy save you! the widow's prayers
protect and draw a blessing on you, in return for all your bounteous goodness,
and for this your unspeakable tenderness in softening to my poor heart an event
that would else have broken it, had any other tongue but yours revealed this
dreadful secret to me!"

Here she was called off by a messenger sent in great haste from the vicarage
to claim her instant assistance to Miss Claypole, who had been in strong
hysterics since Henry had left her, and so terrified the old woman, her only
attendant, that, after rousing the cottagers at next door, she had dispatched
one of them to Dame May, as a person of skill in such cases, and stocked with
medicines to relieve them. The dame had great scruples about leaving her
wounded friend; but Henry insisting upon it, she obeyed the summons, and
departed, taking with her a competent provision of such nostrums as she judged
proper for the occasion.

In less than an hour she returned, having left her patient in a convalescent
state; but in this period the hysteric lady had in her ramblings been so
communicative, that the good dame, who had at least as much curiosity as came
to the share of any one individual, had perfectly informed herself of every
particular that could elucidate the mystery of our hero's pretended accident:
fraught with this information, she soon gave him to understand that she was no
longer imposed upon, though he still persisted in taking it upon himself as a
chance blow in the struggle, and that he was positive the lady had no serious
intention of doing any injury either to him or herself. As the dame, however,
was strenuous in unbelief, and he found himself rather faint and exhausted by
loss of blood, he cut short the argument, by desiring her to prepare Ezekiel's
bed for his repose; but as he well knew her passion for telling news was not a
whit inferior to her pleasure in hearing it, he was very earnest with her to
keep secret what she had heard from Fanny Claypole, or rather what she herself
suggested from the ramblings of a disordered imagination, stating to her how
extremely dishonorable it would be in her, who acted in a medical capacity, to
disclose the secrets of a patient, which, he observed, would be a heinous sin
against the inviolable free-masonry of the faculty.

Henry retired to his repose with the pleasing reflection that he had
compounded a very heavy penalty with a slight fine, for such he now considered
his wound to be; and indeed the pure habit of his body would have accommodated
itself to a demand of a more serious nature than this was likely to prove; for
the knife had only pierced the fleshy part of his arm, without any material
injury: neither was he the less happy in his present quarters for the testimony
which every thing about him bore to the taste and benignity of the beloved
person who had provided them: every object he now looked upon, every comfort he
enjoyed, was of Isabella's bestowing; and whilst he fed on that delightful
recollection, no wonder if the grateful approaches of sleep, so sweetly
recommended, stole upon his senses with peculiar softness, till, by the magic
of his dream, the air-drawn image of his beauteous Isabella rose to view,
graced with ten thousand charms, and pictured to the height of fancy's warmest
coloring, kind, happy, greeting him with smiles of love, consenting, melting
into soft desires, and self-surrendered to his fond embrace.

CHAPTER X. Our wounded Hero bleeds afresh.
THE next morning Henry rose with recruited strength: the air was so fresh, and
the sun so gay, that if we had any ambition to emulate our brother novelists in
description, here is the very moment for it; but we decline the opportunity.

Dame May examined his wound, and perceiving that Dame Nature was in the humor
to take the cure out of her hands, humbly resigned the task into her care, and
contented herself with the simple application of a fresh pledget of dry lint,
and swathed it as before. She now set out her tea-table in its holiday trim,
and administered the ceremonies of breakfast in her very best style: when this
service was dispatched, she left her guest in possession of her parlour, and
addressed herself to her own domestic affairs in another quarter.

She had not left him many minutes, when her lovely patroness stepped into the
house, unseen by Henry; -- "It occurs to me," said Isabella to the dame, "that
something may be wanting in your friend Mr. Daw's apartment, and therefore I
should be glad to look it over before he arrives." -- Without stopping for an
answer, she nimbly ascended the stairs. The good dame's thoughts were rather
from home at that moment, and not present to the recollection that Henry's
bedchamber was not exactly in a state fit to receive the visit of a young
lady; instead therefore of stopping her on the stairs, she hobbled after her
into the room; -- "Heyday," cried Isabella, upon looking about her, "what is
this? somebody has slept here I perceive." -- "Lackaday!" exclaimed the dame,
"I humbly ask your pardon for not stopping you in time. Dear good young lady,
be not offended with me; but indeed you was so nimble, and took me, as I may
say, at such a nonplus, that I never thought to tell you that the chamber was
not fit for you to come into. Sure enough, though, it was my sweet dear young
friend, Mr. Henry himself, who reposed himself in that bed last night, (Heaven
bless him!) and I have not had leisure yet to set the room to rights."

"Did he sleep here?" said the lovely intruder, as she was quitting the
chamber; and just then recollecting that she was leaving the survey unfinished,
which she came to make, stopped and cast her eyes deliberately round the room,
observing that she wished it was more worthy of her guest, "But I hope at
least," added she, with an encouraging smile, "you took care to air it well for
your friend and benefactor." -- "Heaven forbid!" cried Goody May, "that I
should bring his precious life into danger; there are wretches enough in this
world too ready to do that, the more shame their's; but I say nothing; the Lord
he knows their hearts and mine also, how it bleeds for him at this moment; and
that is the reason I was so absent in my duty to you. Well, to be sure, the
wickedness of some folks is surprising; I am sure it will be more God's mercy
than my skill, if my dear Mr. Henry escapes out of their murderous hands alive."

"Bless me!" cried Isabella, "I protest you startle me. Is Mr. Henry now in the
house?" Goody May answering in the affirmative, Isabella came silently down the
stairs, and understanding he was in the parlour, turned into the common room
which was opposite to it, making a sign to her follower to do the same. Here
she immediately began a course of questions, which soon betrayed the
communicative dame into so complete a recital of every circumstance respecting
Henry's wound, that nothing she had collected from Miss Claypole in her fit,
and which Henry had conjured her to keep secret, was untold. There is reason to
believe, this poor woman would have gone to death for Henry's sake, whilst she
was thus running counter to his injunctions; but to deny herself the pleasure
of broaching a piece of news, particularly one so honorable to Henry, and so
interesting to the hearer, was a virtue which her nature could not reach; a
sacrifice her resolution was not equal to.

Henry, in the meanwhile, unconscious of what was passing so near him, sat in
the little parlour with his eyes fixed upon the print of Isabella's father, that
hung opposite to him, pondering in his mind the lovely vision of the preceding
night, his imagination fascinated with the contemplation of her matchless
beauty, her engaging manners, and attractive graces, when behold the sound of
the lock drew his eyes to the door, which, gently opening, disclosed to his
sight the very object of his meditations in her existing and substantial form,
more exquisitely beautiful than any shade that fancy ever pictured in the
poet's brain: surprised, enraptured, he started from his chair, and in the
momentary transport that deprived him of reflection, ran and caught her in his
arms: instantly undeceived, and convinced it was no shadow he embraced,
terrified at what he had done, he dropped upon his knee, and begged for pardon. --
"I was deceived," he cried; "my mind had left me, and was strayed beyond
realities: I saw you in my meditations, and, like a man delirious, seized what
in my better senses I would not offend for worlds, and know myself unworthy to
approach."

What passed in Isabella's mind, whilst Henry was thus pleading for pardon at
her feet, words will not describe, for she made use of none: it was not anger,
for her looks were melting soft; it could not but be modesty, for blushes
spread all over her fair face; no doubt but sensibility had a share in it, for
tears bedewed her cheeks.

He was preparing to proceed with his apology, when a shriek from Isabella
stopped his speech, and instantly he perceived the blood streaming from his
wound. -- "Behold," he cried, "how justly I am brought to recollection of my
offense." Isabella, in the mean time, frightened past the power of motion, kept
calling out for Goody May. It was obvious that her sudden appearance had
surprised him into an exertion, that had opened his wound afresh, when he
inconsiderately threw his arms about her waste. The poor woman, terrified with
what she heard and saw, in her confusion scarce knew what to do first; but
recollecting, after a few moments, the process she had before observed, begged
Isabella to assist in opening his coat sleeve, whilst she hastened to her
repository for means to stop the blood. Isabella, pale and trembling as she
was, summoned spirits to assist in supporting his arm, as well as in the
operation of untying the tapes Goody May had sewed upon his sleeve, which she
had ripped open over the wounded part. The business most immediately necessary
was soon effected by the application of fresh lint and the former styptic; but
Isabella's horrors at the glimpse she had of his wound were not so soon
dismissed. Henry's attention was so totally absorbed in his care for his fair
assistant, that he seemed to have no sense of what was doing to himself, and he
would fain have dismissed the operatrix for hartshorn and water, before she had
secured the bandage; but when he felt the gentle touch of Isabella, engaged in
the work jointly with the old woman, -- "Who would not gladly shed his blood,"
he cried, "for such an honor?" and now a certain tender glance from Isabella's
eyes made answer in so flattering a language, that the heart of our hero, so
far from sinking under its loss, seemed to beat with double energy and spirit.

The hartshorn and water was now brought, Isabella recovered, and her alarm
having subsided, the prudent dame thought her presence was no longer necessary,
and retired.

"We looked for you last night," said Isabella; "my father charged Susan with a
message to that purpose, and to prevent mistakes I wrote you a short note; but
I understand from Susan that you did not receive it."

"I hope," replied he, fixing his eyes upon the floor, "she told you at the
same time upon what motive I denied myself that happiness."

"She did," rejoined Isabella; "the letter I received from her this morning
does credit to her heart and justice to your honor, not only in the trifling
matter of my note, but in a circumstance of real self-denial, in which, permit
me to say, you have given the noblest proof of an exalted generosity."

"If I merit your praise," said Henry, "in either instance, it is in that which
you term the more trifling instance of the two: it is no hard task for a man
not mercenary to act as I did in the affair of Blachford, for it is a victory
over a mean and abject passion; but there is some struggle to obey the dictates
of honor, when it calls upon us to oppose the strongest impulse and affection
that the heart can feel; but your commands to Susan May were positive, and I
obeyed them."

"They were calculated," she rejoined, "for your accommodation; you had another
engagement, and solicitation is in that case an embarrassment to a well-bred
man."

"There," said he, "you lead me to look back upon a transaction that covers me
with confusion and self-reproach; yet, if it were a plea your purity might
listen to, I have enough to say that would acquit my conscience toward the
engagement you allude to, though nothing can totally exculpate me from folly
and infirmity. A fortunate explanation with Miss Claypole, yesterday evening,
has set me free from all conditions of atonement, and I am happy it is in my
power to assert with truth, that the promise I held myself bound to make was
not a composition for the loss of innocence on her part, but simply for the
risque of reputation."

"Whatever you seriously assert," Isabella replied, "I implicitly believe; but
when you call your explanation with that lady a fortunate one, I should suspect
you are once more guilty of forgetting you have a wound, that demands more care
and attention than you seem disposed to afford it. If you are to shed your
blood with such repeated profusion in every lady's company you chance upon, and
one is to give, another to renew your wounds, I think you are in a likely way
to become a victim to the sex."

"I see," said Henry, smiling, "that my old prattling dame has broke faith with
me, and let out all she knows, with more, perhaps, than her information
warrants; but in your heavenly nature I well know there will be found a
principle of candor, that can look with pity on the extravagances of an
uncorrected temper, and consign them to oblivion. If the tongue of this gossip
can be stopped in time, we may yet suppress a story, that would do no credit to
Miss Claypole; and in this I flatter myself your good nature will assist me.
For my own part, I propose to wait here no longer than till Lady Crowbery
arrives, who must pass this door in her way, and whom I am bound to see once
more before I leave England."

"What are you talking of?" said Isabella, fixing her expressive eyes
despondingly upon him. -- "Can you think of leaving us at this moment, and
trusting yourself in this condition on board a ship? Can there be any such
cruel necessity to make so rash a sacrifice of yourself? Can my gentle Lady
Crowbery require it of you? Will her humanity permit it? Nay, when you consider
how disconsolate she will leave us, will your own?"

"Oh, thou angelic sweetness!" he exclaimed, gently taking her hand in his, "my
gratitude, my duty, my destiny demand this effort, for which, if I might now
expose to you all the motives, you would confess them such as I must be a
monster if I shrunk from, how severe soever the separation they compel me to.
And can I look upon those eyes, and see them beaming with such soft compassion
on me, yet forbear to tell you what I suffer by this painful effort? No,
loveliest of your sex, whom present, absent, my poor heart devotedly adores, it
is in vain to counterfeit; you see, you know the violence I commit against my
nature, when I suppress its feelings; you perceive I love you. What shall I
say? How shall I palliate my presumption? Yet reflect with pity on my case;
remember I have lived by sufferance in your sight; (could I see and not admire
you?) have by your condescension been indulged beyond my humble merit, with
some moments of your privacy; (could I converse with you, and not be charmed?)
in short, I have contemplated perfection in your mind and person, and fixed your
image on my heart so deep and so indelible, that if to love you be a crime, I
am unpardonably guilty."

"You are not guilty," said Isabella, looking down, and blushing as she spoke;
"to me at least not guilty."

"I know," resumed Henry, "who it is that print which faces me reflects -- your
excellent father; I know your love, your piety, to that best of parents, and
can well believe the patience you now hear me with springs from pity; on that
therefore I build no false presumptuous hopes; for I know the difficulties of
my present situation, the distance to which it throws me, and I would scorn to
take advantage of your private moments for saying any thing in a whisper, which
I dared not openly to repeat in the presence of Sir Roger Manstock himself: if
then, at this instant, the fatherly eye within that frame had sight, though I
might shrink from it a while, mysterious as I am compelled to be, yet in my
conscience I should stand acquitted, because I know myself."

A start of surprise from Isabella, and a look betokening curiosity, at this
moment directed toward him, checked him from proceeding; after a pause, he
repeated -- "Yes, loveliest Isabella, I know myself, and hope I shall in time
be known."

Here Henry stopped; it seemed as if the most important secret of his life was
upon the verge of discovery. Isabella too was silent; she was debating in her
thoughts whether she should urge him to explain, or repress her curiosity; the
latter seemed most honorable, and she decided for it: at last, turning toward
him with a look of inexpressible sweetness, she thus addressed him -- "Henry
(so let me call you, till I know by what addition else to accost you) I would
not wish to have the keeping of a secret, that might cause regret to you for
having parted with it; neither is there any information wanting to convince me
you are nobly born; I am certified of that by my own observation, and have long
been so. Honor, and worth, and genius may emerge from low originals, but
elegance and delicacy of manners are rarely natives of a coarse and rustic
soil. A strange idea haunts me: shall I confide it to you? I have really
thought at times, or fancy may have feigned it, that you have a marked
resemblance in your air and features to my beloved Lady Crowbery, as I remember
her some few years ago: this may be mere imagination; but I have humored
myself in it the rather, because it helps me naturally to account for certain
situations I have seen her in with you, which else might seem at variance with
her strict reserve and delicacy of conduct: I can almost persuade myself you
are after some manner related to her; at least these have been my idle
reveries; but never did one syllable to that effect escape my lips till now; I
am not quite so fond of tatling as our good dame. And now, moreover, I
recollect amongst the motives you enumerated for leaving us, you mentioned
duty: be it so! we must conform ourselves to duty; but let me hope that we
shall meet again."

"And do you wish it?" said he, looking tenderly upon her. -- "Do I wish it?"
she repeated. -- "Oh Henry! Henry! if that is a question with you, where is your
intelligence?" -- Here the tears stopped her, and she leant her forehead on his
shoulder, covering her face with her handkerchief. -- "Heaven guard your life!"
she cried; "may no female demon ever more attempt it! Horrid creature!
shameless abandoned being! what phrenzy could possess her! Come not in her way;
oh Henry, I conjure you; never look upon her more; I could not bear the sight
of her; I blush to think that I have ever conversed with such a woman. But you,
thank Heaven, had virtue to resist her, and virtue sure, without a blush, may
give the hand to virtue."

This said, she took his hand. The manner of the action stamped it with the
seal of modesty, and modestly it was received, though love was the inspirer: it
was the silent contract of their hearts, pledged with the tender interchange of
sighs and looks, that bade farewell, and vowed unalterable constancy: again she
pressed his hand -- "And are you now convinced," she asked, "how anxiously I
shall wish for your return? Yes, Henry, I Am free to own, my hopes, my
happiness, my heart goes with you."

Oh! ecstacies how pure! moments how precious! it is now, O love, that virtue's
self may welcome thee without reserve or coyness; composed of these chaste
qualities, honor may lodge thee in his heart's best core; yea, in his heart of
heart; the moral hand may paint, the modest eye peruse thee in this attitude;
come ever thus, thou best and worst of deities, or dwell not with us long upon
the scene! this will not raise a blush; Heaven warrants these endearments, and
nature in this instance borrows no excuse from sophistry to palliate her
propensities.

And now the tender conference closed: a servant of Lady Crowbery galloped past
the window to announce her approach: Isabella saw the signal, and slowly rose
from her seat; she paused awhile, and it seemed as if something was in her mind
to say, which she could wish to give utterance to, but it died away in a sigh.
Henry pressed her hand to his lips in silence, and they parted.

END OF THE SEVENTH BOOK.
BOOK THE EIGHTH.
CHAPTER I. An Old Man's Prattle in a wintry Night.
AS the state of society becomes more refined, eccentricity of character wears
away; a writer therefore of the present age, who aims to give amusing pictures
of the humors of the times, finds nature less favorable to him in that
respect than she was to those who resorted to her for the like purposes a
century or two ago. This cannot be denied; but nature still is inexhaustible,
and there is no need to emigrate from her domain in search of novelty and
entertainment.

Originality of humor, or as it is more commonly called, a new character, in
play or novel, is the writer's first aim, as it is sure to be the first in
request by every spectator and critic, and the chief test by which his genius
will be tried; but when we use the term originality as applied to the human
character, we cannot be understood to mean a new creature, a being formed by
fancy, and not to be found in nature, but simply a close copy, a happy
likeness, of some striking character, whose peculiarities have a strong effect,
either in the moral or the humor of our composition. The old drama abounds
with personages of this sort, and as the moulds in which they were cast are now
destroyed by time, we gaze upon them with surprise and delight, regarding them
as non-descripts, or creatures of a separate species, though, at the time of
their production, they were doubtless sketched from nature; and it is possible
that the authors of that era were not more applauded for their originality,
than we of the present time are by our contemporaries. When the critics
therefore cry against the stage as fallen off in its spirit from the old
masters, and seem to think we ought to exhibit as much novelty, and produce as
much surprise by living characters, as they do by raising the dead, who are out
of memory and forgotten, they require of us a power, which, though the witch of
Endor had, no modern poet now can boast; hence it follows, that some amongst
us, who are indignant of reproach, however unreasonable, being hurried upon
rash attempts, either spend their talents in copying after copies, whilst they
aim to paint the manners as they were in times past, or endeavoring to create
the same surprise by modern novelties, find themselves carried out of nature
and probability into the visions of extravagance and romance. This in its
consequence brings disgrace upon the stage, by reducing comedy into farce, and
farce into puppet-shew and pantomime: the novelist, in the mean time, breaking
loose from society, runs wild into forests and deserts, in search of caves and
uninhabited castles, where, forgetting every law of nature, and even every
feature of the human countenance, he paints men and women such as never were in
existence, and then, amidst the shades of night and horror, rattles his chains,
and conjures up his ghosts, till having frightened his readers out of their
senses, he vainly supposes he has charmed them into applauses.

But the evil does not stop here; for as a man, who runs mad about the streets,
will be followed by a mob, in like manner the rhodomontade of the novel is
copied by the nonsense of the opera; and whilst ghosts glide over the stage,
thunders roll, and towers tumble, to the amusement of the galleries, the
carpenter plays off his machinery to the roar of applauding crowds, and the
author, if he has any feeling for the dignity of his profession, blushes at his
triumphs, when he reflects that they are founded on the disgrace of the theater.

Let the author then beware how he is piqued into absurdities by his own
vanity, or the false taste of the public; if the genius that God has given him,
and the matter that nature supplies him with, will not serve the purpose, let
him drop the undertaking. If his imagination can frame incidents, combine them
well, and weave them naturally into a pleasing fable, he has gained his point;
but an over-anxiety to produce some striking novelty will most likely end in
producing some striking absurdity. All ranks of life are open to his choice,
and he has a right to select the strongest humors he can find; but if he does
not find what suits his purpose in nature, he has no excuse for going out of
it, whilst he professes to be a delineator of the living manners: fancy may
ramble as she likes, if she avowedly beats about for imaginary beings; but if
she produces her own creations, and calls them men and women, or paints
characters out of date, and passes them upon us for contemporaries, she does
more than she has fair warrant and authority to do.

What I have here said of character is applicable to incident: the writers of
fiction are generally actuated by so strong a passion for the mavelous, that
they seem to throw every thing off the hinges, merely to alarm us with the din
and clatter they make. Of all wretched expedients, which barren genius can
resort to, the abrupt introduction of casualties is one of the meanest; in the
novels of the present day, we encounter them at every turn, yet they never
impose upon credulity; for when the sick heroine at death's door threatens us
with an exit, we are convinced she does not mean to favor us with the
performance of it. Surely there is no occasion for all this; neither is the
impression very pleasing which it conveys.

If that originality of character, which we have been speaking of, is now
become hardly attainable, discrimination is yet within reach; and by a happy
contrast of leading characters, although they shall not be really new, yet all
the best effects of novelty may be obtained by an alternate play on each
other's humors, by the means of which very comic and amusing situations may be
struck out. Amongst our countrymen, the great masters of contrast in our own
day are Fielding and Stern: Square and Thwackum, Western and his sister, the
father and the uncle of Tristram Shandy, are admirable instances: Shakspeare
had it from nature, Jonson caught it from Aristophanes; Socrates and the Clown
Strepsiades, in the comedy of The Clouds, is, perhaps, the most brilliant
contrast of comic humor in the now-existing records of the stage, ancient or
modern.

Let me suppose I am now speaking to a young author, sitting down for the first
time to his maiden work. The first thing necessary is to understand himself,
the next, to know the age, in which he writes: when his nerves are fortified
with a proper confidence in his own powers, let that confidence be tempered
with all the respect, which is due to people of an enlightened understanding,
who are to be his examiners and judges. It is a very sacred correspondence,
that takes place between the mind of the author and the mind of the reader; it
is not like the slight and casual intercourse we hold with our familiars and
acquaintance, where any prattle serves to fill up a few social minutes, and set
the table in a roar; what we commit to our readers has no apology from hurry
and inattention; it is the result of thought well digested, of sentiments by
which we must stand or fall in reputation, of principles for which we must be
responsible to our contemporaries and to posterity.

In the degree of entertainment our productions may have the fortune to afford,
our expectations may be pardonably mistaken; but in what offends good morals,
or sins against the truth of nature, we err without excuse; self-love cannot
blind us in these respects, because it is not a matter of talents, but of
rectitude and common sense. We talk of critics as of men set apart on purpose
to annoy and censure us; whereas every reader is a critic, and publishes his
opinion of us wherever he goes; we ourselves are critics in our turn, and what
we complain of in our own persons we do to others; and though few think it
worth their while to publish their criticisms, let it be remembered that some
men's voices circulate further than other men's publications.

Let us, therefore, who write, weigh well the duty of the task we engage in,
and let the puerile practice of invoking the mercy of our readers be no more
thought of, for, generally speaking, we are entitled to no more mercy than
liberal-minded men will give us without our begging for it: I am aware of some
exceptions, and am, I hope, as sensitive toward such cases as I ought to be;
but I am now speaking generally of authors, who write for same, and not for
bread. If these had all the diffidence they affect to have, how came it not to
stand in their way when they resorted to the press? And why this terror of the
critics? An author cannot be harmed by a bad critic; and why should he be
afraid of being benefitted by a good one?

CHAPTER II. The best Friends must part.
WE closed our last book with the parting of Henry and Isabella, in one of
those situations which we would rather refer to the reader's imagination than
aim to describe. Happily for him, his friendly hostess gave no interruption to
his meditations, nor did they wander from their beloved object, till the sound
of Lady Crowbery's wheels called him out to meet her. The chaise was stopped at
the gate of the cottage-garden, and her attendant got out by her lady's order,
and stepped aside, whilst Zachary and the nurse, who occupied a hackney carriage,
halted in the rear. When Henry's conversation with his mother was over, and
they had parted, he engaged the driver of Zachary's chaise to take him back to
Crowbery on his return, which was accordingly done, and he once more found
himself in the hospitable cottage with his friend Ezekiel.

To him he purposed to dedicate the remainder of that day, and the next morning
to join the ship, according to the notice he had received from Captain Carry.
Upon his arrival, he found that Blachford had breathed his last, and Susan May,
with her infant, had taken possession of his quarters at the cottage; he
therefore determined upon going on that evening to the port, and to wait no
longer than till a chaise could be brought from the neighboring post town.
When he had past some time with Susan and honest Daw, in discoursing on their
affairs, and had contrived to satisfy their anxiety about his wound, with as
little violence to truth as the suppression of Miss Claypole's name would admit
of, a tap at the door announced a visitor, when young Tom Weevil presented
himself, clad in his best apparel, carrying a wallet or knapsack at the end of
a crooked stick upon his shoulder, with a cutlass slung in a buff belt round
his waste.

The preacher, seeing an armed man enter his house, started from his seat, and
marching up to him with an intrepid air, cried out, "What ailest thou, Thomas
Weevil, that thou have armed thyself in this fashion? speak, is it peace,
Jehu?" -- "With your leave, Doctor Daw," replied the young miller, "my business
is with the gentleman there, and not with you." -- "Render up your purpose to
my ears, Thomas Weevil," repeated Ezekiel, "for thou shall not pass me to
approach my guest, until thou have answered to my question; Is it peace?" -- "I
know not what you mean by your question," quoth Tom, "for be it peace or be it
war, all is one to me, seeing that I am come to tender my services to Mr. Henry,
who, I understand, is going over sea to foreign countries; and as I bear, do
you see, in grateful mind, that he has saved my life, I think it but just and
right to risque it in his service; and so I am here ready to follow him to the
world's end; that is all, Master Zekiel, I have to say."

"And thou have said well, friend Thomas," quoth Ezekiel, "therefore pass in
peace, and make thyself welcome with a cup of my best ale, which I will
forthwith administer unto thee." So saying, the good man went out, on
hospitable thoughts intent.

At the same time old Weevil made his appearance, and repeated to Henry the
same tender, in nearly the same terms, adding, that he had given his free
consent to Tom's departure, for, God be thanked, he had sons enough left to
keep the mill going the whilst. "Tom," said he, "has played a little loose to
be sure, but he has seen his error, and that is every thing. He is a good lad
in the main, and has a grateful heart." Here Ezekiel came to them, bearing in
his hand a lusty pitcher, and saluting the miller with a friendly nod, set it
down on the tressel-board, invitingly full and frothing.

Henry now, having given his hand to the father first, and afterward to the
son, expressed himself very sensibly affected by the offer they had made him.
He was going out, he told them, with a gallant captain, in a ship of war, who
might possibly fall in with an enemy before he found his port -- "and who can
tell," said he, "where an unlucky shot may glance? I should be sorry therefore
to expose my friend Tom to broken bones, though I know him to be a brave fellow."
To this Tom replied, that he despised danger in his service; that he was ready
to share his fortune by sea and by land; that he had got his father's leave,
and had a longing desire to see the world; in short, that it would break his
heart if Henry would not permit him to go with him. This was again seconded by
old Weevil, when Ezekiel, rising up, and putting himself into his accustomed
posture, took up his parable as follows: -- "Thy zeal, young man, to share the
fortune of him, who, under Providence, was the preserver of thy life, indicates
a grateful mind, and I commend thee therefore; and thou, son Henry, must no
longer oppose the laudable desire, which this youth has expressed, of devoting
himself to thy service, seeing it is no less a part of generosity, in some
cases, to receive an obligation, than to bestow one: it suffices that thou
have ingenuously forewarned Thomas Weevil of the dangers he may chance to incur
in the course of thy peregrination. And verily I am myself at this moment in no
small strait, having fully purposed not to suffer thee to depart alone, but to
bear thee company in thy travels in pure affection of heart, knowing thee to be
of a bold adventurous spirit, which pusheth thee into dangers; these, if by
counsel and experience I could not avert, I might at least have shared, being
resolute to go with thee, if need required, even unto death. But now behold the
corpse of Mr. Blachford lies yet unburied, and having been the happy means of
turning him from the error of his ways, can I fail to attend his body to the
grave, and not be present to put up a prayer for the repose of his soul? And
lo! here is the damsel also, who has suffered violence by him, and whose heart
now fails her through fear of slander, needs one to console her and
support: who then but myself, the friend of her mother the widow, and witness
to the confession of her seducer, who was once a son of Belial, excusing her
and accusing himself, is so fitted to that labor of love? These, not to
mention the care of her worldly affairs, which lies on me, are amongst the
calls by which the trouble of my heart is enlarged, when I reflect that I must
suffer thee, son Henry, to depart alone; yet not alone, if so be this friendly
youth, whose grateful tender of himself I do exhort thee to accept, shall be
thy companion by the way. And now seeing the hour of thy departure approaches,
and the evening draws on, I must be brief, as is my manner of speech, saying
only those things which it were a shame to omit, and praying the Lord of all
mercy to preserve thee in all thy goings, beseeching him to dispose thy heart
to continue steadfast in his fear and love amidst all the temptations of this
sinful world, and in his good time to return thee and this thy companion safe
and unhurt to your rejoicing friends."

The good man having concluded his harangue, lifted the pitcher to his lips,
and drank a farewell to his parting guests, for Henry's chaise had now come up
to the door. Tom Weevil, whose offer was accepted joyfully, bestirred himself
in stowing Henry's baggage and his own upon the carriage; and now the moment
came when our hero, taking Ezekiel's hands in his, tenderly addressed him in
these words -- "Farewell, my worthy friend; wherever Providence disposes of
me, and whatever may befall me, whilst I retain life and memory, your kindness,
benevolence, charities, and virtues will be registered in my heart." -- Then
turning to Susan, who stood ^ute with sorrow at seeing him prepare to depart,
heir cheeks bathed with tears, he took her in his arms, and, after a tender
embrace, recommended her to the protection of Ezekiel, saying -- "I leave you
to the care of this good man, who will also stand in my place as guardian of
your infant till I return to you again: he knows the purport of Mr. Blachford's
will, and will take the measures on my part as executor, which a prudent care
of your interest will prescribe: I need not caution you to observe a proper
attention to the amiable young lady, in whose service you will now no longer
remain. To this your best of benefactors you owe the duty of a daughter, and
you will not fail to pay it, for to his pious exhortations it is owing, that
the father of your child was brought to a sense of the injuries he had done
you, and induced to atone for them; at the same time take notice, that this
excellent creature suffered not one shilling of the deceased to adhere to his
fingers, notwithstanding every offer which, to my knowledge, was repeatedly
pressed upon him by that penitent on his death bed." -- "This," said he,
addressing himself to old Weevil, who was standing by, "is a noble instance of
disinterestedness, and merits the applause of every honest man." -- Then giving
his hand to Weevil, he bade him farewell, promising him to take care of his
son; and hastening out of doors, stepped into his chaise, followed by Tom, and
was off as fast as four nimble horses and two dashing drivers could transport
him.

In the mean time silence reigned in the cottage: Ezekiel committed himself to
his wicker-chair, and remained in pensive meditation: Susan seated herself by
his side, and as he rested his hand upon the arm of his chair, pressed her lips
upon it, and bathed it in her tears: old Weevil felt an aching in his throat,
and applied himself to the pitcher without uttering a word. Ezekiel seeing
this, roused himself in his seat, and cried, though in a faultering voice,
"Courage, neighbor, we have only parted from our friends, we have not lost
them." -- "No, no," cried the miller, as he took the pitcher from his lips; "to
be sure, as you say, we have not to mourn over the loss of them, but somehow or
other it makes one feel a little queer; for, as nobody can be sure of life for
an hour to come, parting methinks is, as I may say, like taking leave for
ever." -- "Heaven, in its mercy, forbid that," cried Susan, and burst aloud
into an agony of grief. -- "Child, child," said Ezekiel, "moderate thy wailing;
it becomes not us to give way to inordinate grief: what have thou lost which I
have not lost, and do thou see me give way to this unseemly weakness? why
do thou not take example by me? thou see, damsel, that I am firm and
unshaken." Here his voice began to quiver, and he seemed fighting against
something that rose in his throat, and would not suffer him to proceed. "I
know," cried Susan, "we should not anticipate affliction, but when a dreadful
image is presented to my imagination, how can I forbear to feel a horror at the
thoughts of losing such a friend for ever? Think only what he has been to me;
think what he is, how kind, how gentle, how benevolent! Call to mind his
virtues, his sufferings, his humility" -- Ezekiel groaned. -- "What poverty,
what persecution he has endured." -- Ezekiel marked his assent with a motion of
his head, muttering to himself, with a sigh, that it was true. "You, I am
sure," said Susan, turning to Weevil, "have cause to bless him, you can witness
to his good deeds, and you can also tell how he was rewarded for them; but let
the dead sleep in peace; there are some still living whose malice never sleeps,
there is no end to their attempts against his life, wicked wretches! it is to
some of them he owes that wound, which he would make us believe is accident,
because he is all forgiveness: but I believe some villain has beset him:
Heavens! what must that man's heart be made of?" -- "Millstones," said
Ezekiel. -- "I wish I had them between mine," quoth Weevil, "by the Lord Harry
I would squeeze them." -- "I know whereabouts they are," rejoined Susan, "and
what their spite springs from; and now, my dear Mr. Daw, can you wonder I am
afflicted, when such is their diabolical malice, that perhaps even now they
have a plot upon his life, and are lying in wait to destroy him." -- These
words seizing the brain of Ezekiel, he sprung upon his legs, and with an
asseveration not far short of an oath, declared he would that instant go forth
and defend him. Susan, who saw the phrensy, cried out to Weevil to stop him.
"Are you beside yourself, friend Daw," said the miller, "to think of overtaking
four posthorses with one pair of legs? what the plague, is not my son Tom
there to guard him, and didn't they set off helter skelter as if the devil
drove them? why by this time they are half way to the seaside, and who should
stop them? Our friend Susan does but speak as all women do when they are in a
fright; and I thought you was too much a man to be startled by what they say."
-- "I believe," replied Daw, resuming his dignity, "I am as much of a man as my
neighbors, and not less of a friend to my fellow creatures than I ought to be.
I am not apt to be idle when the wicked are a-foot, and innocence is in danger.
However, I do recollect that they went off with speed, and that there is little
likelihood I can with all my exertions overtake them, though I hold myself no
mean pedestrian, and yield to no one in the race on foot. Howbeit, I decline
the contest against such odds; but no sooner shall tomorrow's sun rise than I
will rise with him, and step over to the port to see if all be well; and, if
aught be wanting, to stand forth in their service and defense."

"Will thou," cried Weevil, "then I am with thee, and will whip thee over in my
jockey-cart in a trice, you will go as easy as if you was in your own
wicker-chair. I will be here at thy door by the first peep of day. What say
thou, is it agreed?" -- "Agreed!" cried Ezekiel, "but hold, what day in the week
will tomorrow be?" -- "Thursday," said the miller. -- "I protest that is
lucky," replied the preacher; "for had it been the Lord's day I could not have
gone with thee." -- "Then give me hold of your hand," quoth Weevil, "for damn
me if thou art not as good a heart as lives, and if ever I have slipped out any
thing in the way of joke to offend thee, I am heartily sorry for it, and I ask
thy pardon." -- "Enough," quoth Daw, "and more than enough, friend Thomas; for
I could have credited thy good will without an oath; however drink, and let us
empty the pitcher."

CHAPTER III. Our Hero goes out to Sea.
PUNCTUAL to his appointment, Miller Weevil presented himself, by break of day,
at the door of Ezekiel's castle, where, having seated the apostle by his side,
directly over the axletree of a vehicle, which, if it had been constructed
professedly as an instrument of torture, might have done credit to the
ingenious cruelty of its inventor, he set forward on a round trot, jolting him
over ruts and rocks with a merciless indifference the straitest way to his
point, till they came in view of the sea, with the frigate riding at anchor.
Ezekiel, who now saw a period to the persecution he had endured for two long
hours, took courage, and being just then in a sandy pass, availed himself of
the first moment he could venture to put his tongue to any use, having wisely
kept it still whilst his teeth were in motion: the scene was magnificent; the
sun, which was flaming in their rear, threw a gleam of splendor over the
shore, the ship and the expanse of waters, that terminated the prospect.
Objects like these could not fail to carry up Ezekiel's thoughts to the Creator
of all things; in his soul Devotion, eagle-winged, sat ever ready to catch the
signal for soaring in its flight toward Heaven; accordingly he began, in a
lofty cadence, to rehearse that portion of the 107th psalm, which begins " They
that go down to the sea in ships." His charioteer in the mean while, struck
with the awful strain, respectfully slackened his pace and listened in silence,
pondering the fate of his son, then floating on the surface of that tremendous
ocean, in the mercy of Him " at whose word the stormy wind arises."

When Ezekiel ceased his recitation, Weevil observed that the words were very
fine, though he was pretty sure he had heard them before. "I believe thou
have," quoth Ezekiel, "if thou did ever hear the psalms." -- "If so," said
he, "I wish you would double down the leaf for son Thomas, for I think every
man who goes to sea should have the fear of God before his eyes." -- "And
whither should any man go without it?" said Ezekiel; and immediately struck
into that enraptured passage of the same sublime minstrel, " Whither shall I go
then from thy spirit," etc.

This again drew the profoundest attention from Weevil, who, at the conclusion,
expressed himself very highly delighted with what he had heard, observing, that
he firmly believed it all, and that no man could commit a bad action safely,
for that God's eyes were every where; "and I make no doubt," added he, "but
that villain Bowsey, though he has got out of our reach, will fall into the hands
of justice sooner or later, and pay sauce for his wickedness in the end; and as
I hold him to be a murderer all one as if Tom had died under his hand, I don't
despair of seeing him brought to the gallows in God's good time." -- "Neighbor
Weevil," replied Ezekiel, "it is not in the death, but in the conversion of a
sinner that our God delights, and thou, taking pattern from his mercy,
should abstain from vengeance, seeing it belongs not to thee, but to him
alone. Forbear, therefore, to wish for the punishment of that runnagate, wish
rather for his repentance. Do all things, my friend, in love and charity to all
men; give thy heart to him that deserves it, thy help to all that stand in need
of it. Remember that the law tries our actions, but God judges our thoughts.
There is a rule, short, easy, equitable -- Do as you would be done by, and you
cannot do wrong." -- "Why that is exactly the rule I follow," said the miller;
"if a man does me a good turn, I requite him with one as good; if he does me an
ill one, I pay him in his own coin; and if he robs and plunders me, like that
villain Bowsey, I wish to see him hanged; that is my way, and I believe it is
very natural."

Weevil was not famous for drawing right conclusions, and Ezekiel would hardly
have failed to convince him of it, had not he just then turned into his
inn-yard, under the sign of the ship, where he was instantly accosted by his
son Thomas, who had just come off from the ship to procure some things that
Henry had occasion for: one of the frigate's boats was waiting for him, and his
job would be dispatched in half an hour, when he would go with them on board,
where Henry was. This interval Weevil proposed to fill up with a good
breakfast; for whatever his companion might think of the matter, he at least
recollected that he had come away from home fasting.

There was a fellow in the kitchen, belonging to the boat, who called himself
the captain's cockswain, who made himself known to our travelers upon hearing
them say they were going on board; he had been taking leave of a nymph of the
shore, who went by the dubious title of his wife, and indeed it may well be
questioned if that honorable and happy title was more than nominal; she was
however in tears, and Jack was comforting her and himself with a glass of
brandy, whilst he repeated to her in a lamentable tone his parting vows,
interlarding them with a continual repetition of "Only be true to me, Poll;"
and clenching his promises of reciprocal fidelity with oaths of so peculiar a
sort, as made Ezekiel stare with astonishment, though he hardly knew what
interpretation to put upon them. At last, when the fellow had pretty well
disposed of every particle about himself to some devil or other, to hold in
pledge for his constancy to his beloved mate, Ezekiel, though in close action
at that moment with the salted buttock of an ox, laid down his knife and fork,
and began to take the swearer to task. "Friend," said Ezekiel, "thou have
talked in so loud a tone that thou have made us hearers of thy conversation
whether we would or not; I perceive with regret that in the midst of thy
affliction at parting from thy spouse, thou have exhorted her to constancy
frequently, and in such a manner as argues a suspicion of her fidelity to thee
in thine absence: what cause thou have to hold in doubt the virtue of the wife
of thy bosom I cannot tell, as thou have stated no actual charge against her;
but I should hope the young woman has not entered into the holy state of
wedlock without weighing and perpending the duties of a wife, and also what a
heinous sin it is to violate the nuptial bed: if she knows this, what need is
there for thy so frequent repetitions on a case so clear? if she knows it
not, I am here ready to instruct her in her matrimonial offices to the best of
my abilities."

"Are you so? you be damned," cried the sailor, eyeing him from head to foot
with the most sovereign contempt; "I Will tell you what, brother, 'twill be the
worst job you ever took in hand in your life. You, indeed! you, with those
lantern jaws, pretend to talk to my Poll; you, with that lank carcass, for all
the world like the purser's shirt upon a hand-spike." And now the lady, no less
irritated than her spokesman, joined her treble to the base, overwhelming poor
Ezekiel with a torrent of words not the most courtly, in a key not the most
harmonious, whilst he stood staring with astonishment on them both, yielding
however no one inch of ground from the post he had taken, nor from the upright
attitude in which he stood, conscious of having given no offense, save that his
zeal had innocently intruded a kind offer where it was not called for. But soon
the din became general; for Weevil, the miller, had now turned out on the part
of his friend, whilst the landlady, who exerted her voice for peace and
silence, roared louder, and with more fury than the parties themselves, who
were vociferous enough in the controversy without her help. When this confusion
was at the height, and the sailor, now roused, like the lion, with his own
roar, was become ferocious, thundering out his oaths by whole broadsides at a
volley, a stripling youth, or rather boy, in the uniform of a midshipman,
stepping up to him, and catching hold of a button of his jacket, cried out in a
shrill emasculate voice, -- "What Is here to do with you, rascal? hold your jaw
and jump aboard, you lubber, or I Will make you change your doxy for the gunner's
daughter."

Silence instantly ensued. -- "Aye, aye, Sir!" cried the sailor, gave a shrug,
pulled up his trowsers, and was off like a shot.

The youngster asked the landlady if the fellow had left any thing unpaid; and
being told there was nothing on the score but a shilling for the brandy he and
the lady had been drinking, he immediately discharged it, intimating to the
aforesaid lady, that no more women would be admitted on board, as the frigate
would weigh with the next tide.

Ezekiel contemplated this instance of discipline with surprise and admiration:
the boyish age and person of the officer carried so little authority in
appearance, that he could scarce account for the immediate effect it took upon
the boisterous spirit of the sailor, and the obedience it produced. -- "Truly,
young gentleman," he said, "there must be admirable order on board your ship,
when an unruly nature can be so readily controlled by a gentle one." -- "I
believe, Sir," said the boy, "we are as well off in that respect as our
neighbors; Captain Carry supports his officers, and I fancy that is the surest
way to keep the men in order." -- Ezekiel then enquired after his friend on
board, said that he had come for the purpose of paying him a short visit before
he sailed, and civilly requested permission to be passed to the ship in his
boat. -- "Most readily," said this young commander; "I am only waiting for a
man who is on shore on that gentleman's business, and I shall be off directly."
At that instant Tom Weevil entered the kitchen, and the miller having paid the
reckoning, Ezekiel with the father and son, under conduct of their warlike
leader, proceeded to the beach, where the boat was manned and waiting. There
was a heavy swell set in by the opposition of wind and tide, and further out a
bar, on which the sea broke in a manner not a little formidable to a landsman's
eyes: the frigate was at anchor about two miles without this bar; Ezekiel and
old Weevil were placed in the stern-sheets, Tom took his post at the bow, and
the noisy fellow, now in office as cockswain, took his seat in the steerage, as
perfectly under command of his beardless officer, as if the admiral of the
fleet had been on board the boat. If Ezekiel was struck with surprise at the
authority of the youngster on shore, he was still more so with his address and
skill in maneuvering the boat through a sea, which he conceived was every
instant about to whelm them in the waves. The miller, who was as much a novice
in navigation as the preacher, exhibited strong symptoms of alarm, jumping up
once or twice in the boat, for which he was very properly reprimanded by the
youngster, who ridiculed his fears, telling him if he was afraid of being
swamp'd, he went the very way to bring it about. Ezekiel, on the contrary, sat
still and kept a steady countenance, not that he did not think he was at the
last crisis of his fate, but because he possessed a mind tranquillized by
religion, and perfectly resigned to that all-directing Being, to whom his
mental ejaculations were then silently addressed. When they had struggled for
some time on the bar, with lusty sinews and hearts of controversy, the young
officer giving his orders with perfect firmness and precision, and all voices
were hushed, but the shrill small pipe of a child, he cried to the cockswain --
"Mind your helm and be damned to you! Steer steady; now, lads, give way all,
and we are clear." -- The energy was instantaneous; what cannot British sailors
do? the boat was driven through the waves, the bar was passed, and they found
themselves at once in deep water and a smoother sea: the little midshipman now
bade them step the mast and hoist the sail; they shot before the wind, and
quickly were along-side of the frigate. The humanity of this youngster gave
orders for taking care of Ezekiel and old Weevil, as they awkwardly scrambled
up the side; a lieutenant stood upon the gunwhale, giving orders about some
fresh beef and other stores they had brought off in the cutter; and Ezekiel had
another call upon his wonder and surprise, when he heard this lieutenant say to
the young officer of the boat -- "You have had a good tuzzle on the bar, Lord
Frederick." -- "So, so," replied Lord Frederick, and immediately taking off his
hat, whilst he addressed his superior officer, informed him that these two
gentlemen wished to speak to Mr. Fitzhenry. The answer was, that he was then in
the cabin under the surgeon's hands, but if the gentlemens' business was
urgent, he would direct them to be shown the way to him. Ezekiel expressing a
desire to be instantly admitted to his friend, was put under the guidance of a
marine, whilst old Weevil went aside with Tom to his quarters.

When Ezekiel entered the cabin, he found Henry with his arm stripped, and the
surgeon cleaning his wound; a kind salutation was all these friends could
interchange in their present circumstances. -- "This gentleman," said Henry,
"who is the surgeon of the ship, is so kind to take in hand this paltry
scratch, and I assure you, he gives a very handsome testimony to our good
dame's performances." -- "A scratch, do you call it?" cried Ezekiel, knitting
his brow, "it is a perilous stab! I protest I did not think by your account it
had been any thing like this:" -- then addressing himself to the surgeon, he
added, -- "I pray you, learned Sir, what is your opinion of this ugly gash?" --
"My opinion is," cried the surgeon, "that had it not been in the direction
where fortunately it is, it might have been an ugly gash indeed; but as it is,
I think it will be well in a few more dressings." -- This he said without
looking at Ezekiel, being then employed in applying a compress to the wound
before he bound it up: having done this, he looked round for the speaker, whom
he no sooner set eyes on, than he said, "Is it you, Mr. Daw? I am very glad to
see you." -- Ezekiel stared upon him for a moment, then marching up to him, and
taking him cordially by the hand, exclaimed, -- "As I live, it is my old friend
and favorite, Billy Williams: never trust me, but I rejoice to see thee in the
land of the living, Mr. Williams; heartily I rejoice at thy well-doing, for I
have much bewailed thy sudden disappearance from amongst us, esteeming thee
very truly for thy towardly disposition and good qualities, no less than for
thy talents. If I mistake not, it is now going on to two years since you
quitted neighbor Cawdle, and we knew not whither you went?" -- This satisfied
Henry's curiosity so far, and as they proceeded in their conversation, Williams
filled up the interval with an account of himself in various ships to the
present time, when having done his business with Henry, and answered all
Ezekiel's enquiries, he respectfully took his leave and retired. And now our
hero and his friend being left to themselves, had a conference of at least half
an hour without interruption, when Captain Carry entered the cabin, who very
kindly welcomed Ezekiel upon Henry's introduction of him: he lamented he could
not ask him to dinner, as they were then weighing anchor, and should be out to
sea. "We must think therefore," said he, "how to get you on shore:" and the
first lieutenant then entering the cabin, he desired him to hail the tender
along-side of them, and ask the loan of their boat to set Ezekiel and his
friend Weevil on shore. They now adjourned to the quarter deck, whilst
Ezekiel's attention was deeply engaged with the exertions of the men at the
capstan, where, for the time they are at work, they enjoy a kind of temporary
saturnalia, venting their sea jokes without restraint, in a most ridiculous
style. All was new to Ezekiel, but the heavy moment of parting from Henry hung
upon his heart, and now the tender's boat was hauled along side; the frigate
swung with the tide; the sails were hoisting, the boatswain plied his whistle,
the men swarmed upon the yards, the officers roared through their trumpets,
Weevil was already in the boat, Ezekiel cast a parting look at Henry, threw his
arms about his neck, sighed out a farewell; recommended him to Providence, and
committed himself to the boat.

CHAPTER. IV. A certain interested Gentleman meets with a Rebuff.
THE tender's boatmen hawled off from the ship a few lengths, and then laid on
their oars, and cheered the frigate, who now began to feel her sails and make
way through the water: this roused Ezekiel from his torpor, and instantly his
ears were assailed by three repeated cheers, in a much louder key from the
whole crew of the tender, who had manned ship in compliment to Captain Carry:
the frigate's crew returned the inspiring compliment, and then presenting her
stern to the tear-full eyes of Ezekiel, she glided majestically over the waves,
scarce deigning them a curtsey as they sunk beneath her keel, conscious, as it
should seem, that she was worthy to assert the empire of the flag which she
displayed.

"Hurrah! my hearts," cried the man in the steerage, the boat cut through the
water. -- "There she goes," looking at the frigate, said one of the fellows at
his oar. -- "Damn me, but I wish I was in her," repeated a second. -- "Have you
then a friend," said Ezekiel, "on board that ship, whom you regret to part
from? and is your heart agoniz'd with grief like mine?" -- "Grief indeed!"
cried the fellow, in a surly tone; "grief never came near my heart since I had
one: I wish myself in her because I think she has a fighting captain on board,
and there'll be something to be got to make merry with on shore: but belike you
are tenderhearted, and take on because your friend is gone to sea; if that be
the case, do you mind me, do as I do, when I part from my wife, swab the spray
out of your glims, and think no more about it." -- "I cannot be sure that I
clearly understand thee, friend," replied Ezekiel, "but I presume it makes to
the benefit of thy country, that thou art void of feeling."

As this did not reach the understanding of the tar, it produced no answer, and
whatever want of feeling in Ezekiel's sense of it there might be in those he
had embarked with, there was such strength and alacrity, that our passengers
soon found themselves safely landed on their native soil. A can of grog to the
crew, and a slight refreshment for Weevil and Ezekiel, to revive languid
nature, filled up the time, whilst the miller's cart was getting ready, which
at length safely landed our travelers at Ezekiel's door, and not without many
of those jars and jumbles emblematic of the troubles inseparably attendant on
our passage through life.

Whilst Henry was now wafted into the ocean, and whilst the land he had left
was sinking in the horizon of his prospect, the tender heart of his beloved
Isabella had directed many a sigh to attend him over the watery waste. Lady
Crowbery had arrived at Manstock House, less exhausted with her first stage
than could reasonably be expected: Sir Roger, Isabella, Zachary Cawdle, every
soul male and female in the family, were in motion to attend upon her, nor did
the reverend Mr. Claypole fail to be amongst the forwardest to exhibit his
devoirs: Fanny, meanwhile, remained in sullen solitude at the vicarage, her
mind experiencing the various torments slighted passion is exposed to. Her
secret was entombed in Isabella's breast; in that of Goody May it had a more
precarious tenure; yet for the present she adhered to the injunctions she had
received, and held her tongue. Lady Crowbery had remarked the condition of
Henry's arm, but had taken up with the slight account he had given of it, the
rather because she perceived he had a ready use of it. Little, however, was
said upon the subject whilst the family were about her, and Isabella did not
think it necessary to speak of the interview she had had at the dame's.

When dinner was over, and Lady Crowbery's spirits seemed recruited by her
repast and the company of her friends, an opportunity was taken by Sir Roger to
introduce a subject, which he knew his friend Mr. Claypole to have much at
heart, and which he opened, by enquiring if she had filled up Mr. Ratcliffe's
vacancy. Upon her replying, that it was yet open, Sir Roger expressed his
wishes in favor of his friend then present, for Claypole's delicacy had not
prevailed with him to retire from the hearing of his own success at first hand,
of which he very naturally entertained the most sanguine expectation. -- "Are
you a party in these wishes of your worthy friend?" said the Lady, addressing
herself to Claypole. -- "I confess to your Ladyship I am," replied he, "and
should hold myself infinitely bound to you for putting me in possession of
those wishes." -- "Mr. Ratcliffe was a constant resident," resumed she, "and,
perhaps, you are not aware that I should stipulate with his successor to tread
as nearly as possible in his steps." -- "I hope, Madam," replied the Divine,
somewhat piqued at the expression, "I should not fall short of my predecessor
in any part of his practice." -- "In some of his doctrines, I believe, you
differ, Mr. Claypole, if I have been rightly informed." -- "As how, Madam, I
beseech you," reiterated the reverend gentleman, with eagerness, "in what one
doctrine, fitting for Mr. Ratcliffe to hold, have I been found to differ from
him, or fall short? I never had my orthodoxy questioned." -- Sir Roger looked
at his niece with marks of surprise, but being a man of few words, waited
silently for a further explanation of this mystery. -- "In this respect," said
the Lady, "I conceive you differ: Mr. Ratcliffe put a value on a just and
generous act, that would have led him to despise the man who gave him sordid
counsel, or condemned him for a sacrifice of interest to conscience. This, I
dare say, is your doctrine in the pulpit, Mr. Claypole, for I don't doubt your
orthodoxy; but, allow me to say, it was his also in the closet; this he
inculcated to Henry, whom he fathered, and who has nobly practiced what he
taught, by giving up the whole of Blachford's fortune to the son of Blachford:
this you condemned; but this my departed friend would have so decidedly
approved of, that I take upon me to say, you differ in your doctrine; and being
employed in seeking out some successor, who shall, as I before said, tread as
nearly as possible in the steps of that excellent and ever-lamented friend, I
can only tell you, that I have not yet discovered the person that answers to my
search."

Here the lady ceased from speaking. The persons present were Sir Roger
Manstock, Isabella, and the gentleman himself, to whom the words were
addressed; of these not one seemed disposed at that time to renew the subject;
various motives kept them silent; when Claypole, who had probably better
dispositions for taking up the conversation, but less matter to support it with
than any present, sullenly retired, and lest the uncle, niece, and Isabella, to
comment upon it as they saw fit.

Sir Roger, who was not yet informed of the transaction alluded to by Lady
Crowbery, and, to his great surprise, had heard his application answered in so
different a manner from what he looked for, saw Claypole leave the room without
offering a word either in support of his suit, or which might lead to an
explanation of what he did not yet comprehend. Isabella alone knew the real
motives of the absent gentleman for the proceeding, which Lady Crowbery
resented in this manner, and at the same time foresaw the farther
disappointment that was in reserve for him, when he should next have a meeting
with his niece. Sir Roger, in the mean time, after some pause, requested to be
informed by Lady Crowbery, how it was Mr. Claypole had been so unfortunate as
to loose her good opinion? This drew from her an account of Henry's generous
behavior in the matter of Blachford's will, and of the sentiments Mr. Claypole
had expressed upon that transaction, when he called upon Henry at Crowbery.
Every circumstance of this was new to the worthy Baronet, who, without
hesitation, concurred in passing the highest encomiums on our hero, and
concluded by saying, that he always suspected his friend Claypole to have a
little more attention to the main chance, than was strictly consistent with his
own way of thinking. -- "Witness," said he, "his readiness to give up me and my
parish for an exchange, which, upon calculation, could not have benefitted him
in more than a hundred a year at most, so that, I confess to you, it put me
upon computing the price at which he valued the society of an old friend, whose
house and heart were ever open to him. After all, perhaps, it may be too much
to require of any man, that he should love me better than his money; and as for
his advice to our friend Henry, which appears to you so reprehensible,
recollecting, as I do, how much it was the wish of his heart to marry him to
his niece Fanny, I can account for his regret at seeing such a fortune as Mr.
Blachford's slip out of his fingers." -- "Heavens!" exclaimed Lady Crowbery,
forgetting herself in the moment of surprise, "had he the assurance to suppose
that my Henry would throw himself away upon that flippant flirting thing Fanny
Claypole? I Will venture to pronounce, his heart was never that way disposed; no,
no, he has better notions, better taste, and better pretensions."

The Baronet, though too much a man of honor to expose what had been passing
in his house, was yet unwilling to hear his intelligence so totally decried,
and turning to his daughter, said, he fancied she could testify there was some
truth in what he said: this appeal came rather unseasonably upon Isabella, who
had taken to herself the application of some words, which Lady Crowbery had
concluded with, and she simply replied, that Miss Claypole, she believed, would
not have been adverse to such a proposal; but she added, incautiously enough,
that she was sure no such thing could ever take place. -- "Indeed!" cried her
father, "are you sure of that? Upon what grounds, I beg to know, do you speak
so confidently about Henry's resolutions?" -- "Because," replied Isabella, and
here she faultered; but truth was too familiar with her lips to be held back --
"because he told me so himself."

CHAPTER V. Let Innocence beware! Spring-guns and Man-traps are laid in these
Premises!
WHEN Isabella gave this honest answer to her father's question, a light struck
upon his mind, which some of our readers may think might have reached him
before. Accustomed ever to behold her open brow without a cloud, and to hear
her speak to him without faultering, the embarrassment that now he could not
fail to discover, opened a new train of thoughts, and he instantly pressed
fresh questions upon Isabella, which she had too much candor to evade. She
told him how she had accidentally dropped in at dame May's that very morning,
where she found Henry. -- "And how came he there?" Sir Roger demanded? -- "He
had hurt his arm, and the good woman was dressing it." -- "And did he tell you
of Mr. Claypole's proposal for his niece, and of his own rejection of her?" --
"I understood," replied Isabella, "he had an interview with Miss Claypole,
which had been conclusive against any further correspondence or connection." --
"And how was you interested," demanded he, "to be informed of that?" -- "I
should hope," replied Isabella, "that my father does not want to search into my
thoughts, as suspecting they conceal what ought not to be there." -- This
apostrophe, and perhaps the presence of Lady Crowbery, checked for a time the
curiosity of Sir Roger; Zachary also helped to turn the subject, by coming in
with a medicine he had been preparing for his patient.

The reverend Mr. Claypole, who had left the room upon his rebuff from the lady
patroness of Ratcliffe's living, had gone straight to the vicarage in quest of
his niece: here he was greeted, not with the sight of Fanny, but of Fanny's
letter, put into his hands by the old woman of the house, who informed him that
the young lady had taken her departure early in the morning. This letter
briefly told him, that she had for ever taken leave of a place that was
rendered odious to her by the treatment she had met in it; that she made no
doubt stories would be circulated disreputable to her character, but they could
be nothing but the basest forgeries, which she conjured him to treat with the
contempt they merited; that she had discovered the young man, he thought so
well of, to be half knave half fool, and, for her part, she had done with him;
she added, that he had frightened her into fits by his awkwardness, in letting
a knife, which she had used for cutting open the leaves of a book, run into his
arm, and wound him. In conclusion, she apologized for the early hour of her
departure, which prevented her from taking leave of him; but he should hear
from her when she arrived in London.

Claypole's breast now boiled with indignation against Henry; he had disgraced
his niece, and, which was worse, disappointed him of a valuable living; for he
was too well informed, not to know that Ratcliffe had left it in a state that
would bear a deal of stretching. In this temper of mind he sauntered slowly
toward Sir Roger's, deeply meditating by the way: the baronet was no less
eager for the meeting than he was, and having stepped out of the room when
Zachary entered in, encountered him in the hall. Claypole was full charged with
venom he had brooded upon by the way; "I thank you, dear and worthy Sir," said
he, with counterfeited humility, "for your kind though ineffectual intercession
in my favor. Having heard a character of myself so contrary to what I expected
or deserved, I hope you will not think me petulant, if I beg leave to retire to
my chamber for this evening, rather than meet the eyes of a lady, which had not
used to look so unfavourably upon me, and for whom I entertain too high a
reverence and esteem, to be indifferent to her contempt of me. Perhaps, Sir,
you may have thought, as Lady Crowbery does, that this young man's conduct in
Blachford's business is an act of high honor, and that I was a very shabby
fellow to advise him otherwise." -- "I don't quite say that," replied Sir Roger
gravely; "because I believe you thought of him as likely to be a part of the
family; but I confess to you, the transaction, as represented to me, appears a
very honorable one on his part." -- "His motives must determine that," said
Claypole; "it is a cheap way of doing a seemingly disinterested action, when he
gains the favor of Lady Crowbery, and the good opinion of Miss Manstock." Sir
Roger started. "I own," continued he, "that I did zealously press forward a
marriage, in which I did not altogether wish to make so total a sacrifice of my
niece, as to marry her to absolute beggary, but recommended him to reserve some
portion of Mr. Blachford's property as a maintenance: this is the mercenary
advice for which I am condemned; but, with humble submission to Lady Crowbery,
I am of opinion I was sufficiently disinterested, when I promoted a marriage
even upon these terms, and which I should not have listened to for a moment
upon any, had I not been persuaded, that by taking the danger of an obscure
unpromising connection on myself, I was fulfilling the duties of gratitude and
friendship, by consulting the interests of my patron and benefactor, in the
most essential object of his life." Here Sir Roger again made a motion
expressive of agitation and surprise. "And now, Sir," added he, "if I, who have
been so long honored with your friendship, and so much profited by your
hospitality, have appeared to you as a man insensible to your bounty and my own
happiness, and one who, upon mercenary motives, was reaching after a better
benefice in a distant place, I hope you will now discern my motives, and acquit
me of such folly, and such ingratitude, as would stamp my conduct, upon any
other principles than the real ones; for, in the first place, what could I
profit by the exchange, granting that Mr. Ratcliffe's living were somewhat
better than my own, a fact which I have not been curious to enquire into: but
be the advantage what in may, surely it would not balance the difference
between living upon my own establishment, and appertaining to yours; but when
I foresaw, with grief of heart, that whether this young nameless fellow
married, or married not, my Fanny Claypole, my station in this family had no
lasting tenure, consistently with your repose or my own, can you wonder that I
caught at any hope that offered me an opportunity of retreating in good time,
without disturbing your peace at my departure, content that you should even
condemn me for the measure, rather than be driven, as I now am, to open your
eyes upon the real motives for it?"

"Mr. Claypole," said Sir Roger, no longer able to refrain himself, "you do
indeed open my eyes, which have been in darkness; but I must desire you will
also enable them to see clearly all the danger that is before them, else,
permit me to observe, that your friendship only goes the length of alarming me,
but stops short where it should inform me." -- "Sir Roger Manstock," replied
Claypole, in a tone of much solemnity, "after the proof I have given how far my
attachment has already carried me, I should hope you will not suppose it likely
to stop short, or shrink from any duties friendship can require of me. If this
young adventurer had carried off my niece, I should have held myself justified
in serving you so far, and should have seceded from your family in silence; for
where would have been the kindness or use in opening your eyes upon dangers,
after you had escaped them? You would then, perhaps, have set me down in your
thoughts for a capricious, fickle minded man; but my conscience would have
witnessed better things. But now that this Mr. Henry Fitzhenry, or whatever
name he chooses to be called by, has thought fit to reject Miss Claypole, with
fifteen thousand pounds to her fortune, and my honest attempt is defeated, with
the sacrifice of my niece's peace and reputation, whilst he is extolled to the
skies for his rejection both of her generous offer and Blachford's liberal
bequest, what am I to think, but that he has friends in those who so highly
praise him, who are too well disposed to reward him for sacrificing my
connection, and to ruin me in your esteem, (of which design I think you have
already had some proof) for my attempt to take upon myself your danger, and
defeat their wishes! And now, Sir Roger, let me make one serious condition with
you in this place; consent to drop this matter for the present; Lady Crowbery
is your guest for this night; separate not yourself any longer from her, I
beseech you; change not, if possible, your countenance, nor abate of your good
humor to either of those amiable ladies, who will wonder at your absence, if
you do not suffer me to retire immediately. If any question is asked, why I do
not attend at supper, be pleased to let my apology be a slight indisposition:
the plea will not offend against the truth, for I am far from well." This said,
he took Sir Roger's hand, tenderly pressed it in his, and hastened away.

When he found himself in his chamber, he again took out his niece's letter,
and then for the first time discovered that there was a postscript over leaf,
which he had overlooked in his first reading, there being no reference to it.
The purport was as follows: --

The Gentleman took up his abode last night with Mother May, a good commodious
body, as you will confess, if you find, upon enquiry, that the immaculate
Isabella shall have given him the meeting there (if she did, let Sir Roger look
about him); I can take upon me to assure you she is fond of him; and it is my
opinion, that in spite of all her sanctified airs, she is up to any act of
desperation love can drive her to. Once more I repeat, -- let Sir Roger look
about him. This postscript, so happily coinciding with his own operations
already commenced, determined Claypole to set out immediately upon discoveries.
His first wish was to sift Goody May; but of this he soon saw the impolicy, at
least of undertaking it in his own person; he therefore bent his steps to his
own house, supposing he might get something from the old woman in his service,
and with whom his curiosity was not likely to subject him to the same
suspicion. Of her he learnt no more, than that Henry had been a pretty
considerable time alone with Miss Fanny, during which she never entered the
room; but that just as he was going, he rung the bell with great vehemence, and
upon her coming to it, told her, that her young lady was taken suddenly ill,
and charged her to be careful of her, and not leave her; that she did not then
discover he was wounded, but was told it by Miss Fanny, who raved, and rambled,
and took on at a piteous rate, being in strong hysterics. "As for what she
talked about in her fit" -- said the old woman. "Tell me what she said in her
fit;" quoth Claypole; "it is very material to me to know what she said, and
it is your duty not to conceal it from me." The woman then repeated, as well as
she could, such of her incoherent sallies, as she could call to mind: they were
made up of various passions, breaking out in confused exclamations; sometimes
of violent love, at other times of hatred and contempt as violent; some
expressions she recollected full of terror for his life, and as if she had
accused herself of having murdered him. "At one time," added the old woman, "I
was sorely afraid the poor young lady had been betrayed, and dealt dishonestly
by, for she said again and again, that he had made a fool of her, and was a
base deceiver; upon that I straightly asked her, if he had taken advantage of her
in an unlucky moment, and had his wicked will of her. To this she answered, no,
no, with great vehemence; he had deceived her in another way." -- "Well, well,"
cried Claypole, stopping her, "say no more upon that subject; I am satisfied no
real injury has been done to her virtue." -- "None, be assured," echoed the old
Dame; "I Will stake my life upon that, and Mrs. May will certify the same." --
"How!" exclaimed he, "Mrs. May will certify! what knows she of the affair?" --
"Lackaday!" answered she; "I was fain to call in help, for young Madam was
quite obstreperous; and so as I knew neighbor May was knowing in those cases,
I sent away for her, and well it was she came, for she quickly fetched her out
of her fit, and quieted her. -- "Well," resumed Claypole, "and what became of
the gentleman?" -- "Oh!" cried the old woman, "he took up his lodgings at Mrs.
May's, and did not go off next morning till he had seen my Lady Crowbery, who
stopped at the door, and took him into the chaise with her, where they sat
together, as some of the neighbors tell me, for I know not how long, whilst my
Lady's Gentlewoman got out to make room for him; nay, and there is more than all
that, only belike you will be angry with me for talking to you about matters."
-- "Not I," quoth Claypole; "I desire you will tell of all matters that you
believe or know to be true. Did Miss Manstock come to Goody May's, while the
Gentleman was there?" -- "Aye, did she, as sure as you are in that place
alive," said the hag; "and was all alone with him ever so long in the parlour
that Madam has decked out so finely for a new-comer amongst us, when, as all
the neighbors say, she might have found some of her own poor parishioners to
bestow it upon, instead of a stranger." -- "What Is that to the purpose?" said
Claypole, peevishly, "go on with your story about Henry and Miss Manstock; are
you sure they were in private together?" -- "Certain sure," replied she; "for
just then I called upon Mrs. May to return her some bottles of stuff, which had
not been used, and as I was turning into the parlour to the closet where she
keeps her drugs, she laid hold of me in a great hurry, telling me I must not go
into that room for my life; I, seeing her in such a combustion, strait thought
within myself, how that something was going on more than common, and taking no
further notice at the time, determined upon peeping in at the window when I
went away, and she was out of sight: I did so; God forgive me if I did wrong!
and there I saw young Madam and her spark sitting lovingly together; not that I
would go to say there was any harm in what they were about; but if ever I saw
any thing clearly with these eyes in my life, I saw Madam Isabella, with her
head upon the Gentleman's shoulder, and his arm round her waist: Oho! said I to
myself, well may our poor young Lady weep and wail at such a rate if these be
your false hearted doings."

Well satisfied with the substance of this intelligence, and quick in
discerning the advantages of it, Claypole departed.

CHAPTER VI. Cunning can hold off Detection for a while.
A NATURE like Sir Roger Manstock's was not easily wrought upon by the poison
of suspicion toward a character like Isabella's: Confidence, long rooted in
strong affection, was not speedily to be shaken; yet his happiness was
disturbed, and his spirits depressed. When Henry was spoken of, which he
frequently was by Lady Crowbery, he was either silent on the subject, or
contrived to pass it off; his looks at the same time were watchfully directed
toward his daughter, and the effect of them was very painfully felt. When Lady
Crowbery retired for the night, he attended her himself to her chamber, and
contrived to take Isabella away with him. The night passed heavily with her,
and the next morning afforded no opportunity of being private with her cousin;
the sad hour of departure drew near, and though there was not more than time
for such friends to take a farewell, which was probably to be their last, nobody
dared to speak the word; all parties sat silent; Zachary Cawdle had the
consideration to keep out of the way: at last, Lady Crowbery spoke as follows:
--

"I had reserved many things to say to you, my dear uncle, but I perceive too
late the fallacy of postponing those things to a time, when the pain of parting
occupies the mind to the exclusion of all other thoughts. I shall therefore
refer you for them to my letters, if my health enables me to write; if not, you
will find a paper enclosed with my will, to be read by you after my death, in
which my heart, and all its sorrows, is laid open to your view: be as tender to
my memory when I am no more, as you have been kind and generous to me whilst
living, and may Heaven reward you for it! if I have offended you in the matter
of your application for Mr. Claypole, or in the manner of my treating it in the
presence of that gentleman, I am sorry for it; but I cannot revoke my opinion
of him, though I suspect it may appear to you as a very harsh one; but this is
not the moment for me to prevaricate, impressed as I am with the persuasion,
that it is amongst the last I have to pass with you."

"Heaven forbid!" cried the venerable Baronet, and tenderly embraced her.
Isabella, weeping, next presented herself, to take her melancholy adieu; Lady
Crowbery whispered a few words to her as she was in her arms, and then, with
assistance, rose from her chair, and was supported to the carriage, that waited
at the door, where all the domestics of Manstock House were assembled, to offer
up their good wishes for her recovery: alas! how fruitless!

Sir Roger retired to his library, Isabella to her apartment. Claypole had kept
close, and did not present himself at Lady Crowbery's departure. This was not
unnoticed by Sir Roger, who did not expect to meet so strong a mark of his
resentment: the solemn declaration made by that lady, under the impression that
they were the last words she should address to him in person, sunk deep into
his mind -- I cannot revoke my opinion of him. -- He was not of a nature prone
to suspicion, nor had he that gift of intuition, which can discover the real
character of a man, by tracing it through the windings and involutions of
artifice and cunning. Claypole, by superior acuteness of intellect, had gained
a complete ascendancy over him, and preserved it long; yet he had not a little
surprised Sir Roger by his solicitation for Ratcliffe's living; it struck him
in the light of a dereliction of his friendship, upon motives merely mercenary;
but the artful interpretation afterward given to those motives had put a very
favorable gloss upon it as to Claypole's conduct; but it fatally instilled
into his mind a doubt, as to the dearest object of his affections, and for the
first time shook his confidence in his beloved Isabella. This was now the
painful subject of his meditations; and after opposing thought to thought, and
weighing them calmly and impartially to the best of his judgment and
understanding, he began to sum up the result of his reflections in the
following manner: --

"Lady Crowbery says, she cannot revoke her opinion of Mr. Claypole; neither
can I, without better proof than I am yet provided with. -- If a small
augmentation of his income could have tempted him to turn his back upon me, I
should have doubted the sincerity of his friendship; for he does not want
money. -- But this exchange was not the way to gain it; therefore I am the more
disposed to believe the reasons he assigns for seeking it. -- He says, he would
have given his niece to Henry for my sake, for my repose, -- and what can that
imply, but that he apprehends me to be in danger; and how in danger! but that
he suspects my Isabella to be attached to the young man, whom he would have
married to Miss Claypole. -- This is indeed alarming; suspicion is always so;
but I must not give way to suspicion without proofs; hitherto he has given me
none. Isabella confesses that she met him accidentally at the cottage; what
then? her very confession of it should disarm suspicion; and my child has ever
been ingenuous and sincere. Claypole would have me think he took a dangerous
connection on himself for my sake; if so, he has had an escape; why then this
resentment against Henry for refusing to endanger him? But he was eager enough
for the connection when I first conversed with him about it: he sought the
young man, unknown to me, conferred with him at Crowbery, and strove to persuade
him to avail himself of Blachford's legacy; that could not be for my sake;
there is something here that does not seem to accord: I am puzzled how to
judge."

At this moment Claypole announced himself with a gentle tap at the library
dour, and was desired to enter. Sir Roger had well nigh entangled himself in
his medications, and probably was not sorry thus to cut the knot, which he
could not untie. "Well, my good friend," said he, with a sigh, "my niece is
gone, perhaps for ever: I think you was not present to take leave of her." --
"My presence, I am afraid," replied Claypole, "could not have been agreeable to
her, nor my respects acceptable." -- "To me at least they would, if not to
her," said Sir Roger. -- "To you they never can be wanting," resumed he; "of
which this tender of them is my witness, when I am fitter for my bed than to be
about." -- "I am very sorry you are indisposed," resumed the Baronet; "for I
confess to you there was part of your conversation last night which has left my
thoughts in a state of great inquietude." -- "If that be so," replied Claypole,
"I am quite at leisure to satisfy you upon any points you may wish to have
explained; clear in conscience, and cordial in my zeal for your interest and
content, I can never be taken unprovided with a strait answer to any questions
you may choose to ask." -- "I cannot doubt you," quoth the Baronet; "and shall
accordingly avail myself of your indulgence. I think you stated the proposed
connection with young Henry and Miss Claypole as a dangerous one, but which,
nevertheless, you was resolute to encounter upon reasons that had respect to my
repose, the nature of which I can well understand." -- "I did so." -- "Did you
see it in that light of danger when you first started it in our conversation
together in the hall?" -- "I do not perfectly call to mind how I saw it, or how
I started it upon that occasion; it was a night of bustle and confusion; we had
sat long and indulged freely at table." -- "We had so," rejoined Sir Roger;
"yet I remember you embraced it with so much seeming warmth and good liking,
that if you was then projecting to make a sacrifice of your own interests to
mine, you really masked your motives so effectually, that I was not aware of
the concern I had in them." -- "That they were my motives," said Claypole, "I
can truly assert; that you did not discover them might very naturally happen,
as I did not study the display of a disinterested action, and cautiously
avoided alarming you with danger which I was in hopes to divert from you for
ever: but, added to this, might it not happen, that I thought better of the
young man at that time than I have done since? I am free to say,
notwithstanding Lady Crowbery's decision against me for my opinion in that
case, I did not approve of his romantic heroism in beggaring himself for Susan
May's bastard: he held a very haughty language to me upon that occasion, and I
do not think it became him either to talk or to act as he did in that affair."
-- To this Sir Roger replied, "A haughty language did not become him, and a
disrespectful one toward a person of your age and character was greatly
reprehensible; but as for the act itself, I cannot but regard it as a very
honorable one." -- "Sir," said Claypole, "these are high-flown fancies; the
fellow is a beggar with a fair face and a proud stomach; he lives upon
charity." -- "And that charity will enable him to live," said Sir Roger calmly.
-- "Scantily, I should guess," replied Claypole; "some small provision Lady
Crowbery may have made for him in her will, but I should hope her Ladyship will
not heap any great matters upon such an one as him, to the detriment of your
family." -- "There, Sir," returned the Baronet, "you are much more zealous for
my family than I am myself: my estate is more than sufficient for all my
occasions, sure it will suffice to portion one daughter." -- "Permit me then,"
replied Claypole, "to say to you, Sir, without offense, that I sincerely hope
that daughter will never have any other interest in Lady Crowbery's property
but what that lady herself may bequeath to her as Miss Manstock." -- "I clearly
comprehend you," said Sir Roger; "and as you mean it so I receive it: and now I
call upon you as my friend, to tell me, without reserve, upon what proofs you
ground your apprehensions of my daughter's attachment to this young man;
suspicion is a serious thing; I am persuaded you would not frivolously alarm
it: be so good to tell me what you have discovered in Miss Manstock's conduct."
-- "Pardon me," replied Claypole; "I pretend to take no other part than that of
a warning friend; I do not covet the character of an informing spy: let the
woman of the cottage be interrogated." -- "Not so," said Sir Roger calmly; "let
my child, with your leave, be fairly heard before I call witnesses to the
charge against her. Let me at least make trial of her sincerity; she has never
yet deceived me to my knowledge, and I should be loath to take a secret course
with her; and now as you have, with so much friendly zeal, made my repose and
the honor of my family your own concern, let me request you wilt be present
whilst I ask a few questions of my daughter as from myfelf." Claypole instantly
started from his seat, and resolutely protested against such a proposal, saying
that he had no desire to be made a party in family disputes, either by being
set up as an umpire between father and daughter, or called to the indelicate
office of deposing against a young lady: he had spoken his fears in the way of
caution; if they were investigated, he did not doubt but they would be found
not to have been lightly taken up, but he confessed he had not sufficient
firmness to assert them to the face of so fair a lady. This said, he left the
room.

CHAPTER VII. Let the Man, who suspects, resort speedily to Explanation.
"CAN this be pure friendship?" said Sir Roger within himself, as Claypole
parted from him; "I am willing to hope it is, but I can hardly think it has all
the characteristics of it." He now went up stairs to his daughter's
dressing room, where he found her alone; she had been weeping, and was sitting
in a pensive posture without any employment. He approached her gently, for
sorrow claims respect, and in a tender tone he said, "You have been in tears,
my child; but I cannot wonder at it, it is an affecting trial to take leave of
so dear a friend with so little hope of ever meeting again. I feel it deeply
too; I believe my affliction is as heavy as your own." -- "I hope not," replied
Isabella, "because I am afraid I have more losses than one to aggravate my
affliction." -- Of what loss do you complain besides this of Lady Crowbery?"
said he, in the accent of alarm. -- "Of the loss of your confidence, Sir,"
returned she, looking up in his face with conscious innocence. The appeal was
irresistible; the most hardened tyrant would have felt it; how could it fail to
touch the tender heart of so affectionate a father? "Not so, my child," said
he; "you have not lost my confidence; you will not lose it; you will merit an
increase of it, your candor will confirm and fix it beyond the reach of doubt
for ever after." -- "In truth," she replied, "my heart is exactly as nature and
you have made it; it is conscious of no guilt, and I have taught it no
disguise; prove it therefore and examine it; tell me all that you suspect, all
that has been reported to you, all that your own fears suggest, and leave no
particle unfifted, for never can I be happy whilst any doubt remains to cloud
that countenance which hitherto has smiled upon me so serenely." -- "'It Is
spoken like yourself," said the father, his countenance brightening as he said
it; "and now, my dear, I should be glad to know, provided you can tell me with
honor to Lady Crowbery, what it was she said to you in a whisper when you took
leave of each other." -- "Readily," answered Isabella; "and the rather because
it was advice that does her credit, though in justice to myself I must add, I did
not then stand in need of it. She had observed you was startled at my meeting
Henry at the cottage, she suspected Mr. Claypole had been alarming you on the
subject, and she advised me to be sincere in relating to you every thing that
passed between us: this was the purport of what she whispered to me, and this I
am now most perfectly ready to fulfill."

Here it may be proper to inform our readers, that Isabella in this statement
reported truly as far as she went, but candor, it is hoped, will acquit her if
she did not betray what was further divulged to her in strict secrecy; for in
that parting moment Lady Crowbery, impressed with a sad presentiment that she
should never see her more, had imparted to her the mystery of Henry's birth,
avowing him to be her son by Captain Delapoer, and informing her that she had
made him her heir.

In return for this candid tender Sir Roger observed, that it was not merely
the circumstance of her meeting Henry, and conversing with him without a third
person present that gave him alarm; that must have often happened whilst he was
a visitor in his house; but in this business there was a seeming secrecy and
mysteriousness in their meeting that gave it the air of a concerted
assignation; that his sudden departure without a word said or written to him by
way of farewell favored that appearance; and he added, that he could not well
account for his declining a connection every way so flattering and so
advantageous to a person in his circumstance as that with Miss Claypole, any
otherwise than as having an attachment elsewhere.

In answer to this Isabella assured him, that her meeting with Henry at the
cottage was purely accidental: he had a wound which broke out afresh whilst she
was there and bled profusely; she staid with him whilst it was dressed; it was a
deep stab in the arm: she remained some time after it was stanched, and they
were left to themselves; he then told her that his treaty with Miss Claypole
was broken off; the reasons for it he did not tell, but he certainly did not
speak of it with any regret, nor did she believe he had ever considered it
either as an advantageous or agreeable connection. As to her father's
observation, that he had not communicated with him in any manner, she said she
could only ascribe that to his fear of being questioned about his wound, of
which she found him very unwilling to give any other account than in general
terms as an accident, and even this she observed was unpleasant to him to speak
of. "Did he come wounded from his interview with Fanny Claypole?" -- "She
believed he did." -- "Then he got it there." -- "She understood so."

Sir Roger pondered upon this for some time in silence; he then renewed the
conversation in the following manner: "This is a dark business, Isabella: Fanny
Claypole is a girl of a violent temper; as for Henry, I should be unjust if I
did not bear testimony to his good principles as far as I have had experience
of them: his person, manners and behavior are highly impressive; the situation
in which I sound him, the unjust treatment he had suffered, and his deportment
under it, prejudiced me strongly in his favor; my niece Crowbery's protection
in the first instance was natural, as considering him the eleve of Ratcliffe
and undeservedly distressed: I warmly coincided with it: it afterward grew
more ardent, I was alarmed at it; it now is become mysterious, and I cannot
understand it. When I invited him into my house, I did not forget that I
possessed a beautiful daughter, the heiress of my fortune and the darling of my
soul; but such was the distance of your conditions from each other, such my
confidence in your discretion, and my opinion of his proper understanding of
himself, that I own to you I foresaw no danger, and let me hope I have incurred
none. But if my confidence has led me into error, or he, mistaking your pity
for encouragement, has been rash enough to attempt your affections, it is now
high time that I endeavor to repair that error by calling you to a
recollection of yourself and me."

"And what," she demanded, "would my father prescribe to me for his future
assurance and content?"

"I would have you keep in mind," he replied, "that I exact no other rights
than nature has endowed me with, when I require you, if ever you entertained a
thought of this young man, to call to mind now in good time my solemn
declaration, that I never will admit of your connection with a man so
circumstanc'd: I never wish to force your inclinations, have no unreasonable
ambition to ally you to great rank or overgrown estate; but to absolute
obscurity, to mystery, to an unknown creature, parentless and nameless, I
cannot, will not sacrifice my child."

"How just and reasonable," said she, "is that denunciation! I seal it with my
promise faithfully to adhere to it."

"Take notice," added the father, "that Blachford's whole possessions could
have made no change in my resolves, nor been of any avail to him, as he is."

"I understand it perfectly," she said, "he must be known; his history must be
develop'd and his parentage clearly ascertained. Should time bring that to
light, and set him forth to view as unexceptionable in birth and condition as
he is amiable in character and manners, may I not presume my father would
relax?" -- "Stop there," he cried, "nor cherish such delusions, which will only
prove you have him more at heart than I could wish. Alas! alas! my child, I
fear your eyes have led your understanding astray; I doubt, Isabella, you are
captivated by what the worst as well as the best, the meanest as well as the
most noble may present to you, a handsome person." -- "Surely, my dear Sir,"
said Isabella blushing, "you just now spoke with approbation of his principles."

"I did so," he replied, "and I will not unsay it. He has done generous
actions, noble ones, that would extort applause even from his enemy, which I am
not."

"But he has enemies," she rejoined; "at least there are some minds so hostile
to merit, or so perverted by malice, as to allow him no applause,"

"I grant you," replied Sir Roger; "but Claypole is angry with him for refusing
his niece."

"Ah, Sir!" returned the lovely Isabella, "then Henry, I fear, will soon
experience the effects of his anger."

"That would be hard," Sir Roger observed, "as he suspected he had received one
wound from the family already."

"But there are deeper and more fatal wounds than he has yet felt," said
Isabella, "that he has still to apprehend; I have reason to believe that a stab
in your opinion, would afflict him more than any thing his flesh can suffer."

"Come, come," said the worthy Baronet, with a parental smile, "Henry may have
enemies, but I perceive he has one steady friend, and that friend has great
power, for she is very near my heart."

With these words he rose from his seat, approached her with a gentle aspect,
and, having impressed a kiss upon her forehead, departed.

CHAPTER VIII. She, who confesses less than the Whole, may save a Blush, but
will incur a Danger.
ISABELLA found the anguish of her mind allayed by the preceding conversation
with her father; it had not totally extinguished it. There were still some
tender incidents belonging to her interview with Henry, which remained untold;
yet upon reflection she could hardly be persuaded, to attach any degree of self
reproach to the omission of such incidents in her narrative, as it was next to
impossible to convey by any form of words the delicacy of those circumstances
which introduced, and the purity of those sensations which admitted these
chaste and innocent endearments. How could she find expressions that would
describe what was passing in the mind of Henry, when starting from his reverie
on her sudden appearance in his room, he wildly ran and caught her in his arms,
unmindful of his wound that burst instantly open? In the like degree language
would have failed her to impress him with a just conception of those soft but
guiltless emotions, occasioned by the sight of the blood flowing from his
wound, by the tenderness of his looks, his language, and the mixed assemblage of
enervating ideas at the touching crisis of departure, which had caused her to
sink under a momentary oppression of spirits, whilst he supported her in his
arms. This she despaired to paint in terms that could exemplify a scene, which
nothing but the manner of it could strictly justify, and none but a spectator
could completely understand.

Therefore it was that her ingenuous nature found a plea in its own want of
powers for letting these small incidents remain untold, and who that has a
heart, which love or pity ever touched, but will subscribe a wish that they had
been unseen?

In the next conversation that took place between Claypole and Sir Roger, the
latter repeated the substance of what had passed between himself and his
daughter; expressing his entire satisfaction in the result of it, and declaring
in the joy of his heart, that he was now perfectly at ease with respect to his
late alarm, about the inteveiw at the cottage. Claypole affected to receive
this account with pleasure, saying he was very glad he had taken that method of
investigation, which made the quickest dispatch in dismissing his uneasiness;
happiness, he observed, was worth obtaining even by delusion, and for that
reason he would recommend to him to sit down contented with the account he had
received, though it was from the party concerned, and not expose himself to the
risque of future inquietude by investigating the affair any further, or seeking
after witnesses whose accounts might perhaps perplex him, by differing in some
particulars from that which had been so satisfactory. He then with an air of
indifference turned the discourse to some other subject, and left his
observation to work as it might, or might not, within the mind of his friend to
whom he addressed it.

The next day Ezekiel Daw walked over from Crowbery, upon a visit to his friend
Dame May at the cottage, bearing a kind message from her daughter, and inviting
her to take up her abode with her at the deceased Mr. Blachford's house, where,
by advice of her friends, she purposed to establish herself and the infant
heir. He was also encharged by Susan to apologize on her behalf, in the most
respectful terms, to Miss Manstock, for her not paying her duty in person, and
with other small commissions to be settled with the servants. This brought him
to the great house, after halting on his way at the widow's, and his arrival
was announced to Isabella, as she was in company with her father and Mr.
Claypole. She would fain have left the room to attend upon him, but the thought
struck Sir Roger to have him introduced to the parlour, declaring that he was
not only greatly taken with the oddity of his character, but that he esteemed
him as a very upright honest creature.

Ezekiel made his advances in a respectful manner to the worthy Baronet, and
was by him very kindly welcomed to Manstock House. He acquitted himself of his
commission to the young Lady after his manner properly enough, and then made an
effort to take leave, but was stayed by a question from Sir Roger, relative to
the amount of what Mr. Blachford had bequeathed to his heir: Ezekiel said that
it consisted of property in Jamaica, which returned about two thousand pounds
one year with another, as far as he could understand, with about ten thousand
pounds in money, and the small estate at Crowbery; but he desired not to be
understood as speaking correctly. Sir Roger said in an under-voice to Claypole,
-- "It is not so much as I guessed he was possessed of, but it is a great deal
for a poor man to give up upon principle." He then enquired if there were any
legacies: Ezekiel informed him there were a few; upon which Claypole said, --
"I suppose you have got a legacy, sir;" -- "No, reverend sir," replied the good
man, "I have no legacy, nor did I covet one; it fits not the servant of Christ
to be greedy after gain." -- "Then I suppose," resumed he, "that it was by your
advice Mr. Fitzhenry declined his legacy;" -- "Not so, sir," replied Ezekiel,
"the first I heard of it was just before you came into my poor cottage, when,
if I mistake not, you disapproved of that act, which in my humble opinion was a
very meritorious one: but it is not by the praise or dispraise of men that
actions can be truly tried; Heaven knows that excellent young man has received
little else but unjust judgment upon earth, and evil treatment from cruel
hands. Even now he is gone forth to sea most barbarously wounded." -- "Do you
pretend to know then," said Claypole, "how he got that wound?" -- "Yes,
reverend sir," replied Ezekiel, rising in his tone, "I do pretend to know." --
"Stop there, Mr. Daw," cried Isabella, hastily interposing, "I dare say your
absent friend would not wish you to speak of that affair in this company, or
any other; I beseech you say no more upon the subject:" -- "Lady, I obey,"
answered Ezekiel, "and verily I am beholden to you for your timely counsel."
Silence now ensuing, honest Daw made his bow and retired.

"Pray, Madam," said Claypole, "may I ask without offense why you stopped that
man's answer to a question, which I who put it to him had a right to expect,
and no repugnance to meet?" -- "Because I am persuaded," replied Isabella, "he
had received no account of the transaction from the person who received the
wound, and I think it was both dangerous and improper for him to speak upon any
other authority:" -- "Suffer me to observe," said he, "that I do not see the
justice of saving any man from the danger of a malicious story, when it is
clear he has the propensity to publish it. Had he been suffered to proceed, we
might have been led through the medium of falsehood to the investigation of
truth, and I might have had a fair opportunity of vindicating the character of
my niece, as well as of punishing the wickedness of her defamers. But I
perceive Ezekiel Daw, the itinerant preacher, is considered by you as a sacred
person; and under your shield, Madam, how can it be expected that my arm can
reach him, or indeed be raised against him? I perceive, Madam, there is a
design to propagate a most villainous story, and to affix a murderous intent
upon a matter of mere accident. When the wounded gentleman got his hurt, nobody
was present but my niece; I am at a loss, therefore, to think from whom else
this evil report should originate but from him." To this Isabella steadily
replied, "Whatever term you may affix to the report, I dare say it did not
spring from him, if indeed it be an evil one it could not." -- "Then, Madam,"
replied Claypole, "we must lay it at the door of some tattling gossip, who,
gathering some expressions from the terrified imagination of my niece, when the
sight of the accident had thrown her into fits, founded this malicious
interpretation of it; and if that be all, I am sure the wisest way is to
disregard it; for in truth their silly fables merit nothing but contempt; they
pretend to hear things that were never said, and to see things that probably
were never done, and then they fasten their fictions upon you and upon Henry,
and perhaps upon every one of us in our turn." -- "What do they fasten upon me,
may I ask?" demanded Isabella. -- "What I paid little or no attention to when I
heard it, yet it serves to show how ingenious they are in their idle devices
not to let the purest character escape their tongues; what wonder then if their
scandal is busy with my poor niece?" -- "There is a mysteriousness in this
story," said Sir Roger, "and I think all suck should be fairly produced with
their authors, especially where a lady's name is made use of." -- "I am clearly
of that opinion," replied Claypole; "and I hold it to be a duty which I owe to
you, to this amiable young lady, and to truth itself, not to let any report
affecting her enter my ears without giving up both it and the author, whom I am
the less inclined to screen because she belongs to me for the present; and as I
am persuaded Miss Manstock can confute her tale, I shall instantly proceed to
punish her by a dismission from my service, and sorry I shall be that my power
reaches no farther." -- "This is perfectly candid in you," said Sir Roger; "and
what I should expect from your friendship; but without more delay let us hear
the story; I will venture to say my daughter has no objection to hearing it."
-- "None in life," replied she, "if Mr. Claypole has none to the relation of
it; but indeed he has now gone too far to suppress it."

"It is soon told, Madam," said Claypole, "and I doubt not as soon confuted;
but my foolish old woman at the vicarage pretends to say, that calling upon the
widow May whilst you and Mr. Fitzhenry were together, she was prevented from
entering the room where you were, with so much appearance of alarm on the part
of the good woman who guarded the door, that suspecting there was a secret, and
naturally curious, as such silly old gossips are apt to be, she took her
opportunity of peeping in at the window, and discovered you in an attitude
(impossible upon the face of it!) for the impudent hussy says she saw him with
his arm round your waist, and your head reclining upon his shoulder." -- "How Is
that?" cried Sir Roger with vehemence, starting at the same moment on his legs;
"does the infamous trollop say that? I Will have her taken up and committed to
the house of correction." -- "No, Sir," said Isabella, "sinking as I was under
my alarm at the bloody spectacle I had been surveying, I can still recollect
too much of my situation at that moment not to remember that there was a person
came up to the window whilst Henry was supporting me, and if this is the person
she says no more than the truth, which Mr. Claypole has very faithfully
reported, with what intent he best knows; but justice compels me to say that
correction is not due to the woman." There was an air of so much conscious
innocence in Isabella's ready explanation and confession, that Claypole
instantly perceived he had missed his aim in her particular at least, but in
Sir Roger he had lodged his shaft. A strict observer of decorum in all its
antiquated rigor, he only looked to consequences, not to cause; it was enough
for him to know his daughter had submitted to the embrace of this young man,
and that she had been a spectacle for vulgar eyes in that degrading situation;
it struck him with a painful recollection, that she had suppressed this
circumstance in the account she had given him at first; and turning a severe
look to his daughter, he said, "Isabella, you never see that young man again
whilst you live; at least within my doors never. You have deceived me, child,
for the first time: you have concealed from me a fact, whilst you made me
believe you had ingenuously related the whole of what passed between you. You
have been discovered in a situation unfit for you to be seen in by a peasant in
the parish, who, having gratified her own curiosity, will not spare to gratify
the curiosity of others, and the tale will be circulated through the
neighborhood, to your shame and to mine."

To this our heroine instantly replied as follows: -- "When I assure my father
that such was the state of my nerves at the time I was discovered in the
situation Mr. Claypole has been describing, that I must have sunk upon the
floor had not Henry prevented it, I flatter myself I shall not be thought
guilty of any great offense against propriety in accepting of his support,
neither, perhaps, can he be justly condemned for giving it. I hope I have not
hitherto been found so disingenuous as not to deserve credit for what I assert,
nor so flippant as to be thought capable of throwing myself voluntarily into
any man's arms. The sight of a deep and terrible wound streaming with blood
upon the floor, and the assistance that humanity compelled me to give in
stanching the wound, was a scene so new and alarming to me that my spirits
could not stand against it. I confess to you I suppressed this circumstance in my
discourse with you, but I had motives for so doing which did not spring from
any consciousness of guilt or dread of explanation on my own part: my silence
had respect to others, not to myself; and the same motives that led me to stop
Ezekiel Daw just now from speaking on this subject, operated with me, and will
operate, for avoiding as far as it is in my power any mention of that affair."
She then turned to Mr. Claypole, and, in a calm, unembarrassed accent, said,
"You will now perceive, that your foolish old woman, as you call her, has done
nothing to incur your displeasure, or to merit the punishment you threaten her
with; she had only the curiosity to peep in at a window, and seems to have
related to you, very faithfully, what she discovered, which you, Sir, as
faithfully, have related to my father; this, no doubt, you did in the pure
spirit of friendship to my father; and I have only to say, for his sake, that I
hope this will be the last proof of your friendship, accompanied with pain to
him, and that every subsequent one will communicate nothing but pleasure. You
have, however, told him something, which I had not told him, and so far I am
made to appear evasive and disingenuous; but I have given you the clue to my
exculpation, and, if you have a mind to pursue it, you will be led to the clear
understanding of my motives. I am willing to interpret the part you have taken
as meant for my good; and, indeed, if I have been guilty of thinking more
favorably of this mysterious young man, than you conceive I ought to think,
your measures have been so far crowned with success, that you have had the
satisfaction to hear my father declare, that I am never again to see that
person whilst I live, at least within his doors. To this I answer, I have never
yet disobeyed my father's commands, nor ever will; let him therefore repeat
that solemn denunciation again, and here I am ready as solemnly to pledge
myself to the observance of it, let it cost me what it will. I desire to live
but to please him, and only whilst I please him; and though I don't wish to hold
back the very high opinion I entertain of this proscribed young man, (or, if
you please to give it any other name that purity may acknowledge, I will
confess to that) yet I now declare, I will never hereafter hold correspondence,
direct or indirect, with him, unless it shall be with the privity and consent,
nay, even by the requisition and desire, of my father himself. This, Sir, I
presume, will satisfy you, if you are sincerely bent to oppose my attachment;
and if my dear father is truly desirous to interdict it, he will, I dare say,
confide in what I have promised."

CHAPTER IX. A tempting Offer honorably withstood.
TO this defense Claypole made no reply, neither did Sir Roger seem in haste to
speak; for the gust of anger, which artifice had raised, innocence and truth
had now dispelled. He turned his eyes upon the accuser first, and then upon his
daughter; each look was decisive to the party it was addressed to; neither of
them stood in need of any further explanation of the opinion he entertained; at
last, turning to Claypole, he said, "I think, Sir, it had been better for us
both if you had not listened to this eaves-dropper; for it appears to me, that
you have gathered nothing from her information, but what my Isabella has very
naturally accounted for. -- "It is very well," replied Claypole; "I know the
consequences of over-zealous friendship, and none can accrue to me, which I am
not prepared for." With these words he left the room.

"He is very angry," said Sir Roger; "but his disappointments vex him: rebuff'd
by Lady Crowbery, rebuff'd by Henry, and tormented with his niece, his
vexations have followed close upon one another; we must make allowances for
men's tempers, and Claypole's is not the most patient, therefore let it pass;
we'll say no more of him: and now, my child, a word or two with you upon what
is nearest to my heart -- your happiness, and a right understanding betwixt us.
It is clear to me, Isabella, that you are attached to this young unknown; that
is a very serious thing, truly; for who is he, and what is he? If you can
answer to these points, explain to me, satisfy me. I am not greedy of wealth, I
am not ambitious of titles for you; but the character and condition of a
gentleman is an indispensible requisite in the person of my son in-law; I
cannot away with obscurity or meanness; therefore, if you know any thing of
Henry, tell it to me; it is your own concern, and, if a secret, I will not
reveal it."

"I am sure you would not," replied she; "and was a secret imparted to me,
under strict injunctions to keep it inviolable, I am no less sure, you would
hold me base, should I reveal it; I hope, therefore, you will not regard it as
a breach of duty, if I decline an answer to your question."

"Hold there," replied the father; "I am apt to think it is a part of your duty
to take no secrets into your trust in which I am not to share, especially when
they are committed to you by a young man like Henry." -- "But if I have it not
from him," said she, "the case does not apply."

"No matter," rejoined he; "it is of him, it relates to him, and that is reason
enough why I should know it. In one word, Isabella, give me up the matter of
your information without the author of it, and if it appears, to my
satisfaction, that this young man is by birth a gentleman, and such as I can
with propriety adopt into my family, I pass my word to you, that I will no
longer oppose myself to your inclinations, for his character and manners please
me, and I can well believe his person not less engaging; but if you will not
confide to me what you know of this young man, I shall take for granted it is
not fit to be known, and, in that persuasion, exert the authority of a father
for laying my injunctions upon you, never to let me see his face, or hear his
name again; neither shall I forgive you, if I discover that you carry on any
correspondence with him, or about him. This, Isabella, is your alternative; now
take your choice, and the consequences of your choice."

A stronger temptation than was now offered to Isabella could hardly present
itself; but her steady nature rejected it without scruple, and, by persisting
in her good faith to Lady Crowbery, she incurred, to her infinite regret, the
displeasure of her father, most tenderly beloved: the conference, therefore,
concluded in anger on his part, and in a solemn promise on here is, to hold no
correspondence with Henry, nor, even through her cousin Lady Crowbery, about
him in future. Time, it is true, might probably develope the mystery which her
honor would not suffer her to do, and to that alone she trusted for a
justification of her silence, both toward her father and her lover.

The Rev. Mr. Claypole, meanwhile, betook himself in sullen discontent to his
chamber, there to meditate upon future measures: in the interim, a letter was
delivered to him, which had come by special messenger from Crowbery Castle, the
contents of which were as follow: --

My dear Uncle,
In consequence of a most polite invitation from the worthy Lord of this
castle, I have been prevailed upon to take up my abode here for a few days. The
chief inducement with me for accepting this solicitation was, the opportunity
it affords me of being within reach of my dear uncle, without the pain of
taking up my residence in the same place with a family from whom I have
received the most unhandsome treatment. Nothing can exceed the kindness and
attention of Lord Crowbery, and I am charged by him, in the most earnest
manner, to request the favor of your company at the castle: I am sure you will
not regret the change from Manstock House; and, if I have any interest with
you, his request will be complied with the rather as I find myself, in Lady
Crowbery's absence, in a situation to stand in need of your cover and
protection, being at present the only female visitor in the house.

I am, ever yours, FRANCES CLAYPOLE.


Nothing could be more acceptable to Mr. Claypole, in his present state of
mind, than the invitation which this letter conveyed; it relieved him from a
situation, of which he was heartily sick, and offered him the gratification of
putting a slight upon Lady Crowbery, of the most pointed sort: he well knew how
it would be felt by Sir Roger Manstock, and on that very account he embraced it
the more readily; for there was no longer any trace of past favors in his
memory, and of favors to come all expectation was at an end. He had, however,
views upon futurity in Lord Crowbery's particular; for he had seen enough of
Lady Crowbery, to set her down, in his account, as a dead woman, and his niece
Fanny was a very lively one. He had more than once taken her with him to the
castle, in times when better harmony subsisted between the families, and on
those visits Fanny had made her way much better with the lord than with the
lady of the house, with the latter of whom, to say the truth, she was in no
great favor. The fact was, that Lady Crowbery regarded her character with
contempt, and Fanny imputed it to jealousy; to rouse this passion was a
gratification too agreeable to be resisted, and therefore, though his Lordship
was nothing less than an Adonis, there was amusement at least in the
experiment, and she considered it as no small triumph to engage the attention
of a man, who was capable of neglecting a most lovely woman, and devoting
himself to her. Her purpose in hastening from the vicarage, in the manner we
have related, was with the view of obtaining one more interview with Henry, or,
at least, of gaining such intelligence as might satisfy her as to the
consequences of his wound; she therefore boldly shaped her course toward the
port he was to embark at, but in passing through the village of Crowbery,
luckily fell in with the noble proprietor, who was cheering his spirits with a
morning ride, in his lady's absence, and, after some importunity, prevailed
upon her to stop short in her progress, and repose herself in the castle. Here
she remained some time, till propriety, or something else, dictated to her the
expedient of writing to her uncle in manner above related, to which his
Lordship, with equal propriety, very courteously acceded.

Sir Roger Manstock, who perceived that his daughter was in possession of a
secret that he could not extort from her, concluded, very naturally, that it
came from Lady Crowbery; and this brought to his recollection, what she had
said to him upon their parting, relative to the paper she had enclosed under
the same cover with her will, to be opened after her death. This packet he had
deposited in his strong box; it was under four seals, and evidently enveloped
more papers than one: he had no doubt, from Isabella's answers, that the secret
she had in charge from Lady Crowbery related to Henry's birth, and that it
would be discovered upon the opening of this packet. He could not reconcile to
himself the being excluded from a confidence which had been reposed in his
daughter, and was not a little discontented to find, that his niece had
referred him to her death for a discovery that she had already made to Isabella.

He now summoned Isabella to him, and holding Lady Crowbery's packet in his
hand, addressed himself to her as follows: -- "I am here encharged with a
paper, sealed as you see, containing your cousin's will, and other private
matters, which are only to be opened by me upon the event of her death: I have
no doubt but it incloses a discovery of that very secret, which she has already
imparted to you, and that it refers to the mystery of this young man's birth,
who has caused so much unhappiness to me and my family. I understand withal,
that I am to be the executor of this will, and, most probably, of certain
instructions and trusts relative to the gentleman, who is then, for the first
time, to be made known to me. Now these are terms that I will not agree to; I
am no dealer in obscure matters, and it is therefore become my fixed resolution
peremptorily to decline the commission, and so to inform Lady Crowbery, by
special express, unless you are prepared to tell me what it is you know of
these secret contents, so far as they relate to the person called Henry
Fitz-Henry; for I do not hold it becoming me, in any respect, to be surprised
into a trust that may involve me with a person whom at present I have every
reason to hold at distance, and for whom, perhaps, I may never choose to be
concerned, even in the most trifling degree. Now then, Isabella, let me ask
you, if what I have been saying seems reasonable, and whether you rightly
comprehend it?" To this she replied in the affirmative; upon which he thus
proceeded: -- "If it is reasonable then that I should not be blindly committed
in a business I am ignorant of, and if you are interested to retain these
papers in my hands, rather than to have them sent back to her from whom they
came, you have the alternative at your choice; tell me what you know of them,
or take the consequences, and abide by the promise you have made me: never let
me hear the name of Henry Fitz-Henry from your lips any more."

"If that be the alternative," replied the lovely Isabella, whilst the tears
started in her eyes, "necessity imposes the hard task upon me of abiding by the
painful consequences you have stated. Can I violate my promise? Ought not every
trust to be held sacred? This is of all most sacred, and I dare not betray it.
Let me then, for the last time in your hearing, declare, that wherever this
discarded person, whose name I will not utter in your ears, shall betake
himself, he carries with him, to the end of life, my prayers, my blessings, my
unalienable affections, and my heart for ever; but let not this ingenuous
confession of my love shake your confidence in my honor, for upon my knees I
take to witness truth, and Heaven itself, that I will faithfully perform the
promise I have made you, and, renouncing him, devote myself to your commands
and to my duty."

CHAPTER X. Where is the Daughter, that may not take a Lesson from our Heroine?
THE definitive answer, which our last chapter concludes with, put a period to
any further conference between the respective parties, and determined Sir Roger
Manstock to take the very measure he had threatened to pursue. He immediately
wrote a letter to his niece, explanatory of his sensations with respect to
Henry, and beseeching her to excuse him from any trust that had relation to a
person, who had caused him such uneasiness, and whom he was determined never to
be connected with: he also informed her of the promise made to him by his
daughter, and prayed her to send down a trusty person, properly authorized,
into whose hands he might safely render back the packet she had entrusted to
him: he then concluded, in the most conciliating terms that his tenderness
could suggest, wishing her a return of health, and assuring her of his
unalterable affection.

A servant was ordered to set off express with this letter, who had directions
where to find the lady in town, if he did not overtake her on the road, of
which, however, there was the greatest probability, as her daily stages were
very short.

In the mean time our amiable heroine did not, like some others, dedicate every
hour to sullen silence and continual melancholy; for though her private moments
were sad enough, she had yet a smile for her father when they met, and the same
eyes that showered tears in secret, reassumed their native cheerful luster when
her parent was in sight.

Not so the Reverend Mr. Claypole; there was something in his breast resembling
those goads and stings which disappointed malice or ambition sometimes
entertain themselves with in secret, in the way of penance for attempts which
conscience does not quite approve of. He was indeed superior to that
tergiversation and incertitude of purpose, which consciences over nice
sometimes impose upon resolutions not over strong; for he was firmly resolved
to turn his back upon his old friend, and his face toward his new one; but he
could not quite persuade himself that such a resolve had all the qualities of a
virtuous purpose; for he could not but feel that he ought to be grateful to the
one, and suspicious of the other. He had motives, however, and principles of
action in his mind, which some soft souls in the world seem to know nothing of;
amongst these, the gratification that his visit to Lord Crowbery would
administer to his mind, as an insult to the patroness of Ratcliffe's living,
was to him very pleasing on reflection. That his visit would be highly
offensive to Sir Roger, and cut off his return for ever after to the house of
Manstock, he clearly saw; but there was no loss could accrue from an exclusion,
where he never wished more to be admitted. In fact, he saw how totally he was
ruined in this family; and having no doubt that his niece had dealt the stab to
Henry, he was not sorry to avail himself of the protection of Lord Crowbery,
and the countenance, which his reception of her would give to her story, in
opposition to all others; but what above all weighed with him for accepting the
invitation was, the hope it held out to his ambition, upon the event of Lady
Crowbery's death, if his niece would consent to govern herself by his advice.

Reasoning in this manner, he prepared for his departure from the house of his
friend; and this he did so secretly and expeditiously, that he stole his march,
unknown to Sir Roger, leaving only the few following lines as his apology and
adieu: --

Mr. Claypole leaves his respectful compliments to Sir Roger Manstock, with
thanks for all favors: the duty which he owes to a much-injur'd orphan niece
compels him to so hasty a departure, that time, conspiring with his own
feelings, prevents him from taking leave in person of a friend, whom he has so
long and justly held in honor. An order was now dispatched from Sir Roger,
directing Dame May to come to him at the Great House. This was instantly obeyed
by the good woman, who was given to understand, in a few words, that her longer
residence in the house, which Isabella had provided for her, would be very
readily dispensed with. To this she immediately answered, that she would
without delay prepare for her removal, having received an invitation from her
daughter, who, by the blessing of Providence, was now in a condition to support
her; she therefore begged leave to return her humble thanks for the favors she
had received, and would no longer be a burden to his charity; she would be
gone that very night, if Sir Roger wished it, and leave the few things she had
in the house to follow her the next day. To this the Baronet shortly answered,
that it was very well, and there the business would have closed, but that it
occurred to him, as she was leaving the room, to put a question to her for
curiosity's sake, respecting Fanny Claypole, which was simply this, -- "If she
understood or believed, that the stab in Henry's arm was given by her hand
purposely and revengefully?" The poor woman was staggered with the abruptness
of the question, and the stern manner in which it was put. She hesitated
through fear and confusion; upon which, in an angry tone, Sir Roger told her,
he had no wish to hear her answer, for he should put little faith in what
anybody said, who was not always ready with a plain reply to a plain question,
and with this rebuke waved his hand and dismissed her.

In relating this short scene as it passed, we are sensible that we must
represent the character of the worthy Baronet in a harsher light than it has
hitherto been seen; but in extenuation we have to say, that he had impressions
on his mind not favorable to this poor woman, and was also disturbed in temper
at the present moment, by the valedictory note of his seceding friend Mr.
Claypole, just before delivered into his hands. Under the same impression, he
was meditating to give orders for dismantling the cottage of its furniture,
when Isabella entered the room, upon which he thought proper to apprize her of
his design, qualifying it with some introductory observations upon the
jealousy, which such favors created in the parish, and the unsuitable elegance
with which she had fitted the apartment: "With your leave, therefore," added
he, "I shall give orders to have the furniture removed, and the cottage reduced
to a condition better fitted to the poverty of the next inhabitants, whom
charity may recommend to it." Isabella bowed her head in token of obedience,
but felt the unkindness of this order in the most poignant manner; she
recollected that she had been allowed to consider this little tenement as her
own, and to carry on her works, both within doors and without, after her own
simple but elegant fancy: the resumption of a fond gift, and the reversal of
all her little amusing operations, by a decree so peremptory and unexpected,
struck deep into her heart, yet she commanded herself so far, when asked if she
had any further use for the furniture, as to make answer with great mildness
and submission, that there was nothing there she particularly wished to
preserve, but a certain print, which she had hung up in the parlour, as a
memorial of the donor, and the similitude of a face, which had ever been
accustomed to look upon her with the tenderest affection. "Pooh! pooh!" replied
Sir Roger, "you have copies enough of that unhappy countenance, and I would
advise you to put this out of the way as speedily as you can, lest it should
sometime or other tell tales of what it has been a spectator of." -- "I am
answered, Sir," replied Isabella, "and with a reproach, which, if I am capable
of deserving from you, I must be unfit any longer to remain in your presence."

So saying, she hid her face in her handkerchief, and hastened out of the room
to give vent to her agony.

CHAPTER XI. A pious Mind resorts to Providence for its Support.
FEW moments had passed after Isabella left her father, before he felt as much
pain from the asperity of the retort he had given, as she had experienced in
receiving it. Nature could not be long expelled from his heart, nor could ill
humor take any lasting possession of it. He wished he had not said it; he felt
the cruelty, the injustice of wreaking vengeance on the harmless works of her
fancy, and, perhaps, he would at this moment have not been sorry, could he have
recalled the messenger he had dispatched to Lady Crowbery. Those sensations of
regret, which a good mind is capable of, Sir Roger felt; but to confess and
atone is the effort of a great mind as well as good, and that was not bestowed
by nature upon him. Men, who affect the reputation of a decided character, are
too apt to mistake obstinacy in error for consistency of opinion; and this was
Sir Roger's misfortune. Few things could have galled him more than Claypole's
conduct, yet his whole life did not furnish so great an instance of weakness,
as his pertinacious attachment to that unworthy friend. No hypocrisy is sooner
discovered than the pretended generosity of a self-interested man, and
opportunities enough had offered themselves to Sir Roger Manstock for
developing the real character of Claypole; but the stronger the light was that
struck upon him, so much the closer he shut his eyes against it. The veil was
now drawn off at once, and prejudice could no longer save him from the
conviction of his own mistake. This vexatious discovery was just rankling in
his mind, when innocence, unfortunately falling in his way, was made to suffer
(as too often happens) for the guilty, who had escaped his resentment.

The next morning brought over Susan May to Manstock House, who was admitted to
her lovely mistress to pay her last duty, and take leave. On this occasion, she
was led into a diffusive recital of all particulars respecting Henry's late
generous proceeding, to which Isabella lent a willing ear. As the one recounted
the noble acts of her benefactor, the heart of the other glowed with delight;
his virtues, his sufferings, his magnanimity, his self-denials were enumerated
and acknowledged; when the subject of his mental perfections was exhausted, his
person, his graceful form, the beauty of his countenance, became the topic of
their praise, and on this subject Susan's eloquence seemed animated into warmer
phrase and diction than on the former. Whilst this was going on, Isabella's
blushes witnessed to the sensibility of soul, which this recital inspired; at
last, no longer able to refrain from joining in the praise of one so dear to
her, she said, "I perfectly agree with you in every thing you have said, or can
say, in commendation of your amiable benefactor. I do not think it is in nature
for any human being to be more noble in mind, more charming in person; and I
feel no shame in confessing to you, what I have avowed to my father, that in
purity of soul I love him. But alas! alas! I have difficulties to encounter,
objections to overcome, and sorrows to endure, that will probably make that a
condition of necessity, which you may remember was once my choice, and devote
me to a single life." -- "Heaven in its mercy forbid!" cried Susan, "that so
much beauty and love should be left to pine away in solitariness and
disappointment; fathers must have hearts of marble, that can so control and
thwart the virtuous affections of their children." -- "Hold," cried Isabella,
"you must not talk in that style, Susan, if you have any value for my
friendship; my father must always be spoken of with respect in my hearing; we
will therefore change the subject to what we cannot differ about, and you will
tell me what you think of Henry's wound: Did he tell you how he came by it?" To
this Susan replied, that he had been very reserved upon the subject; but, for
her own part, she was certain it had been given him by that desperate creature
Fanny Claypole, in the rage of disappointment; "which, indeed," added she, "her
own confession puts out of doubt; for my mother told me in secrecy, that when
she attended her in her fits and ravings, that and many other things came out,
which are almost too bad to relate." -- "I don't wish to hear them," replied
Isabella, "for things of that sort are perfectly disgusting to me; and, I dare
say, if any thing improper passed, she herself was in the fault of it." -- "So
much I will venture to inform you of," said Susan, "that she was not in the
fault that it did not pass; but the truth of the fact is, that the rage of the
lady was roused by the virtue of the man, and the stab was given him in the
fury of revenge and disappointment." -- "That I can well believe," replied the
blushing fair; "and I own to you, I am glad at my heart that Henry did not
demean himself by stooping to her arts; but I wonder what is become of her." To
this Susan answered, that she was now with the Lord of Crowbery Castle, where
she was treated with great attention, and where she did not doubt but she was
playing a very deep and cunning game, and the rather, as she understood that
her reverend uncle had made one of the party, and was now upon a visit at the
Castle. -- "So soon after the departure of my cousin!" cried Isabella, sighing;
"that is indeed extraordinary on his part. I understood he had left us, but I
did not guess he was gone thither of all places; I am sure my father must have
felt that affront very severely." -- "I hope it will open his eyes," replied
Susan, "for all the neighbors cry out upon Mr. Claypole already." Isabella
made some slight observation upon this, and here the conference ended.

Isabella, now alone, resigned herself to meditation, and after a few minutes
so employed, broke out into the following soliloquy: -- "Oh Henry! mysterious
son of an unhappy mother, little does my father think how nearly thou art
allied to him; and though I am now interdicted from all communication with
thee, I will still nourish one spark of hope, that thy affection may prevail
against appearances, and thou persist to love me, till time shall develope the
secret which honor now forbids me to divulge, in spite of all temptations. May
providence protect thee in all dangers, and by restoring thy beloved parent to
health, crown thy filial undertaking with a happy event! meanwhile, though I
will pray for thee in secret, I must remember the promise I have given to my
father, and sacredly fulfill it in its strictest sense, without prevarication:
this is my duty; but when I reflect what circumstances may occur to shake my
constancy, and overpower my nature, I tremble at the task I have engaged in.
Where then shall I find fortitude in the hour of trial, and whither shall I
resort, but to thee, O thou, who art the father of all those that faithfully
refer themselves to thy protection? take then, I pray thee, into thy most
gracious disposal, my heart and its purposes, too weak without thy
strengthening providence, too fallible without thy merciful support."

END OF THE EIGHTH BOOK.
BOOK THE NINTH.
CHAPTER I. A short Interlude between the Acts.
WHILST the dramatic author cheers his audience with a tune between the acts, I
am forced to fill up my intervals with a treatise, and (what is still worse)
with a treatise of my own making, which is not quite the case with his tune.
His spectators are regaled with harmony in a brilliant theater, amidst a blaze
of lights; my reader, in his solitary chair, sits moping over the dull strain
of an uninteresting dissertation, which probably has little other merit but of
putting him to sleep: what inspires his critics with good humor, only
stupifies mine.

But if these are his advantages in the periods of suspension, many more and
much greater are they, when he returns to the stage and I to my history. The
actor before the curtain and the scenist behind it conspire to lift him into
fame, almost without any effort of his own: he is upheld by the charms of
spectacle, I am loaded with the drudgery of detail; he has castles in the
clouds, that drop down at the word of command, we are forced to labor late and
early, till our brains are well nigh beaten into brick and mortar with the
slavery of building them. A nimble scene-painter will dash off a cataract in
full froth and foam, that will cost us twenty pages of hard pumping, before we
can get a single drop to flow: how many pens do we split in conjuring up a
storm of thunder and lightning, whilst he, by one mark in the margin of his
manuscript, sets all the elements in a roar; we find it a very troublesome job
to furnish horses and carriages for the conveyance of our company, his
characters are wafted from scene to scene by a whistle; when his heroine is in
a crisis, some one cries, -- Hah! she faints! -- and the inimitable Siddons
dies away; another cries, -- Hah! she revives! -- the inimitable Siddons is
alive again. We cannot do this without salts and hartshorn at the least, and in
an obstinate sit, hardly with the help of burnt feathers, an unsavory
experiment he is never driven to.

Let us put the case, that the author of a novel shall lay his scene in the
house of some abandoned strumpet, where a set of cutthroats resort for the
plotting of some murderous conspiracy, and let the hero of his story, for whom
our pity is to be interested, enlist himself in this gang, and let him
introduce a virtuous wife, the darling of his heart, and the faithful partner
of his bed, into this house of ill-fame and assembly of villains, there to be
left in the hands of these miscreants as a hostage for his good faith, telling
her withal, that he is sworn to assassinate her father that very night, who but
would cry out against the conduct of such a fable? but let Otway's fascinating
muse put this into melodious meter, let the bell toll for execution, bring
forth the rack, send the actress on the stage with hair dishevelled, cheeks of
chalk, and eyes wildly staring -- no matter why so mad at once, nor what she
talks of, (be it of seas of milk or ships of amber) -- all hearts bow down to
her resistless energy; she takes her poet on her wings, and soars to fame.

Wonderful in all ages, and honored by all enlightened nations, has been the
actor's magic art; the theaters and forums of Greece were embellished with his
statues; they gazed upon him like a descended god; their greatest poets, down
to Aeschylus and Aristophanes, trod the stage in person: Rome also honored her
actors, and they in return were the grace and ornament of all societies; their
sayings were recorded, and collections of their apothegms have come down to our
times; Caesar in all his power made suite to them, and even knights of Rome did
not revolt from the profession. It remained for modern times to complete their
triumphs, by admitting female candidates into the lists; from that moment
Nature took possession of her rights; the finest feelings were consigned to the
fairest forms; the very Muse herself appeared in her own sex and person:
beauty, that gives being to the poet's rapturous vision, a voice that guides
his language to the heart, smiles that enchant, tears that dissolve us, with
looks that fascinate, and dying plaintive tones that sink into the soul, are
now the appropriate and exclusive attributes of that all-conquering sex; in
short, they bind our nobles in chains, and our princes in links -- of love.

CHAPTER II. An Adventure on board a Frigate.
WE now return to our hero, who, with fair weather and favoring gales, was far
advanced upon his voyage. A few, and but slight sensations of uneasiness had
attended his initiation on shipboard. Cary's gay and gallant spirit cheered
him at all moments; the novelty of the scene, the succession of adventures
which occurred to him in passing through the Channel, and the striking
characters of British seamen, for ever in his view, were to a mind like his
most interesting contemplations. The cleanliness, good order, and discipline of
Cary's frigate were exemplary; and as she had cleared the Channel, and was upon
the sharp look-out for an enemy, expectation kept every body alert, and in a
state of warlike preparation.

Tom Weevil was a lively thoughtless fellow, and had passed through all the
discipline of being seized up to the shrouds, and every other species of
sea-jokes practiced upon fresh water novices, with perfect good humor. He had
made acquaintance with several gentlemen of easy address, particularly in the
foretop, with the captain of which, Jack Jones by name, he had established a
sworn friendship; and as Tom was very fond of taking the air on that elevated
station where Jack presided, he was mostly to be found in the aforesaid top,
where, in leisure hours, he edified his company with reading (a gift which he
alone possessed) the illustrious history of Robinson Crusoe, to which all ears
were open, and universal faith from all parties subscribed without reserve.
Happy would it be for congregations in general were they so attentive to their
preacher as Tom's audience were to him: they were also able commentators upon
many parts of the work; but as they did not always concur in the same
explanations and remarks, the progress of the history was liable to
considerable interruptions and chasms, whilst the interlocutory parts were
filled up with oaths and lies, given and taken very liberally in the true
spirit of controversy.

Mr. William Williams, the surgeon (or, in the sea phrase, the doctor) had so
ably conducted the cure of Henry's wound, by adding nothing to nature's
operations but cleanliness and fresh lint, that his arm was come to its perfect
use, and, it may be presumed, his spirit was not unwilling to try its strength
upon the enemies of his country, if they came in his way. It was now early
morning, and that wished-for opportunity was in near approach: Henry was on
deck, enjoying that most magnificent of all spectacles, the sun rising over the
waters, a rayless globe of fire; his heart expanded at the sight, and his
thoughts ascended toward the Creator of those wonders he contemplated. Captain
Carry was at present under easy sail, and the weather fine, when the man at the
mast-head descried a sail ahead: instantly the officer on watch informed the
Captain, who, leaping out of his cot, huddled on his clothes, and in little
more time than a lion would bestow upon his toilet, presented himself on the
quarter deck, having ordered all hands up, and sail to be made. A very little
time discovered her to be a square-rigged vessel, and as she kept her course
toward Carry, with the wind in her favor, she was soon visible from the deck,
where every glass in the ship was directed toward her, and every voice
pronounced her to be a frigate of equal or superior force to their own; and,
upon a nearer view, from certain marks, which experienced seamen are quick in
discerning, she was adjudged, without one dissenting voice, to be an enemy, and
an enemy, it should seem, that did not decline an action.

Now began that aweful arrangement in which silence still as death prevailed,
and every thing moved at the word of one man, whose voice, and none other, was
heard, and to whose command absolute obedience followed on the instant. Henry
surveyed the whole with silent awe, and reverence for a service so conducted:
his heart glowed with love and pride for his friend, whom situation seemed now
to have transformed into a new creature; that countenance, which hitherto he
had only seen charactered with the mirthful smile of raillery and frolic, was
now terrible and frowning, as he bent his eye upon the enemy, in the same act
of preparation with himself. He was a perfect hero arming for battle, courage
tempered with deliberate circumspection marked every word he said, which were
distinctly and precisely given out in orders to every officer in the ship; the
lieutenants repaired to their quarters, the men assembled in the tops, and
honest Weevil was honored with a post at one of the cabin-guns, in company
with eight other brave fellows. Carry, having hoisted his colors, addressed
himself to his men in a short but animating speech, that in language suited to
their habits and apprehensions gave them to understand, that whilst he had
breath in his body those colors were never to come down; that the advantage of
the few guns the enemy had over them was to be compensated by superior skill
and courage, and he was resolved that republican frigate should either follow
him into a British port or sink alongside of him. This was followed by three
cheers; when, turning to Henry, he said, "Now, my brave Henry, if you like the
sport, we will give you a taste of it; this fellow seems to have some stomach
for fighting, but no great management in bringing it to bear: I see he means to
fight us on the starboard side, and has armed himself accordingly; but I shall
baulk his fancy, and take him where he is not prepared." This said, he gave the
word, helm-a-weather, and by a rapid maneuver well executed, brought his
frigate on the other side, pouring in a raking fire as he sheered across him.
This maneuver produced much confusion and some loss to the enemy, who are in
the practice of arming only on one side. The position Carry had taken, and the
rapidity of his fire, had great effect, as the action was close. When the enemy
had recovered from his surprise, his behavior was perfectly gallant; and by
something giving way on board the British frigate, she became unmanageable, and
fell broadside to upon the Frenchman; part of the crew being occupied in
repairing this accident, the enemy seized the opportunity for boarding, being
full of men. Henry now felt his spirit called upon in a manner not to be
resisted; a confused and scrambling fight took place upon the gang-way, where
the French had lodged themselves in some numbers, under conduct of a spirited
officer, whom Henry immediately singled out as his man; he flew to the scene of
action sword in hand, shouting to the people as he advanced, and at the very
first stroke brought down the leader of the boarding crew, who fell dead into
the waste. Animated by his example, the defendants became invincible, and
repulse and slaughter ensued: the few that escaped back to their ship were
instantly followed by the victorious party, Henry being one of the first, if
not the very first, that leapt on board the national frigate; there was no
leader like him to rally the fugitives; in the first fury of the onset the
carnage was indiscriminate, till a general cry for quarter recalled that mercy
which is never long absent from the hearts of our countrymen, and stopped the
hand of death. The colors were hauled down, and three cheers from the
conquerors gave notice to their gallant captain and comrades alongside of them,
that they were in possession of their prize. A crowd gathered round Henry, who,
like Achilles bathed in the blood of Hector, stood in the midst of them
tremendously beautiful: he had thrown off his coat before he entered into
action, his hat had been beaten off, and his hair, Medusa like, fell in wild
disorder on his forehead, his eyes seemed on fire, the frown yet dwelt upon his
brow, and the angry spot of crimson hue still burnt upon his cheek. A confusion
of voices now arose, all applauding their young volunteer, with many huggings,
and squeezings, and slappings on the back, garnished with oaths of the most
unaccountable variety, which, through an excess of good will, blasted every
limb in the company, and sent our hero himself to the devil by a thousand
different conveyances. Amongst these vociferous admirers his eye singled out a
figure in the outward row, whom he discovered to be his friend Tom Weevil, in
spite of a small alteration in his countenance, occasioned by the removal of
one ear and part of a cheek out of their place, and dangling upon his shoulder
by the help of certain fibers which still restrained them from total
separation. Henry flew to his wounded friend, compressed the fleshy fragments
into their place as well as he could, and taking off his neckcloth, bound them
up, and hurried him away to Doctor Williams, whom he found in the cockpit
stripped to his shirt, with his sleeves rolled up to his shoulders, and bathed in
a mingled stream of blood and sweat. "When you can turn your hand," cried
Henry, "to a brave lad, who wants a little of your art, I shall be obliged to
you." A foretop man, one of Weevil's audience, was then under Williams's hands,
who seemed in a most hopeless case. "It Is all up with me," cried the dying
sailor; "death has stopped my grog for everlasting; therefore, do you see,
Doctor, never break your head about me, but turn your hand to the lad, splice
his chops, and send him going." The heroism of this expiring warrior, the scene
of human misery which the cockpit presented, and the gory figure of Williams
himself, were too much for the unhardened nerves of Henry -- the tears started
from his eyes. The dying man was still anxious for the glory of his country,
and demanded to know what had been the event of the fight. When Henry had
informed him of this, life seemed to reinspire his half-closed eyes, a gleam of
joy fleeted over his distorted visage; "Oh! that I could have one peep at the
prize," he exclaimed, "before my daylights are out." -- "So thou shall,"
exclaimed Jack Jones, who was standing over him, "if the brave volunteer will
condescend to bear a hand." -- "If I was an admiral," replied our hero, "I
should be honored by the office;" and having so said, taking up one end of the
hammock on which the dying man was stretched, and Jones taking the other, they
carried him up the ladder, and placed him where, with the prize in his view, he
breathed out his gallant spirit in the arms of victory.

CHAPTER III. Our Hero makes an interesting Discovery.
WHEN our hero had performed the last offices to the dying sailor, he went upon
the quarter deck, where Captain Carry was busily occupied in giving orders upon
various matters. The first moment he could detach himself from business, he ran
to Henry, and throwing his arms about him, overwhelmed him with applauses:
great was their mutual joy to find that neither had received the slightest
hurt; but what a change did it appear to Henry, as he cast his eyes about the
frigate, late in such beautiful and perfect trim, now exhibiting nothing but a
pent-house of dangling rags and mangled rigging overhead, and below, a chaos of
broken booms, shattered boats, and decks floated with water black as Styx with
the scattering of the powder. When Carry had devoted a few moments to his
gallant friend, he called the first lieutenant to him, and shaking him
cordially by the hand, gave him joy of his prize; "Go, my brave fellow," he
cried, "and take possession of that noble frigate, which your valor and good
conduct has contributed to conquer; and you, volunteer," added he, addressing
himself to Henry, "go with your officer, and board her for the second time; but
here," pointing to his coat, that laid under the barricade, "slip on your
clothes, and get a hat." He then gave directions for shifting the prisoners,
and that proper care should be had of the wounded men, by superintending the
treatment they received from their own surgeons: and now began the carpenter's
and boatswain's reports, with a long train of various duties, that fall to the
share of every one in Cary's situation, and which none were better qualified to
execute than he was.

When the first lieutenant, accompanied by our hero, came on board the prize,
he found the crew and passengers of a Lisbon packet, which she had captured in
her cruize, and of these he bade Henry take charge, whilst he gave attention to
more pressing matters. Henry, now acting under orders, immediately began to
exert his delegated authority, by assembling his countrymen from all parts of
the vessel, for the joyful purpose of restoring them to their liberty. When he
was about to embark them in the boat, that waited to receive them, under the
command of Lord Frederick, our young midshipman heretofore described, one of
the company informed him, there was a sick gentleman in his hammock below,
whose state of health required instant attention. To this person Henry
immediately went, with one of the party for a guide, who brought him to the
cable-tier, where the sick gentleman was lying in his hammock, attended by two
servants. When our hero had imparted to him the cheering purpose of his visit,
and recommended a speedy removal on board the British frigate, where he would
be better accommodated, he answered, in a faint tone, that it would be a most
welcome release; he had been tortured with noise and clamor, and, at the same
time, nearly suffocated with heat and stench; "but surely," added he, "I have
heard that voice before, though I cannot discern your countenance in this dark
place. Is it possible, Sir, that you and I can have met at Crowbery?" A short
explanation now took place, which, to Henry's great and joyful surprise,
convinced him that Providence had directed him to the rescue of his father.
Difficult though it was to suppress his emotion on such a discovery, yet he had
command enough over himself to check his tongue, and immediately began his
operations for removing him from his loathsome abode, all which he planned and
executed with the tenderest care and attention. The refreshing sensation of air
and motion revived the spirits of the redeemed prisoner; he was lifted into the
boat in his bedding; Henry's eye watched every movement that could annoy him,
Henry's arm supported him through every moment of the passage, and his care
superintended the operation of getting him on board, where he instantly
assigned him his own cot, and recommended him, in the strongest terms, to his
friend Williams.

So reformed was the appearance of Cary's frigate, that it appeared to Henry as
the work of magic; but what cannot British seamen, well commanded, perform? She
was now once more in sailing trim, her decks washed, and her lumber stowed
away. Henry delivered up his redeemed prisoners, with a list of their names, to
the captain; and, having executed these instructions, demanded if there were
any further commands for him? "Nothing, at present, but to refresh yourself in
the cabin," replied Carry, "where you will find cold meat and wine, and some of
the national officers at work upon it." Thither our exhausted hero eagerly
repaired; and, as he was mixing with the prisoners, he heard one of them
relating a circumstance of an English deserter, who, being mutinous at his gun
in the time of action, and refusing to serve it against his countrymen, had
been run through the back by one of the officers on the spot. This was told in
French, which Henry had enough of the language to understand, and, in the same
language, made shift to enquire the name of the renegado. This the Frenchman
did not know; but he learnt enough of his station and description in the ship
to guide him in the enquiries which his humanity toward a fellow creature,
under such circumstances, inspired him to make. He therefore snatched a hasty
morsel, took a refreshing draught of wine, and jumped into the boat, that was
just then going off to the prize. Here he soon traced his enquiries to the
wretched object he was in search of, and in whom there appeared so much to pity
and condemn. He found him stretched at his length upon the bare deck, beside
the gun he had been posted at, incapable of raising himself up, floated with
his own blood, and at the point of death. Judge, reader, what was Henry's
sensation, when, in this expiring wretch, he recognized the features of his
acquaintance Bowsey. "Ah! miserable man," he cried, "is this your fate at last?
Do you not know me? Speak to me, if you have strength to utter; look on me, if
you can lift your eyes, and I will yet give you the last comfort of knowing
that your victim, Thomas Weevil, survives the blow you dealt him." -- "Good
Lord, good Lord," murmured the expiring man; "Weevil is alive, then I am no
murderer: I know you, Mr. Henry; you are a good man; I wish I had taken your
good counsel, then I had never been in these damned fellows' hands; I am dying,
I am dying; I would not fight against my country; though bad enough in all
reason, I was not such a shabby rascal as that came to, so a scoundrel thrust
his sword into my back, (the devil reward him for it!) and here I Have lain ever
since." Henry saw the agonies of death upon him; he grew convulsed at times,
then brought out a few words, and seemed struggling to reach out his hand,
which Henry no sooner perceived, than stooping down, he took him by the hand,
saying, "Farewell, the Lord have mercy upon you and forgive you." This was
understood by Bowsey, who, deeply groaning, muttered something, of which Henry
could make out no more than, Sleep, sleep -- they say it is all sleep. -- "They
are liars and blasphemers," exclaimed Henry, and was proceeding, when he
perceived the senses he addressed were closed, the last breath was spent, and
the soul had taken flight to those unknown regions, where all who credit or
inculcate these impious doctrines, will be destined to experience a terrible
confutation of their eternal sleep.

CHAPTER IV. First Love strikes deep.
WHEN Captain Carry had taken into consideration the state of his prize, (a
large forty gun frigate) the number of his prisoners, and various other
circumstances, which made a separation unadviseable, he determined to avail
himself of a fair wind, and his proximity to the coast, for convoying her into
the first English port he could make, though his own destination was for the
Tagus; he therefore made known this his resolution to his officers in each
ship, and steered for the channel; the wind continued to serve, and he pushed
into Falmouth, as the first port that was favorable to his purpose.

Here Henry landed with his father, who still concealed himself under the name
of Smith. The ships took the first occasion for proceeding to Plymouth, where
they could receive the necessary repair, whilst Henry staid with his two
convalescents at Falmouth, for Tom Weevil's wound was now, by Williams's skill,
far advanced toward a cure. The last conversation that Henry held with
Williams was on the evening preceding the departure of the ships, when with
some difficulty he prevailed upon him to accept a suitable present for his
great attention to his own and Weevil's wounds: Mr. Smith, so called, had
rewarded him in a more magnificent style, according to the customs of the East.
In this conversation Williams, whose modesty had seldom permitted him to speak
of himself and his own adventures, was enticed into a more circumstantial
detail of past occurrences, which it imports not this history to record in any
other period, than that in which he was employed as an assistant to our
acquaintance Zachary Cawdle at Crowbery, where the youthful charms of Susan
May, then in their first blossom, made sad havoc with Williams's susceptible
heart. It did not appear, even from his own modest account, that Susan was
altogether inexorable, for Williams was a very handsome fellow, with a thousand
good qualities, and, over all, one of the sweetest tempers man ever possessed,
but there were rubs innumerable, which fortune perversely threw in the way of
his passion that Williams had not skill or confidence to struggle with: the
chief of these had root in Jemima's jealousy and spite, some sprung from honest
Zachary himself, who thought love no great recommendation in a compounder of
medicines; and others were thrown in his way by the collusion of Blachford with
Dame Jemima, the bright eyes of the damsel having set fire to the bilious
particles of the Justice's blood in no less degree than to the milky ones of
Williams. To extricate himself from this dilemma by deliberate means required
more nerves than Williams had to spare, he therefore took quicker but less
regular measures, and fairly escaped by flight, taking nothing away with him
but an aching heart, and defrauding his master of no one tittle of his right,
save only of the pleasure of paying him certain running arrears of wages, which
Williams probably had neither time nor inclination to demand.

When Williams had concluded his narrative, Henry resolved first to try the
pulse of his affection, before he threw the lure of Susan's fortune in his way,
and this he rightly conceived to be the most honorable proceeding to both
parties. He therefore began to discourse with him in such a way as might best
discover how far Susan still kept any hold upon the heart of her first lover,
and when this was made clear to him, he proceeded to unfold the dark
transaction which Blachford had been concerned in, and the consequences it had
produced. Here Williams, no longer able to restrain himself, broke out into
violent denunciations against her betrayer, taking Heaven to witness, that
whenever opportunity should serve, he would have his revenge upon him for what
he had done; but this Henry soon put a stop to, by informing him how completely
the offender was now out of his reach. "It is an exit too good for such a
villain," cried Williams, "he should have died by the halter, or, if the law
could not have reached him, my arm should; but though his life is out of my
reach, his memory is not, and I will vindicate the innocent against the guilty,
by making public the truth, and sharing my last shilling in support of my poor
girl, wherever she can be found, and to whatever situation she may be reduced."
-- "That is a resolution," said Henry, "every way worthy of you, and bespeaks a
generous soul; it also convinces me that you loved her honorably, and esteemed
her worthy of your love." -- "And she is worthy still," rejoined he. "Can I
love her less because she has suffered wrong and violence from the blackest
wretch that ever breathed? No, I should be base as he is if I could; but I am
impatient to know what has been her fate, and how she has struggled under
misery so complicated." This drew out that account, which no relater but one of
Henry's delicacy of sentiment would have reserved for the conclusion of his
story; and though it may be well believed the facts now recounted were not
embellished with any self-encomiums, yet the coldest color he could give to
truth could not prevent his hearer from receiving it with transports of
admiration and gratitude. -- "Oh Heavens!" cried Williams, "what a soul is
yours? And have you risqued a life so precious in a voluntary combat with those
madmen? God be praised, the villains have not drawn one drop of blood from your
veins! well might we conquer, who were headed by an angel." -- "Stop," cried
Henry; "we will talk common sense, if you please, and treat each other like
rational creatures. I have been telling you mere matter of fact, and as you
seem to take a warm share in our friend Susan's interest, so far my story has
repaid you for the pains it gave you in some parts, by the pleasure you receive
in the conclusion of it. When your duty permits, and your inclination disposes
you to make a trip to Crowbery, you will find your old acquaintance respectably
established; and if you see her with my eyes, and judge of her as I think you
must, I persuade myself you will find no one charm of person, or good quality
of heart, impaired by what has passed since you lost sight of her: and now a
thought strikes me, Mr. Williams, as a hint for you to turn in your mind, which
is simply this; your old friend Zachary Cawdle is now from home upon a service,
which, I have reason to believe, will set him free from business for the rest
of his days; should this be the case, and if you prefer a stationary employ to
a roving one like your present, it is not improbable but means may be taken for
settling you in his business, if the spot is agreeable to you, and the object
worth your thoughts." To this Williams answered, that the situation indeed
would be very desirable; but he doubted his capacity of obtaining it, for he
had no money, nor was in the way of getting any. -- "Then I perceive," quoth
Henry, "my good friend, you have no present thoughts of marrying." Williams
blushed and was silent. Henry smiled, and shaking him by the hand, bade him be
of good courage, telling him that it was probable he should have an opportunity
of talking with Zachary before long, and that he would find means to inform him
of the result of their conversation.

CHAPTER V. Our Hero quits the Sea.
THE next day Captain Carry took his departure for Plymouth, carrying his prize
with him. Some time would be necessary for repairing the damages his frigate
had received in the action, and this determined Henry to stay at Falmouth, not
only for the purpose of attending upon his father, but in the hope of hearing
some tidings of Lady Crowbery, whose arrival might now be looked for from day
to day. Mr. Smith had taken lodgings in a private house, and was recovering his
strength apace: to him Henry repaired, after his conversation with Williams
above related, and found a chaise waiting at his door for a morning airing. His
tender attentions had so won the heart of his unconscious father, that he
seemed to live only in his company, and as this airing was a first effort,
Henry offered to attend upon him in the carriage, which was most thankfully
accepted. The driver was directed to choose the smoothest road, and go gently
along; the sick man's spirits were revived by the air and motion, and now for
the first time he found strength to converse more at large, than as yet he had
been able to do. -- "Your goodness to me, dear sir," said he, "has been such as
I can never find words to express my sense of: I have hitherto been silent, not
through want of gratitude but want of powers to give utterance to it; yet I
have much to say to you, some things to explain, and others to apologize for.
In the first place I should tell you, that in all our casual rencounters, since
the first time we met, when I pretended to have picked up a ring of Lady
Crowbery's, I have been imposing myself upon you under a feigned name and
character: I am the third son now living of the Lord Pendennis, my name Henry
Delapoer; a very early attachment to the loveliest of her sex being most
unfortunately traversed by her father decided my fate, and hurried me to the
East Indies, with a broken heart, upon a desperate adventure. It was the will
of providence I should survive my loss of happiness, by turning aside from me
in various ways, almost miraculous, that death which I presumptuously courted.
As my heart never varied from its first affection, I never have had a thought
of marrying; and though I have been little studious of accumulating money, yet
circumstances, unsought for on my part, have thrown a fortune upon me, which,
though not to be compared with many, is an affluent one, and, which is better,
fairly earned, without cruelty or extortion. Having now disclosed to you who I
am, I shall next inform you of my purpose in setting out for Lisbon, in which
undertaking I suspect it will be found that we have both the same object,
namely, that of tendering our last melancholy offices to the much injured lady
of that execrable tyrant Crowbery; of your motives, my dear Sir, I know no more
than common report has given out, and they do credit to your gratitude, for I
have heard she has been a beneficent and kind friend to you, and I cannot doubt
but she has acted on the purest principles; how it comes to pass that I am so
affected by her situation, and enraged against her oppressor, a single word
will explain, when I tell you she was all but my wedded wife, when her
inexorable father overtook us, in the last stage of our progress toward Gretna
Green, and obstinately severed that knot which a very few hours would have made
indissoluble. Merciful Heaven! what a heart-rending moment was that, which tore
me from the arms of my Cecilia! Oh! Sir, it was attended with such aggravating
horrors! Figure to yourself the circumstance most killing to the heart of
honor, and that case was our's. What might have been the result of it I can
well conceive; what it was Heaven only knows; for I was hurried out of England,
and remained in ignorance of her fate; and now I find her wedded to a brute,
childless, unhappy, and alas! far gone in a decay. If providence shall
graciously permit her to survive her voyage, Lisbon gives me one last chance of
meeting her on this side Heaven; if not, the short remnant of days that may be
left to me shall be spent in bewailing her loss, and, if opportunity can be
found, in avenging her wrongs."

Here the father ceased, exhausted not less by the agitation of his mind, than
by the exertion of his discourse; a short silence took place, which Henry was
too considerate of his repose to interrupt; at length perceiving that he
expected a reply, he spoke as follows, -- "I am greatly honored by the
confidence you repose in me, and it gives me the highest satisfaction to know,
that my small services have been useful to you in any degree: I was certainly
well prepared for the discovery you have been pleased to make, for it has long
been out of doubt with me, that your first assumed condition was not your real
one; the manners, character, and deportment of a man of birth and education
cannot easily be disguised, and yours least of all. I am not totally
uninformed of Lady Crowbery's early attachment to the honorable Captain
Delapoer, my life from infancy to a period not long passed having been spent
under the care and tuition of a most intimate friend of here is, the Reverend Mr.
Ratcliffe, lately deceased; by that excellent man I was received as a deserted
nameless infant, deposited at his door, and recommended to his benevolent
protection by my mysterious mother. Through some secret channel, unknown to me,
the charges of my maintenance were supplied, when at his death they stopped at
once, and I was thrown friendless and helpless on the world at large.
Misfortunes, which at some other time I will detail to you, fell upon me,
pressing me down to the extremity of human misery and distress; in this state
the charity of Lady Crowbery found me; her bounty to me drew the malice of her
tyrant into open acts of oppression, loading her with calumny most gross and
injurious, and racking her too sensitive feelings, till her tender frame gave
way, and sunk under the attack; it is to me, therefore, belongs the punishment
of that monster, for it is I who have been made the plea and apology for his
abominable cruelty. Her death, which Heaven avert, would set my hands at
liberty, and as I have an auspicious impression on my mind that time will
shortly reveal the present mystery of my birth, I may then be in possession of
a name cowardice cannot shrink from; and when his pride can no longer shelter
itself in the obscurity of my person, his cunning will no longer be able to
evade the terror of my appeal. Here then you see the motives of my journey to
Lisbon, and rightly suggest that they are in some respects congenial with your
own. Undiminished affection on your part, and ardent gratitude on mine, attract
us to the same point; and this being the case, I should humbly conceive it will
be our mutual wish to wait her arrival in this port, and, if she has no
objection, to embark with her in the same packet, if your health serves for the
undertaking."

"You speak my wishes correctly," replied the father; "and as for my health, it
is so secondary an object, compared to here is, that I do not suffer it to occupy
a single thought." As these words were uttering, a chaise came in sight,
followed by another, and by two servants on horseback. Henry started at the
sight, and exclaimed, "My God! here is the very lady herself." Then calling to
the postillion to stop, he hastily opened the door of the chaise, and leaping
out, planted himself by the side of the road, which it was necessary for the
approaching carriages to take.

Henry, though greatly agitated, was not wanting in sufficient presence of mind
to be cautious in his mode of stopping Lady Crowbery's carriage, which he did
as gently and as silently as he could contrive. When he presented himself at
the window, the exhausted traveller had raised herself up to enquire into the
cause of the stop, when immediately as her eyes lighted on the face of her son,
the blood rushed into her faded cheeks, and she exclaimed -- "My Henry! my
Henry! is it possible?" and was proceeding; when, to save her from unseasonable
exertions, he told his story in as few words as possible, omitting for the
present the circumstance of his meeting with his father, who remained in his
chaise, drawn out of the road at some distance.

He had taken the precaution to secure her quiet apartments in a private house,
and having directed her drivers to follow his chaise, he left her, and returned
to his father, whom he found in great agitation of spirits. It was agreed
between them that Henry should prepare Lady Crowbery, before Mr. Delapoer
attempted to see her; and as soon therefore as he had entered the town he
quitted the chaise, and conducted Lady Crowbery's people to the door of the
house he had taken for her.

Here she alighted, and between Henry and Doctor Cawdle was conducted to her
apartment, which, presenting her with a fine view of the sea, and being both in
point of aspect and interior accommodations much to her liking, seemed to have
the effect of reviving her spirits, exhilarated no doubt by the sight, above
all others, of her beloved Henry.

Honest Zachary, little less delighted than his patient at this unexpected
meeting, now let out the circumstance, hitherto suppressed by Henry, of the
action Carry had had, which he had picked up by report upon the road, but
prudently forbore to speak of. This forced our hero upon a narrative of the
whole affair, in which he took not the glory to himself that was due, but in
all other particulars was a very correct relater of facts. Zachary now began
his journal, and traveled very circumstantially from London to Falmouth,
commenting upon his own sagacious proceedings by the way, to which he very
justly ascribed the success that had hitherto crowned his operations; and
certain it was, the health and strength of the lady did not appear, to Henry's
observation, to have suffered much, if any, diminution by the journey. A
restorative was now administered, on which Zachary descanted with much
learning, and at the same time pronounced, that a repose of some days would be
indispensible for her Ladyship's safety, before she embarked on board the
packet. A fresh supply of certain drugs being wanted, he sallied forth in
search of a proper shop, from whence to replenish his stock. As soon as he was
gone, the mother being left with her son, threw her arms about his neck, and
gave full vent to those exquisite sensations which nature and affection,
hitherto repressed, had implanted in her soul. Moments so free and mutually
delicious they had never yet enjoyed; they exchanged embraces and mingled
tears, till Henry, recollecting that even joy may be too violent, gently
extricated himself from her embrace, rose from her feet where he was kneeling,
and having seated himself at her side, clasping one of her hands in his, she
began a conversation, which will be recorded in the following chapter.

CHAPTER VI. Friends long divided meet at last.
"I HAVE received a letter," said the Lady Crowbery, "from my uncle Manstock,
which occasioned me to make a longer stay in London than I should else have
made; it obliged me to send down my lawyer, to receive from his hands the
packet containing my will and other papers, which I had deposited with him.
What particular reasons he had for declining a trust, that he had willingly
accepted, is matter of conjecture only; but I suppose they proceed from some
suspicion entertained of your attachment to Isabella, and here is to you, for
which he is probably indebted to the kind suggestions of his friend Mr.
Claypole, from whose resentment, upon being refused the living of our lamented
Ratcliffe, I have every thing malicious to expect. If, then, my uncle will
surrender up his understanding to that unworthy guide, can I help it? I have
appointed my executor, and shall put into your hands a copy of my will, with
full directions where to apply for the original, which I have lodged with Mr. G
--, of Gray's Inn, a man in whose integrity the most sacred trust may be
reposed. But how far this change of opinion in Sir Roger Manstock may affect
his amiable daughter is a question of very serious concern; for, if I
understand his letter rightly, you are put under absolute proscription; nor do
I expect she will be allowed to correspond with me, unless my letters are
submitted to inspection before they reach her hands; and as for her writing to
me, I do not suppose she will be suffered to do it on any account; you see,
therefore, in what light you stand; and, according to your own feelings, must
either prepare yourself for mortification and disappointment, if you persist in
thinking of her; or, if you can let your judgment overruled your passion, you
will divert your thoughts from a pursuit that now seems hopeless; for to
attempt at detaching Isabella from the strict observance of her father's
commands is an undertaking as impracticable as it would be dishonorable."

"That is an attempt," replied Henry; "I shall never make; for that would be to
ruin myself both in her esteem and my own. Interdicted by her father, I am
excluded from all hope; at the same time, if I know my own heart, I know that
time can work no change in its affections; and if I am totally to despair of
Isabella, so long as it shall please Heaven to impose upon a wretched creature
life bereft of all happiness, so long I shall, with all the resignation that
becomes me, endure the dispensation; for it is not my nature to rebel against
my Creator."

"I perceive," said the mother, "that your love, my dear Henry, lies deep, and
is immovable; hasty passions waste themselves in vehement asseverations; the
flame burns out, and there is an end to them, but yours is fixed deliberate
approbation, therefore I shall not argue against it; on the contrary, I must
confess to you, that before I parted from Isabella, I confided to her the
secret of your birth; I owned myself your mother, and disclosed to her the
whole purport of those papers, which I deposited with her father, to be opened
only on the event of my decease. She knows you, therefore, for the son of
Delapoer, the heir of my estate, and, perhaps, of his fortune, if he has
returned, as I am informed, without connections, and in affluent circumstances.
In her heart, therefore, I should flatter myself you will keep your place,
unless my uncle should extort from her any promise to your absolute exclusion.
In the mean time, I could wish, before I die, to obtain, if possible, an
interview with your father, who is unconscious of your existence, and which
might have taken place but for the provoking oversight of honest Cawdle, who
forgot to give you my note with the ring. Whilst I was in London, I caused
enquiry to be made after Delapoer; I was informed he remained unmarried, had
preserved an excellent character, and brought home a respectable fortune, very
honorably acquired; he was not in town, nor was it exactly known where he was
gone, for he had neither house nor servants in London, and the report was, that
he was going out of England for the winter, to a warmer climate. It occurs to
me, therefore, that if he has heard of my being ordered to Lisbon, he may
possibly make that his point."

"And should you be well pleased if it was so?" demanded Henry. -- "I confess
to you, I should not be sorry," replied the lady, "for the reasons I have
already stated." -- "Then I may venture to inform you," said Henry, "that he
was with me in the chaise when I met you on the road." At these words the blood
rushed into the cheeks of the feeble invalid, her eyes sparkled with joy, and
she exclaimed with unusual energy, "How wonderful are the ways of Providence!
What an unexpected blessing, that I am now permitted to be a happy instrument
of a discovery like this! Let me see him without loss of time; let me not
postpone, even for an hour, a duty so important, an opportunity so graciously
offered. I take for granted, you have not declared yourself to him." He assured
her he had not. "Then run for him," she cried; "bring him to me this instant;
nature struggles at my heart, and will not be restrained."

Henry was gone whilst the words were on her lips: she immediately gave orders
to her servants to prevent interruption, and then began to collect her thoughts
for the awful interview. Whilst she reflected on the extraordinary combination
of events that had brought about this unexpected meeting, it inspired her to
hope, that Heaven had sealed her pardon for the past offenses of her youth, and
brought her sufferings to a period. When she endeavored to put her thoughts
into some form of words, and prepare for the discovery she had to make, she
found herself incapable of arranging her ideas, and gave up the attempt. "It is
in vain," she cried, "to meditate on what I am to say; I must leave it to
nature and the impulse of the moment." And now the voice of Henry in the house
warned her of his approach; and soon she heard the steps of two men upon the
stairs; when the door being opened, presented to her view the sickly and
emaciated form of Delapoer, leaning on the arm of his conductor, trembling as
he advanced toward her, and panting for breath through faintness and
agitation. Henry instantly retired: not a word was uttered by either of the
parties; she made an effort to raise herself from her seat, but sunk back, and,
putting her hands before her face, burst into tears. There was a chair beside
her, in which Delapoer sat down. "How shall I express my thanks to you," he
said, after a short pause, "for this indulgence? Providence seems to have
brought us together, by the most extraordinary means, in the last scene of our
life's sad tragedy, that we may once more exchange a parting look upon the
ruins of time before we separate to our unchangeable destinations. Your lot, my
ever-beloved lady, I am persuaded will be blessed; you have labored much, and
will reap abundantly, I snatched a sight of you at Crowbery; it was too much
for an exhausted frame; I have been sinking ever since; for I heard you was
unhappy, and my heart rose against your tyrant, though discretion stopped my hand.
I passed several days about the purlieus of your castle, disguising both my
name and habit, lest I might awaken the suspicion of your jailer: I met that
excellent young man, who accompanied me hither, and sent you a pledge by his
hands, which I thought you would understand as a token I was yet alive. Ever
since the inexorable decree that tore us from each other, I have been
struggling with my hard fortune, in the hope of earning, by my sword and
services, a competency to enable me to return an independent man; but alas! a
variety of crosses and misfortunes bore so strong upon me for a course of
eighteen years, that, until the last few months of my abode in India, I was
toiling against the stream of adversity; at length, one lucky expedition, of
which I had the conduct, presented to me the alternative of enormous plunder
with a guilty conscience, or moderate earnings with a clear one; I chose the
latter, and am now returned, affluent in circumstances, and, I thank God,
irreproachable in character. Never, during this tedious period, did the eye of
beauty, Indian or English, draw aside one thought, one wish, one, even the
slightest, regard, from the center where first love, and the memory of my
ever-ador'd Cecilia, had fixed it for life. The vow that I had made, so sealed,
so sanctified, so rivetted into the very heart of honor, was to me a marriage
vow -- but, I perceive, I give you pain; let me not do that; my expressions,
though strong, were only binding on myself; you was not free; you had a father,
whom you was forced to obey, and, I implore you to believe they were not
pointed against your proceeding; I can well suppose your marriage with a wretch
like Crowbery was a compulsory one."

"It was, indeed," replied she, raising her eyes for the first time, and
turning them upon him in the most affecting manner; "it was imposed upon me,
not only as a command, which I could not disobey, but as an atonement for an
offense, which I could no otherwise expiate."

"Gracious Heaven!" he exclaimed; "and was my unhappy Cecilia made to atone for
an offense, for which I, vile betrayer as I was, am alone responsible? It is I,
then, who am the source of all your sorrows; I, to whose unceasing
solicitations your kind heart at last reluctantly gave way; I have been the
hateful cause of all your sufferings, like the deceiver of our first parents,
the father of all evil."

"Not so," rejoined she hastily; "say, rather, you have been the father of my
only blessing."

"What do you mean?" he exclaimed, in a tone of impatience and surprise. "Speak
to me, I beseech you, without reserve; lead me the straitest way to truth, for
you have stirred a thought within my heart that will not bear evasion or delay.
Am I a father? answer me."

"You are, you are a father," she replied; "and Henry is your son."

As she spoke these words, Delapoer's senses seemed lost in astonishment; he
smote his hands together in a transport of joy, gazed upon her eagerly for a
while, then cast his eyes to Heaven; his lips moved, but no voice was heard;
then throwing himself back in his chair, he seemed lost in meditation, till,
roused to sudden recollection, he adjured her, in the most solemn terms, to
confirm the truth of what she had told him by an appeal to Heaven. "I take
Heaven to witness," she replied, "to the truth of what I have said; conscious
as I am that the Judge is at the door, in whose presence I must soon appear, I
repeat to you, at the peril of my soul, were I capable of deceit, that Henry is
your son and mine." -- "I am satisfied," cried Delapoer; and, dropping on his
knees, broke forth into prayers and praises to the Supreme Disposer of all
events. She then imparted to him the purport of her will, and briefly related
what had passed between her uncle and herself since her departure from
Manstock. When he found she had confided the secret to no one but Isabella,
except Henry himself and Zachary, who was professionally made privy to it, he
paused for some time, and then demanded, why he alone might not stand forth to
the world as the father of Henry, without committing her name in any future
time. "Let it remain a mystery," he said; "or, at most, a surmise. Why should
we give that triumph to the malice of Lord Crowbery? why should we put to shame
the family pride of Sir Roger Manstock? I have fortune enough to bestow upon my
son; and the first lawyer that is capable of drawing a deed of gift shall
secure the reversion of my whole property to him. As for your paternal estate,
bequeath it in it is natural course, so that no suspicion rest upon your memory."

"Your suggestion," said the lady, "is truly generous; but it is far too
important to be adopted without due reflection: my uncle Manstock has but one
child, and she a daughter; she is already superabundantly endowed; and to
accumulate estates upon the heiress of that wealthy house, is mere
supererogation; unless our Henry, who is master of her affections, was as much
in favor with the father."

"Cannot it be left conditionally, upon her marrying Henry?" said Delapoer. --
Lady Crowbery shook her head, and remarked, that this would little differ, in
appearance to the world, from an absolute bequest to him. "Yet if I could
depend," added she, "upon her attachment to Henry, or, rather, I should say,
upon her father's consent, all might be well; and my son, through her medium,
would still be my heir: but there is little reliance on my uncle, whilst he is
under influence hostile to my wishes."

"Did you not say," he rejoined, "that Miss Manstock was privy to the secret of
our Henry's birth? If so, it is to be presumed, you have perfect confidence in
her honor; you also believe she is attached to him, else you would not have
trusted her with an unnecessary secret: how then can this young lady, knowing
Henry to be your son, act otherwise by your estate than either share it with
him as his wife, or restore it to him as your heir?"

"There is much argument," she replied, "in what you say; and, I believe, more
true honor does not exist in a human heart, than in my cousin Isabella's; but,
after all, we must talk with Henry." This was the most immediate wish of
Delapoer's heart, who was longing to embrace a son justly so dear to him; --
and now he recited to Lady Crowbery the whole narrative of the action, dwelling
with rapture upon the bravery and humanity of our hero: the sensations it
produced in a mother's heart need not be described, and it is well they need
not, for I should doubt if they can.

In short, we hold our readers in too much respect to sicken them with our
descriptive powers, convinced that there is no incident arising from this
history, or any other of the kind, which may not be referred to their feelings
in natural language, without those tedious circumlocutory embellishments, which
only serve to load the page. I trust they will not think the worse of my
females, if they are not drowned in floods of tears upon every occasion, or
fall into fainting fits with excess of sensibility; for to such as are pleased
with these tricks we do not write, contented to devote our labors to the
friends of nature, and to them alone.

CHAPTER VII. Our Hero is restored to both his Parents.
OUR readers need not be reminded, that the hero of this history knew Delapoer
to be his father before he was called to a conference upon the proposal stated
in the preceding chapter. The meeting took place in Lady Crowbery's presence;
and the nameless foundling, whom adversity had so lately crushed, now heard
himself acknowledged, and felt the animating pressure of a parental embrace, by
turns bestowed upon him, with praises, prayers and blessings, superadded in
abundance.

"Son," cried Lady Crowbery, "it has now pleased Heaven to let me see this
hour, which closes every wish that my fond heart conceived, and blesses me
beyond what I have ever merited, or can compute. I have lived to place you in
the protection of a father, I have survived to behold you clasped in his
embrace; and what can I say -- but that the transport is unutterable? A term of
life beyond what may suffice to execute the few maternal ties that are yet
unfinished, is what I dare not, what I do not pray for, Let us not therefore
loiter, for the time is short; let us work while it is day, for darkness and
death are at hand. There is a business to be done, upon which I must consult
you. My paternal estate is, as you know, in my disposal; it is yours: on whom
but on my son can I bestow it?" -- "Not so," replied Henry; "bestowing it on
me, you avow me as your son, and bequeath your name to detraction and disgrace.
Suppose (which Heaven forbid!) Lord Crowbery survives you, what will he say?
outrageous insult to your memory will ensue: this may be repelled, you will say;
but what can be opposed to Sir Roger Manstock's discontent? If he will not
suffer you to leave a paper in his hands, upon the suspicion only of my name
being found in it, how will he resent a will, that is to make me the heir of
your estate, to the exclusion of his family?" -- "And if Isabella inherits it,"
said the mother, "what then?" -- "Then she who best deserves it, has it,"
replied Henry; "and as no earthly blessing can accrue to me, but what
originates with her, you put my fate into her hands, who is the mistress of it,
whether you so consider her, or not. To her I am known; by her alone I can be
made happy; if I have any interest dear to me upon earth, it is to recommend
myself to her thoughts; and, therefore, what can best do that, is best for my
interest: let the lovely Isabella then possess what she is entitled to, of
which, if any share devolves to me, let her bestow it with herself: I cannot be
too rich in fortune's gifts, with Isabella to partake of them; without her I
shall be beyond the reach of fortune, nothing can lessen or augment my
wretchedness."

"Oh, my dear son," cried Delapoer, "how perfectly you speak my sentiments! I
adopt your reasoning, nay, rather, I anticipate it, for it is exactly what I
recommended to your beloved mother. I have enough, and all I have is yours."

The business was no further pressed, for the conference had been long, and
Lady Crowbery seemed exhausted: she was silent, but it was a silence that
betokened acquiescence. As the business could not be done to her satisfaction
without the presence of her confidential lawyer Mr. G --, who was in possession
of papers, which, according to this plan, it behoved her to cancel, she
determined to write to him by express, and request him to come down to her, if
his business admitted of it, in person, else to dispatch some trusty and
sufficient proxy, who might act in his place: the intermediate time was not
longer than seemed requisite for her case, which now became more and more
doubtful; for Zachary, who began to assume a very pensive aspect, had taken a
medical assessor into council, and both joined in pronouncing that unless some
favorable and speedy change took place, the project of embarking her for
Lisbon must be abandoned. Delapoer and Henry saw these inauspicious symptoms in
the same melancholy light, and drew the most desponding conclusions from them.
One evening, when they were in anxious expectation of Mr. G --, Henry,
perceiving that his mother would be glad to dispense with Zachary's attendance,
drew him aside, and, walking down to the beach, began to question him about his
patient, expressing himself as without hope of her recovery, and under
momentary terrors of her immediate dissolution. To this Zachary replied, that
although be saw that sad event in approach, and, in his own judgment, regarded
it as inevitable, yet he conjectured that she would have a gradual and
lingering dismission out of life, without pain or loss of senses; and that no
rapid, or immediate, dissolution was to be apprehended. "I hope therefore,"
added he, "our dear lady will yet find time and capacity to settle her affairs
to your satisfaction and advantage, and put you in a situation to propose for
the loveliest girl in England, to whom, I perceive, you are very seriously
attached." No answer being returned to this, he proceeded -- "For my own part,
I am persuaded there is no love lost between you, as the saying is; and if you
have left your heart with Miss Manstock in pledge, you have taken here is away
with you in possession; for I am no indifferent physiognomist, and not apt to
be out in my conjectures as to the human heart. I had a little private talk
with the young lady during our halt at Manstock House; and, I believe, my
friend, I did your cause no harm by what I said on that occasion." -- "The less
you said, the better," Henry coldly replied. -- "Come, come, young gentleman,"
resumed Zachary, "you are too modest, too diffident; it is not the first time
you have stood in your own light with the ladies: And that puts me in mind of
my poor boozy dame, who has now, I suppose, drank up her drink, and sleeps in
peace. Alexander Kinloch writes me word, and I have this morning received his
letter, that she is absolutely at death's door. Well! God's will be done; I
must bear it with christian patience; Mors omnibus communis." -- Here the
Doctor took out his handkerchief, and, in conformity to custom upon such
occasions, applied it to his eyes; where, if there had been a tear, no doubt
the aforesaid handkerchief would have done its duty, and disposed of it. "But I
must prepare myself to expect the worst," added he; "for if death be at the
door, and none but Sawney Kinloch to keep him out, why it is natural to
conclude, that all is over with my poor dame. To be sure she had her failings,
as who has not? but custom familiariz'd me to them. She certainly made some
trips in point of fidelity to my bed, but then she was over-partial to the
brandy-bottle, and that accounts for her incontinence, you know, very
naturally. She was a little over-righteous, it must be owned, and saddled me
with the saints rather more than was agreeable; but then her religion was mere
hypocrisy, so that I could not quarrel with her on that account. She was
something of a termagant, I cannot deny; told a pretty many untruths, and bred
a pretty many disturbances in my family; but then she did the same by all her
neighbors as by me, so that I had no cause in particular to complain of her;
and, upon the whole, have as much reason to regret the loss of my wife, as most
husbands have to lament for their's."

"Well, my good master," said Henry smiling, "notwithstanding all these good
qualities which you have counted up, I am in hopes you will hear your loss with
tolerable composure, and that your days to come will not pass the less to your
content because you have no longer a wife in existence, who answers to the
description you have been giving: At least I hope life may be tolerable, though
you have neither sot, slut, nor shrew in your house, to entertain you: and as
the time, I fear, is not far off, when you will have a real friend to lament, I
foresee that your professional cares will not long survive your domestic ones,
and in that case you will have to look out for a successor in your business.
Should that be the case, and should Alexander Kinloch not be the man that
answers to your wishes, I beg you will let me recommend to you a friend of
mine, for whose sufficiency, in all respects, I will make myself responsible:
the person I speak of is your quondam assistant, Mr. William Williams, at
present Surgeon of Captain Carey's frigate, a man very highly to be esteemed
for his private character, and of whose abilities, in every branch of his
profession, I am bold to promise, you may be furnished with the strongest
testimonials." -- To this Zachary replied, that he had a very high opinion of
Williams, and without hesitation should prefer him to every other proponent,
not only in respect to Henry's good wishes for him, but on the score of his own
merit: as for the old Scotchman, he protested against him in any other capacity
than as a cheap drudge at the mortar, if Williams chose to continue him there,
which however he should not be very forward to advise.

This matter being adjusted to Henry's satisfaction, he now perceived a chaise
and four stop at Lady Crowbery's door; and running to it, had the gratification
of finding that Mr. G -- himself had complied with that Lady's request, and
come down in person. A short conversation with that excellent man soon opened
to him a character, in which integrity is so prominent, that nature, in the
formation of it, seemed determined so to place her work as that no one should
overlook or mistake it. It will suffice therefore to say, that every thing was
done, acording to the will of the testatrix, which method in business and
correctness in form could effect: the same opportunity also served for Mr.
Delapoer to make his promised settlement on his son our hero; and this being
done, our honest lawyer (and as such we venture to pronounce him one of the
worthiest members of the community) returned to his station in life; where we
hope he will long abide, to protect the property of his clients, and enliven
the society of his friends.

CHAPTER VIII. A gentle Being drops into the Grave.
A Few days had passed after the departure of Mr. G --, when the Lady Crowbery,
perceiving her small remains of strength hourly on the decline, communicated to
her friends her total abandonment of all hope of stirring from the spot she was
in; at the same time expressing her acquiescence in the call of Providence, and
the thankfulness with which she should obey the summons, in the presence of
those who were dearest to her in this world. She still found strength, by
intervals, to write a farewell letter to her unworthy Lord, also one of a very
affectionate cast to her uncle Manstock, both which she committed to the post:
to Isabella she likewise wrote, on a subject more important to her than that of
taking leave for life, as it respected the future happiness of her beloved son,
and explained (in terms, however, the most delicate) her implied hopes and
views in the disposition she had made of her estate; and this letter she put
into Henry's hands, referring it to his discretion in what manner, and at what
period, to make use of it.

To Zachary Cawdle she bequeathed an annuity of three hundred pounds a year,
chargeable upon her estate, to be paid quarterly and punctually. In small
legacies to servants, and charitable donations, a further sum was involved, for
which due provision was made, and direction given. Of Henry no mention was to
be found in her will; but both to him and his father she gave, with her own
hands, several little articles, valuable only as tokens of affection and
pledges of remembrance. Every thing that personally belonged to her in Crowbery
Castle, of which she had many particulars, were left to the Lord of that
mansion; the residue was bequeathed in trust to Sir Roger Manstock, for the use
and benefit of Isabella, without entail, and at her free disposal, when she
should attain the age of eighteen years, of which there yet remained some
months only before her nonage should expire.

Neither her senses nor spirits seemed to yield at the approach of death; every
morning she was conveyed from her bed to a couch in her sitting-room, which had
a pleasant view of the sea and shore. Here she was constantly attended by one
or both of her beloved friends, whose tender assiduities cheared her to her
latest moments; she took particular delight in listening to Delapoer's
narrative of his adventures in India, which he contrived to render both
interesting and entertaining to her, introducing it at such times only as she
seemed to call for it, and in such proportions as might not weary her
attention, or too forcibly agitate her feelings. -- She also, in her turn, had
a story to relate, which, though told with great mitigation toward Lord
Crowbery, and with the suppression of many cruel circumstances in his conduct,
and sufferings on her part, was not always heard with the temper and patience
that she wished to inspire. Delapoer, in spite of all his caution, would
sometimes give way to the warmth of his natural character, and once or twice,
to her sensible regret, broke forth into menaces and denunciations. These she
would, with anxious solicitude, strive to qualify and repress. "If you love me,
Delapoer," she would say, "you will remember my words after death, and not
disgrace my memory, or disturb my spirit in the grave, by a revengeful and
violent proceeding toward Lord Crowbery. Had he been indulgent and kind to me,
how severely would my conscience have reproached me; and if, on the contrary,
he has been somewhat harsh and ungentle, cannot you recollect enough, both
committed and omitted on my part, to extenuate, if not to warrant, his
unkindness? You Will say my marriage was a compulsory one -- it is true it was so;
but still I was a party, though a most unwilling one, in the imposition that was
put upon him: in my heart he never could obtain a place; I paid him obedience
-- I had no more to bestow."

The last conversation of this sort she had with Delapoer was on the evening
preceding the day on which she died: she was fervent in prayer that her errors
might be pardoned, and, in the most solemn manner, conjured him to conspire
with her in atonement, by giving double diligence to the performance of those
duties which their joint offense had entailed upon them in the person of their
son. Whilst she was thus addressing him, Delapoer, who was supporting her as
she sat erect on the couch, perceived a convulsive symptom in the muscles
about her mouth, which gave him instant alarm: and the eager look with which he
pursued his observation, convinced her that some change had happened in her
features to occasion it. -- "Ah! my dear friend," she said, "I understand your
looks, I am dying; perhaps I am disfigured; if so, leave me, I implore you; do
not let the last impression of this face, which you once beheld with pleasure,
remain upon your memory with disgust and horror. If I am fit to be seen, let me
thus expire, supported in your arms; if not, farewell for ever; let my servants
be called, and let me not shock either you or my son with an object so
distressing." As she faintly uttered these words, she put her hands before her
face, which Delapoer gently clasped in his, assuring her, that her suspicion
was unfounded, and that her features indicated no such symptoms as she
apprehended. He soon after rung the bell, when Henry entered hastily, followed
by Zachary and two female attendants: Henry threw himself on his knees by the
side of her couch, and continued for some minutes enfolded in her arms, in
speechless agony; for he also perceived the change, and saw the hand of death
was upon her. A convulsive tremor now seized her whole frame, and she sunk down
on her couch insensible, while the Doctor exhorted them to leave her to the
care of himself and the women. Through the remainder of the night she dosed
with short intervals, in which she appeared to have some degree of
recollection, but never uttered a word or seemed to experience a pain; at an
early hour of the morning, she drew her last sigh and expired. The father and
the son were standing by the side of the bed at that awful moment, and the
smile, which love impressed upon her features, as her eyes caught a parting
sight of them, before they closed for ever, remained after death, as if to tell
the beholders that her soul, unwilling to derange the beautiful frame in which
it had been encased, had left its peace behind it, whilst it conveyed itself
away to the mansions of immortality and bliss.

CHAPTER IX. Our History presents a Scene, not very flattering to Human Nature.
WE have now closed the history of the amiable but unhappy Lady Crowbery, and
we would fain hope that such of our readers as are parents, will think the
moral of her fate not unworthy of their consideration and reflection.

One of the first duties that devolved upon her afflicted friends, was to give
information of the mournful event to her absent connections. This business was
undertaken by Doctor Zachary, who immediately penned a respectful epistle to
Sir Roger Manstock; and also one in like terms to the Lord Viscount Crowbery,
which were sent off by express.

Delapoer and his son determined upon staying by the remains of their lamented
friend, till orders should be received from Lord Crowbery respecting the
funeral; and Henry took an early opportunity of making his friend Captain Carey
acquainted with the sad event, that had now occasioned him to decline all
thoughts of rejoining the victorious frigate. The return of the post brought
him the following answer from that gallant officer: -- My dear friend,
I loved and respected my relation Lady Crowbery, as much as I despise and
abhor the wretch, who not only shortened but embittered her days; and I lament
her sad fate and your loss, from the bottom of my heart. Bear up, however, my
brave fellow, and when you are weary of the shore, remember you have a
mess-mate, who so long as he has a plank to float on, will be proud to approve
himself yours on all occasions, most sincerely and affectionately,

-- CAREY.


The messenger in the mean time, who was charged with the mournful tidings of
his lady's death, proceeded on his way with all possible expedition; and
according to his instructions, first presented himself at the castle of his
Lord, and delivered his dispatch. It was received and read in the company of
the Reverend Mr. Claypole and Miss Fanny; the former of whom had deported
himself with all possible address, and enjoyed the satisfaction of
contemplating the flattering prospect, that every hour brought nearer to his
view, from the increasing attachment of that noble personage to his amiable
niece. An uncle, more sensitive to appearances, or less persuaded of the purity
of the female character, might have proved a troublesome guest to a nobleman of
his Lordship's irritable feelings at certain moments, when the vehemence of his
passion carried him beyond the bounds, which some people of more rigid notions
would have thought a little on the outside of discretion; but Mr. Claypole was
not one of these formal disciplinarians, and accommodated himself to times and
seasons with admirable facility. With a soul superior to suspicion, he heeded
not those innocent dalliances that passed between the lovers, whilst he had the
resource of a book, or a walk, and sometimes of a nap in his chair, to fill up
an hour when conversation was suspended, and dumb-shew took place of dialogue.

Captain Crowbery was upon a visit to a friend in a distant country, so that
the society of the castle was very much confined, and their harmony seldom if
ever interrupted by the intrusion of unwelcome visitors. Miss Fanny possessed
the apartment of the absent lady, and had already made some arrangements in the
disposition and furniture of it, which she asserted, and my Lord acknowledged,
to be very striking improvements. Two or three old domestics, who had
considered themselves as appertaining to the lady of the house, were now very
naturally regarded as supernumeraries; and upon a principle of economy, which
the Reverend Mr. Claypole took all proper occasions to inculcate, were paid off
and dismissed. One or two of these, who had belonged to Lady Crowbery's family
from their youth, and were past the age of service, were entertained by Sir
Roger Manstock, and charitably enrolled amongst his band of pensioners; the
others sought their livelihood where they could find it. By an arrangement with
the parson of Crowbery, the Reverend Mr. Claypole took the duty of that parish
upon himself, and transferred to him the service of the church at Manstock; to
which Sir Roger very willingly accorded, from motives, that in candor we must
acknowledge to have had some respect to his own ease and convenience, as well
as to the aforesaid Mr. Claypole's. No intercourse whatever had in the mean
time passed between the allied houses of Crowbery and Manstock; few souls were
less akin than those of their owners and their respective associates.

No charge could be laid against Mother Nature, for having misapplied her
workmanship upon the mould in which she had cast the person of Lord Crowbery;
nay, on the contrary, it should seem she had both tempered and modelled it with
the most accurate attention, and harmonized it to the soul which it enveloped
with the nicest art. No man of common observation could receive a false
impression of his Lordship's character from the first glance of his exterior.
Nature had not given to him the outward semblance of any one virtue, dignity or
endowment, which he did not mentally possess; neither was there one moral
failing or defect to be found in the journal of his life, which might not
figuratively be said to stand recorded in the title page of that history: In
short, if he had had hypocrisy enough to affect the manners of a gentleman,
nobody but a fool would have been capable of being duped by him.

This accomplished Peer, though not quite fitted in all particulars to fill up
the vacancy which Henry had left in the soft heart of Miss Fanny, nevertheless
was encouraged by that young lady to believe that he was in absolute possession
of it. To develope her motives for deceiving him into this opinion might be an
unpleasant investigation; but when we have said that ambition and revenge were
of the party, it is not necessary to search for others to make up the number.
This young lady and his Lordship were just then engaged in conversation on a
very interesting topic, whilst the Reverend Mr. Claypole had dropped asleep on a
sopha that filled up a recess in the room; when the servant arrived from
Falmouth with the letter, which announced the death of Lady Crowbery. His
Lordship read it with a countenance, that did not indicate any of those
weaknesses, which human nature sometimes is betrayed into upon a sudden
surprise. He perused it with a steady eye, folded it up again with a firm hand,
and putting it into his pocket, in a tone of voice which abated nothing of its
usual energy, coolly observed, that the expected event was come to pass -- Lady
Crowbery was dead.

Miss Fanny started from her seat, with an exclamation very frequently applied
by ladies of her fashion, to express either joy, sorrow, surprise or any other
passion, that attacks their gentle spirits unawares. At the same instant the
reverend sleeper sprung from his couch, ready prepared to second any emotion
that his noble friend might be pleased to express, either of joy or sorrow: his
noble friend did not as yet discover to which party he was disposed to incline,
therefore Mr. Claypole judiciously kept silence, and held his faculties
suspended in a neutral state, till circumstances should determine them. "I
guessed how this scheme to Lisbon would end," cried the Peer. -- "Yes," replied
the Parson, "I suspected it would terminate as it has done, when that booby of
an apothecary took upon him the charge of her ladyship's constitution." -- "A
pretty fellow truly," resumed my Lord, "to be traveling physician to a woman
of quality! but I can understand nothing from his letter, but that his patient
has slipped through his hands; therefore, with your leave, I shall step into my
library, and try what information may be gathered from the messenger." -- This
said, he rose from his chair, and calmly stalked out of the room.

The uncle and niece were now set free from all restraint, and soon began to
let loose their sentiments upon this interesting event, without reserve: -- "I
judged her case to be desperate," cried the uncle; "she was a lost woman when I
saw her at Manstock. I cannot say she gave me any great reason to lament her
loss: if I ever had any obligations to her, she canceled them all by her last
haughty treatment of me, when I modestly made suit for the poor favor of
succeeding Parson Ratcliffe." To this the niece made no answer, nor indeed had
she paid any attention, as her mind was just then engaged in computing the
period of a widower's first mourning; and as this meditation involved her in
some dilemma, she abruptly appealed to her uncle, whether it was totally out of
form for his Lordship to be married, before he was out of weepers and black
gloves: "That is as it may be," replied the uncle, "some people judge in those
matters with more liberality and latitude than others; I am no great critic in
forms, but this I know, that the sooner you bring his Lordship to the point, my
dear Fanny, the better;" -- "Why that is done already," cried the Lady elect,
"the point is carried, and I have his honor in pledge; else can you suppose I
would admit?" -- "Certainly not," cried Claypole, interrupting her; "I cannot
doubt but you know the ground you are upon, and therefore it is that I have
never interposed my advice; but now that there is no longer any obstacle, I
should recommend you to hold back, till he fulfils his engagements: a
seasonable reserve may quicken desire, too much kindness may chance to quell
it." -- "I believe," cried the niece, "I am fully capable of conducting myself
in this affair, without resorting to an adviser; where there is no passion at
the heart, it is not likely there should be any error in the judgment, and I
flatter myself you do me justice to believe, I am not in love with the person
of Lord Crowbery: he is not a Henry to catch the eye or engage the heart, but
he is a Peer of England, has a good estate and a noble castle, which, when I am
the mistress of, I confess the triumph it will give me over that provoking chit
Isabella, whom I hate and detest at my heart, will not be amongst the least of
my enjoyments."

Lord Crowbery, in the meantime, having asked a few trifling questions of the
bearer of the letter, dismissed him, and sent for his agent lawyer Ferret, to
whom he dictated the following lines, by way of answer to the questions
referred to him in Zachary's dispatch:

Mr. Cawdle, Sir,
I am commanded by the Lord Viscount Crowbery to say, that he has received
yours of the 19th ultimo, informing him of the death of your patient on the
morning of that day. With respect to your further enquiries, touching the
burial ceremonies, his Lordship bids me tell you he has no answer to give: the
heir or heirs of the deceased, whoever they may be, will act as they see fit in
the case: you have no instructions to expect from him.

I am, Sir, your humble servant, JOHN JEFFERY FERRET.


CHAPTER X. The Scene is shifted to Manstock House.
WHEN the messenger arrived at Manstock House, Sir Roger was just returned home
from the county town, where he had been unanimously elected representative in
parliament. The mournful news caused deep affliction both to him and the
sensitive Isabella; the same servant was charged with a verbal message from
Lord Crowbery, signifying that he declined interfering with any wishes Sir
Roger might have, respecting the place of burial and the disposal of the
remains; he added, that when the will was opened he presumed he should have
notice. Sir Roger well understood the spirit of this message, and properly felt
both the insult and the meanness it implied. The instant he could compose his
thoughts sufficiently for the purpose, he wrote to Zachary Cawdle, requiring
him to transmit the body with all proper decorum and attendance, fitting the
quality of the deceased, by easy stages to the family vault of her ancestors,
at her paternal seat of Hagley Hall, where himself and his daughter purposed to
be in waiting to receive it, and to pay the last honors to the corpse of his
most dear and lamented niece. The business this involved him in, had probably
the effect of occupying so much of his time and thoughts, that grief had the
less opportunity of fixing upon him; but the tender Isabella, who had not so
full a share of those avocations, surrendered herself to melancholy and
desponding meditations. In her breast also there was lodged a secret of most
serious import; and in the mean time she had no instructions how to dispose of
it; these she expected to receive by some hand or other, but what to wish she
knew not; whether they should be to impart it to her father, or still to
conceal it from him, was an alternative that offered nothing to her reflection,
but difficulties and distresses on both sides: that Henry should be left heir
to his mother's estate, was naturally to be expected, but how he could be named
or described in her will, without a discovery of his birth, was what she could
not comprehend: the papers that had been written for her father's inspection
after her cousin's death, she knew had been destroyed, and that purpose
revoked: she apprehended, therefore, that some order would come to her for
divulging it to Sir Roger; and this was a task which of all earthly
undertakings was most dreadful to her: In the meantime the preparations were
put forward for the journey, and servants were dispatched beforehand to get the
house in order to receive them, and to set on foot all the preliminary
ceremonials for a respectable and splendid funeral.

In this interval arrived Mr. G -- with the will, and his coming was most
seasonable, for it was on the very eve of Sir Roger's setting out on his
journey. This event was immediately communicated to Lord Crowbery, and with the
messenger, who carried Sir Roger's note to his Lordship, returned not the
principal himself, but his representative Mr. John Jeffery Ferret, attorney at
law and agent to the noble Peer aforesaid.

The arrival of this august personage being announced, the Baronet with his
fair daughter, and the respectable holder and maker of the will, assembled in
the book-room, and were soon honored with the presence of Mr. Ferret, before
whom the seals, after being submitted to his inspection, were solemnly broken
open, and the will distinctly and audibly read by Mr. G --. The signatures,
seals, dates, and every other particular, were minutely examined by the said
Mr. Ferret, who was asked by Mr. G -- if he was satisfied as to what he had
seen and heard; to which, after due time for recollection, he gravely replied,
"In point of form I see nothing at present to object to, in point of essence I
shall decline giving any answer till I have advised with counsel. This lady
died in an obscure and distant corner of the island, the will is also dated not
many days previous to her decease, it will be requisite to ascertain, that the
testatrix was actually and bona fide of sound mind and judgment at the time of
her signing the said will; understand me not, I pray you, as insinuating any
thing to the contrary, but being a professional man yourself, you will admit
the reasonableness of what I say, which is no more than my duty to my principal
requires of me;" -- "I believe your principal," replied Mr. G --, "received a
letter from the testatrix, written throughout with her own hand, since the date
of this will, which if he is not disposed to refer to, Sir Roger Manstock, I am
persuaded, has one of as late a date to produce, which will testify to her
capacity, together with other proofs, which will be forthcoming whenever you
are instructed to call for them: in short, Sir, we shall be ready to meet you
in any way you shall think fit to require of us."

During this conversation Sir Roger sat in silent astonishment to find the
purport of the will so contrary to his expectations, inasmuch as the name or
description of Henry was no where mentioned, nor any bequest whatever
specified, that could by any implication refer to him, whilst the agitation it
occasioned in the bosom of Isabella was such, that unable to keep her seat, she
rose and demanded of Mr. G -- if she might not be permitted to leave the room,
which being answered in the affirmative, she lost no time to avail herself of,
and hastened away. "I perceive," said lawyer Ferret, "that my Lord Crowbery has
no further interest in this will, than what respects a few personals
appertaining to the deceased, left behind her in the castle, of which perhaps a
query might be made as to her Ladyship's right of disposal:" -- "That Is a
query," cried M. G --, "we have no concern with; it can only affect yourselves,
therefore you will manage it in your own way." -- "I perceive also," resumed
Ferret with some surprise, "here is no mention made of a certain young man,
whom we in these parts expected to find remembered by her Ladyship at her
death, having seen him so much favored by her in her life time." Upon this Sir
Roger rose from his seat, and addressing himself to Mr. G -- said, "I humbly
conceive, Sir, if this gentleman has no legal observations to state, we are not
bound to listen to any others, and may break up the meeting." Mr. G -- having
made sign of assent, the Baronet departed without further ceremony, and lawyer
Ferret having put in his claim for a copy of the will, called for his horse and
set forward on the spur, to report his proceedings at the place from whence he
came.

This business being ended, Mr. G -- joined the Baronet and the heiress, who
were expecting him in the adjoining room. Sir Roger began the conversation, by
expressing himself very greatly surprised at the purport of his niece's bequest
of her entire estate to his daughter: "Nay, I must fairly declare to you,"
added he, "that I am at a loss how to reconcile myself to the justice of it.
The remark which that impertinent attorney made, upon the total silence
observed toward a certain young man, who to my knowledge was encouraged to
expect a provision, was a very natural one in itself, though out of place in
his mouth: and to say the truth, Sir, I cannot for the life of me comprehend
how such an omission could take place, after the promises and assurances I
myself have been a witness to. May I ask you to explain this, and how it came
to pass that either he forfeited her favor, or that she forgot to make good
her promise?" To this Mr. G -- replied, that he could only answer that enquiry
in part, by assuring him that the young gentleman in question, had in no degree
forfeited the favor and good opinion of the lady deceased. -- "Then I am more
than ever puzzled to find a cause of her neglect of him," said the Baronet:
"Permit me to ask you if he saw my niece before her death: -- "He was with her
Ladyship, as I believe, to the very hour of her death." -- "And was he privy to
the will;" demanded Sir Roger? "I doubt," said the worthy respondent, "if I
ought in strictness to answer that question, but in confidence I will venture
to disclose to you and this lady present, that he was not only perfectly made
acquainted with the disposition of Lady Crowbery's property, but also a very
active party in the promotion of that measure:" "Then upon my life," exclaimed
Sir Roger, "that same mysterious unknown is without exception the most
extraordinary and unaccountable young man now living: this is the second time
he has put fortune from him, and voluntarily preferred poverty to affluence."
-- "I protest I do not see any mystery in that," said the other, "I clearly
understand there are certain sensations he prefers to others, and certain
things in this world which he loves better than his interest."

At this moment Mr. G --, in taking his snuff box from his pocket, dropped his
glove upon the floor without perceiving it, which the lovely Isabella
immediately picked up and presented to him with a grace peculiar to herself. An
attention so flattering, naturally drew a return of excuses and apologies from
Mr. G -- for his inattention in suffering her to condescend to such an office;
to which she replied, whilst blushes overspread her cheeks, and gratitude
glistened in her eyes; -- "Any thing I can do to show my respect for Mr. G --,
will be an office I shall be proud of." This was pointed in so marked a manner,
and introduced with a look so expressive, that it would have been impossible
for any common observer, much less for that intelligent person himself, not to
comprehend the motive of it; and though Sir Roger gave no sign of his having
regarded it otherwise than as an ordinary act of politeness, yet we may risque
a conjecture, that he argued from it in his own thoughts pretty much in the
same way with the gentleman to whom it was addressed.

This little incident did not, however, altogether turn their discourse from
the topic they were upon: Isabella ventured to enquire of Mr. G -- if Henry was
recovered from his wound, which question, he conceiving it to allude to the
action on board the frigate, drew him into a description of that fight, as he
had heard it from Mr. Delapoer. This was in itself an interesting narrative,
though not altogether new to the hearers of it, for Carry had written to his
uncle since he came into port, and done justice to his brave volunteer; but the
warmth of his heart, who had it now in narration, and the affection he had
conceived for our amiable hero through the natural sympathy of congenial souls,
gave a brighter hue to the description, and animated one at least of his
audience in so peculiar a manner, that, at the conclusion of it, she was
impelled to venture upon an inference, which in a more collected moment she
would hardly have risqued, viz. "That where so much courage and benevolence
were united, it was no wonder if every action of such a character, produced
something uncommonly noble and superior to views of worldly minds."

An apostrophe, so much above the pitch of Isabella's natural diffidence, would
hardly have passed without a comment from Sir Roger, had not Mr. G -- been
present, or, let us rather say, had it not been justly due to the merits of our
hero.

CHAPTER XI. A Gleam of Hope suddenly reversed.
"WHAT imprudence have I given way to," said Isabella within herself, when she
retired to her solitary meditations in her own apartment; "I shall certainly
receive the rebuke which I have merited from my father: but Oh! that I might be
suffered to give vent to my respect and gratitude for that charming man who
spoke so warmly of my Henry; yes, yes, he is all that is good and generous, all
that is brave and benevolent, all that is engaging, amiable, and excellent in
human nature: and now I can interpret his proceeding, I can solve his motives
for the sacrifice he has made of his inheritance, to preserve the memory of his
mother from disgrace and shame: glorious, unequalled generosity, which throws
him on my honor for restitution; and, thank Heaven, that honor glows within
my breast as warmly as within his own. Let the consequences be whatever they
may, I swear to truth, I will not be a day in possession of the power to do him
justice, without seizing the opportunity for performing it: but is that enough?
Is there not another hope at his heart? Is there not another wish in mine? May
I not believe he loves me? Have I not heard him tenderly express his feelings,
his affections, and what answer did I make? Oh! such an one it was as opened my
whole soul, without the feeble, the fallacious aid of words. My sighs were
vows, my parting tears were seals of love, more sacred, more sincere, than all
the bonds that law or language can devise; and I will keep them faithfully in
remembrance; yes, Henry, whilst I have life my heart can never change; I may be
wretched, false I will not be."

Here Sir Roger entered the room; his plea was to enquire if she was preparing
for her journey on the next morning; but he sat down, and entered into a
discourse that certainly was not calculated to forward those preparations: he
began by observing to her how much he had been surprised at the reading of his
niece's will; and asked her, with a smile, how she felt herself affected by the
sudden accession of so great a fortune; "I fancy," said he, "you did not
expect, when we proposed this mournful journey, that you was going to take
possession of your own estate; I can assure you, Isabella, it is a very fine
place, and, I am told, has been well kept up, though our poor friend never
visited it: I hope however it will not put you out of conceit with Manstock
House." -- "So long as you inhabit it," she replied, "no place can rival
Manstock in my thoughts." -- "But when you marry you may entertain other
thoughts." -- "I will never marry any man capable of an attempt to detach me
from a preference so natural, so unalterable." -- "Then you must not marry any
man," said Sir Roger, who has a predilection for his own family seat." --
"Having already one more than I want," replied Isabella, smiling, "I hope you
think there is no occasion for me to add to it." -- "I understand you," said
the father, in a tone of good humor, "the man to your mind must have no
encumbrances of house or home: he must be without fortune." "I confess,"
answering quickly, said Isabella, "I could readily wave that, if he had virtue,
courage, generosity, good sense, and discernment to respect and honor you;
without these qualities I should despise him, had he the wealth of worlds." --
"But you know no such person, not you," said the Baronet, looking archly at her
as he spoke; "you have never met with any lover of this description, and whilst
you persist in so many unreasonable demands upon his character, probably you
never will." -- "Not above once in my life, I dare say," answered Isabella. --
"And once is enough," said he, "if you are sure of your man: look ye, daughter,
I love fair dealing and confession; I fancy our friend G -- and you are pretty
much of the same opinion in this case, for I observe you seconded his encomiums
on a certain person with uncommon ardour; now I conceive, when a young lady is
so warm in the praises of a young man, and both parties are unmarried, it is a
strong presumption that there is a liking in the case; if so, why not confess
it? Seeing I have no other power over your mind, except by correcting your
judgment where I think it errs, or confirming your choice where I think it is
well placed."

"Oh! my dear, dear Sir," replied the grateful damsel, "I should be indeed
unworthy of so much goodness, if I did not meet your candor with the sincerest
exposition of my heart and its affections. Yes, my ever-hononr'd father, I will
confess to you, and I trust I need not blush at the confession, that I
contemplate Henry's character with admiration and delight: I do believe it is a
combination of all human virtues; and I ground my faith, not upon presumptive
partial conjecture, but upon proofs which will bear the strictest examination,
which cannot be contraverted by malice itself, and to most of which you
yourself can witness. Let his conduct be scrutiniz'd from the first moment that
fortune threw him upon our mercy to the present instant; where can be found an
example of such patience, resignation, fortitude; of such benevolence, bravery,
generosity? What has he not endured, what has he not forgiven? Who ever made
such disinterested sacrifices to a principle of justice and honor, in the most
refined, the most exalted sense of those virtues? Neither is he less to be
admired for the purity of his morals than for the delicacy of his principles."
-- "Well, well," cried the Baronet, "so far, so good; you have gone on briskly
with his mental qualities, and I don't know that you have said a word too much;
but what is it all, if that one thing should be wanting, without which no young
lady ever yielded more than her approbation to the bed of men? If the person in
which all these virtues center is not agreeable to you, if the form is not
elegant, the manners not engaging, the address not captivating, why then, you
know, there can be no love in the heart, and praise is all that poor Henry is
ever to expect from your lips." -- "Ah! my beloved Sir," cried Isabella,
blushing, yet with eyes that showed it was the blush of joy: "now you are
rallying me because I have forborne to speak of what I dare say you suspect was
foremost in my thoughts; but in points of truth and fact there can be but one
opinion, in matters of taste there may be many: it appears to me that nature
has been as partial to Henry in person as in mind; you may not see him with the
same eyes." -- "Not exactly, perhaps," he replied, smiling; but yet I can see
enough to comprehend why Fanny Claypole fell in love with him, why Susan May
was distracted for him, and why you, my dear Isabella, do not absolutely
dislike him." -- "Dislike him," echoed the fond damsel; "Oh Heavens! I should
be a wretch insensible to the finest work of the Creator, if I could dislike
him: surely, Sir, nothing in the human form can be more perfect than Henry." --
"Come, come!" resumed Sir Roger, "you have made up for all deficiencies at
last; more need not be attempted, for more, I think, cannot be said; and now,
Isabella, having heard your confession, it is my turn to call upon your
attention whilst I make mine. In every thing your have said of Henry I
perfectly concur; greater proof I cannot give you of my very high opinion of
his merit and accomplishments, than by assuring you, that the reasons I have
hitherto had for opposing your attachment to him, are, by recent circumstances,
in a great degree removed; and as want of fortune alone would in no instance
have been my absolute objection, I shall the less insist upon it in the present
case, forasmuch as your means are now so great as to make any further
augmentation of them by marriage an object not worth attending to. In the place
therefore of several impediments, I now see but one remaining, and that is my
ignorance of his birth and condition; I cannot dispense with obscurity or
meanness. Now although the mystery is not cleared up by the melancholy event of
your cousin's decease, yet the terror of it is removed from my mind by the
circmstances of her will; for I shall now disclose to you what I should never
have mentioned whilst Lady Crowbery was living, that there was something in her
deportment toward your friend Henry that gave me great uneasiness and alarm:
not that I entertained suspicions of the sort which her imperious husband had,
or affected to have, of their connection; no, that was not the nature of my
terror; the thought was out of reach of probability; the character of the lady
gave no countenance to it; on the contrary, there was such an air of maternal
tenderness in her regards, that I protest to you, Isabella, I found myself
haunted by an idea, that the idle rumor which was spread about the
neighborhood after my niece had elop'd with Mr. Delapoer might have been true,
and that this same youth had been the unlawful issue of that connection: under
the impression of such an idea, you cannot wonder at the vehemence with which I
interdicted your correspondence with him; but now that I see him totally
overlooked in her will, I can no longer entertain any suspicion of his standing
in so near a relation to her, and with that suspicion of his being her son, I
now dismiss my opposition to his pretensions as your admirer."

Had Sir Roger Manstock waited for an answer to this speech, it would have been
impossible for Isabella to have disguised the sensations it produced,
sensations as opposite to those it was meant to convey as chilling
disappointment is to thankful joy! But he was gone as soon as he had uttered
the concluding words, and gone in the persuasion that he had made a being
happy, who was infinitely dear to him, whilst she was left to reflect upon a
situation now rendered far more hopeless and distressing than it had been in
the worst of moments, when his opposition was more open and declared. Whilst
she pondered upon this, her bosom heaved with sighs, and her eyes streamed with
tears. All those fascinating ideas which her fond father's encouraging
discourse had raised in her mind were at once dispersed, and succeeded by a
press of thoughts that presented nothing but despair and disappointment to her
imagination. What to do she knew not, and how to shape her conduct in a dilemma
so full of difficulties, she was incapable of deciding; for if she availed
herself of her father's permission for re-admitting him into the family, what
consequence could ensue from such a fruitless indulgence but an aggravation of
regret, which every hour of increasing love and approbation would accumulate
upon her? On the other hand, what would her father think, after the confession
she had made, if she was now to hold back, when she had his leave to advance?
What, but that she was the most obstinate and capricious coquette in nature,
who was no longer pleased than whilst she was opposed, and had no wishes of her
own when they were found to coincide with his? It was now, for the first time,
she lamented the confidence that had been reposed in her by her deceased friend
and benefactress; for being entrusted with the secret, she could in no case
violate her honor by betraying it; and being now made acquainted with her
father's motives for proscribing Henry whilst he suspected him to be the son of
his niece, no temptation upon earth could overcome her abhorrence of duplicity
or deceit, whilst he should retain a sentiment so adverse to that connection;
and in this she foresaw no probability of change.

With heavy heart, therefore, we must leave the unhappy Isabella to struggle
with these conflicting thoughts, and turn to other scenes, that are prepared to
open the succeeding book.

END OF THE THIRD VOLUME.

