ANECDOTES OF EMINENT PAINTERS IN SPAIN, etc.

VOL. II.

ANECDOTES OF EMINENT PAINTERS IN SPAIN, During the Sixteenth and Seventeenth
Centuries; WITH CURSORY REMARKS UPON THE PRESENT STATE OF ARTS IN THAT KINGDOM.

BY RICHARD CUMBERLAND.

IN TWO VOLUMES.

VOL. II.

LONDON: PRINTED FOR J. WALTER, CHARING CROSS. M.DCC.LXXXII.

ANECDOTES OF EMINENT PAINTERS IN SPAIN, etc.
THE city of Seville, in the language of Spain the Paragon of Cities, the
World's Eighth Wonder and the most famous, which the sun surveys, has the
honor of giving birth to Diego Velazquez de Silva, a painter, who by eminence
in his art rose to every title and emolument, which his merit could claim, or
fortune could bestow: He was born in the year 1594 of Donna Geronima Velazquez
by Juan Rodriguez de Silva, natives of the same illustrious city, and both
descended from ancient and honorable houses; he bore his mother's name
Velazquez antecedent to that of his family, according to the usage of
Andalusia. The family of Silva is of Portuguese original and by long and
honorable descent claims to derive from the ancient kings of Alba-Longa. The
house of Silva in point of splendor and antiquity is unquestionably
respectable; but I have little doubt, that it may say with many more that
contend for Pagan original in the language of the Pharisee "Have we not Abraham
for our father?" In like manner the family of Galvez, a family from the dregs
of the people, availing themselves of a fortuitous similitude of name, pretend
to derive from the Emperor Galba; a silly vanity in men, whom chance has
elevated into station and who by stirring a question, which no prudent man
would have touched, only provoke an enquiry, which traces them through a few
obscure generations to their true Moorish extraction. In short, Spain, which
has as much or more of this pride of pedigree than any kingdom in Europe, is
the one of all others with most bars in its genealogy and that from very
obvious causes adherent to its history.

The parents of Velazquez, though in very narrow circumstances, gave their son
a liberal education, and tradition has preserved many circumstances of his
early docility as well as excellent disposition: But when every paper, on which
he wrote his puerile tasks, exhibited sketches and drawings on the back and
those of such a style as plainly indicated a new and extraordinary genius in
its dawn, the good sense of his parents did not hesitate upon humouring the
impulse and accordingly put him under the instruction of Francisco de Herrera,
commonly called Old Herrera, a rigid master, but of consummate ability in the
art he taught. The manners and temper of Old Herrera were however so
unsupportable to young Velazquez, that he left him and entered himself in the
academy of Pacheco, a man of equal erudition and of an admirable nature: Here
his genius began to display itself in several sketches from nature of peasants
and ordinary people in peculiar habits and occupations, as they struck his
fancy in the streets or posadas of the city. These first sallies of his
imagination give a striking representation of the manners and characters of the
vulgar: They exhibit also a luxuriancy of still-life, that he has introduced in
the scenery of his pieces, in all which the costuma is observed to perfection:
One of his first productions is to be seen in the palace of the Buen-Retiro and
represents an old Aguador in a tattered garment, which through its rents
discovers naked parts of his body, giving water to drink out of his barrel to a
boy; a piece of wonderful nature and expression with a degree of science and
precision in muscular anatomy, which is uncommon.

In subjects of this rustic sort young Velazquez fuffered his imagination to
disport itself in its first sallies, replying to some, that moved him to assume
a higher style of painting, that the foundation of his art must be strength;
delicacy might follow after as the superstructure. It should seem in his first
productions, that he colored in the style of Caravaggio, but upon his seeing
some pictures of Guido, Pamarancio, Cavallero, Ballioni, Lanfranco and Ribera,
which were brought to Seville out of Italy, he altered his manner; but the
artist, upon whose model he chiefly studied to form himself at this time, was
Luis Tristan of Toledo, a scholar of Dominico Greco. Of Tristan he declared
himself an admirer and professed imitator; his design, coloring and vivacity
of invention, were the standard, to which he directed all his studies. In
portraits Dominico Greco was his model, the air of his heads Velazquez held in
the highest estimation, and frequently observed, "that what this master did
well was best of all good things, and what he did ill was bad in the extreme."

Whilst Velazquez was thus engaged in the practice, he by no means neglected
the theory of his art; he read every author of credit, that could form his
judgment, or enlarge his science, and some he diligently studied, in particular
Alberto Durero for the symmetry of the human figure; Andres Bexalio for
anatomy: He read the treatise of Daniel Barbaro on perspective; Vitrubio,
Vin^ola and others on architecture, and at the same time perfected himself in
the propositions of Euclid; elements, that prepare the mind in every art and
every science, to which the human faculties can be applied; which give a rule
and measure for every thing in life, dignify things familiar and familiarize
things abstruse; invigorate the reason, restrain the licentiousness of fancy,
open all the avenues of truth and give a charm even to controversy and dispute.

After five years thus studiously employed in the academy he married Donna
Juana, the daughter of his master Francisco Pacheco, of a family and name as
noble as any in Spain; this respectable artist in his Treatise de la Pintura
(Lib. 1. cap. 9), after an elogium on the merit of his pupil, declares, that he
was moved to bestow his daughter upon him from the many demonstrations he gave
of a most virtuous and liberal disposition, and the high expectation he had
formed of his talents after an experience of five years, which he had spent in
superintending his education; and, after pronouncing prophetically of his
scholar's rising fame, he declares, that so far from regarding it with an eye
of envy, he considered his own reputation advanced thereby in the same manner
as Leonardo da Vinci's was by Rafael, Castelfranco's by Titiano, or Plato's by
Aristotle. Velazquez, who by his marriage with Donna Juana had established
himself to his content, felt himself tempted to undertake a journey to Madrid,
where and at the Escorial so many treasures of art were amassed: In short,
having sacrificed to the softer passions, ambition came in turn to take
dominion of his mind and, leaving Donna Juana at Seville, he sat out with one
attendant only for the capital, where he arrived in April of the year 1622,
being then in his twenty-eighth year, an age when the mind of man demands
expansion and a larger field of action than its native scenes present.
Velazquez upon this visit to Madrid, not finding an opportunity of painting any
of the royal persons of the court, returned after a short stay to Seville in
some degree of disgust; and here perhaps he might have staid, as Murillo
afterward did, for the remainder of his life, if he had not been earnestly
solicited to return by the minister Olivares, who employed Gongora the court
poet to invite him in his name and to offer the accommodations of his house and
family to him. Such an invitation was not to be withstood and in the year
following (viz. 1623) Velazquez for the second time arrived in Madrid.

He was now lodged in the house of the prime minister and was soon admitted to
take the portrait of the King, the Insants and Olivares himself: This was the
most immediate crisis of his fame and fortune. Philip had been painted by most
of the eminent artists of the time, Vincencio Carducho and his brother
Bartolome, Angelo Nardi, Eugenio Caxes and Joseph Leonardo had successively
exerted themselves to the utmost in portraying the royal person of a young
sovereign in possession of every thing, which could rouse their emulation and
reward their diligence: In the house of the minister Philip sat to Velazquez,
and the date of this event is thought important enough to be preserved to
posterity, it was on the 30th of August 1623: The portrait was upon a large
scale, the King was drawn in armor and mounted upon a magnificent steed and
displayed with all the advantageous accompaniments of a beautiful scenery in
the back-ground: The artist succeeded to his wish; the court rang with applause
and all the cognoscenti joined in giving the palm to Velazquez above all his
predecessors: So complete was his triumph on this happy occasion, that the
minister was commanded to inform his inmate that the Royal person of Philip
would in future be committed to no other pencil but his. In consequence he
proceeded to paint the Infants Don Carlos and Don Fernando, and after them he
made a portrait of his patron Don Gaspar de Guzman Conde de Olivares, mounted,
like his Royal master, on a noble Andalusian courser, richly caparisoned. If I
may venture an observation in the general upon these and others of his royal
portraits, it is, that there seems a labor in the artist, working under the
impression of the personal dignity of his sitters, to force a character of the
sublime, which sometimes borders on the tumid and bombast: Every thing swells
and flutters; rich as the Spanish horses are by nature, still there seems a
pleonasm in their manes and tails, that borders on extravagance: But the reader
should be reminded, that Rubens was now at Madrid in habits of intimacy with
Velazquez, that he had painted his figure of San Giorgio slaying the Dragon,
the very quintessence of coloring and the most captivating example of
extravagance which the art of painting can perhaps exhibit.

On the 17th day of March in this year Prince Charles of England had made his
entry into Madrid; that Prince honored Velazquez with peculiar attention. He
did not sit to him, but Velazquez took a sketch of him as he was accompanying
King Philip in the chase. When Velazquez had finished his portrait of the King,
he hung it up by royal permission in a public street of the city, opposite the
convent of San Phelipe; whilst the courtiers applauded it to the skies, and the
poets made sonnets in his praise, the artists silently passing by, pined with
envy at the sight. Fortune now began to open all her treasures to the
meritorious and happy Velazquez. On the last day of October 1623 he was made
King's painter with a salary of twenty ducats per month, exclusively of which
he was paid for his pictures by tale: The royal munificence assigned him a
handsome house to live in of two hundred ducats a year; Philip paid him three
hundred ducats sor his portrait and granted a pension of three hundred more by
year specisically for this performance. Great rewards being thus heaped upon
Velazquez, great things were expected from him and, though the public
subscribed to his superiority in portraitures, he had not executed yet any
capital historical piece, as his competitors Caxes, Carduchio and Nardi had
done. Each of these had signalized themselves on a subject of great popular
eclat, the Expulsion of the Moors out of Spain by Philip the IIId; he again
entered the lists with these artists and, following them in their subjects,
exhibited a superb composition, in the center of which he placed the King armed
and in the act of giving directions to a party of soldiers, who are escorting a
groupe of Moors of different ages and sexes to an embarkation, which awaits
them in one extremity of the canvass; on the opposite side he has personified
the kingdom of Spain as a majestic matron in Roman armor with part of a
stately edifice, and this inscription at her feet, viz. "Philippo III. Hispan.
Regi Cathol. Regum pientissimo, Belgico, Germ. Afric. pacis et justitiae
cultori publicae quietis assertori ob eliminatos feliciter Mauros Philippus IV.
robore ac virtute magnus, in magnis maximus, animo ad majora nato propter
antiq. tanti parentis et pietatis observantiaeq. ergo trophaeum hoc erigit anno
1627." Below he signs as follows, viz. "Didacus Velazquez Hispalensis Philip
IV. Regis Hispan. pictor, ipsiusque jussu fecit anno 1627."

No sooner had he completed this composition, than he again experienced the
munificence of the sovereign. In the same year he was made Usher of the
Chamber, an office of great rank and honor; and in further support of his new
dignity Philip added a stipend of a daily ration of twelve rials and a yearly
suit or habit of ninety ducats value. In this year Rubens made his second visit
to Madrid in quality of Ambassador; the intimacy, which he formed with
Velazquez and the ideas he thereby inspired into him of the state of the arts
in Italy, raised an irresistible desire in that ambitious artist of prosecuting
further improvements in the study of the antique and in the schools and
collections in Rome. Velazquez was now in such favor, that he had no sooner
expressed his wishes for a tour to Italy, than he found himself anticipated in
every preparative for his undertaking, that the indulgence of his Sovereign
could provide. His Majesty gave him four hundred ducats and two years salary to
defray his expenses, and Olivares upon parting added two hundred ducats more in
gold and a medal with the head of the King and many recommendatory letters: He
left Madrid in company with Don Alonso Espinola, the King's general in
Flanders, and embarked at Barcelona on the feast of San Lorenzo: In August 1629
he landed at Venice, and was lodged at the Spanish ambassador's house, who
showed him all possible kindness and directed his servants to attend him,
whenever he went out. In Venice he copied a picture of Tintoreto's, but, not
choosing to make any long abode there, he took his route to Rome, passing
through Ferrara, where he was very honorably entertained by Cardinal Sacheti,
who had been nuncio in Spain, with whom he passed two days: In Rome he was
lodged in the Vatican by favor of Cardinal Barberino, who gave him access at
all times to the works of Rafael and Michael Angelo Bonarrota: Of these great
authors he studied the most capital productions with unremitting attention and
delight; but his health being impaired by intense application, he was directed
into a more airy part of the city, in the house of the Florentine ambassador
through the favor of the Conde de Monte Rey, Philip's ambassador at Rome:
Being now convalescent, he gave himself up to the study of the antique for the
space of two months. During his abode in Rome he painted his celebrated history
of Jacob, when his sons show the bloody garment of Joseph, a picture, which in
all the great requisites of perfection is scarcely to be exceeded and is
undoubtedly one of his most capital performances; he also painted the Discovery
of Venus's Insidelity, as related by Apollo to Vulcan, who is represented at
his forge attended by his journeymen the Cyclops, a wonderful piece of
expression: Both these pictures he transmitted to King Philip, who ordered them
to his palace of the Buen-Retiro, from whence that of Joseph was removed to the
Escorial, where it now hangs, an illustrious accession to that invaluable
collection.

Velazquez, after a year and a half's absence, returned to Madrid, taking
Naples in his way, where he made a portrait of Donna Maria de Austria, Queen of
Hungary, consort of Ferdinand the IIId: Absence had not impaired his favor
with the King, who made him one of the gentlemen of his wardrobe and appointed
him a painting-room in his palace, of which the King himself kept a private
key; resorting to him as Charles did to Titiano and Philip the IId to Coello:
Fuit enim ea comitas illi, propter quam gratior Alexandro magno erat,
frequenter in officinam ventitanti. (Plin. Not. Hist. lib. 31. cap. 10.)

In 1638 Velazquez made a portrait of Don Francisco IIId, Duque de Modena, who
was then at Madrid, and in the same year he painted his famous crucifix now in
the convent of the monks of San Placido at Madrid; and surely, if there were
nothing but this single figure to immortalize the fame of Velazquez, this alone
were sufficient: It is of the size of life upon a plain back ground, disposed
with great simplicity and nature, but with an expression in the features, an
air in the depression of the head and a harmonious tone of coloring, at once
so tender and of such effect, that nothing can exceed it. I visited this
exquisite production repeatedly and every time with new delight and surprise.
The wretched cell or cabin, where it hangs, affords but little light through the
iron grate of a window not glazed and that little is unfavourable: Mount
Calvary itself was scarce more dismal. In the same year Velazquez finished a
portrait of Don Adrian Pulido Paresa, Admiral of the King's fleet in New Spain:
This officer was under orders for repairing to his command, when Philip, upon
entering the chamber of Velazquez then at work upon this portrait, mistaking it
for the Admiral himself, entered into sudden expostulation with him for staying
at Madrid beyond his time; declaring to Velazquez, after discovering his
mistake, that it was so perfect a counterpart of the Admiral, that with no
light in the room but what struck immediately upon the figure, he had for some
time actually believed it to be the person himself, and was surprised at
finding him there in disobedience to his orders. In painting this picture
Velazquez used pencils with very long handles to produce more effect by
distance; this admirable portrait was in possession of the late Duque de Arcos.

It may well be expected to find the performances of this period of Velazquez's
life executed in his best style, when his taste was formed by study at Rome,
his judgment matured by experience and his fire not yet abated by years;
caressed by his sovereign, applauded by his contemporaries and at the summit of
all worldly prosperity. In 1643 the minister Olivares was dismissed from his
employments and confined to his town of de Toro, where he died on the 22d of
July 1645, and his body was permitted to be removed for interment by the
barefooted Carmelites at Loeches in the convent of his own foundation. The good
fortune of Velazquez received no shock by the disgrace of his patron. It is to
be mentioned to his honor upon this event, that he did not forsake his
benefactor in misfortune, but took occasion, notwithstanding his employ at
court, to see Don Gaspar de Guzman in his exile and give him one, and perhaps
the only, example of an unshaken attachment; the healing consolation, which
such a visit must bring with it to a mind galled by ingratitude and languishing
under the inquietudes of disappointed ambition, need not be pointed out: It is
an amiable trait in Philip's character, that he saw this attachment and
suffered it without withdrawing any portion of his favor from Velazquez; this
I think is clear from his giving him this very year the honor of the gold key
and taking him with him upon his second journey to Zaragoza: He had accompanied
the King into Aragon the year before Olivares's disgrace, when Philip made his
expedition for quieting the tumults in Catalun^a; this was repeated in 1644 and
now his favorite artist attended him as groom of the chamber, and upon the
submission of Lerida to Philip on the 31st of July of that year, who entered it
in person on the 7th of August following, Velazquez made a magnificent portrait
of the King in the habit he then wore with all the insignia of a general, an
inestimable work: He drew the Cardinal Infant Don Fernando, Philip's brother,
the Queen Donna Isabel richly habited, mounted on a beautiful white palfrey,
and the prince Don Carlos, very young, in armor with a general's staff in his
hand on a Spanish jennet in full speed: He made many other portraits of
illustrious persons, Don Francisco de Quevedo Villegas, Cardinal de Borja y
Velasco, Archbishop of Seville and Toledo, the learned Simon de Roxas and
others. He drew the King again on horseback in armor with his titles as
follows, viz. Philippus Magn: hujus nom: IV, potentissimus Hispaniarum Rex
Indiar: maxim: Imp: Anno Christ: XXV, Saeculi XVII, Era. XX. A.

In the year 1648 Velazquez was dispatched upon a particular embassy to Pope
Innocent X. and was at the same time commissioned by the King to purchase
statues and pictures in Italy for the royal collection; on this expedition he
sat out from Madrid in the month of November and embarked at Malaga with Don
Jayme Manuel de Cardenas, Duque de Naxera, who was going to Trent a esperar a
la Reyna Donna Maria An^a de Austria, daughter of the Emperor Ferdinando IIId
and Donna Maria Infanta of Spain. Velazquez landed in Genoa, passed through
Milan, Padua and from thence to Venice, where he passed some time in reviving
his acquaintance with the admired compositions of Titiano, Tintoreto, Paulo
Verones and others; and here he had the good fortune to purchase some capital
pictures, as likewise in Bologna, where he engaged Miguel Colona and Agustin
Miteli to go into Spain to execute some paintings in fresco for the King. He
made some stay in Florence and paid a visit to the Duke of Modena, who received
him with great cordiality and showed him the portrait he had painted at Madrid,
splendidly equipped and disposed to all possible advantage in the best
apartment of the palace; from hence he went to Parma to view the works of the
celebrated Corregio, and whilst he was on his way from Parma to Rome, he was
called away to Naples by express from the Viceroy Conde de On^ate, who had
received the King's commands to confer with Velazquez upon the objects of his
commission; here he was visited by the famous Ribera, a Knight of the order of
Christ. When he arrived in Rome he was received with great kindness and
distinction by the Pope, and as he found many hours, when the duties of his
employ did not engage his attention, he painted many portraits in Rome of
dignified persons after the example of Rubens during his embassy at Madrid.
Innocent X. sat to Velazquez and, in token of his satisfaction, gave him a
magnificent golden medal. Velazquez sent a copy of this picture over to Spain.
He made a portrait of Juan de Parexa the painter, which being exhibited to the
public on the feast of San Joseph, after the departure of Velazquez, it was so
universally applauded, that the academicians of Rome elected him of their body
and sent his appointment after him to Spain. It was not till the year 1651,
that Velazquez took his departure by sea from Genoa on his return to Spain,
freighted with a very grand collection of antique statues, busts and some
pictures of the most celebrated masters. He arrived in safety with his cargo,
and was received by Philip with his accustomed favor. The Queen Donna Isabel
de Bourbon had died whilst Velazquez was absent, and the King had wedded Donna
Maria An^a de Austria.

In 1652, Philip bestowed upon Velazquez, a very distinguishing mark of his
favor by appointing him Aposentador major of his royal palace in the room of
Don Pedro de Torres, an office to be filled by none but men of eminent
pretensions either in rank or service, and after his return from Italy it
appears, that Philip took him into absolute confidence, passing many hours in
private with him and advising with him upon affairs of the greatest delicacy
and importance. It was at this time Velazquez designed and executed his famous
picture, in which he has represented himself at his easel with his pallet in
one hand and his pencil in the other; the picture, on which he is working, is
the portrait of Donna Margarita Maria of Austria, Infanta of Spain, and
afterward Empress of Germany. It is related of this picture, that Philip with
his own hand put in the order of Santiago upon the portrait of Velazquez, which
at the time of painting this piece (viz. 1656) he was not yet possessed of.
When Charles the IId of Spain showed this picture to Lucas Jordan, he exclaimed
with rapture and surprise, Sen^or esta es la Theologia de la Pintura.

This year 1656 Velazquez received an order from the King to select a number of
original pictures to augment the collection at the Escorial: They were taken
out of those, which he himself had purchased for the King in Italy, with
others, that had been collected in Naples by the Viceroy Conde de Castrillo,
and the pictures, which had been bought in England at the sale of the late
Royal Martyr's effects: Amongst these latter it is well known was the
inestimable Perla of Rafael, an Holy Family by Andrea del Sarto and a capital
piece by Tintoret of our Savior washing his Disciples feet: These were amongst
the selection made by Velazquez, and are now deposited in the sacristy of the
Escorial, there to remain for ever dedicated to San Lorenzo and obscurity, or
until some such extraordinary revolution, as they have already experienced,
shall again transplant them into other hands together with the magazine of
wealth and precious things imprisoned with them. The extraction of such
inestimable pieces of art out of any country may well be termed a national loss
and misfortune, and, viewing it as such, we justly execrate the tasteless
demagogues, that put them up to public sale; but this once done, we certainly
have cause for self-congratulation and surprise, that any of the valuable
relics of that collection are left amongst us; how it came to pass that the
cartoons of Rafael were bought in by the Protector, when Philip's ambassador
was a bidder, one is at a loss to account; and it must be considered as a very
happy chance, that they did not expatriate together with the Perla and its
companions: Add to this, that at an era when it was religion to break painted
windows, it might have been meritorious to burn painted canvass; so that it is
well their sentence was not death, instead of banishment.

Much I know has been said both in poetry and prose upon the near alliance
between freedom and the liberal arts; I hope it has been both said and sung
with truth and reason; we are interested to wish, that such respectable parties
should be upon the best of terms; but it must be remembered, in this instance
at least, the party, who attacked freedom, was the collector and the party, who
desended it, the seller: I might add, that the buyer was an absolute Prince:
Certainly it is hard with the arts, when an arbitrary sovereign upon a scruple
of conscience issues his edict for the demolition of all pictures in the nude:
Such a manifesto in the teeth of taste can only be exceeded by Caliph Omar's
order for the burning of the Alexandrian library. In such cases we cannot too
much lament the misuse of power, where such deplorable effects result from the
exercise of it; but where is the tyrant who could issue edicts more completely
barbarous than the following, viz.

July 23, 1645.
Ordered, That all such pictures and statues there (viz. York House) as are
without any superstition, shall be forthwith sold for the benefit of Ireland
and the North.

Ordered, That all such pictures there, as have the representation of the
second person in Trinity upon them, shall be forthwith burnt.

Ordered, That all such pictures there, as have the representation of the
Virgin Mary upon them, shall be forthwith burnt.

To all this on one side as well as the other there needs no other answer to be
given, than that fanaticism is not freedom, nor the freaks of prudery true
modesty of nature.

Velazquez in obedience to his orders removed forty-one capital pictures to the
Escorial, collected by Philip, of all which he presented to the King a full and
critical description and account. In 1658 Colona and Miteli, the two artists,
whom Velazquez had engaged at Bologna, arrived at court and were immediately
employed under the superintendance of Velazquez in many considerable fresco
paintings of the galleries, cielings of the palace and theater, as well as of
the fountains and buildings in the gardens; in these works they were assisted
by the celebrated Don Juan Carren^o and Don Francisco Rici, both artists in the
service of the King. Agustin Miteli died in 1660, much lamented, and was buried
at the Royal charge with great solemnity in the convent of our Lady de la
Merced with the following inscription on his tomb, viz. D. M. S. Agustinus
Miteli Bononensis, pictor praeclarus naturae aemulus admirandus ac perspectiva
incomparabilis cujus manu prope vivebant imagines, ipsa invida, occubuit Mantua
Carpetanae, postridie Kalendas Augusti anno MDCLX. HSESTTL.

Colona, after concluding his commission much to the satisfaction of the King
and his own emolument, returned to Italy in September 1662, though others have
supposed, that he went to France.

In 1659 Velazquez by order of the King painted a portrait of Don Phelipe
Prince of Asturias born 1651, which was sent into Germany to the Emperor. He
also painted one of the Infanta Donna Margarita de Austria, an excellent piece,
which portraits were the last works, that this illustrious artist lived to
finish. In the year preceding this Philip had conferred upon Velazquez the
military order of Santiago; the King was then at the Escorial and, having
according to the rules of the order issued his mandate to the Marquis de Tabara
the president to examine and report the proofs of qualification on the part of
Velazquez, which being complied with and presented to the King, Philip turning
himself to Velazquez with a smile, that expressed every thing most gracious and
complacent, replied, Give him the order, for I know his noble birth and the
right he has to it; and thus at once made needless any further scrutiny and
examination. As a further grace to this distinguished artist, Philip appointed
his investiture for the feast of San Prospero, which was the day of the Prince
of Asturias, who bore that amongst his names; and thus upon the grand gala of
the court, amidst the utmost festivity and magnificence, Velazquez was invested
with the insignia of the order by the hands of Sen^or Don Gaspar Juan Alonso
Perez de Guzman, then Conde de Niebla and afterward Duque de Medina Sidonia;
his sponsor on the solemnity being the Marquis de Malpica, Comendador of the
order. The functions of his office of Aposentador now occupied the chief part
of Velazquez's time, who, full of fame and years, began to obey the summons of
old age and abate of his wonted application to his art.

The King now prepared for his journey to Irun to meet the King of France, who
by his ambassador extraordinary had demanded the Infanta Donna Maria Teresa in
marriage; this journey took place in 1660, and Velazquez in execution of his
office sat out before the court; the King followed with the Infanta; they
passed through Alcala, Guadalaxara and Burgos, in which capital Velazquez
waited to receive the further orders of his sovereign for fitting and preparing
the ceremonials of the interview: The house appointed for this purpose was in
the Isle de los faysanes upon the river Vidasas near to Irun in the province of
Guepuzcoa. Velazquez advanced to this place in company with the Baron de
Batebilla, Governor of San Sebastian, for the purpose of putting it in proper
order and condition for the reception of the royal personages, who were there
to meet; this interview took place in the month of June, when Louis the
fourteenth, after being splendidly regaled and having interchanged several
magnificent presents with the Catholic King, received his bride and Philip
returned to San Sebastian. In all these splendid ceremonials Velazquez
officiated in quality of his post, adorned with the insignia of his knighthood
and other dignities, magnificently apparelled in a vest of golilla with rich
silver lace of Milan, according to the fashion of the times; on his cloak the
red cross, profusely adorned with diamonds and other precious stones, a
beautiful silver-hilted sword of exquisite workmanship with figures in relievo,
made in Italy; a costly gold chain round his collar, with the order of Santiago
appending to it in a magnificent setting of diamonds.

The King returned through Guadarrama and the Escorial to Madrid, and Velazquez
at the summit of all worldly happiness and prosperity hastened to enjoy the
congratulations and embraces of his family. What must have been his
disappointment in the moment, when he was met with melancholy and dejected
countenances by all his household, on account of his death being predicted to
them by several of the court. Velazquez was too considerable a man to fall
without some traditional presages of his death; this is a tribute, which the
superstition of the time generally demands and, if chance does not furnish the
fact, invention must supply it and biographers must record it: On the eve of
San Ignacio, at the end of the month of July in 1660, Velazquez, having
attended his functions at court, complained of being unusually fatigued and
sickened that night; his family physician Don Vicencio Moles was immediately
called in; the alarm of his illness soon reached the King; the royal physicians
Don Miguel de Alva and Don Pedro de Chavarri were sent to assist, and the
fever, (as well may be believed) kept pace with their assistance. The King,
after so many splendid favors bestowed upon Velazquez through the course of
his reign, added the last melancholy office of friendship by sending to him a
spiritual comforter in the person of Don Alonso Perez de Guzman, a good and
pious prelate, Archbishop of Tire in partibus infidelium and Patriarch of the
Indies: He supported himself against the violence of his distemper and the
medicines of his doctors till the evening of the 6th of August, when this great
artist, at the age of 66, having completed a life of uninterrupted felicity
and fame, resigned it with becoming fortitude and composure; lamented by his
Sovereign, and regretted by all but those, who envied his talents and
prosperity. Philip who naturally was a lover of the arts, under the tuition of
Velazquez had become a judge; the hours, which he had dedicated to the society
of this elegant and grateful instructor, were the most serene and pleasing
passages of his life: His attachment to Velazquez had been caused by admiration
of his talents, but it was closed and confirmed by experience of his
discretion, fidelity and virtue: This attachment had been now coeval with his
reign; it had felt no interruption or abatement, had outlasted all those
political ones, to which for a time he had so absolutely surrendered himself:
In the revulsion of his affection from his favorite Olivares, a shock which
might naturally be thought decisive against Velazquez, Philip had the
moderation to admit of sharing his attentions with a minister, whom he had
discarded; a self-submission difficult for any man, but doubly so for one
possessed of arbitrary power; the grateful vassal felt his Sovereign's
magnanimity and knew the value of the sacrifice; from that period his devotion
was unbounded, and Philip's confidence kept pace with it so effectually, in
spite of all the peevish efforts of the envious, that he possessed his favor
undiminished to the last hour of life: That event deprived the King of a
resource and made a gap in his enjoyments, which he could never more fill up;
the loss to Philip was irreparable, and nothing now remained but to pay the
last honors to the memory of Velazquez with a solemnity, that should at once
mark the love he bore his person and the esteem he entertained for his merits:
This was effectually performed and Velazquez was attended to his grave in the
parochial church of San Juan, by a train of courtiers and Grandees, with the
band of the Royal chapels and all the funeral ceremonies of the most splendid
church on earth. Don Juan de Alfaro of Cordova, a disciple of Velazquez, in
partnership with his brother Henry a physician, composed the following epitaph,
which, if the reader shall think deficient in elegance, will recompense him in
quantity.

Posteritati Sacratum. D. Didacus Velazquius de Silva Hispalensis, Pictor
eximius, natus anno MDLXXXXIV. picturae nobilissimae arti sese dicavit
(preceptore accuratissimo Francisco Pocieco qui de pictura pereleganter
scripsit) jacet hic: Proh dolor! D. D. Philippi IV. Hispaniarum regis
augustissimi a cubiculo pictor primus, a camara excelsa adjutor
vigilantissimus, in Regio palatio et extra ad hospitium cubicularius maximus, a
quo studiorum ergo missus, ut Romae et aliarum Italiae urbium picturae tabulas
admirandas, vel quid aliud hujus suppelectilis, veluti statuas marmoreas,
aereas conquireret, persectaret ac secum adduceret, nummis largiter sibi
tradditis: sic cum ipse pro tunc etiam Innocentii X. Pont. Max. faciem
coloribus mire expraessarit, aurea catena pretii supra ordinarii eum
remuneratus est, numismate, gemmis, caelato cum ipsius Pontificis effigy
insculpta ex ipsa ex annulo appenso; tandem D. Jacobi stemmate fuit
condecoratus, et post redditum ex sonte rapido Galliae confini Urbe Matritum
versus cum Rege suo potentissimo e nuptiis Serenissimae D. Mariae Theresiae
Bibianae de Austria et Borbon, e connubio scilicet cum Rege Galliarum
Christianissimo D. D. Ludovico XIV. labor itineris febri praehensus, obiit
Mantua Carpentanae, postridie nonas Augusti, aetatis LXVI. anno M.DC.LX.
sepultusque est honorifice in D. Joannis Parrochiali ecclesia nocte, septimo
Idus mensis, sumptu maximo immodicisque expensis, sed non immodicis tanto viro;
Haeroum concomitatu, in hoc domini Gasparis Fuensalida Grafierii Regii
amicissimi subterraneo sarcophago; suoque magistro praeclaroque viro saeculis
omnibus venerando, Pictura collacrimante, hoc breve epicedium Joannes de Alfaro
Cordubensis moestus posuit et Henricus frater medicus.

Francisco Zurbaran, though a native of Fuente de Cantos in the neighborhood
of Seville, studied in Estremadura under one of the scholars of El Divino
Morales; before he had perfected himself with this master, his parents returned
with him into Andalusia to the place of his nativity, and entered him in the
school of the celebrated Canon Pablo de las Roelas at Seville, who, as we have
before observed, was a disciple of Titiano. In this academy Zurbaran applied
himself with such diligence and success to his art, that he soon acquired the
reputation of an eminent painter; struck with the bold effects of Caravaggio's
clear-obscure, he adopted his style of coloring, at the same time adhering
closely to nature without extravagance or caprice: His first compositions
acquired great fame, and are in the second cloister of the barefooted Merced in
Seville: They represent the history of San Pedro Nolasco, and all the religious
being in white habits, the draperies are managed with great art and delicacy:
Many other of his paintings are in this city and several in Cordova; such was
the reputation of this artist, that when it was reported that he was about to
settle at Fuente de Cantos, the magistrates and people of Seville, alarmed at
the idea of losing so celebrated an artist and so excellent a citizen, deputed
certain of their body to wait upon Zurbaran by commission and entreat him not
to depart out of their city for the purpose of settling elsewhere: He obeyed
the flattering deputation by revoking his design, but the commands of the King
were soon after signified to him by Velazquez in the year 1650, calling him up
to Madrid: To these orders the citizens of Seville opposed no remonstrance, nor
could he easily demur in the case. Upon his arrival in Madrid he was employed
in the Retiro, where he executed the paintings of Hercules and was in great
favor with Philip the IVth. He painted several pictures for the Casa de Campo
and the other Royal Sitios; many of his performances are dispersed in the
churches, and not a few in private hands: He died at the age of 66 years in
1662. Zurbaran was made King's painter, and Philip, who had a mode of bestowing
his favors peculiarly gracious, announced his appointment by telling him, that
having been for some time King of the Painters, it was fit he should
henceforward be Painter to the King; whilst this was saying Philip had gently
rested his hand upon the shoulder of Zurbaran, accompanying his favor with one
of those familiar actions of princely condescension, which are better felt than
described and which, if they do not constitute the essence of generosity,
certainly are the ornament of it.

Antonio del Castillo y Saavedra of Cordova, was of a very noble stock and
studied painting under his father Agustin del Castillo, at whose death he went
to Seville and perfected himself in the academy of the abovementioned Zurbaran:
Many valuable paintings in the cathedral of Cordova bear testimony to
Castillo's merit, and if his coloring had been equal to his drawing, it would
not have been easy in this catalogue to have found his superior. In the church
of San Francisco in his native city of Cordova there is a composition of his
representing the baptism of the Saint, which he painted in competition with
Alfaro, and as that painter was in the habit of signing all his pieces with his
name, which Castillo imputed to vanity, he wrote at the foot of this canvass,
Non fecit Alvaro. In 1666 he returned to Seville, where he had not been since
his youth; Murillo was then in general vogue and at the height of his fame;
some of his productions were shown to Castillo; he surveyed them for a time
with mute astonishment and surprise; he saw Nature reflected in her most
perfect shapes and with a brilliancy of pencil, which he was conscious he did
not possess, and probably did not believe to be within the power of the art; at
length he recovered his speech and turning from the object exclaimed with a
sigh, Ya murio Castillo! Castillo is no more: He returned to Cordova; seized
with disgust he abstained from his art, and verified his prediction before a
year had expired, pining away in melancholy and despair; with such painful
sensibility are some men constructed, that to take away their opinion of their
own superiority is in effect to take away their lives. I have enquired into
this circumstance, as related by Palomino, and I find it well authenticated by
unquestionable tradition. The reader may be apt to conclude that Castillo was a
man of insufferable selfconceit and corroded with envy; to the contrary of this
there is not to be found upon record an artist of more distinguished good
qualities, or more complacent disposition: In accounting for the operations of
a sensitive mind acting upon a delicate frame of body, there seems to be no
occasion for making the malevolent passions accessory to an event like this
which took place in the person of poor Castillo: The deduction, which I should
recommend to be drawn from it, and in which I am persuaded I shall be
anticipated by candor, is simply to reflect, that such being the frail
materials, of which men of tender feelings, and more especially professors of
the fine arts, are too apt by nature to be compounded, we ought to regard their
infirmity with compassion and be cautious how we attempt to derogate from that
excuseable self-opinion, which is so inseparable from talents and so essential
to man's happiness: In this view of the case perhaps that species of
detraction, which a court of law will not denominate a libel, in a court of
conscience and in the eye of Heaven shall amount to murder. I had almost forgot
to add that Castillo was a poet.

The genius of Velazquez was of that quality, that to be within the sphere of
its activity was in some degree to partake of its enthusiasm, at least where
its attraction met with any particles that were of correspondent quality. A
slave, by name Juan de Paresa, a Mulatto, was employed in mixing his colors
and feeding his pallet; from pointing the arrows of Apollo he became ambitious
of trying his strength at the bow: The disqualification of his condition
nevertheless was such, that to touch the most liberal of arts with the hand of
a slave was danger in the extreme: The Casts in India do not stand off at
greater distance from each other, than degrees of men do in Spain, and
Velazquez was of all masters the least likely to brook a violation so
presumptuous as that which Paresa meditated: Hung round with chains of gold and
courtly orders, of haughty pretensions in point of family and high in favor
and familiarity with his Sovereign, Velazquez would have treated the insolence
of his slave, as Jupiter did that of Salmoneus, by extinguishing his existence:
Notwithstanding the temptation was for ever present and the impulses of genius
in the end became irresistible; in the stolen moments of his master's siesta,
or when court avocations called him from home, Paresa seized the clandestine
opportunities and by the force of talents became in time an accomplished
artist. Ambition now inspired him with higher projects, and as the liberality
of Philip held out a general asylum to merit, he determined upon a method of
introducing his performances to the eye of the King: He observed it was his
practice in Velazquez's chamber to order the pictures, that stood with their
faces to the wall, to be turned that he might see them; this suggested to him
the thought of substituting one of his own productions, and taking his chance
for what should follow. The expedient happily took place, and the King coming
in to the academy, ordered the canvass to be turned; Paresa eagerly obeyed and
presented to the royal view a piece composed by the audacious pencil of a slave
and a Mulatto, but such an one in point of excellence, as would have done
honor to a freer and a fairer artist: It was not easy to appeal to better
judgment than the King's, or enter upon his trial at a more merciful tribunal:
Paresa fell upon his knees, and avowing the guilt of the performance, implored
protection against the resentment of his master for having secretly purloined
his art. Velazquez, says the King, you must not only overlook this
transgression in Paresa, but observe that such talents should emancipate the
possessor. The generous decree was obeyed by Velazquez, and Paresa had his
freedom; the grateful freed man continued his voluntary service till the death
of Velazquez, and after his death to his daughter, who married Don Juan
Bauptista del Mazo. I wish I could add that I had seen any of his works, but I
understand he was eminent in portraits and copied very ably the style and
manner of his master: Paresa died at Madrid in 1670 aged sixty years.

Alonso Cano may be styled the Michael Angelo of Spain, he excelled as Painter,
Statuary and Architect, and it is difficult to decide in which branch his
talents were most conspicuous: He was born in the city of Grenada in 1600: His
father was an eminent architect and educated him in his own profession; the
genius of Alonso was not to be limited to one department in the arts or
sciences; he had industry to combat any difficulties, ardour to undertake and
readiness to apprehend. When he had completed his theoretical studies under his
father, as far as his instructions could carry him in architecture, he applied
himself to the more animating study of sculpture and made an uncommon progress
in a very short time; he next repaired to Seville and admitted himself as one
of Pacheco's disciples, he staid eight months with him and then completed
himself under Juan del Castillo, in whose academy he executed many noble
paintings for public edifices in Seville, and at the same time gave some
specimens of his excellence in statuary, which were perfectly astonishing in so
early a proficient; being then only twenty-four years of age. Cano was of a
noble family and so highminded that in his early practice he would not admit of
being paid for his productions, excusing himself by declaring that he worked
for reputation and practice, and that he considered himself as yet so
unfinished and imperfect in his art, that he could not in conscience admit of
any recompense: Nevertheless in this early period of life he exhibited some
statues of such superior workmanship, in particular a Madonna and Child, now in
the great church of Nebriga, and two colossal figures of San Pedro and San
Pablo, that the Flemish artists, hearing of their fame, came into Andalusia to
copy them, and returned in admiration at his talents.

Cano, who was generous and gallant in the extreme, was of a turbulent and
fiery temper, and having upon some occasion quarrelled with Sebastian de Llanos
y Valdes, a painter of eminence in Seville, he challenged him to single combat,
and being a most expert swordsman wounded Llanos in the right arm: I have no
doubt but Cano was wrong in the dispute, for he found it necessary to quit
Seville upon the affair, and Philip the IVth chancing to pass through that city
with his minister Olivares, Cano attached himself to the suite of the Conde
Duque, and under his protection came to Madrid; an artist of his extensive
capacity was not likely to be overlooked by Philip, and in a short time he was
made First Royal Architect, King's Painter, and Teacher to the Prince Don
Balthazar Carlos de Austria. As architect he projected several additional works
to the palaces, some public gates to the city and a triumphal arch erected upon
the grand entrance of Mariana de Austria, second consort to Philip the IVth;
this was universally admired, as well for the novelty as for the sublimity of
the idea. As a painter he executed many celebrated compositions; in the parish
church of Santa Maria in Madrid there is a much-admired picture on the subject
of San Isidro; a Saint Francis with an Angel in the parish church of Santiago;
a Santa Cantalina, a San Joseph and some others in the church of San Miguel,
and many more in the Imperial College and otherwise dispersed in Madrid, which
any curious enquirer that is desirous of tracing the productions of this
celebrated artist may readily enough find out. He was now at the summit of
prosperity and fame; of course he was an object for envy and detraction. He
takes his compositions, said the cavillers, from the refuse of the print-shops;
and is not such plagiarism mean and unbecoming for so great a pretender?
Granted, replied Alonso; but if you commit the same offense, gentlemen, I shall
not make the same complaint.

An event now happened, which involved him in much trouble and persecution;
returning home one evening he discovered his wife murdered, his house robbed
and an Italian journeyman, on whom the suspicion naturally fell, escaped and
not to be found. The criminal judges held a court of enquiry upon the fact, and
having discovered that Alonso Cano had been jealous of this Italian, and also
that he was known to be attached to another woman, they acquitted the sugitive
gallant and with a sagacity truly in character condemned the husband; no choice
was now left to Cano but to fly and abandon Madrid in the midst of his
prosperity; he caused it to be reported that he was gone to Portugal and took
refuge in the city of Valencia; necessity soon compelled him to have recourse
to his art, and his art immediately betrayed him; in this exigency he betook
himself to the asylum of a Carthusian convent at Porta Coeli about three
leagues from Valencia: Here he seemed for a time determined upon taking the
order, but either the austerities of that habit, or some hopes of returning
with impunity to a course of life more to his taste than a convent, put him by
from his design, and he was even rash enough to return to Madrid, thinking to
conceal himself in the house of his father Don Rafael Sanguineto. He made
several paintings here as well as with the Carthusians, and not being of a
temper to maintain any lasting restraint over himself, he neglected to keep
house with Don Rafael, and was apprehended in the streets, and directions were
given for putting him to the torture: Cano defended himself by the plea of
excellens in art, and he obtained so much mitigation as to have his right arm
exempted from the ligature; he suffered the rack, and had the resolution under
his tortures not to criminate himself by any confession, not uttering a single
word. This circumstance being related to Philip, he received him again into
favor, and as Cano saw there was no absolute safety but within the pale of the
Church, he solicited the King with that view and was named Residentiary of
Grenada: The Chapter objected to his nomination, and deputed two of their body
to represent to Philip against the person of Cano, enumerating many
disqualifications and amongst the rest want of learning: The King dismissed the
Deputies bidding them proceed to admit his nomination, and telling them that if
Cano had been a man of learning, he should perhaps have made him their Bishop
and not a Residentiary. "Priests like you (said Philip) I the King can make at
pleasure, but God alone can create an Alonso Cano;" using the same retort to
these complainants, as Charles the Vth did to his courtiers in the case of
Titiano: The Church of Grenada profited by his appointment, many sculptures and
paintings being of his donation, and some he also bestowed upon the church of
Malaga. A Counselor of Grenada having refused to pay the sum of one hundred
pistoles for an image of San Antonio de Padua which Cano had made for him, he
dashed the Saint into pieces on the pavement of his academy, whilst the stupid
Counselor was reckoning up how many pistoles per day Cano had earned whilst
the work was in hand: You have been five-and-twenty days carving this image of
San Antonio, said the niggardly arithmetician, and the purchasemoney demanded
being one hundred, you have rated your labor at the exorbitant price of four
pistoles per day, whilst I, who am a Counselor and your superior, do not make
half your profits by my talents. -- Wretch, cried the enraged Artist, to talk
to me of your talents -- I have been fifty years learning to make this statue
in twenty-five days, and so saying he flung it with the utmost violence upon
the pavement. The affrighted Counselor escaped out of the house with the
utmost precipitation, concluding that the man, who was bold enough to demolish
a Saint, would have very little remorse in destroying a Lawyer. Happily for
Cano the story did not reach the ears of the Inquisitors, else he would have
had a second rehearsal of his former tortures and the doom of Torrigiano; but
he escaped with no other punishment than a suspension from his function by the
Chapter of Grenada, to which however he was restored by the King, but not
until he had finished a magnificent crucifix, which the Queen had commissioned
him to carve and which he had long neglected to perform. This passed in the
year 1658; from this period to his death he led an exempiary life of great
charity and devotion; when he had no money to bestow in alms, which was
frequently the case, he would call for paper and give a beggar a drawing,
directing him where to carry it for sale; but to Jews he bore such antipathy
that he considered every touch of theirs as a contamination, and in such cases
would give away his clothes, forbidding however his servant on whom he bestowed
them, on any account to wear what he had cast off. On his deathbed he would
not receive the sacraments from a priest, who attended him, because he had
given them to the converted Jews; and from another he would not accept the
crucifix presented to him in his last moments, telling him it was so bungling a
piece of work that he could not endure the sight of it; in this manner died
Alonso Cano at the age of seventy-six in the year 1676; a circumstance which
shows that his ruling passion for the Arts accompanied him in the article of
death superseding even religion itself in those moments, when the great
interests of falvation naturally must be supposed to occupy the mind to the
exclusion of every other idea.

Had it not been that the persecution of his judges deprived Cano of that
tranquillity, which is so necessary to the very existence of the fine arts, I
am inclined to think his talents would have produced a display superior to any
Spain had given birth to; in the early period of his life, when the great
artists of Flanders thought a journey to Spain well repaid by surveying and
copying his works, and when he had so strong an idea in his mind of further
excellence, that he refused payment for productions he regarded as imperfect,
he could have given no greater evidence of the true spirit and native genius of
an artist; the same spirit attended him to his last hour, the very eye that the
hand of death was in the act of closing, and in which the light of life was all
but absolutely extinct, revolted with abhorrence from a disproportioned and
ill-carved crucifix, though to that object the indispensable duties of his
religion were affixed. Strong indeed must be the enthusiasm of that Virtuoso,
who, when naked and starving, was to refuse entering the door that was opened
to him, because the rules of architecture were not observed in its
construction; if we may say of such a man that he loved his art better than his
life, we may pronounce of Cano in stronger terms that it was dearer to him than
his soul.

How it happened that he avoided the Inquisition when he broke Saint Antony in
pieces is matter of just surprise; nor is it less to be wondered at that he
escaped self-crimination on the rack; in that situation there is no defense but
in absolute silence; like the Divine Author of our religion to be dumb before
our accusers is in that case the only part which innocence can take. If it be
true that the Inquisition had its origin in the Crusades, it is the legitimate
child of persecution, and has not degenerated from its stock to the present
hour: False accusations are hard enough to bear, let them come from whom they
may; but to be compelled falsely to accuse one's self is a refinement on
tyranny, for which mankind are indebted to the ingenious cruelty of the Holy
Office: The law, or, speaking more properly, that abuse of justice, which
usurps its name, and which at present obtains in the afflicted and truly
pitiable kingdom, where this account has chiefly been composed, participates
much of the nature of inquisitorial proceedings, and I am in this place tempted
to relate a fact, of which I was a very interested and anxious spectator, that
will confirm what I have advanced. I had in my family at Madrid a young man of
exemplary character, who lived with me in great trust and intimacy, and was a
native of that city, universally known and respected in it; he had been my
guest but one night, when the next day at the hour of dinner the officers of
justice entered my chamber, whilst a party of soldiers paraded at my gates,
demanding the body of this unfortunate victim; it was as vain to ask to know
the charge, as it was impracticable to avoid or resist it; after conditioning
for the removal of the soldiers, and some promises of humanity on the part of
the judge, I surrendered to that magistrate a young man, born of Irish parents,
red-haired, of a fair complexion, and without impediment in his gait or person.
I mention these circumstances because this officer and his alguazils were in
search of his direct opposite in every particular, viz. of an old felon, an
Asturian, black as a gypsey and lame in one of his feet by a natural defect in
its formation. In spite of the evidence of his own eyes, the judge conducted my
guest to prison, hand-cuffed and hauled between two fiend-like alguazils, in
the sight of hundreds of spectators, who followed him through the streets
silently compassionating his ignominy and misfortune. The next day his books,
papers and effects were seized and rummaged, where fortunately they found no
food for the Holy Office, nor offense against the state. In the regular course
of proceeding he should have laid in prison ten or twelve years, if nature
could have subsisted for that time, before he was allowed to see his judge; but
at my instance he was speedily admitted to an examination, and I place it
justly amongst the many marks of kindness I was distinguished with in that
kingdom, that justice was made so to quicken her customary pace on my account.
When he was brought before the judge, though every feature in his face swore to
the mistake of his commitment, the necessary forms of inquisition were not to
be passed over and he was called upon to recollect all the passages of his life
and conversation, and to guess the cause for which he was arrested and
imprisoned: In perfect simplicity of heart he exposed to his inquisitor all his
history and habits of life with the whole of his correspondence and
acquaintance, as well as a disturbed imagination could bring it to
recollection: When this had passed and happily nothing had dropped on which his
judge could fasten any new matter of crimination, he was coolly informed he did
not answer to the description of the felon they were in search of, and that he
was at liberty to return to the place from which he came.

To such uneven hands is the scale of justice delegated in some states; with
such tenants are the towers of Segovia and Cadiz peopled; and who that reflects
on this, and has the sentiments and feelings of a man, but must regret, nay
execrate, that narrow, impious and impolitic principle of intolerancy and
persecution, which drives our Catholic subjects in shoals to seek a subsistence
in a hostile service? Let the English reader excuse this short digression,
whilst he can say within himself, My house is my castle, I shall know my
charge, and face my accusers; I cannot be left to languish in a prison and when
I am called to trial, I shall not be made to criminate myself; nor can I, if I
would. Of such a constitution we may justly glory; our fathers have bled to
establish it, and if in the course of this unequal war we follow our sons to
the grave who die in its defense, we have not bought our privilege too dear,
however painful may have been the purchase. Before I quite dismiss this account
it may be some satisfaction to humanity to know that I extracted the above
gentleman safely out of Spain.

Don Juan de Alfaro y Gamon of Cordova was a painter of too great eminence to
be passed over in silence; he was educated under Castillo, and completed his
studies with Velazquez at Madrid, whose style he copied, particularly in his
portraits; in his latter manner he inclined more to the simplicity and nature
of Vandyke, and some of his paintings, particularly upon a reduced size, are
not with certainty to be distinguished from that master: Alfaro attached
himself to the Admiral of Castile and lived in his family with the greatest
intimacy and friendship till the time of the admiral's exile; upon that event
the disconsolate Alfaro could no longer support a residence in Madrid and
retired to Cordova his native city in 1678; here he lived in great privacy and
obscurity, and an edict having been published for taxing pictures ad valorem,
Alfaro then sore with the loss and misfortunes of his friend, and indignant
against a principle so discouraging to the arts, totally abstained from
painting, though his fame was at its height and his age not yet forty: Under
this spirited self-denial he was suffering infinite distresses, when
information was brought of the releasement of his friend: To hear these glad
tidings and to set out upon his journey of congratulation to Madrid was in
Alfaro the operation of one and the same moment: His provision for the way was
no impediment to his dispatch, and perhaps at that instant the concern never
entered his mind; though the journey was long and the country difficult, yet
the impulse of an ardent affection smoothed all obstacles; if Alfaro was
destitute, yet he might presume upon encountering hospitality by the way, and
if all other doors were shut against his necessities the doors of convents are
ever open to the wayfaring man and the poor. He arrived in Madrid at length and
hastened to the palace of his patron and friend, but whether the meanness of
his habit and appearance, or what other pretense operated for his repulse does
not appear, but so it proved that upon repeated visits he could not obtain
admission to an interview with the admiral; pierced to the heart with this
cutting disappointment, destitute of fortune and abandoned to despair, the too
sensitive heart of Alfaro sunk under the shock and a few days laid him in his
grave, at the age of forty years in 1680. Thus perished one of the most
ingenious and elegant artists, that Spain ever produced; a man described to
have been of refined manners, and as it well appears of a most soft and
susceptible spirit. A genius dedicated to science or the study of the fine arts
is seldom capable of surmounting those worldly rubs, which ingratitude, or
distress, or insult are for ever throwing in the way; such men should only
tread in flowery paths through life, the thorns and briars which coarser feet
either trample upon without pain, or kick aside with indifference, in them
produce wounds and rankling sores, that in the end too frequently prove mortal,
and from slight offenses become serious evils: The fair sex and the fine arts
should be treated with equal delicacy: Genius and Beauty, like blossoms of the
choicest plants, are not to be touched by profane and vulgar hands, but
fostered with the tenderest attention and respect.

I come now to speak of the tender and natural Murillo, a painter better known
in England than any of the Spanish school except Ribera, and yet I very much
doubt whether any historical groupe or composition of Murillo's is in English
hands; at least my enquiry has not ascertained any such to be sound: It is of
course a very imperfect measure of his merit we can take in this country: The
great Historical Paintings of the Life of Jacob in the possession of the
Marquis de Santiago at Madrid are the finest compositions which I have seen of
Murillo, and was I to follow no better authority than the impression left on my
feelings by those wonderful representations of nature, and put to make at once
an unstudied choice, I am inclined to think I should take those canvasses
before any I have ever seen, one miracle of art alone excepted, the Venus of
Titiano. His Catholic Majesty has several beautiful paintings by Marillo in his
collection, but his great scriptural pieces are in religious incareeration at
Seville; that was the place of his residence and there he has left the most
numerous monuments of his same: A student or lover of painting, who comes to
Spain for edification or amusement, ought by all means to visit the city of
Seville; from this place our collectors have extracted what few pictures of
value they have drawn out of Spain, and in this number some few single figures
of Murillo and more, that assume his name, may be included. A late edict of the
present King in its preamble recites this circumstance of the extraction of
Murillo's pictures and gives the strictest order to the officers of his customs
for its prevention; but what mandate may not be evaded by the contrivance of
packages or the corruption of custom-house officers? Valencia, Cordova, Granada
contain a magazine of paintings, and in some cases even the hands of Monks may
be made to quit their hold; in the little wretched convent of San Placido at
Madrid there are pictures by Guercino, Velazquez, Coello and others of
inestimable value; the reputed relicque of a saint though cut from a gibbet,
might perhaps move some of them from their frames, and thus although it could
not be said to work miracles itself, it might purchase those who did. Was it
the policy of Spain to emancipate some of her treasures in art, and put them
into circulation through Europe, according to my idea it would answer to her in
point of interest and reputation and be the means of drawing foreigners to
extend their tour into her now-unvisited dominions. Notwithstanding the
severity of this edict, it was my good fortune, not surreptitiously, but under
favor of his Catholic Majesty's generous and condescending indulgence to bring
out of Spain some few valuable samples of the great Spanish masters, with a
composition of Vandyke's of undoubted originality obtained by a most happy
accident; the cloth is nine feet by six and the composition a dead Christ, the
body supported by Mary the sister of Martha and Mary Magdalene, two angels
kneel at the feet and a cherubim in tears points to his wounds; the size is
that of nature, and I may add so is the expression: This picture; before it was
upon sale, was in the hands of Mengs and served him for a study: The attitude
and air of the head of the first Mary he has evidently transcribed into his
picture on the same subject in the Madrid palace, with this difference that he
has transferred it to his San Juan. The rigor of our custom-house in London,
and my fruitless solicitation for obtaining an exemption from the royal import
duties on pictures to be measured by the foot, put me to the painful obligation
of opening a roll, which the King of Spain's painters had contrived with the
utmost care and attention, so that, notwithstanding I had every indulgence from
the executive officers that their duty could admit of, this canvass and one by
Velazquez in a very tender state received injury. I should not have presumed
upon interposing this anecdote, but in the hope that some one of my readers may
repine at this regulation so inimical to the fine arts, whose interest may
extend to procure its abolition.

Bartolome Estevan Murillo, or as he is commonly styled the Spanish Vandyke,
was descended from a family of respectable rank in the province of Andalusia,
and in times past distinguished for their opulency and possessions: The small
town of Pilas, about five leagues distant from Seville, has the honor of being
the place of his birth, which was in the year 1613. Castillo, of whom we have
frequently spoken, was his uncle by the mother's side, and in his academy at
Seville he received his first instructions: How long he studied under this
master I cannot determine, but I take for granted not to the time of Castillo's
death, for he must have been thirty-seven years of age at that period. His
first manner was rather black and inky, and indeed the coloring of Castillo
afforded no good example to his disciples; in all other requisites he was
competent to the profession of a teacher. It was then the custom for the young
novitiates to expose their productions at the fair, held annually in the city
of Seville; many of Murillo's first pictures were purchased in this manner, and
so many were bought up and exported to the West India colonies, that it has
given rise to a false tradition of his having gone thither in person. Velazquez
was painting at the height of his reputation in Madrid, when Murillo conceived
the ambition of visiting that capital and introducing himself to the notice of
that eminent professor. Velazquez was of too liberal a genius, and withal too
intuitive in his art, to reject the advances of a man of talents and a
countryman: He admitted young Murillo into his academy, and a new scene
instantly presented itself to his view: Here he had access to every thing which
the Royal collections contained, and he was too ardent in the prosecution of
his art not to profit by the opportunity: He copied several of the best
paintings of Titiano, Rubens and Vandyke, by which he greatly improved his
method of coloring: After a proper time thus spent under the eye of Velazquez,
Murillo returned to Seville, and began to resume the practice of his art, but
with such advantages in point of improvement, and with so much force of nature
and expression, that his fellow citizens were in astonishment, and as Murillo
was of a solitary and studious turn of mind, it was reported generally and
believed, that he had sequestered himself in some retirement for the purpose of
a closer application to the study of nature, and that the pretense of an
expedition to Madrid was held out to cover the circumstance of his
nonappearance at Seville. He now performed his first great work in fresco,
being the History of San Francisco, still to be seen in the famous cloister of
that convent; all the figures in this composition are portraits, in which
practice I am inclined to think he persisted; for it is in a close and lively
imitation of nature he principally excels; all his forms have a national
peculiarity of air, habit and countenance; nothing of the academy is to be
discovered in his groupes: His Madonnas, his Saints and even his Saviors have
the Spanish cast of features; and though he oftentimes adopts a beautiful
expression of nature, there is generally a peasant-like simplicity in his
ideas, holding a middle place between the vulgarity of the Flemings and the
elegant gusto of the Italians. In his Rustics we behold the life itself, with a
minute observance of Costuma. There are many figures of Christ at the age of
eight or ten years, of magic luster and transparency of hue, with a
characteristic expression of the eyes, that appears to me to be peculiar and by
itself; still there is a mark and cast of features, that to any man who is
versed in Andalusian countenances will appear strikingly provincial. His
Baptist and his Saints, particularly San Francisco Xavier give instances
occasionally of great sublimity; but it is a sublimity, that neither forces nor
enlarges nature; truth and simplicity are never out of sight: It is what the
painter sees, not what he conceives, which is presented to you: Herein he is
distinguishable from his preceptor Velazquez; that great master by his courtly
habits and intercourse with the great contracted a more proud and swelling
character, to which the simple and chaste pencil of Murillo never sought to
aspire; a plain and pensive cast, sweetly attempered by humility and
benevolence, marks his canvass; and on other occasions, where it is of
necessity impassioned or inflamed, it is the zeal of devotion, the influx of
pious inspiration, and never the guilty passions he exhibits; in short from
what he sees he separates what he feels, and has within himself the
counter-type of almost every object he describes. So far from having ever
quitted Spain as Joachim de Sandart and others have asserted, I believe he
never made a second journey to Madrid: In the year 1670, when he must have been
fifty-seven years old, an Immaculate Conception of his painting was exhibited
at Madrid, in the great procession of the Corpus Christi, to the admiration and
surprise of the whole court and city; many of his works could not then have
reached Madrid, much less could he have practiced and resided in that capital,
where this picture was regarded as so new and extraordinary a phenomenon, that
application was immediately made to his friend Don Francisco Emminente to
intercede with him to come up to Madrid; and this was done by order of King
Charles the IId, then on the throne, with a promise of appointing him one of
his Royal Artists: Murillo, whose love of retirement and attachment to his
native city of Seville was not to be superseded by any considerations of
interest or ambition, excused himself from the proposal on account of his age;
Emminente finding it impossible to prevail with him to accept the royal offer
of becoming one of the court artists and of residing at Madrid, was
commissioned to desire that he would send up some specimen of his performances,
that should be equal in merit to the picture he had exhibited at the solemnity
abovementioned, for which he should be rewarded with suitable munificence: To
this message Murillo could oppose no absolute excuse, but at the same time
evaded an immediate compliance by requiring a longer space of time for
executing the commission, than the impatience and curiosity of the King could
dispense with: In the mean time therefore Emminente was employed in procuring
some pieces of his painting for the Royal Collection; and hearing that Murillo
had given his uncle Castillo a painting of San Juan in the Desert, he purchased
that famous picture for the small sum of 125 dollars, now in the palace of
Madrid, a very beautiful sample of the master in his clearest manner; several
others were afterward obtained, and now remain in the royal possession,
particularly one of exquisite beauty and expression, representing the Savior
carrying a lamb on his shoulder: The bulk of his productions are still to be
found at Seville, and the edict abovementioned, which particularly refers to
the works of Murillo, serves to show with what jealousy the court of Spain
guards the possession of these valuable remains of his art. Besides the famous
cloister of San Francisco, which we have already noticed, there is at Seville
in the christening chapel of the church of the Miraculous Paduan a celebrated
picture by this author, representing San Antonio with Christ under a glory of
Cherubims, the back ground giving the perspective of part of a temple of
admirable architecture; and by the side of the Saint is a table, on which is
placed a jar with lillies, so naturally represented, that the monks relate the
story of a small bird attempting to rest upon the flowers to pick the seeds; a
compliment, which probably has been paid to many an inferior artist, but which
the Fathers after their manner enlarge upon with rapture. It is dwelling longer
on a trifle than it merits, to observe to the reader that the whole back ground
of this picture, including the lillies in question, was put in by Valdez a
contemporary artist, so that we must rest the credit of Murillo upon some
better testimony than that of the monks and their small birds Valdez was born
in Seville 1630, presided in the academy there for many years, and died of the
palsy in 1691.
. In the same church there are two fine portraits of Leander and Isidor,
brothers and archbishops of Seville; also two compositions on the birth of our
Savior, accompanied with Angels and a glory of Cherubims in his best manner
and brightest coloring. In the church of the Capuchins in the same city they
have no less than sixteen pictures upon canvass by Murillo, one of which he
distinguished by calling it Su Lienzo; the subject is San Tomas of Villaneuva
distributing alms to a number of poor objects: In this composition the genius
of the painter has its full scope and display, which was never so happily
employed as in the representation of nature in its simplest and most ordinary
forms; the persons, who are receiving the charity of the Saint, are disposed
with great variety of character and effect, particularly a man in the
fore-ground with his back turned to the spectator, that has a striking force of
clear-obscure. In the high altar of the said church is a picture six yards in
height, representing the Jubilee of the Porciuncula, illuminated with a glory;
Christ is drawn with the cross looking at his Holy Mother, who stands on his
right hand in the act of intercession to him for the grant described in the
picture, with a variety of beautiful Angels attending; this altar-piece has
been celebrated by all artists and others who have seen and examined it. In the
Church of the Charity there are several pictures, particularly one which
represents Saint John of God carrying a poor man; an Angel supports him in his
charitable office, and the Saint regards him with a look of veneration and
gratitude, that is beautifully conceived. There is in this church a picture of
Saint Elizabeth, Queen of Hungary, in the act of healing a poor leprous man; a
Moses striking the Rock, and a representation of the Miracle of Loaves and
Fishes, in which he has disposed a numerous collection of people in so many
attitudes, with such variety of dresses, faces and ages, that it forms one of
the most striking groupes any where to be seen.

Murillo executed many pictures for Cadiz; there is one still to be seen on the
high altar of the church of San Phelipo Neri; also a grand composition on a
canvass near six yards high, representing Christ with Mary and Joseph, and
above God and the Holy Ghost with a glory of Angels, in the possession of the
family of Pedroso.

In the city of Grenada some works of Murillo are to be found, particularly a
Good Shepherd greatly celebrated in the Sanctuary of the Nuns of the Angel;
also a small piece in the Prior's cell of the Carthusian convent, representing
the Immaculate Conception. There are some at Cordova on scriptural subjects in
the possession of the Religious, and many are in private hands throughout the
kingdom, but of these the most valuable belong to the Marquis de Santiago at
Madrid; they consist of five grand compositions exhibiting the Life of Jacob in
the different periods of his history, as I before observed; these pictures were
originally in the collection of the Marquis de Villamanrique: The first design
was to have had the Life of David painted by Murillo, and the landscapes or
back-grounds by. Ignacio Iriarte of Seville, who excelled in that branch of the
art; Murillo desired Iriarte to make the landscapes and he would afterward
place the figures; Iriarte on the other hand contended for Murillo's placing
the figures before he filled up the back-grounds; to remedy this difficulty
Murillo executed the whole without Iriarte's assistance, taking Jacob's history
instead of David's, and thus it came to pass that these extraordinary pictures
remain a monument of Murillo's genius in every branch of the art, and a
treasure truly inestimable in the possession of a family, which by the
precaution of an absolute entail has guarded against any future possibility of
alienation. The same gentleman has a Madona with the infant Jesus, highly
finished and in most perfect preservation, the Madona painted to the knees; I
have an engraving from this picture: The Madona appears to be a portrait, and
not of a beautiful subject; in this piece the art is much superior to the
design. But there are in the same collection two full-length pictures,
companions in size and excellence, which are superior to all the works of this
author in the Royal collection, and which no stranger of taste, who visits
Madrid, should fail to see; the one a Saint Joseph leading by the hand a Christ
of the age of eight or ten years, and over head a glory of Cherubims, the back
ground a landscape in a grand style and exquisite harmony; the other, a Saint
Francis Xavier in a sublime and elevated attitude, his eyes raised to Heaven
with great spirit and enthusiasm, whilst a stream of light smites on his
breast, which is bare, and visibly conveys to him the inspiration of the Deity,
previous to the commencement of his mission amongst the savages of America,
represented at distance in the back ground in a considerable groupe amidst a
scene finely varied with sea and land. These two pictures are sufficient to
immortalize the name of Murillo; they appear to me to possess every perfection,
of which the art is capable, both in respect of design as well as execution: As
I have never received any competent idea of a picture from description, I may
reasonably despair of conveying any by it.

I have seen several portraits by Murillo; they are in general a simple
representation of nature, according to truth, without any of those ingenious
aids and devices, by which modern artists, especially those of England,
embellish their characters, and bestow employment and importance upon the idle
and insignificant. In the church of the Venerables at Seville there is a
portrait of the Canon Don Faustino de Nebes universally admired; he is attended
by a little English dog, at which a parcel of curs are barking, the whole
expressed with singular spirit, and is the only emblematical accompaniment,
that has come to my notice in any of Murillo's portraits. I have never heard of
more than two portraits of himself by his own hand, from one of these I am told
an engraving was made in Flanders by Nicholas Amazurino. Murillo was in his
person graceful, of a mild and humble deportment and an expressive handsome
countenance; to the allurements of interest or ambition he was equally
insensible; he resisted, as we have seen, the offers of Charles, and at his
death was found possessed of one hundred rials, which he had received the day
before, and sixty dollars in a drawer: He was in his seventy-third year, when
mounting a scaffold to make a painting of Saint Catherine for the convent of
Capuchins at Cadiz, he fell, and, having already a rupture, bruised himself so
as to bring on a violent increase of his disorder; but such was the delicacy of
his nature, that being unwilling to expose his infirmity to the examination of
a surgeon, he suffered in silence, and after some days anguish a mortification
taking place, with perfect composure he resigned a life, tinged with no other
excess, but that of an inherent modesty, to which, having repeatedly sacrificed
what is generally esteemed most valuable in life, he lastly gave up life itself.

Claudio Coello, of a respectable Portuguese family, was a native of Spain,
born in Madrid in the seventeenth century, but in what precise year I have not
been able to ascertain; he was a relation of the famous painter Alonso Sanchez
Coello, of whom we have already spoken. His father Faustino Coello was of the
city of Tulbusino in the bishopric of Visco in Portugal. He was educated in
the academy of the famous Francisco Ricci painter to King Philip III. and was
his favorite disciple; giving early and repeated proofs of an extraordinary
genius he completed his studies under the tuition of this great master, by
whose means he had access to the royal collection, and copied many works of
Titian, Rubens, Vandyke and others.

As Coello never traveled out of Spain and as few if any of his pictures are
in private hands, there is little probability of any of his works being
extracted from the obscurity in which they are immured; and I question if his
name has yet found its way beyond the confines of Spain or Portugal; as he was
a native of Madrid and resided there constantly, except when he was employed in
the Escorial as a Royal Artist, many monuments of his genius are to be found in
the convents and churches of that capital; these I have traced with an
assiduity that has been richly repaid; for though I have had continual occasion
to regret the disadvantageous position of his pictures in those gloomy
repositaries, yet with the assistance of a most brilliant climate and the kind
offices of the Fathers whom I have ever found studious to assist my curiosity,
I have seen very excellent productions of his pencil; and though I cannot
absolutely close with the enthusiasm of some of his living admirers who set
Coello decidedly at the head of the Spanish school, preferring him to Murillo,
Ribera and even Velazquez, yet there can be no doubt but he is to be ranked in
the class of the first, though perhaps not the first of the class. His capital
picture de la Colocazion de las Santas Formas, on which he expended seven years
labor, is an amazing composition, and deservedly maintains its rank at the
altar of the grand sacristy of Saint Lorenzo in the Escorial, though in company
with the productions of Raphael, Titiano and the greatest Italian and Flemish
masters. I do not remember ever to have seen such a striking effect of
clearobscure and force of perspective. In the groupe of persons who form the
grand procession of the collocation there are to be sound the portraits of the
King and all the principal nobility of his court, executed to the life itself;
every thing is traced with the most masterly and determined pencil. Such a
majestic and orderly solemnity is observed in the arrangement of his figures,
as bespeaks the art of the composer, and suits the dignity of his subject; all
the accompaniments are in such perfect harmony and the coloring of the parts
so rich and glowing with such forcible but clear relief, that it forms the most
ravishing spectacle, that art can form, nor is it easy to call off the
attention to the other great productions that enrich this inestimable
repositary, till the eye is in some degree satisfied with this striking canvass.

As this picture is undoubtedly the chef d'oeuvre of Coello, it will not be
necessary to enter upon a minute enumeration of his works in the churches and
convents of Madrid, Toledo and Zaragossa; it will suffice to observe that there
is a Nativity by this master in the royal collection at Madrid, which hangs in
the same room with the Adoration of Rubens and is a picture of very high
pretensions though in such a neighborhood. In the chapel of the nuns of Saint
Placido there is a large altar-piece of Coello's painting on the subject of the
Incarnation; the Holy Virgin is displayed in the center of the piece, above is
a glory of Angels, and in the fore-ground a groupe of Prophets and Sybils who
announce the coming of the Messiah. This was the first composition of Coello,
and was executed by him whilst in the school of Francisco Ricci. It is a piece
in high estimation, but the unfavourable light in which it is placed and its
great height from the eye, (the figures being only of the natural size) scarce
allow the spectator to form any judgment of its excellence. In the same
altar-piece, and in various parts of the same chapel there are many smaller
paintings of Coello and some slight sketches in the pannels of the altars of
distinguished merit: But of all the remains of this master those which in my
opinion deserve to be ranked next to his altar-piece in the Escorial
abovementioned are two pictures upon canvass in the valuable collection of the
Carmelitish convent in the great street of Alcala; but these again are in such
lights, or more properly in such want of light, that our gratification scarce
balances our regret. On the whole it appears to me that if Coello's works could
be reprieved from their imprisonment, and were favorably disposed amongst the
great collections of Europe they would hold a very distinguished rank, wherever
they were placed; of all the masters of established name and character I am of
opinion he most resembles Paulo Veronese; his draperies, colors and characters
are mostly of that cast and his compositions fully on a level: In the nude I
have seen no specimens and I am inclined to believe there are few if any to be
found. In the pictures belonging to the Carmelites, which refer to the legends
of two Saints, of which I have lost the remembrance, he is as natural and
simple as Murillo, but with somewhat less rusticity of manner; he is in no case
so proud and swelling as Velazquez and though he has singular force in his
clear-obscure he is never so black and inky as Ribera, nor does he like him
martyr his Saints or delight in scenes of terror, although Coello was so
remarkable for a melancholy and saturnine appearance that a certain religious
physiognomist observing it to Francisco Ricci predicted boldly in disfavour of
his genius; Ricci, with whom his pupil was in high esteem, replied, Pues Padre
virtudes vencen sen^ales.

Upon the death of Francis de Herrera, King Philip the IVth promoted Coello to
be one of his painters at the instigation of Carren^o, and it was not till
after the death of Carren^o, as well as of Francisco Rici that Coello begun to
paint his famous picture of the Collocation; when he had completed that work
he returned to Madrid in the year 1689, liberally rewarded. In a short time
Luca Jordano was invited into Spain by King Charles the IId to paint the fresco
of the great staircase at the Escorial and for other works. His arrival, which
took place in 1692, was so deeply resented by Coello, that he totally declined
any other undertaking, except putting the last hand to his great picture of
Saint Stephen for the church of that Saint in Salamanca, which having finished,
he exhibited it in the gallery of the grandees at the Pardo to the admiration
of the whole court and no less so of Jordano himself. The resentful spirit of
Coello notwithstanding this testimony could never be induced to brook the
interposition of a rival, and after venting himself in many bitter satires and
invectives against Jordano, to which he was naturally too much addicted, he
sickened and soon after died in 1693, to the general regret of all who admired
his many great and eminent talents; with this melancholy aggravation to the
regret which his death universally occasioned, that it was owing to the effects
of envy and chagrin operating on a most implacable temper, which all his
eminent talents could not conquer or correct.

Don Juan Nin^o de Guevara, born in Madrid, was a son of the captain of the
guards of the Vice-king of Arragon, under whose protection he was put to study
painting under Don Miguel de Manrique a scholar of Rubens. He afterward
removed to Madrid and became a scholar of Alonso Cano's, and is supposed to
have excelled his master. He resided chiefly at Malaga where he married a lady
of noble birth. In this city he died in his sixty-seventh year, School.

Luca Jordano's works in Spain are both numerous and considerable: He arrived
at Madrid in May 1692 by the invitation of Charles the IId, who appointed a
very liberal allowance for his journey giving him the steel key on his arrival,
though he was now in his sixty-fourth year. He has no where left greater proofs
of that dispatch in his art, for which he stands remarkable to a proverb; in
the space of two years he covered an immense compass of cieling with fresco in
the church and staircase of the Escorial. Of all his frescos that of the
staircase representing the famous battle of Saint Quintin and the taking of
Montmorenci is in the highest estimation. It certainly forms a magnificent
display of color and design, though neither the lights nor the architecture set
it off with any advantage; the staircase is not uncommonly spacious and of
itself offers nothing to the eye, but a melancholy mass of stone-work of the
dullest hue, unrelieved by any order or ornament whatsoever. He remained in
Spain till the death of Charles the IId and accompanied King Philip to Naples
in the year 1702; in that period he executed a number of compositions in
various manners and with various degrees of merit at Madrid, the Escorial and
at Toledo: His frescos in the Buen Retiro are well preserved although that
palace is quite dismantled, and are very reputable productions. His facility in
assuming the styles of different masters is well known, and Charles the IId
never put his talents to better use, than when he employed them in copying his
capital pictures. Some original histories of his are admitted into the
collection at the New Palace and that collection would certainly be no sufferer
by the exchange if his Catholic Majesty thought fit to supersede these pictures
by some of his capital Bassans which hang in neglect and obscurity at the
Retiro. It rarely happens that industry and address unite in the same person;
but Luca Jordano's application to his art was fully equal to the rapidity of
his execution, and his economy was equal to either: It is not therefore to be
wondered at that he amassed a considerable fortune in Spain and elsewhere;
impatient to return to his native country, he did not long furvive that
wishedfor event, and died at Naples in 1704 at the age of 76. His school under
Francisco Solimena languished for a time; but Italy after this period produced
few or no painters of any eminence.

I have now carried down my account to the death of Charles the IId, which
concludes the seventeenth century and places another family on the throne of
Spain. Beyond this period I have pursued no particular enquiries; as to the
present state of arts and improvements in Spain few people are in need of
information, and I should unwillingly draw any comparisons, which might not be
in favor of living professors. If Spain during the prefent century has not
produced so many eminent painters as in those we have been reviewing, the
circumstance is by no means peculiar to Spain as a kingdom; the declension has
been as great in Flanders and in France; in Italy much greater: The Princes of
the House of Bourbon, who have reigned in Spain, cannot be charged with having
starved the cause, if expense be the measure of encouragement: The warmest
admirer of Mengs will not venture to say that his talents were not duly
considered and rewarded by the prefent Sovereign, in whose pay and employ he
died. The reputation of this artist stood high in Europe, perhaps the highest;
but he found no solid encouragement until he went into Spain; in Germany he
painted miniatures and for England he painted copies; he was a fugitive from
Dresden and a beggar in Rome; in the court of the Catholic King he found honor
and emolument and exercised his art in as respectable a style as Titiano did
under Charles the Vth, Coello under Philip the IId, or Velazquez in the favor
of Philip the IVth: Certain it is that under these Princes Spain produced many
eminent painters and was resorted to by the most distinguished foreign masters;
but neither the good sense of Charles, the resources of his successor, nor the
professional experience of Philip the IVth could of themselves have created an
age of painters in Spain, if the spirit of the nation had then been put under
that subjection and restraint, which subsequent connexions have imposed upon
it: A variety of causes may operate to depress national genius and character;
not one of which may be absolutely chargeable to the account of the Sovereign:
A very able Prince may indeed find out temporary expedients to stem the
torrent, when Art and Science are rushing to decay; but a man may mean very
honestly and yet miss the discovery: When the introduction of soreign
professors into any kingdom is the result of grace and favor, they illuminate
the country which receives them and rouse its emulation; but when they enter
it, as it were by prescription and authority, it is much if the natives in such
a case are not either hurried into violence by resentment, or rendered languid
and inanimate by despair: Perhaps an enquiry into the proceedings of this
century would show that both these consequences have obtained by turns in the
case of Spain; habitudes and characters naturally dissimilar will hardly be
brought into contact and alliance; and though the arbitrary hand of force may
bend them into temporary approximation against the grain, there is much hazard
in the compulsion and no security can be placed in such uncertain acquiescence.

It would not be easy to account for any rapid decline or sudden dearth of art
and science, where there has been no want of encouragement or scarcity of
employ, unless by referring to some such overruling cause, as I allude to:
People, who are curious to find a natural reason for every event in the history
of the human mind, have in the map of their discoveries laid down the springs
and fountain-heads of genius in certain happy latitudes, as those of Greece,
Italy and Spain; but at the same time that a proper temperature of climate is
acknowledged necessary for the exercise of several elegant arts, and perhaps
for the investigation of many useful sciences, yet the hypothesis which some
adopt is far from satisfactory; it would not be easy to find a reason upon
their principle, why the Athenians should be ingenious and the Thebans dull;
for whatever may have been said of the fogs of Boeotia in poetical ridicule,
truth would tell us that it was the thickness of intellect in the native which
gave the climate its character, and not the climate which condensed and clouded
the brains of the inhabitants. There is reason to believe that the natives of
old Rome, who were so distinguished in science, were defective in arts; their
painters, sculptors and architects were Greeks; modern Rome on the contrary has
figured more in arts and less in science, than any other of the illuminated
states of Europe; if her climate in the mean time has undergone an alteration,
it has certainly changed for the worse: Whereas the air of Madrid by the
amendment of its police must be greatly better, than it was when the Austrian
princes sat on the throne; and if climate is ever to come into consideration,
as a moving cause of genius, it will leave us at a loss to guess what kind of
inspiration could be drawn from the stench of Madrid in times past, which its
present state of purity is not competent to produce; for my part it is matter
of surprise to me, not only how talents could be exerted, but rather how life
could be endured in such an atmosphere. If men will absolutely account for
every thing by system, let them take that of climate, it will serve as well as
another: But to speak naturally in the case, it is observable and without a
doubt that the manners are changing; the high-minded independence of the
Arragonians and the steady dignity of the Castilians are in the waine; the
churches and convents faturated with virtu no longer make any demands upon the
arts; the good Fathers have made a full meal and are fallen asleep after it.
When ministers were chosen from the body of the Nobles, the power of the state
was often lodged in elegant hands, and the whole order of Grandees seconded the
example of the Crown by encouraging talents; the policy of the present century
has been to exclude the Nobility from any active share in government, and under
the shade of Royal jealousy who can wonder if their dignity has drooped? Though
the ambition of subjects may be dangerous to a Throne, it is oftentimes
glorious to a state: Shut out all the brighter prospects of life from the view
of the rising generations, and you will soon choke the sources of merit in the
seeds of education; despondency quickly ends in ignorance. If the light of the
sun is to shine upon none but mercenaries and intruders, the natives who sit in
the shade may murmur for a while; but when the darkness thickens and the night
falls heavy upon them, their faculties will grow torpid and they will sleep
away their lives and their resentments in laziness and oblivion: When the dregs
of the vulgar are set over the nobles and made rulers of the people, all
conditions of men will be overthrown, no one will be found in his proper class
and station; the elevated party will exhibit but an awkward imitation of
greatness, and by how much loftier the height so much lower will be the fall of
the party depressed. Some people have argued against monarchy and despotism, as
if they were death to all the liberal arts; I have slightly adverted to this
opinion in the foregoing pages and it is not pleasant to hold an argument in
opposition to it; but in the case of the particular art, which is the object of
the present discussion, experience has much to oppose to the advocate on the
popular side of the question; a stupid tyrant may indeed make dreadful havoc
in the arts, and condemn whole magazines of science to the flames; a silly one,
in the wantonness of mischief, may find pastime in defacing Rafael and
Corregio, and Muley Ishmael himself never made more destruction of the lives of
men, than some have done of their representatives; but instances of this sort
do not abound, and for the true destructive spirit of barbarism I am apt to
think nothing ever equalled your thorough-paced fanatic; such levellers of
mankind are levellers indeed, and the annals of their triumphs from the sacking
of Rome to the late conslagrations in our capital, may give the challenge to
all that despotism ever did from the foundation of society.

To go back to the subject before us, it is but just to observe that the public
works of the present reigning family in Spain have been both numerous and
magnificent; at the same time if we were to enter into a discussion of
particulars, we should find perhaps in each some reason, why a public work has
failed of being a public benefit; to employ the arts is one thing, but to
improve them is another: The sumptuous gardens of San Ildefonso involved
amazing sums; they gave employment to a multitude of artists, who seem to have
exhausted their ingenuity in devising modes of torturing nature; the wilderness
has at length with much reluctance submitted to the regular approaches of clipped
hedges and formal parterres; the mountain rills and water-falls are forced into
pipes and made to squirt up again in the shapes of flower-baskets and pyramids
to their primitive levels, or to trickle down a flight of stairs into the oval
enclosure of a marble basin. I need not observe that these gardens are laid out
in the French taste; the courtiers boast of them and perhaps in reality admire
them; but graver people think that the Wood-nymphs of Castile are not benefited
by being tricked out in the frippery and furbelows of Versailles.

The removals of the Court from one Sitio or country palace to another are
regular to a day; in truth every movement of the present Sovereign, whether of
business or the chase, is methodized to a minute; the spring is apportioned to
Aranjuez, the summer to San Ildefonso where the heats in part are avoided by
passing to the northward of the Guadaramas; the autumnal months are spent at
the Escorial and the winter at the Pardo; whilst some occasional but sparing
portions of the royal residence are bestowed upon the capital: Of all these
royal Sitios foreigners have generally agreed to give the preference to
Aranjuez, and in my opinion it deserves to be preferred: I have never yet met
with elms of so magnificent a growth; the ducts which are trained from the
Tagus have forced them into an astonishing luxuriance, and the disposition of
the avenues and gardens, though in a taste of more formality than is now
approved of in England, has more local merit than any of a newer fashion would
be found to have; the renegado Tagus, which deserts its native kingdom to give
a harbor and commerce to Lisbon, has at least bestowed verdure and refreshment
upon Aranjuez in its passage: In some of the fountains and in the parterre
adjoining to the palace there are samples of excellent sculpture; in particular
a groupe by Alexandro Algardi on the pedestal of which Philip the IIId has
caused to be engraved the date of the year 1621; some Tritons by Alonso
Berruguete, and some statues by Pompeyo Leoni: With respect to the palace both
in point of ornament and convenience much is owing to the improvements made by
Philip the Vth and Ferdinand the VIth; the new chapel, which has been erected
by the present King upon the plan of the royal architect Sabatini, is a most
exquisite model of beauty both in design and execution.

The new palace of Madrid, as a single edifice, is probably the greatest work
in Europe of the present century. The ancient castle of Madrid is supposed to
have been erected by King Alonso the VIth and overthrown by an earthquake;
Henry the IId built on the same foundation, and Henry the IVth made additions
to the edifice: The Emperor Charles in the year 1537 began to modernize and
improve this palace, but made no great advances for the remainder of his reign;
Philip the IId was occupied with his foundation of the Escorial, but the two
monarchs next in succession greatly enlarged and beautified the ancient
structure; some works were also added by Charles the IId, but the whole was
finally reduced to ashes on Christmas evening in the year 1734. This event
determined Philip the Vth to erect a new palace upon a scale of consummate
magnificence; the architect he chose for this purpose was the Abbe Don Felipe
Juvarra, a person of superior talents and high in reputation throughout all
Italy for many eminent works. This man was born at Messina in 1683, he studied
architecture in Rome under the Chevalier Fontana: The King of Sardinia made him
first royal architect, and gave him the rich abbey of Selve: He planned several
buildings in Mantua, Como, Milan and Rome: He went to Lisbon with permission of
the King of Sardinia and executed some designs for the King of Portugal in that
capital. Upon the destruction of the palace of Madrid by fire, as
abovementioned, he came to Spain by desire of Philip the Vth, where, in
obedience to his commission he formed a model in wood of the most superb
edifice in the world, containing church, library, offices of state and all the
appendages of royalty in the greatest extent and splendour. This model is yet in
existence and was shown to me by the royal architect Sabatini beforementioned,
and is in truth a wonderful production: What the palace of Nero may have been I
cannot pretend to say, but I am certain that Versailles would have stood in no
rank of competition with this of Juvarra's, had it been carried into execution;
and this I was informed from the best authority might have been done within the
expense of the present more contracted edifice; Philip not deciding speedily
upon this plan, it became in time matter of ministerial discussion and cabal,
till after much irksome attendance and procrastination, Juvarra was directed
with many symptoms of disfavour to lower his projects, condemned as
extravagantly vast, and to reduce his scale to a more practicable proportion;
the health of the architect was now declining apace; the vigor of a mind too
sensitive for a court was exhausted by disappointment and chagrin, and the
present plan, which comparatively with the other is but the abortive offspring
of an enfeebled parent, was soon followed by his death: The author being dead,
it is little to be wondered at if many errata crept into his copy; more would
have followed, if the timely interposition of Sabatini, who concluded the
building, had not corrected many things and supplied others with distinguished
ability; an instance of this is the grand staircase, the merit of which is
entirely with him, and would do honor to the court of Augustus: The site of
the edifice upon the ancient foundation has been the main impediment and cause
of many difficulties in the construction of the whole; it has been thought
necessary to give it such a foundation, or rather embankment against the hill,
after the manner of the terrace of the Adelphi, that as much masonry has been
expended below the surface of the ground, as in the superstructure; Juvarra's
first ideas had been directed to a spot without the walls of Madrid, where the
nature of the ground admitted of a much greater display upon the same scale of
expense; and it can never be enough lamented that either this situation, or
that of the old palace of the Retiro had not been chosen in preference: It is
placed as I before observed upon the site of the ancient castle, on the edge of
a steep hill from which there is a precipitate descent to the river Mansanares,
that forms a very meagre current in the bottom: This river, which is flattered
with a very handsome bridge, has its fits of flowing, when the snow upon the
neighboring mountains of Guadarama condescends to melt and make a vehicle of
its channel; in the mean time it stands in no better capacity, as an auxiliary
to the town of Madrid, than by serving for the general washing-tub of the
place; as an ornament to the palace it contributes little else in point of
spectacle, but crowds of washing-women not the fairest or most silent of their
species, and rows of linen of every sort, size and description in use for
either sex hang up to dry upon its banks in view of the apartments: This
palace, however faulty, is yet respectable in its exterior, and doubly so in
its contents. Sabatini, who conducted the fitting, has collected an assemblage
of every thing splendid and ornamental that Spain could offer to his choice;
samples of the rarest and most beautiful marbles from the quarries of Grenada
and Andalusia; prodigious plates of glass from the royal fabric at San
Ildefonso, and a profusion of porcelaine from the manufactory in Madrid, of
which material one entire roof is modelled in a rich and splendid caprice, not
deficient in shapes or coloring. Much remains to be done in disposing the
ground between it and the river, and his Majesty is now adding wings and a
corpse of stabling, which are far advanced. Besides the pictures which it
contains of the several masters, whom we have mentioned in this short review;
there are many of the great Italian and Flemish masters, who have not come
under consideration according to the limitation of my plan; in particular the
most celebrated picture of Rafael, called the Pasmo de Sicilia: This picture
was painted by Rafael in Rome for the church of our Lady dello Spasimo, or the
Agony, and thence by contraction called Pasmo. Mengs in a letter written to Don
Antonio Ponz a royal academician of Madrid, (which letter is published not only
in Ponz's Viage de Espan^a but again in a volume of Mengs' Works collected and
made public since his death) gives a long and labored description of this
picture. As I cannot doubt but that these remains of Mengs will soon find an
English translator and be given to the world entire, I am unwilling to
anticipitate their publication by any partial insertions; I should else be
happy in the occasion of rendering these pages more interesting by copying into
them the observations of an Artist and Author, who will universally be supposed
master of his subject. I should doubt if Paschall ever studied the Bible more
closely than Mengs studied Rafael: He observes upon this picture in general
that all the world have given testimony to its excellence, with an exception of
one depreciator only in the person of Count Malvasia. Ponz quotes some passages
from Malvasia respecting this very picture; I have not seen Malvasia's
publication; but from these quotations it appears that his intention is to run
a comparison between the Roman school and that of Bologna, in contradiction to
the general opinion for preferring the former; with this design Malvasia brings
Rafael and Guido Aspertini together under review, and in the course of his
examination slightingly adverts to the picture abovementioned, saying that
Philip the IVth of Spain was betrayed into the purchase by the encomiums, which
Vasari had lavishly published of it, and which he would insinuate far exceeded
its merit. This publication of Malvasia drew an answer from the celebrated
Canon Don Vicente Victoria of Valencia, a disciple of the Roman school, and a
painter of considerable eminence; the work was wrote in Italian and published
at Rome in 1703 in six books, with a dedication to the Lovers of Painting. The
controversy was now fairly set on foot, and disputants were not wanting to
enlist on either side: The school of Bologna was piqued to support their
champion, however desperate the contest, and Juan Pedro Zanoti, a painter of
that city, took up the defense of Malvasia and entered the lists against the
ingenious Canon of Valencia: How much farther the controversy proceeded, I have
not been interested to enquire: Victoria, as quoted by Ponz, observes that
Philip the IVth, whose judgment was universally acknowledged, held this
picture in the highest admiration and esteem; and that so far from warranting
the insinuation of Malvasia that he had been drawn in by the praises of Vasari
to make a losing bargain with the Monks of Palermo, he always distinguished
this inestimable piece from all others in his collection by terming it la Joya.
The agreement which he made with the Convent of our Lady dello Spasimo was for
the annual rent of one thousand scudi; and the subject of the composition being
that of our Savior bearing his Cross to Mount Calvary, Philip affixed the
picture to the high altar of his royal chapel in Madrid; it has lately been
annexed to the collection in the palace, and Mengs in his remarks upon it,
adverting to this disparaging account given by Malvasia, treats his opinion and
the whole of his publication with a contemptuous severity, which all who are
advocates for the superiority of the Roman school will think this author
deserves. It is well known that this inestimable picture was fortunately
weighed up out of the sea, in which it had sunk and as it is said without any
material damage, but of this latter fact I am inclined to doubt, at least if
this accident was the occasion of the repair by which it has evidently
suffered. The subject of this picture as beforementioned, is that of the
Savior bearing his Cross to Mount Calvary, designed in the background, and he
is in that immediate action of prophecy, in which he says to the women who
surround him weeping, Daughters of Jerusalem, weep not for me, etc. etc. The
mother of Jesus is described in a supplicating posture interceding for pity
from the soldiers and spectators for her Son, who exhausted with fatigue and
anguish has fallen to the earth under the weight of that instrument of torture,
with which he is proceeding to execution. Saint John and the two Mary's compose
the groupe about the Mother of our Lord: Mary Magdalen is in the act of
addressing herself to the Savior; his action is undescribably touching and
significant; with his right hand he embraces the Cross under which he is
sinking; his left is stretehed out in a style of great expression and grandeur
suitable to those moving and solemn predictions which he is delivering; the
attitudes and employments of the guards and spectators in beautiful gradation
compose the ministerial and subservient parts in the tragedy and complete its
pathos. One soldier unfeelingly drags the divine sufferer by a cord drawn
tightly round his waist; another strives to replace the cross upon his shoulder
with one hand, and armed with a lance in the other in a menacing attitude urges
him to resume his burden; a third, whom the spectacle appears to have inspired
with some impression of pity, is assisting to support the weight of the cross,
and in a beautiful manner contrasts the relentless brutality of his comrades.
The countenance of the Savior is a composition that can only result from the
purest imagination and the most perfect execution: Art perhaps never equalled
it and nature cannot exceed it, nor is the expression such as mere humanity,
without a supernatural alliance with the Deity, can be supposed to have; it is
impregnated with all that divinity, which sacred story gives to the person
designed; no sorrow was ever more deeply painted; the eyes are suffused with
tears, the forehead and temples bathed in blood which distills from the crown of
thorns, yet the divine beauty of the visage is not disturbed, nor its majesty
impaired; meekness and resignation are truly charactered, but it is a meekness
that does not detract from dignity, and a resignation that has no connection
with despair; a look of celestial benevolence, which seems to triumph over
affliction, illuminates the whole visage and seizes the attention of the
spectator with irresistible force: With respect to general effect, it always
appeared to me that there was a want of harmony in the composition; the
carnations are all remarkably brown and ruddy (in his manner) nor are the
figures and objects in the back-ground kept down and softened as they are seen
in nature: These defects in part may well be owing to unskilful retouches and
bad modes of cleaning and varnishing; one remarkable circumstance is that of a
leg amongst the groupe without an owner; a redundancy which the author could
never be guilty of, and a collateral proof of the bad hands through which it
has passed.

The King of Spain is possessed of a sew small pieces by Corregio, the
principal of which is a Christ in the Garden, a piece of singular sweetness and
colored with astonishing contrivance. There are examples of both the Poussins,
but not many; some of Paul Veronese, Tintoret, Pedro de Cortona, and some
compositions and heads by Vandyke in his best manner; there are also some
portraits by Leonardo da Vinci, particularly one of Anna Boleyn very beautiful
but in a meretricious cast with a most arch insinuating leer. The paintings of
the Bassans historical as well as pastoral, including those in the palace of
the Buen Retiro, would of themselves form a very splendid and valuable
collection: There are some pictures by Guido Rheni, the principal of which is a
Lucretia in the Buen Retiro very much resembling that in the possession of the
Duke of Dorset at Knole. There are several specimens of the earliest masters,
which in a collection of such compass and variety, forming as it were a regular
series and history of the art, are justly entitled to their place. A spectator
naturally regards these instances of reviviscence in the art with favor and
respect; we see them with the same sort of pleasure with which we contemplate
the first returns of life after its temporary suspension: Their imperfections
demand our excuse and their weakness like that of infancy engages our pity; the
different manner, in which we are affected by viewing an art in its advance
from what we feel when we consider it in its decline, is very observable and at
the same time easily accounted for; an object by which the mind is led up and
made to look forward to perfection communicates ideas far more pleasing than
those which retrospection inspires: we look with very different eyes upon the
master of Rafael from those with which we scrutinize his scholars: The hard and
inharmonious figures of Perrugino and Durero are admitted by collectors with
reverence and esteem, whilst the slight and hasty productions of Sebastian
Conca and his degenerated school convey to all true judges little else but
indignation or regret; in short there is little after the death of the
Carrachis produced by the arts in Italy, which is not painful to contemplate.
Many people of great reputed judgment have regarded Mengs as the one bright
luminary of modern times; in Spain a man would pay his court very ill who did
not applaud him, and some of his enthusiastic admirers join his editor Azara in
comparing him to Rafael and Corregio. Some particulars of this painter's
history I have extracted from Azara's publica^ion, by which we are informed
that his family was originally of Lusatia, but had migrated from thence to
Hamburgh where his grandfather settled for a time, and from thence passed to
Copenhagen; this man had a very numerous issue, and when the father of our
painter was born he had him christened by the name of Ishmael, in pursuance of
a silly whim which struck him of opening the Bible and taking the first name in
the first leaf that his eye chanced to light upon: Ishmael was put to such
masters as Copenhagen afforded to learn to paint: He married the daughter of
one Cofre a Frenchman, under whom he studied painting in oils, but his wife
objecting to the scent, he diverted his talents thenceforwards to miniatures,
and probably made no great sacrifice by his gallantry. Soon after this marriage
he left Copenhagen upon the plea of avoiding an epidemic distemper, and took
his peregrination through several of the German courts, and in Ausig in
Bohemia, a town on the borders of Saxony, on the 12th day of March 1728 was
born Antonio Rafael Mengs, so named in honor of those great masters Antonio
Alegri de Corregio and Rafael; by these sounding characters our insant painter
was ushered into life; Ishmael in some opinions having been guided by a kind of
prophetical choice in preferring these names to his own, from which he seems to
have inherited little else but the vagrant character of his Arabic appellation,
and the uncontrollable exercise of paternal tyranny in full measure and extent.
Ishmael began very early to instruct his son in the principles of drawing, and
as he shifted his quarters from Ausig to Dresden better opportunities occurred
for advancing his education. In the year 1741 he took him to Rome, where he
continued him under his own tuition: Augustus the IIId of Poland had made
Ishmael one of his royal painters during his abode at Dresden, and Antonio was
now employed by his father in copying some pictures of Rafael for the King in
miniature which were sent to Dresden. After three years residence in Rome,
during which his father rigidly confined him to his studies, he returned to
Dresden; here he was constituted King's painter with a salary, and after a time
made a second journey to Rome; he painted miniatures in compliance with his
father's predilection for his own branch of the art, during the first four
years of his residence, after which he commenced his career upon a greater
scale and exhibited a Holy Family of his own composition which was greatly
applauded; his inclination was to fix himself in Rome, having married a young
woman by name Margarita Guazzi, from whom he had modelled the head of the
Madona in the Holy Family abovementioned; in this inclination he was
overruled by his father, and in a manner compelled to return to Saxony, where
he arrived in 1749; Mengs though married and established as an artist of
reputation, was by no means emancipated from the tyranny of his father; and
although the King was so gracious as to enlarge his pension, he found his
situation rendered so miserable and his health and spirits so impaired by
Ishmael's unfatherly treatment, that he solicited and obtained the royal leave
to return with his wife and an infant daughter to Rome, where he arrived in
1752; he soon recovered his health in this city, and one of the first works he
performed was the copy which he made for the present Duke of Northumberland of
Rafael's School of Athens: He was now in great embarrassment of circumstances,
his salarysin Dresden having ceased upon the distresses in which King Augustus
became involved by the war; he worked for his maintenance at low prices, and
with much pains gained a very scanty support chiefly by painting frescos. He
had made an excursion to Naples to fulfill a commission he had received from
King Augustus, and in that expedition became known to Charles the IIId of
Spain, then King of Naples, who upon succeeding Ferdinand the VIth lost no time
in sending for Mengs to Madrid, offering him through the channel of the
minister Roda; then resident in Rome, a very considerable salary; Mengs could
not hesitate to accept these liberal proposals and arrived at Madrid in 1761.
He was at first employed in frescos and painted the cieling of the Graces in
the King's antichamber, the cieling of the Aurora in the Queen's apartment and
the altar of the King's private Oratory on the subject of the Nativity. Amongst
several easel pictures his composition of the Dead Christ with the Mother, St.
John, Mary Magdalen and other attendant characters is the most considerable; of
this groupe the figure of St. John is far the most impassioned production of
the author. Mengs through his whole life devoted himself entirely to his art,
at which he labored without the necessary relaxations of exercise or society.
He had left his wife and family at Rome; oppressed with melancholy and
threatened by the approaches of a consumption, he found it necessary to betake
himself without loss of time to the more friendly climate of Rome, to which the
King with his usual benignity acceded; his infirmity constrained him to halt at
Monaco, where he began to recover, and during his convalescence painted his
celebrated picture of the Nativity; in this piece the light is managed in the
way of Corregio's Noche, and as a security against injury its royal possessor
has covered it with a magnificent glass; amongst the shepherds the painter has
inserted his own portrait. Upon his arrival at Rome he engaged in a
considerable undertaking for Pope Clement XIV. This and the pretense of health
engaged him for a term of three years nor did he return at length to Madrid but
with evident reluctance and after every possible procrastination and delay. His
Royal Master received him nevertheless with his accustomed condescension,
accepted his excuses and continued him in his pay and employ: He now composed
the cieling of the great saloon of the palace at Madrid, in which he has
described the apotheosis of the Emperor Trajan; a subject selected with
judgment and executed in a style of grand display. A residence of little more
than two years and incessant application again impaired the constitution of
Mengs to such a degree that he plainly perceived Spain was a climate in which
he could no longer exist, and he for the last time quitted Madrid and repaired
to Rome with plenary indulgence and an augmented stipend from his munificent
master: To this capital of the ancient arts his wishes always pointed, and his
wasted spirits felt a fresh return of vigor, as he approached the favorite
spot, to which he finally resolved to devote his future days: The death of his
wife, to whom he was faithfully and fondly attached soon reversed these happy
prospects; the melancholy in which he became involved by this event and the
change of habits thereby entailed upon him brought back his old disorders and
superadded many new complaints; in this state of desperation he put himself
into the hands of an ignorant empiric, and by persisting in his medicines upon
the credit of such flattering professions as are usual with this tribe of
pretenders, his shattered constitution yielded to the violence of an
unseasonable dose of physic and at the age of fifty-one years and three months
Antonio Rafael Mengs departed this life. The works of Mengs in the royal
possession consist of the frescos of the Trajan, The Graces and The Aurora,
which are cielings; the altar-piece of the private Oratory he repainted in oil:
There are seventeen easel pictures in the palace of Madrid, exclusive of the
Annunciation lately arrived from Rome; this picture was the last work of his
life and has not received his finishing hand; it was not hung up when I saw it,
being just taken out of the packing-case. The picture of the Dead Christ is in
my opinion the best of the above number; the figures are of the natural size:
The Nativity, which is covered with a single plate of glass, is nine feet ten
inches by seven; that of the Dead Christ is considerably bigger: These three
pictures of the Death of Christ, the Nativity and the Annunciation, composed at
different periods of his life and at different places, the first being painted
at Madrid and the two last at Rome, are the compositions that must decide his
reputation: In the palace of Aranjuez there are several portraits and a
Crucifixion which hangs in the King's bedchamber: The Prince of Asturias has
two pictures, one of which is a Holy Family in his elegant Casino at the
Escorial: The Infants Don Gabriel and Don Luis and many Grandees and other
distinguished persons have pieces of this author, most of which are portraits;
Azara enumerates seventy-three pictures of Mengs existing in Spain.

Living authors rarely find in the voice of the public their proper level, and
this artist so lately died that sufficient time has not yet elapsed to cool the
heats of partisans, and to let the dispassionate and judicious weigh his merits
in their proper scale. This cannot be fairly done by any one who has not seen
his works in Spain: It is in that court only where the witnesses can be called
to his character whose evidence ought to lead the opinion of such as sit in
judgment on his merits: There he will literally be seen always in the best
light; if indeed that be the best light for any modern author's works so to
predominate in a collection of the first artists of the world, as to make what
most people will think his superiors secede and give place upon every occasion.
Yet this is evidently the case; predilection cannot go further; not that I
would be misunderstood to arraign the principle of partiality to a living
artist; no slattery, no warmth of favor short of that which tends to lessen
his industry or impair his intellects can in such a case be too much: Accursed
be that disposition, wheresoever it is found, which can praise no times but
those which are gone by; it is easy to know that such encomiums are the effects
of spleen under the assumption of candor: One applauding sentence bestowed
upon contemporary genius is more to the credit of the giver, than volumes of
historical panegyric; it is like the mite of the widow thrown into the mass of
the treasury, a contribution to be respected not so much for the value of the
offering, as for being the tribute of the heart: De vivis nil nisi bonum, de
mortuis nil nisi verum, is a noble reading of Johnson's: He has said many
things well, but he never said any thing better than this: Why should we so
despair of contemporary merit, as if a painter never could arise to equal them
that went before? Let us not bring on the competition by lowering the dead, but
by raising the living: So far therefore as this striking preference in favor
of Mengs had effect in calling forth his exertions and fortifying his genius by
a due proportion of self-confidence and proper opinion it appears to have been
kingly and meritorious: Mengs himself with all his idolatry for Rafael thinks
the world has produced artists with which he cannot come into competition, and
what is singular in the opinion is, that he does not refer to the works of the
Grecian sculptors, but to their painters for that perfection, that idea of
consummate beauty, which he finds wanting in his own great model. But as Mengs
takes up his idea of the superiority of the ancient painters entirely upon
hypothesis, and no reference being to be had to ocular conviction, which alone
can settle the question, the world will gain more by the ingenuity of his
conjectures, than truth will by his discovery. There are other positions
equally new in his posthumous publication, which I shall be glad to see
canvassed in the true spirit of candid criticism. Mengs loved the truth, but he
did not always find it out; under all the disadvantages of a contracted
education, and sowered by the insupportable severity of his father's
discipline, his habit became saturnine and morose and his manners unsocial and
inelegant: He had a great propensity for speaking what are called plain truths,
but which oftentimes in fact are no truths at all: His biographer and editor
Azara has given us an instance of this sort in a reply he made to Pope Clement
XIV. His Holiness had asked Mengs's opinion of some pictures he had collected
at Venice: They are good for nothing, said Mengs: How so? rejoined his
Holine;ss, they have been highly commended; naming a certain painter as his
authority for their merit: Most Holy Father, replied Mengs, we are both
professors of the same art; he extols what he cannot equal, and I depreciate
what I am sensible I can excel. N. y. yo somos dos profesores: El uno alaba lo
que es superior a su esfera; y el otro vitupera lo que l^es superior. I should
suspect that Clement thought very little the worse of his pictures, and not
much the better of Mengs for his repartee. Whether Mengs really thought with
contempt of art which was inferior to his own, I will not pretend to decide;
but that he was apt to speak contemptuously of artists superior to himself I am
inclined to believe: Azara tells us that he pronounced of the academical
lectures of our Reynolds, that they were calculated to mislead young students
into error, teaching nothing but those superficial principles which he plainly
avers are all that the author himself knows of the art he professes. Del libro
moderno del Sr. Raynolds, Ingles, decia que es una obra, que puede conducir los
jovenes al error; posque se queda en los principios superficiales que conoce
solamente a quel author. Azara immediately proceeds to say that Mengs was of a
temperament colerico y adusto, and that his bitter and satirical turn created
him infinitos agraviados y quejosos. When his historian and friend says this
there is no occasion for me to repeat the remark. If the genius of Mengs had
been capable of producing a composition equal to that of the tragic and
pathetic Ugolino, I am persuaded such a sentence as the above would never have
passed his lips; but flattery made him vain and sickness rendered him peevish;
he found himself at Madrid in a country without rivals, and because the arts
had traveled out of his sight he was disposed to think they existed nowhere
but on his own pallet. The time perhaps is at hand, when our virtuosi will
extend their route to Spain, and of these some one will probably be found, who,
regarding with just indignation these dogmatical decrees of Mengs, will take in
hand the examination of his paintings which I have now enumerated; and we may
then be told with the authority of science, that his Nativity, though so
splendidly encased, and covered with such care, that the very winds of Heaven
are not permitted to visit its face too roughly, would have owed more to the
crystal than it does in some parts at least had it been less transparent than
it is; that it discovers an abortive and puisny bambino which seems copied from
a bottle; that Mengs was an artist who had seen much, and invented little; that
he dispenses neither life nor death to his figures, excites no terror, rouses
no passions, and risques no flights; that by studying to avoid particular
defects, he incurs general ones, and paints with tameness and servility; that
the contracted scale and idea of a painter of miniatures, as which he was
brought up, is to be traced in all or most of his compositions, in which a
finished delicacy of pencil exhibits the Hand of the Artist, but gives no
emanations of the Soul of the Master; if it is beauty, It does not warm; if it
is sorrow, it excites no pity: That when the Angel announces the salutation to
Mary it is a messenger that has neither used dispatch in the errand, nor grace
in the delivery; that although Rubens was by one of his oracular sayings
condemned to the ignominious dullness of a Dutch translator, Mengs was as
capable of painting Rubens's Adoration, as he was of creating the Star in the
East that ushered the Magi: But these are questions above my capacity; I resign
Mengs to abler critics, and Reynolds to better defenders; well contented that
posterity should admire them both, and well assured that the fame of our
countryman is established beyond the reach of envy or detraction.

Of the marbles, which compose so beautiful a part of the fitting in the royal
apartments, I should be glad some such particular description might be given by
our travelers, who print their journals, as would attract the attention of
this kingdom to the extraction of those precious materials from such parts of
Spain at least as border on the ocean or Mediterranean; I made a collection in
Madrid of one hundred and twenty-six different specimens, which I brought to
England, and had free and liberal permission from his Catholic Majesty to have
applied to his royal architect Sabatini for blocks or slabs from any of the
respective quarries, if such had been acceptable. Jacobo Trezo, a Milanese, of
whom Vasari speaks in high terms of commendation for his art in sculpture and
the casting of metals, is reported to have carried his researches through most
parts of Spain with great success in the time of Philip the IId, when he was
founding the Escorial; and it is thought that he has brought to light many more
samples than were known to the Romans, who furnished their capital and adorned
their villas from the quarries of Spain: Porphyry is found in the vicinity of
Cordova and in such vast blocks as to form magnificent columns; Aracena
produces jasper, Consuegra, Leon and Malaga abound in alabasters, and the green
marble of Grenada fully rivals the verd-antique; of this latter sort it is not
easy to procure slabs of considerable dimensions, yet I have seen tables in the
palace and elsewhere of exquisite beauty and a magnificent size; innumerable
sorts of jasper are to be had in Andalusia, Valencia, Aragon, Biscaya, Cuenca,
Tortosa and the Castiles; and the mountains about Toledo, Urda, Murizedro,
Badajoz, Talavera and Macael furnish a variety of marbles in an inexhaustible
abundance.

Unhappy kingdom! as if some evil genius had dominion of thy fate, perverting
the course of every natural blessing and turning the most gracious
dispensations of Providence to thy loss and disfavour. All productions, which
the earth can yield both on and below its surface, are proper to Spain; every
advantageous access either to the ocean or Mediterranean, every security of an
impassable frontier against its continental neighbors are proper to Spain; in
short it has all the benefits of an insular situation, and none of its
objections. Though formed to be a seat of empire and a land of peace, it has
been little else but a provincial dependency, or a theater of internal war and
bloodshed. Though it has thrown out many great and eminent characters both in
arms and arts, it was to fill the annals of other countries and not to grace
their own; if emperors, they sat on other thrones; if warriors, they fought
for other states; if philosophers, they taught in other schools and wrote in
other tongues. If every species of subjugation be disgraceful to a state, Spain
has passed under every description of tyranny and has experienced a variety of
wretchedness. When Carthage was her mistress, it is not easy to conceive a
situation more degrading for a noble people, than to bear the yoke of
mercantile republicans and do homage at the shopboards of upstart demagogues;
surely it is in human nature to prefer the tyranny of the most absolute despot
that ever wore a crown to the mercenary and imposing insults of a trader: Who
would not rather appeal to a court, than a compting-house? Who would not rather
submit and be made a sacrifice to a kingly fiat, than a shopman's firm? Let
the Rajahs of Bengal decide upon the alternative. From the dominion of Carthage
she was transferred to that of Rome; her struggle was obstinate against the
transition, and miracles of bravery were exhibited in the persevering
contention; in the choice of yokes it is probable she preferred the Roman, her
objections were to wearing any; at length she submitted and came into the pale
of the empire; we are told of Roman toleration, and the happy condition of
Roman provinces; but we have it on the authority of their own historians, and
so far as one insignificant opinion goes, I reject it utterly; I cannot
comprehend how the servile act of digging in a mine for ore and marble to
supply the avarice and increase the splendor of ancient Rome could constitute
the happiness or gratify the ambition of a native Spaniard. As Rome made foam
advances in civilization, though at best a very barbarous and ferocious people,
Spain perhaps partook of her advances; but it was following at a distance, and
subordinate improvements seldom reach far; what she gained by her annexation to
Rome is easily counted up, what she lost by it involves a great extent and
compass of conjecture; and though modern Spain may celebrate the Apotheosis of
Trajan, I am of opinion a true Spaniard will neither compare him to Viriatus,
nor Seneca to Ximenes. The next revolution which Spain suffered was by the
general inundation of the northern barbarians. To aim at any description of
these times is to put to sea without a compass and without a star; the influx
of their Mohammedan conquerors furnished the first light that broke the general
obscurity; the courts of Grenada and Cordova were profusely splendid and not
devoid of arts and sciences: Their commerce with the East supplied them with
abundance of wealth, and their intercourse with Constantinople gave some faint
shadowings of Grecian elegance: The heroic virtues were displayed in a romantic
degree; legends of chivalry, poetical tales and love-songs, where courage and
chastity were liberally dispensed to the respective sexes, music and dances of
a very captivating sort, pharmacy with the use and knowledge of simples, and a
solemn peculiarity of architecture were accomplishments of Moorish importation;
the insurmountable barriers of religion would not however admit of their
incorporation with the native Spaniards, and both parties experienced the
horrors of a war at their own gates, which admitted few and short intervals of
quiet and repose. At length the long-depending contest was determined, and the
total expulsion of the Moors delivered Spain for a time from all internal
terrors and commotions: She had scarce enjoyed a breathing space before she
started on a course of new and distant adventures in the late discovered world.
Every one now flocked with ardour to America, as to a second crusade; can it be
wondered at if arts and sciences stood still in the mean time? When she had
massacred kings and laid waste their kingdoms for the extortion of treasure,
she found that the ores of Mexico and Peru, like the streams of the Tagus and
the Douro, ran through her dominions only to empty their stores into the hands
of her neighbors and rivals: Although these consequences may well result from
the bad policy of her proceedings, yet it will naturally be the case that all
discoverers of countries, like projectors in the arts, exhaust themselves in
the first efforts, and leave others to erect their fortune, where they have
laid the foundation: The commerce of the European nations has been established
upon the discoveries of Spain, and every other treasury is filled from the
mines of the new world except her own: Whilst she was extending her empire over
the barren Cordeleras, the richest provinces in Europe fell off from her
dominion; Portugal took the harbor of Lisbon and a valuable tract of coast
from the heart of her empire; the standard of Britain flew in triumph upon the
pillars of Hercules, whilst she continued to stretch her feeble arms over half
the globe, so to remain, till the first convulsive shock shall make her quit
her hold. Still she might have remained respectable in misfortunes, and
formidable though in decay; the last hand, that was put to her ruin, held the
pen which signed away her reputation and independence in the family compact;
generous, unsuspecting and impolitic, she has bound herself to an ally, whose
union, like the action of certain chemical mixtures, will dissolve every noble
particle in her composition and leave her spiritless and vapid. Great empires,
like great men, are aggrandized and secured by the coalition of inferiors;
petty states may sometimes be fostered into temporary importance to serve
occasional purposes; but kingdoms, such as France and Spain, of recent equality
and emulation, can never find reciprocal advantages in political alliance; the
interests of the weaker party must of necessity become a sacrifice to those of
the stronger and more artful, and with which of the two that superiority
actually lies, and those advantages are likely to remain, is a point too clear
to admit a doubt, or need an explanation.

INDEX TO THE SECOND VOLUME.
DIEGO Velazquez de Silva Page 1 Francis Zurbaran 59 Antonio de Castillo y
Saa-vedra 63 Juan de Paresa 68 Alonso Cano 72 Juon de Alfaro y Gamon 96
Bartolome Estevan Murillo 101 Claudio Coello 130 Juan Nino de Guevara 142 Luca
Jordano ib. Antonio Rafael Mengs 186
FINIS.

