ANECDOTES OF EMINENT PAINTERS IN SPAIN, etc.

VOL. I.

ANECDOTES OF EMINENT PAINTERS IN SPAIN, During the Sixteenth and Seventeenth
Centuries; WITH CURSORY REMARKS UPON THE PRESENT STATE OF ARTS IN THAT KINGDOM.

BY RICHARD CUMBERLAND.

IN TWO VOLUMES.

VOL. I.

LONDON: PRINTED FOR J. WALTER, CHARING CROSS. M.DCC.LXXXII.

ANECDOTES OF EMINENT PAINTERS IN SPAIN, etc.
SPAIN has given birth to so many eminent Painters, of whom there is no
memorial in the rest of Europe, and abounds with so many admirable examples of
their art, dispersed in churches, convents and palaces, where the curiosity of
modern travelers rarely carries them, that I persuade myself it will not be
unacceptable to the public to have some account of men and works so little
known and yet so highly worthy to be recorded. I am not aware that this has
been professedly attempted by any Spanish writer, except by Palomino; who in an
elaborate treatise on the Art of Painting, in two folio volumes, has inserted
the lives of two hundred and thirty-three Painters and Sculptors, who flourished
in Spain from the time of Ferdinand the Catholic to the conclusion of the reign
of Philip the Fourth; of these materials I have principally availed myself in
the following sheets, but not without due attention to other authorities, that
interpose accounts differing from his, or extend to particulars, which he has
failed to enumerate. He is said to have written with a competent knowledge of
his subject, as an art, of which he was himself a professor; and in rules for
the practice of painting he is very diffusive: If he had been more
communicative or entertaining in those matters, for which I chiefly consulted
him, I might have needed less apology for the present publication: Many
particulars however have been furnished to me from tradition, which help out
the sterility and dryness of his catalogue; and I must not omit to acknowledge
the assistance I drew from the treatise of Pacheco, a book now become extremely
rare and hardly to be obtained. I know there was an English abridgement of
Palomino's Painters published in the year 1739, but the original is in very few
hands; so that, unless some Spanish biographer shall speedily be found with
public spirit to engage in the task of rescuing the fame of his ingenious
countrymen from approaching extinction, their histories at least will soon be
lost, whatever may be the fate of their works. The world is in possession of
many memoirs of the artists of Italy, France and Flanders; and the Painters,
who distinguished themselves in England, have by happy fortune found a
biographer, whose entertaining talents will secure to them a reception with
posterity; whilst of all the Painters, to whose memory I have dedicated this
slight attempt, scarce a name is heard without the limits of Spain, except
those of Velasquez, Murillo, and Ribeira: The paintings of the latter it is
true are very generally known, many excellent performances of his being
dispersed through Europe: Some respectable remains of Velasquez are to be found
in Italy, but the principal exertions of his pencil were reserved for his own
country, and the Sovereign, who entertained him in his service; these, we may
naturally suppose, can never be extracted: And as for Murillo, although some
pieces of his have in time past been extracted from Seville, yet I think I may
venture to say, that not many of them, which pass under his name, are
legitimate; and in a less proportion can we find amongst such, as are true
pictures, any of so capital a rank, as to impart a competent idea of his
extraordinary merit.

The candid reader will observe, that I do not profess to give the Lives of the
Painters, who are treated of in this catalogue, for which my materials do not
suffice; nor shall I hazard many criticisms upon their respective works, for
which more science would be requisite than I can pretend to; still I hope there
will be sound sufficient novelty to amuse such of my readers, as can endure to
hear of paintings, as they strike the feelings of an ordinary observer, without
presuming to dissect them in the learned jargon of a Virtuoso: It will be
remembered therefore that I offer nothing more to the public than Anecdotes of
the Eminent Painters, who have flourished in Spain during the two centuries last
past; and in this description I include all such illustrious foreigners, as
have resorted to Spain for the display of their talents under protection of the
Princes or Nobles of that kingdom; these are a pretty numerous class, and in
treating of them, I shall study to avoid repeating what may have been better
told by others; but even of these perhaps some local anecdotes will occur,
which may at least be supplementary to the accounts already in existence. My
residence in Spain, and some advantages incident to my peculiar situation
there, gave me repeated access to every thing I wished to see; almost every
religious foundation throughout the kingdom contains a magazine of art; in
resorting to these nothing will be found, of which a stranger can complain,
unless of the gloominess of some of the edifices, and the unfavourable lights,
in which many capital paintings are disposed: In private houses it is not
unusual to discover very fine pictures in neglect and decay; thrown aside
amongst the rubbish of cast-off furniture; whether it be, that the possessor
has no knowledge of their excellence, or thinks it below his notice to attend
to their preservation; but how much soever the Spaniards have declined from
their former taste and passion for the elegant arts, I am persuaded they have
in no degree fallen off from their national character for generosity, which is
still so prevalent amongst them, that a stranger, who is interestedly disposed
to avail himself of their munificence, may in a great measure obtain whatever
is the object of his praise and admiration: As for the royal collections at
Madrid, the Escorial and elsewhere, he will meet a condescension so
accommodated to his curiosity, that the one is as little likely to be exhausted
as the other; the facility of access to every palace in possession of His
Catholic Majesty is only to be equalled by the gratification it produces.

THE Arts, which revived in Italy during the 14th century, did not reach Spain
till the time of Ferdinand the Catholic; Antonio Del Rincon, a native of
Guadalaxara, may be considered as the father of the Spanish school; he studied
in Rome, and, returning to his native country, was taken into the service of
Ferdinand, who bestowed on him the Order of Santiago, and made him Groom of his
Chamber. There are two portraits of Ferdinand and Isabella, painted by him,
still to be seen at Toledo, in the church of San Juan de los Reyes, and several
pictures by his hand perished in the fire, that destroyed the palace of the
Pardo in the year 1608. This artist died in the year 1500.

The unhappy catastrophe of Torrigiano, the Florentine, followed in the year
1522: After having enriched the cities of Andalusia with several pieces of
sculpture, not unworthy the disciple and rival of Michael Angelo; he was
condemned to death by the Inquisition, and expired in the prison of Seville
under the horrors of an approaching execution: The story is as follows;
Torrigiano had undertaken to carve a Madona and child of the natural size, at
the order of a certain Spanish Grandee; it was to be made after the model of
one, which he had already executed; and promise was given him of a reward
proportioned to the merit of his work. His employer was one of the first
Grandees of Spain, and Torrigiano, who conceived highly of his generosity, and
well knew what his own talents could perform, was determined to outdo his
former work; he had passed great part of his life in traveling from kingdom to
kingdom in search of employment, and, flattering himself with the hope, that he
had now at last found a resting place after all his labors, the ingenious
artist with much pains and application completed the work, and presented to
his employer a matchless piece of sculpture, the utmost effort of his art; the
Grandee surveyed the striking performance with great delight and reverence;
applauded Torrigiano to the skies; and, impatient to possess himself of the
enchanting idol, forthwith sent to demand it; at the same time, to set off his
generosity with a better display, he loaded two lacqueys with the money, that
was to defray the purchase; the bulk at least was promising, but when
Torrigiano turned out the bags, and found the specie nothing better than a
parcel of brass maravedi, amounting only to the paltry sum of thirty ducats,
vexation at this sudden disappointment of his hopes, and just resentment for
what he considered as an insult to his merit, so transported him, that,
snatching up his mallet in a rage, and not regarding the perfection, or (what
to him was of more fatal consequence) the sacred character of the image he had
made; he broke it suddenly in pieces, and dismissed the lacqueys with their
load of farthings to tell the tale: They executed their errand too well. The
Grandee in his turn fired with shame, vexation and revenge, and assuming, or
perhaps conceiving, horror for the sacrilegious nature of the act, presented
himself before the Court of Inquisition, and impeached the unhappy artist at
that terrible tribunal; it was in vain that poor Torrigiano urged the right of
an author over his own creation; Reason pleaded on his side, but Superstition
sat in judgment; the decree was death with torture. The Holy Office lost its
victim; for Torrigiano expired under the horrors, not under the hands of the
executioner: That he was of a fierce impatient spirit we may well believe from
what is related of his maiming the great Michael Angelo by a violent blow on
the sace; the heretical reader perhaps will think this blow a more inexcusable,
offense, than that, for which he suffered; and an enthusiast in the arts will
scarce lament the punishment, which by a just transition fell upon him; for my
part, I lament both his offense and his punishment; the man, who could be so
frantic with passion, as in the person of Michael Angelo to deface one of the
divinest works of heaven, might easily be tempted to demolish his own; and it
has been generally observed, that hearts, so prone to anger, have on occasion
been as susceptible of apprehension and fear; it is to be supposed, that
Torrigiano's case was not better in the eyes of the Holy Office for his having
been resident in England and employed by King Henry the Eighth: Whether they
considered him as tinctured with the heresy of that Royal apostate does not
appear; I am inclined to believe he more resembled Henry in temper than in
opinion: At least, if we are to credit his assault on Michael Angelo and try
him on that action; since the days of Diomed few mortals ever launched a more
impious blow.

The arts, being thus transplanted from Italy into Spain, found a ready
naturalization in a country, then abounding with genius: The province of
Andalusia took the lead on this occasion, and has in all times been productive
of extraordinary talents; it was the cradle of most of the Spanish painters;
it is natives continue to be remarked for quick and volatile parts, differing
much in manners and disposition from the Castilians. Certain it is that Spain
has many local qualifications for becoming a nursery of Painters, which other
countries are in want os: It enjoys a clear and vivid sky, with a dry and
healthy air, favorable to the preservation if not to the production of works
of art; the human countenance there is in general of a grave historical cast;
the intermixture of the Jewish and Moorish tribes have marked the lower classes
with a strong peculiarity of features; the forms of the children, till they
attain the age of eight or ten, are good, and oftentimes their faces beautiful;
the eyes of the women black and piercing, and, as they use much action when
they converse, and are universally addicted to the Moorish modes of dancing,
which almost every peasant can accompany with his voice and instrument, their
groupes become extremely picturesque: To these may be added the character of
their dress, particularly that of Andalusia, which both in male and female is
uncommonly antique and graceful; the cloak alone may be folded twenty different
ways for different applications, and each attitude presents a specimen of
drapery worthy the study of an academy. The Painters have availed themselves of
this, Italians as well as natives, and the Capa will be found frequently upon
their canvasses, even where the scene does not lie in Spain. In speaking of
Spain, as a country favorable to Painters, I think it is just to except
painters of landscapes; in these it has neither excelled nor abounded; and the
general want of trees and verdure readily supplies a reason: Groves and rivers
and scattered habitations, emblematic of rural tranquillity, which furnish the
most pleasing subjects to the imagination of the scenist, are there but thinly
spread; the face of Nature is adust and frowning.

The Emperor Charles, though not very cordially attached to his Spanish
subjects, nor over partial to their country, cultivated notwithstanding the
genius of their Painters; and this he effected not only by sending them to
study under the Italian masters, but also by inviting the Italian masters into
Spain; the fertile genius of Titiano might have been alone sufficient to
illuminate a kingdom, and there were many others in the like employ; Julio and
Alexandro, Italians of the school of Juan de Udine, a disciple of Rafael, were
artists of great eminence; Charles employed them in a royal work, the
beautifying the Alhambra of Grenada; they enriched the Hospital of Santiago, in
the city of Ubeda, with many noble paintings, and the famous Duke of Alva found
employment for their talents.

Alonso Berruguete, a Castilian, educated in the school of the great Michael
Angelo, the friend and contemporary of Andrea del Sarto, Bachio Bandinello and
others, returned into Spain an eminent proficient in painting, sculpture and
architecture; deeply skilled in the theory of his art, he exhibited to the
world a new system of human symmetry and proportion, differing at once from the
rules of Pomponio Gaurico, Philipo de Borgona and Alberto Durero, over whom he
finally triumphed both in principle and practice; leaving many illustrious
monuments of his excellence in all the branches of his study, both at Madrid,
the Pardo and the Alhambra of Grenada; for which he was suitably honored and
rewarded by the Emperor Charles, and died full of years and replete with fame
and fortune, in 1545, in the city of Madrid. I should observe in this place,
that in the choir of the cathedral in Toledo, there are an innumerable number
of beautiful carvings by Berruguete; Philip de Borgona executed one side of the
choir, and Berruguete the other.

The success of this artist was an encouragement to others, and the school of
Michael Angelo was eagerly resorted to by Baptista Bergamo and Gaspar Becerra,
of Baiza in Andalusia; these illustrious students returned together to Spain,
and were immediately taken into the protection of the Emperor. The arts, which
Rincon had transplanted into Spain, which Berruguete had so prosperously
advanced, they (but especially Becerra) pushed into maturity; this man, who
even in Rome (at that period in her zenith) had attracted general admiration,
excelled in sculpture, equally as in painting; in the latter art his mode of
coloring, and his management in the relief of his figures, greatly improved
the practice of the Spanish school, and taught his countrymen to look upon
their first manner with contempt: As a statuary, he seems to have found ample
field for the exercise of his talents; the altars now began to wear a different
form; instead of the distorted barbarous shapes of Gothic masonry, crucifixes,
saints and virgins now took place, in all the grande gusto of Michael Angelo.
The churches of Astorga, Zamora, Burgos and Salamanca contended which should
first engage him in their service; he executed all these commissions to the
satisfaction of the Fathers, and, when they had equipped his images in wide
hoops and furbelowed petticoats, they applauded the artist, and adored his
manufacture. It was not so easy to satisfy the caprice of Isabella of Valois;
she commissioned him to carve a wooden image of our Lady of the Solidad, for
the convent of San Francisco de Paulo; Becerra received her Majesty's commands,
and addressed himself with diligence to the work; after the labor of a year he
completed an image to his entire satisfaction; he presented it to the Queen
with an assurance of success, but in vain; his image did not reach the ideas of
the Queen; the expression did not please her; and he was commanded not only to
make a better, but to take less time in making it: He executed his order a
second time, and produced an image to the admiration of all beholders; even the
Fathers of the Convent acknowledged it to be a perfect and exact representation
of nature; it was again submitted to the Queen, and again condemned for falling
short of her Majesty's conceptions of our Lady of the Solidad; the unhappy
artist was threatened to be superseded in the commission by some abler master;
but, anxious to preserve his pre-eminence, and fulfill her Majesty's ideas, he
again applied himself with ardour to the task; he racked his imagination
without ceasing to frame some visage, and devise some form, that Isabella might
confess bore a resemblance to the image in her mind: Wearied out with the
tormenting investigation, the exhausted artist one day fell into a profound
sleep; whilst this was passing, he saw, or thought he saw, a female figure
presenting herself at the feet of his bed; he looked, in hopes perhaps to have
obtained a model for his image; but the lady unluckily concealed her face; at
length, addressing him in the most courteous style, she desired him to open his
eyes, get out of bed, and take the log, that he would find burning on his
hearth, and set to work upon it, and he would find an image to his mind;
Becerra, overjoyed, lost no time in following her advice; he found the log,
quenched it; 'twas a convenient piece of timber; and with this supernatural aid
completed a figure to the heart's content of Isabella; the Monks, whose
prayers assisted the execution, received the miraculous image with joy; it was
erected on the high altar of the convent in Valladolid, with all proper
ceremonials fitting the solemnity; it was habited in the weeds of Queen Joanna,
widow of Philip the Handsome, and remains to this day, not indeed a monument of
Becerra's art (for no part of that is to be seen) but of his patience; and
proves, that, however eminent might be his talent for sculpture, if it had not
been for his faculty of dreaming, he would have made a shameful shipwreck of
his fame. Happy had it been for poor Torrigiano, if he had had Becerra's
discretion, or Becerra's dreams.

Antonio Flores, and Fernando Gallegos (the one of Seville and the other of
Salamanca) were Painters of great merit, and much in the favor of the Emperor,
particularly the latter; they formed themselves in the school of Alberto
Durero, and Gallegos copied the manner of his master so closely, that many of
his pictures cannot be distinguished from Durero's: Some of his works remain at
Salamanca, but most of them so impaired by time, and by the cloister where they
hang, that they are become scarce visible. Charles the Vth also brought with
him into Spain, out of Italy, the celebrated Pedro Campana, a Fleming by birth,
who had studied twenty years in the school of Rafael Urbin: When Charles made
his entry into Bologna, in the year 1530, Pedro Campana devised the grand
triumphal arch, under which he passed: Campana soon after came into Spain,
residing chiefly at Seville. In the chapel of the Purification in that city
there is still to be seen a capital painting by this master on the subject of
the ceremony, to which the chapel is dedicated; a Descent from the Cross and a
Nativity, both celebrated pictures, are yet to be seen in the church of San
Lorenzo; and in the convent of San Pablo, in a small chapel adjoining to the
Chapter House, there is a picture by Campana on the subject of the
Circumcision; all which are much extolled by Pacheco in his treatise on the Art
of Painting. Campana died in the year 1570 at Brussels, where his portrait is
still to be seen in the Consistory.

It was this visit made by the Emperor Charles to Bologna in 1530, which
brought about an event of the first importance in the history of the arts in
Spain; I mean the introduction of the works of Titiano, and some time after of
Titiano himself; that great master was in Bologna, when Charles made his entry,
and like Charles was then in the full luster of his fame; scarce a character of
eminence in Europe, but was to be found on the canvass of Titiano; to be
delivered to posterity in the glowing colors of his pencil seemed an object of
general ambition, and in some degree an anticipation of immortality; Alonso de
Ferrara, Federico Gonzaga (Duke of Mantua) Francisco Maria, (Duke of Urbino)
the Marquis del Basto, Pescara, Alva, Francisco Sforza, Antonio de Leyva, Diego
de Mendoza, Arretino, Bembo, Fracastorio, Ferdinand (King of the Romans) and
his son Maximilian, both afterward Emperors, the Popes Sixtus IV, Julius II,
and Paulus III, the great Emperor Soliman and the Sultaness Rosa were amongst
the illustrious personages, who had been painted by Titiano: The Emperor sat
to him at Bologna, as he passed through that city in the year above mentioned;
he was in the meridian of life and, though he could not be said to inherit the
beauty of Philip the Handsome, he was nevertheless of a majestic comely aspect;
the portrait pleased him well and, though so weak an ingredient as vanity was
not to be found in Charles's composition, yet he was not insensible to
impressions, and henceforward determined never to commit his person to any
other limner than Titiano. He was a lover of arts, not an enthusiast; he knew
the force of their effects, and reverenced them for their power, without-being
captivated by their charms; to men of eminence he was liberal without
familiarity; in short, his affections in this particular, as in every other,
were directed regularly to their object by reason, not driven impetuously by
constitution or passion: Upon this principle he rewarded Titiano for his
portrait with a thousand golden scudi, consulting thereby no less his own
magnificence, than the artist's merit; he paid him 200 ducats for a small
piece; and, upon Titiano's presenting him with a picture of the Annunciation,
for which his countrymen the Venetians had refused to pay him more than 200
scudi, Charles rewarded him for the present with a thousand. He invited Titiano
into Spain, and pressed him to comply, using many promises and some entreaties;
anxious to wrest the palm of glory from the brows of his rival Francis in arts,
as well as arms, he perceived there was no other living merit but Titiano's,
which he could oppose to that of Leonardo da Vinci. Carlos Rodolfi, the
biographer of Titiano, says he never came into Spain, but he is mistaken; it
was not however till the year 1548 that he complied with the Emperor's
invitation; from that period till 1553 he resided in Spain; during this
residence he composed many admirable works, and received many princely rewards;
Charles gave him the key, the order of Santiago at Brussels, and in 1553
constituted him a Count Palatine of the empire at Barcelona by an instrument
worthy to be recorded; viz. Carolus V. divina favente clementia Romanorum
Imperator augustus ac Rex Germaniae, Hispaniarumque spectabili nostro et
imperii sacri fideli dilecto Titiano de Vecellis, sive equiti aurato, et sacri
Lateranensis palatii, aulaeque nrae et imperialis consistorii comiti gratiam
Caesaream et omne bonum.

Cum nobis semper mos fuerit, postquam ad hujus Caesariae dignitatis
celsitudinem divis auspiciis evecti fuerimus, vos potissimum, qui singulari
fide et observantia erga nos et sacrum Romanum imperium praediti egregiis
moribus, eximiis virtutibus et ingenuis artibus industriaque clari et
excellentes habiti sunt prae caeteris benevolentia, favore et gratia nostra
prosequi. Attendentes igitur singularem tuam erga nos, et sacrum Romanum
imperium fidem et observantiam, ac praeter illas egregias virtutes tuas et
ingenii dotes, exquisitam illam pingendi et ad vivum effigiendarum imaginum
scientiam, qua quidem art talis nobis visus es, ut merito hujus saeculi
Apelles dici merearis, etc. Motu igitur proprio et certa nostra scientia, animo
deliberato, sano quoque Principum, Comitum, Baronum, Procerum et aliorum
nostrorum et Imperii sacri dilectorum accidente consilio, et de nostrae
Caesareae potestatis plenitudine te praenominatum Titianum sacri Lateranensis
palatii, aulaeque nrae, et Imperialis consistorii comitem fecimus, creavimus,
ereximus, et comitatus Palatini tititulo clementer insignivimus: Prout tenore
praesentium facimus, creamus, erigimus, attolimus et insignimus ac aliorum
Comitum Palatinorum numero et consortu gratanter aggregamus et adscribimus, etc.

These favors alarmed the jealousy of the nobles both of Germany and Spain,
but their envy drew no other answer from Charles, than that he had many nobles
in his empire and but one Titiano; the artist, who was at some distance,
employed upon a picture, overheard the retort with conscious satisfaction and,
as he made his reverence to the Emperor, dropped a pencil on the floor; the
courteous monarch took it up and, delivering it to him confounded by this
second mark of his condescension, added, that to wait on Titiano was a service
for an Emperor. Charles did not only grace this eminent artist with the
splendid ornaments and titles above mentioned, he gave him more solid marks of
his favor, appointing him rents in Naples of two hundred ducats annually each,
besides a munificent compensation for every picture he executed: Palomino says,
that Charles regarded the possession of a capital piece of Titiano more than he
did the acquisition of a new province to his dominion; but Palomino was a
painter, and more familiar with the pictures of Titiano, than with the politics
of the Emperor: This would have been a caprice unworthy of any prince; but
Charles's character was not the sport of caprice; whilst to the very moment of
his life, when he resigned his dominions, it was evident that ambition was his
ruling passion; had he been capable of that preference, which Palomino ascribes
to him, he would hardly have taken such pains to the last hour of his reign to
persuade his brother Ferdinand to make a sacrifice of his succession of the
empire, nor have retired into the unfurnished cell of his convent with his
puppets and his birds without one consolatory remembrance of his favorite
author to cheer his solitude, or to inflame his devotion: I can hardly be
persuaded, that Charles's abdication of his empire was any proof of caprice; he
plainly enough perceived his health was gone, and he was not willing that his
fame should follow it.

Titiano had quitted Spain, before Philip took possession of the throne; the
arts however had rapidly advanced: Charles had made some improvement to the
royal edifices, but all with a view to accommodation rather than magnificence;
he had fronted the old palace of Madrid, beautified and repaired the venerable
Alhambra of Grenada, planted and disposed the walks and avenues of Aranjuez in
the Flemish taste, and built the Pardo at two leagues distance from the capital
in a retired situation and in a style by no means imperial; it is a square
building of moderate dimensions, flanked with four small towers at the angles,
and environed with a fosse exactly on the scale of a nobleman's seat in his
native country: Superstition soon engaged Philip in a more important
undertaking and, having made a vow upon the victory of St. Quintin to dedicate
a church and monastery to San Lorenzo, he began in the midst of a solitary and
frightful desert to displace the rocks and compel them to take the shape of an
edifice: on the feast day of St. George with much temporal and spiritual pomp
he laid the foundation-stone of the monastery of San Lorenzo, called the
Escorial, with the following, Inscription: Deus O. M. operi Aspiciat! Joan
Baptista Architectus



So much has been said on the subject of this extraordinary edifice, and the
Spanish writers make such a pompous display of its magnificence, that I might
appear to affect a singularity of opinion, if I was to offer freely what my
imperfect judgment suggests on the matter; to such of my readers, as have seen
the Escorial, what I should have to say would have little novelty; and in their
opinions, who have not seen it, and been taught to respect it, it might have
too much. The scale undoubtedly is magnificent, though the mass is graceless;
as a monastery it is vast and aweful, fitly calculated to entomb the living and
the dead; as a palace, it is justly emblematic of its founder, who on the
summit of the superincumbent mountain was accustomed to sit and survey his
rising fabric in silent contemplation and delight. Francisco de los Santos, the
monk, who wrote a pompous ^escription of the Escorial, ob^erves that the
sensation, which a ^pectator feels upon entering the ^reat court, is the same
as at sud^enly hearing a delightful concert; ^he soul, says he, in both cases
is ^bsorbed in ecstasy -- what then must ^ave been the sensations of Phi^ip, as
he sat upon the top of the ^ountain, where at one glance he ^ook in the whole
birds-eye of the ^difice? Certainly, if the good Father heard a concert upon
his en^ering only one of the courts of ^he monastery, His Catholic Majesty,
when stationed on the moun^ain, must have enjoyed a full cho^us of musical
ecstasy: For my ^art, taking into consideration the ^crupulous performance of
his vow, I am inclined to believe his chief pleasure consisted in observing how
exactly he had made the building correspond to the gridiron of San Lorenzo;
this he did in honorable commemoration of the martyrdom of the Saint above
mentioned: He also took the pious precaution of disposing a number of relics in
the balls of the cupolas, crosses and different parts of the building, to
preserve it from fire, storm, or any other injury: These holy preservatives
have not been very successful in their office, for great part of the edifice,
with not a few of the relics in charge, were consumed by a dreadful
conflagration: Nor is this the only element at war with the Escorial, the
furious gusts of wind, that occasionally sweep from the impending mountains,
surpass description: The Escorial is placed in the very eddy of these furious
gusts; as neither man, nor beast, nor carriages can stand before them, a
subterranean passage is cut through the rock, under the area of the court, for
a communication with the town, which is better sheltered from the blast: The
massy walls of the building are proof against the violence of the storms, but
the covering of the roof, though fortified with all possible care against the
attack, continually exhibits melancholy proofs os its insufficiency; whilst the
architect, by disposing the windows to resist the wind, seems to have forgot,
that one part of their office was to admit the light.

If the architect however finds something to condemn, the painter will find
much to admire: It is undoubtedly a repository of noble arts. As soon as Philip
had conceived the idea of enriching the royal convent with every thing suitable
to the magnificence of its scale, and which the mines of America, that flowed
in upon his treasury, could procure, he cast his eyes toward his father's
favorite painter Titiano, then returned into his own country: Whether he
solicited him to come again into Spain does not appear; but he had certainly
given him several commissions for pictures: In a letter, which Philip writes to
Titiano of the 13th of July 1558 from Ghent, he acknowledges the receipt of one
from Titiano of the 19th of the preceding month, and expresses the satisfaction
it gave him to hear, that he had completed his picture of Calixtus and one
also of Diana bathing: He tells him that he had wrote to Garcias Fernandez at
Genoa to forward these pictures for Spain, and desires Titiano himself to
superintend the backing and to direct the cases, that no other of his valuable
productions might be again exposed to the like misfortune, as had befallen his
painting of the Christ, which had been ruined by the way: He earnestly ^equests
of Titiano to restore that loss by another of the same composition, which he
shall highly prize, as coming from the hand of so great a master: In conclusion
he expresses his regret to hear that the rents, settled upon him in Milan and
Naples, had fallen into arrear, and tells him that he will put those payments
in such train, that there shall be no cause of complaint in future. This in
effect he performed by a peremptory mandate to his governor of Milan, directing
him to satisfy the arrears due to Titiano from the date of the grants in 1541
and 1548, and put the same in regular course of payment for the future, either
from the Ducal chamber, or such other funds as might be more conveniently
applied to that purpose. This mandate bears date the 25th of December 1558, and
at the foot of it the King writes these lines with his own hand: You know how I
am interested in this order, as it affects Titiano; comply with it therefore in
such a manner, as to give me no occasion to repeat it. The King had the further
attention to continue to him the grant of his Key, and nominated him First
Painter of the chamber.

The pictures, which Titiano made in Spain, and those he sent into Spain, form
of themselves a large and magnificent collection; the catalogues of the
Escorial and Madrid give some idea of them, but do not nearly reach the amount;
to particularize their respective merit is not the object of this work, and
would be an undertaking far above my hands: In a posthumous publication of
Antonio Rafael Mengs, printed at Madrid in 1780, there are some observations on
Titiano's pictures in the palace at Madrid; I could wish, for the reader's
better gratification, that more had been said by Mengs upon the subject; and in
general it is to be regretted, that he had not entered into a fuller
description of the Madrid collection, of which he professes to give an account:
But it is not in these collections of the Escorial and palace of Madrid, as I
before observed, that we can find the sum of Titiano's works in Spain; many
capital pictures are dispersed, many perished in the deplorable fire, that
destroyed the Pardo, some have been by late decree exiled for their dishonesty,
and some condemned and executed in the flames: Amongst the pictures, that
perished at the Pardo, many portraits of the Austrian family were lost,
together with one of Titiano himself, painted by order of Charles V. a
celebrated work, in which the painter is represented, holding in his hand the
portrait of Charles; transferring by this courtly device the honor of the
representation from himself to the Emperor. On the subject of the exiles and
martyrs above mentioned I am unwilling to enlarge, it will suffice to say, that
being most in the nude, their crime will in some people's judgment appear their
recommendation; certain it is that the unparalleled and inestimable figure of
the sleeping Venus, which was given by Philip the IVth to our Charles the
First, when Prince of Wales, upon the visit he made in Spain, and which, after
the death of that unhappy monarch, was purchased by the Spanish ambassador in
England, has been rescued from execution by the address of Mengs. I frequently
visited this matchless deity in her hiding place, where I found her miserably
lodged, though respectably attended by an Atalanta in the race by Guido,
divinely executed, a Helen and Paris by Rubens, and three Graces of the same
master, colored to a miracle, but much more embonpoint than their principal.
To attempt any description of this sleeping Venus appears to me as impossible,
as it would be to condemn such perfect and withal such modest beauties to the
flames; a graceful turn of the neck gives the full countenance to the
spectator, in which the master-artist has displayed beauty and sweetness of the
divinest sort, with the most perfect innocence of character; the limbs are
elegantly and decently disposed, the hues are glowing and transparent, the
outline round and glittering, and the local lights and shades produced by those
tender and imperceptible touches, that form the magic of Corregio; in short it
is a miracle of art, and was so decidedly the chef d'oeuvre of the master,
that, after several efforts to rival his own matchless work, he quitted this
self-emulation in despair. It is to the honor of Don Antonio Mengs, that he
saved it from destruction: It had another escape from the flames of the Pardo,
which fatal accident being reported to Philip the IVth, then on the throne, he
instantly demanded, if the Titian-Venus had escaped the conflagration; the
messenger assured him that it was saved, then replied the King all other losses
may be supported: I cannot dismiss this enchanting object without observing,
that, by testimony of all the best judges of its merit, it yields in no
particular to the Venus of Medicis, but in the weaker nature of it is material:
twice rescued from the flames, it still exists in perfect condition: May no
future age of the world produce a hand to raise an ax against the one, or to
construct a funeral pile for the other!

There are several paintings of Titiano in the Madrid collection upon fabulous
subjects, and in particular a Tarquin and Lucretia so naturally executed, that,
what between the excess of chastity in one prince, and the notorious abuse of
it in the other, it must be owned the lady has had an escape. But of all his
pictures upon subjects of this description, the most beautiful are two
celebrated companions, the one a groupe of Bacchanals, the other of Cupids, in
the apartments of the Princess; the figures in each are of the third part of
the natural size. In the fore ground of the groupe of Bacchanals there is a
young female votarist asleep, of which Don Antonio Mengs in his critique above
mentioned speaks with rapture; he says that he never saw it without that
striking novelty of delight as if he had never discovered it before: The
coloring of this figure he observes is in Titiano's clearest manner, and the
degradation of tints through the whole groupe, (which is all in the nude, and
which with an infinite variety of nice discriminations composes one uniform
tone) is wonderfully contrived; and constitutes such a model in the art of
coloring, as he never met with in any other example; he concludes his remarks
on this picture by observing, that all the harmonious accompaniments of sky,
variegated soil, with deep and tender shades of the trees, form such an
assemblage of beautiful objects in nature perfectly imitated, that a better
picture in this style he does not think the world can produce: The other
picture represents a very numerous groupe of beautiful Cupids, disposed in a
wonderful variety of attitudes, employed in puerile sports, under a grove of
apple trees, the fruit of which they have scattered about the ground, and are
playing with in the most gay and natural manner: The same curious degradation
of hues in the carnations of the flesh and colors of the hair obtains in this
picture, as in the former, and to an equal degree of excellence; the same
remarks therefore, as I have quoted in that case, are applicable to this: Don
Antonio Mengs adds, that these pictures were formerly in the Ludovici palace at
Rome, and were a present to the king of Spain: Sandrart reports of this groupe
of Cupids, that it served for a study to Dominiquino, Pousin and Flamenco;
Albano has transcribed a part of this groupe into a composition of his
painting, and there are two copies made by Rubens of these pictures to be seen
in the palace; the ingenious author above quoted adds with rather too much
critical severity, that these copies of Rubens are like an elegant author
translated into Dutch, where the sentiments of the original may be guest at,
but all the grace is vanished.

Of scriptural subjects, treated by the hand of this great master, the Escorial
presents a host of valuable examples; not a few art also to be found in the
palace at Madrid; the celebrated picture of the Last Supper in the refectory at
the Escorial has been repeatedly described, and is known to all Europe as a
miracle of art: In a letter of Titiano to Philip, which is preserved, he
informs the King, that he had been seven years employed in painting it; this
must surely be understood with latitude as to other intermediate compositions;
for, although the artist, as it is well known, lived to a very uncommon age,
yet the life of a Patriarch would scarce suffice to warrant undertakings of
such labor, nor would the reward of 2000 golden scudi, which the King sent him
by way of Genoa, and which was in fact a magnificent price in those times, be a
proportionable compensation for the dedication of so great a portion of his
time.

The composition, which is called la gloria de Titiano, that of Christ in the
garden and the Santa Margarita with the Dragon, would claim some description,
if much more capable judges had not already passed the due encomiums on these
excellent performances; the scrupulous sanctity of the monks was offended at
some liberties taken by Santa Margarita in tucking up her robe and discovering
part of a very graceful leg; a thing not seemly to be done, when in company
with a Dragon; especially as all Dragons have not the prudence and good faith
of that, which was in keeping by the Hesperides: But Jordan's rapid pencil
pieced the petticoat, which now, like Raphael's wings, Her feet
Shadows from either heel.


Titiano was born in 1480, and consequently was 68 years old when he came into
Spain; he staid there five years and, after Charles's abdication, painted many
pieces for Philip; it is to be expected therefore, that there will be found
some tokens of natural decay in his later works, and certain it is, that though
his coloring is always good, some pictures there are in the royal collection
of another pencil from his Venus, and far less bright than his slumbring
Bacchant: He prattles sometimes with the privilege of old age; but still it is
the prattle of Nestor.

It is not to be understood that all the pictures of Titiano, that are in the
royal collection, were painted by him, whilst he was King's painter to Charles
and to Philip: Many are of his earlier and better age, and were either
presented to the Crown, or purchased in Italy after the death of Titiano: An
instance of this occurred in the case of the famous pictures abovementioned
extracted from the Ludovice palace, which were a present to Philip: There is
also in the sacristy of the Escorial a San Sebastian in his best manner, which
was given by the Conde de Benavente, and several pieces of Titiano were
collected by the great painter Velazquez in his excursion to Italy by order of
Philip the IVth. Whilst Philip the IId. was thus solicitous to enrich his royal
convent of San Lorenzo with the valuable works of Titiano, extracted out of
Italy, his own kingdom of Spain offered to his choice many eminent professors
and disciples in the art; the residence of that great master in Spain, and the
emulation of contemporary genius, roused into action by the study of his
brilliant compositions, as well as by the introduction of other distinguished
foreigners, engaged in completing and adorning that vast fabric, operated to
produce an Augustan age in Spain. I shall proceed to name some of the principal
painters, as well foreigners as natives, who were employed in furnishing and
adorning the Escorial.

Juan Fernandez Ximenez of Navarre, commonly called El Mudo or the Dumb, and
generally acknowledged as the Titiano of Spain, was born at Logrono, of a
respectable family; the defects of nature (for he was deaf as well as dumb)
were in some degree compensated to him by most quick and brilliant sense in the
remaining faculties. He was first instructed in the art of painting by Fray
Vicente de Santo Domingo, a monk of Santo Catalina in a convent at Talavera in
Castile, of the order of Geronimytes; his early marks of genius were such, that
Fray Vicente proposed to the parents of El Mudo to send him into Italy, which
being accordingly done, he traveled to Florence, Venice, Milan and Naples,
visiting many of the most famous academies; but principally forming himself in
the school of Titiano: He soon established so general a reputation in Italy,
that Philip, being apprized of his fame, recalled him into Spain and appointed
him one of his painters at the Escorial; after having given some sketches of
Prophets in black and white, in the adornments of the sacristy, as samples of
his art, he proceeded to compositions of greater consequence, and painted the
Baptism of our Savior in the Prior's cell; he was after that employed in
several paintings for a chapel, which King Philip caused to be erected in the
wood of Segovia; these paintings were removed to the upper cloister of the
Escorial, and in one of these, which represents the beheading of Santiago, El
Mudo has inserted the portrait of Santoyo in the character of the Executioner,
in revenge for some ill offices, which that minister had done him. Santoyo
complained to the King, making suit that the figure might be expunged, and his
person not delivered to posterity in the disgraceful occupation of a hangman;
the King, who probably knew the cause of the offense, did not disapprove of the
nature of the revenge, and, excusing himself to Santoyo on account of the
excellence of the performance, would not allow the picture to be defaced. The
Twelve Apostles on the great pillars of the church next to the high altar are
also painted by El Mudo. When Titiano's famous painting of the Last Supper
arrived at the Escorial, El Mudo was employed, and upon Philip's proposing to
cut the canvass to the size of the panel in the refectory, where it was
destined to hang, El Mudo to prevent the mutilation of so capital a work made
earnest signs of intercession with the King to be permitted to copy it, and
reduce it to the size of the place allotted, offering to do it in the space of
six months; upon the King's expressing a hesitation on account of the length of
the time required by El Mudo for the work, and proceeding to put his design in
execution, El Mudo repeated his supplications in behalf of his favorite master
with more fervency than ever, offering to complete his copy in less time, than
he at first demanded, tendering at the same time his head, as the punishment of
noncompliance, laying his hand on his breast as a sign, that he claimed the
order of Santiago as his reward if he should succeed; the offer was not
accepted and execution was performed upon Titiano, accompanied with the most
distressful attitudes and distortions of El Mudo. He died soon after at the
Escorial to the great regret of Philip, at the age of 40, in the year 1572,
generally entitled the Titiano of Spain, and was honored with an epitaph by
Fra. Lope Feliz de Vega Carpio.

El Divino Morales was born at Badajoz in the province of Estremadura, in the
beginning of the sixteenth century. He was instructed at Seville in the academy
of Pedro Campana, a disciple of Raphael; from his constant choice of divine
subjects and the extreme delicacy of his pencil he acquired the appellation of
El Divino, and is known to the present age by no other name than that of El
Divino Morales. All his paintings are upon board or copper, and almost
generally heads of the crucified Savior; no instance occurring of his having
executed any composition or figure at full length. His heads are finished off
with infinite care and labored to the utmost, yet not so as to diminish the
force of the expression; for I have seen some examples of his Ecce Homo of a
most exquisite and touching character; also some heads of the Christ bearing
the cross approaching very near to the Savior in the famous Pasmo de Sicilia.
Though Morales never fails to impress the countenance with the deepest tints of
human agony, I never met with any instance of his doing violence to our ideas
of the divinity of the object he represents: His conception of the countenance
seems to be original and his own, more resembling however the face of the
Christ in Raphael's picture abovementioned, than any other; and worked, as it
appears to me, after the manner of the highly-finished heads of Leonardo da
Vinci. He was undoubtedly an artist of a very limited invention and design; in
aerial perspective and the clearobscure I have sometimes found him evidently
deficient, nor has he any tincture of art or academy in grouping his figures
and disposing his attitudes; every thing is left to a simple expression of
affecting nature: His Matter dolorosa is the very extreme of sorrow; nor is he
anxious to maintain any trace of beauty amidst his expressions of affliction: I
am of opinion that no imagination, which had not been aided by the spectacles
of exhausted nature, which a nunnery exhibits, could have devised an object so
extremely woe-begone: It is in short the aggravated portrait of an emaciated
devotee expiring in her vigils. It may readily be believed in a country, where
paintings of this sort are amongst the objects of devotion, and where every
private house is furnished with its oratory and its altar, that the pictures of
Morales must have been in general request; it has been for the same reason
extremely difficult for travelers to extract out of Spain any piece of this
author; and as he worked very slowly and was not very industrious or interested
in his art, his pictures are both very rare and very permanent in their
stations Since this book went to the press, I have received out of Spain an
Ecce Homo by Morales, painted upon stone, which was affixed to a private
oratory in the house of the Duque de Osuna, and transmitted to me by the favor
of that distinguished Grandee.
. Enough may be had of illegitimate or suspicious pretensions, but in general
they are easily to be distinguished. One would expect to find in Morales's
private life a character in unison with his studies; but the contrary of this
appears from his history. When Morales was summoned to the Escorial by Philip,
he left Badajoz at the King's command, and putting himself in the best array,
that his whole substance could procure, presented himself to the sovereign more
like an Ambassador upon the delivery of his credentials, than a rural artist,
called to labor at his profession for hire: Upon the King's remarking on the
unexpected splendour of his appearance, he answered with an air of national
gallantry that, being resolved to dedicate every thing he possessed by nature, or
by fortune, to the service of his sovereign, he had presented himself in the
best condition and attire, that his means admitted in obedience to his summons.
It does not appear, that his reply displeased, neither was the King
dissatisfied with his performances, for which he liberally rewarded him:
However, when upon completion of his undertakings he returned to Badajoz, he
seems to have carried home the same spirit of extravagance; for, when Philip
passed through that place in 1581 on his way to take possession of the kingdom
of Portugal, Morales presented himself in a far different condition, reduced by
poverty and age, for he was then 72 years old; Morales, says the King, methinks
you are grown very old, since last I saw you. True, Sen^or, replied he, and
also very poor. Philip, (of whom the arts at least have nothing to complain)
directly turning to the city treasurer ordered him 200 ducats, telling him it
was to purchase him a dinner -- and a supper too? said Morales; No, answered
the King, give him a hundred ducats more: a fortunate rencounter for poor
Morales: He survived this event some years and died in 1586. Some of his
paintings are preserved at Cordova and Seville; and at Madrid in the chapel of
our Lady of the Soledad, belonging to the convent of the Trinitarians, I have
been shown a Santa Veronica by his hand: There is also an Ecce Homo in the
convent of the nuns of Corpus Christi, which with other specimens I have met in
private cabinets, confirm to me his title to the appellation of El Divino.

Miguel Barroso, (a disciple of Becerra) and Domingo Beltran the Jesuit, a
native of Victoria, were men of eminent talents; they were both excellent
architects and of great erudition: The former was employed at the Escorial in
painting part of the principal cloister, the latter, who had formed himself in
Italy, executed some statues in the great church of admirable workmanship, and
in the grande gusto of Michael Angelo. Beltran also carved a crucisix for the
high altar at the Imperial college, lately occupied by the Jesuits at Madrid, a
work of infinite merit and expression; there is another on the high altar of
the college at Alcala de Henares, which I have not seen, but which is no less
celebrated: Both these ingenious artists died in the year 1590, both were men
of amiable manners, great candor and remarkable modesty.

The same year was also fatal to Teodosio Mingot the Catalan, (a disciple of
Michael Angelo) and Luis de Carvajal of Toledo, both eminent painters, and both
employed at the Escorial: Part of the principal cloister is painted by
Carvajal, and amongst the paintings in the church specimens of a respectable
sort are to be found of both these masters.

But amongst the principal artists, employed by Philip in the paintings of the
Escorial, the Elder Coello was one in the chief favor and esteem of that
sovereign, who in his letters styles him Titiano Portugues (for he was of that
nation) and addresses him by the affectionate appellation of my beloved son
Alonso Sanchez Coello. He studied at Rome in the school of Rafael de Urbino,
and completed himself in his art under the instruction of Antonio Moro in
Spain; he passed from Spain into Portugal, and was in the service of Don Juan,
and afterward of his widow Donna Juana, sister of Philip the second: Upon the
retirement of Antonio Moro, the King of Spain solicited his sister to supply
the loss of that great artist by sending him Coello; upon his arrival at the
court Philip lodged him in an apartment near at hand, with which he had a
private communication, for the purpose of visiting him, whilst he was at work:
On these occasions he treated Coello with great familiarity and condescension;
he was in such favor with all the Royal family, that his apartment became at
times their general rendezvous; and in these visits Coello made several
portraits of Philip on foot and horseback, and of all the Royal or
distinguished personages, that composed the court: In short he became
considered as a man in such high degree of favor, that his protection was
looked up to by the Courtiers and Grandees and his house and table frequented by
the first persons in the nation, not excepting Cardinal Grambela, Don Gaspar de
Zueroga, archbishop of Toledo, and Don Rodrigo de Castro, archbishop of
Seville: Coello was no less in favor with Pope Gregory the XIIIth and Sixtus
Quintus, with the Dukes of Florence and Savoy, Cardinal Farnese and many other
illustrious characters of that time. After endowing a charitable foundation for
the reception of poor orphans at Valladolid, Coello died in the sixty-fifth
year of his age in 1590; an era fatal to the arts in Spain.

If Coello cannot properly be considered as a native of Spain, he must be
acknowledged to rank high amongst the chief artists, who have flourished in
that kingdom: His paintings in the Escorial, which are chiefly of Saints
affixed to the respective altars, do great honor to his memory; the portrait,
that he made of the great patriarch San Ignacio, drawn from an impression of
his face, taken in wax after his death, is much celebrated; and his original
figures of Sisiphus and Titius, as well as his copies from Titiano of Tantalus
and Ixion, now in the palace of Madrid, are noble specimens. His portraits of
many royal and noble persons, which are spoken of as excellent, perished with
many other of his capital works in the unfortunate fire of the Pardo; of all
which survive, the principal in point of composition is preserved in the church
of San Geronimo in Madrid, representing the martyrdom of San Sebastian; on the
right hand of the Saint stands the figure of Christ, on the left the Virgin
Mary, and lower in the front San Bernardo and San Francisco; above a glory and
a figure representing El Padre Eterno; the whole is executed with great majesty
of design, a bold relief and a strong and masterly expression: He colors in
the style of Titiano and seems to draw with great facility and freedom. He died
universally regretted by the artists, lamented by Philip, who regarded him
highly, and celebrated by the famous Lopez de Vega who wrote his epitaph.

Philip in the decline of fortune and life, by the death of Coello lost his
best and perhaps only resource against the vexations of state and the
intrusions of remorse: Haughty by nature and harsh through disappointment,
there were still some moments, when his pride sought the relief of familiarity,
and when his temper for a while relaxed into complacency: In those moments he
would mount the ladder, (the only one he ever climbed without ambition or
disgrace) that privately communicated with the painting-room of Coello. Philip
had deserved well of the arts, and in company with them he found himself for
once amongst his friends: Coello had discretion, good manners and much
acquaintance with the world; if the King encouraged conversation, Coello knew
every body and every thing, and out of those could choose his topics suitably
and treat them agreeably; if the King was disposed to silence during his visit,
as was frequently the case, Coello pursued his work with fixed attention, he
pressed his canvass into life with all the energy and spirit of his genius: The
king sat by, contemplating the new creation, which the hand of art was forming
in his sight, and for a while perhaps forgot the breaches he had caused in that
of nature's producing: By the easel of Coello, if he was not defended from the
cares, he was at least secure from the intrusions of Royalty. Whoever has been
accustomed to look on during the operations of industry or art, must have
experienced a repose of thought, an interval from worldly inquietude, that
steals insensibly and gradually upon the mind, as sleep does on the body: If
such are our sensations, whilst contemplating the labourer at his task, or the
mechanic at his trade, how much do we improve the avocation, when the eye is
called off from every other object and fixed upon one of the most pleasing and
surprising in the whole circle of human arts and inventions! We may naturally
believe that Philip felt the benefits of this resource: In his council chamger
the defection of provinces galled his pride, and the dispersion of armadas
thwarted his ambition: In his closet the injured Perez stung his conscience and
the unhappy Don Carlos haunted his imagination; but in the academy of Coello he
saw himself in his most favorable light, and perhaps the only one, which can
reflect a luster on his memory.

The great works, which Philip was carrying on at the Escorial, and the
magnificent collection of paintings he was there amassing, attracted the
attention of all the artists in Europe, whilst the wealth and munificence of
the King held out ample encouragement to adventurers of merit. Spain at that
brilliant era was in possession of many native painters, who had they been
happy enough to have found an historian to have done justice to their fame,
would at this day have ranked with the most distinguished masters of the age in
Italy; but their names are buried in the obscurity of time, and their works in
that of cloisters and convents.

Philip pressed his favorite undertaking with such ardour, and the
immeasurable walls of the convent of San Lorenzo offered such a field for
emulation, that the harvest could not be reaped by natives only, however
numerous; so that to conclude the work within the period of his reign it was
necessary to call in the assistance of more laborers, and a great body of
ingenious emigrants accepted the invitation: My design is to present the reader
with a few local anecdotes relative to the principal characters of this
description, the gleanings of their better history, which in general is so well
known, as to make any more diffusive relation superfluous and impertinent.

In selecting these I shall principally follow the order of time, in which they
flourished, for the present however confining myself to the reign of Philip the
IId.

Antonio Moro (Sir Antony More) the predecessor and preceptor of the elder
Coello above mentioned, was born at Utrecht, where in the early years of his
life he studied in the school of Juan Escorelio; from thence he passed into
Italy, where he ultimately formed himself upon the models of the great masters
Michael Angelo and Rafael de Urbino. He came into Spain 1552, Charles V. being
then on the throne, under the protection of his countryman Cardinal Grambeli;
he made a portrait of Prince Philip, and, being recommended by the Cardinal to
the service of the Emperor, he was sent by him into Portugal to take the
portrait of the Princess Donna Maria, then contracted to Philip: At the same
time he painted John III. of Portugal and his queen Donna Catalina, Charles's
youngest sister; by all which portraits he gave entire satisfaction, and was
magnificently rewarded both by Charles and the Royal personages
abovementioned. Having succeeded so well in this commission, he was next
dispatched by the Emperor into England to the court of Mary, to take the
portrait of that princess, previous to her espousals with Philip: Moro employed
all the flattering aids of his art in this portrait, and so captivated the
courtiers of Spain with the charms of Mary's person, that he was employed by
his patron the Cardinal and many of the Grandees to make copies of his picture,
one of which I have seen in possession of a noble family, and by which it
should appear that Moro was not only a very good painter, but an excellent
courtier. Having enriched himself by his embassy to England, he returned into
Spain upon the conclusion of peace between that kingdom and France, and was
eagerly received into the service of Philip II. then on the throne. His
excellence in the painting of portraits supplied him with ample employ in this
court, Philip, who made slaves of his friends and friends of his painters,
treated Moro with extraordinary familiarity. This great artist had not all the
courtly disoretion of his scholar Coello, and met the King's advances with the
same ease that they were made; so that one day, whilst he was at his work and
Philip looking on, Moro dipped his pencil in carmine, and with it smeared the
hand of the King, who was resting his arm on his shoulder: The jest was rash,
and the character, to which it was applied, not to be played upon with
impunity; the hand of the Sovereign of Spain (which even the fair sex kneel
down to salute) was never so treated since the foundation of the monarchy; the
King surveyed it seriously a while, and in that perilous moment of suspense the
fate of Moro balanced on a hair; the courtiers, who were in awful attendance,
revolted from the sight with horror and amazement (could Luca Jordano have
seized the groupe in that moment and dashed it off with his rapid facility,
what a subject for a painter!) caprice, or I would rather say pity, turned the
scale, and Philip passed the silly action off with a smile of complacency: The
painter, dropping on his knees, eagerly seized those of the King, and kissed
his seet in humble atonement for the offense, and all was well, or seemed at
least so to be; but the person of the King was too sacred in the consideration
of those times, and the act too daring to escape the notice of the awful office
of the Inquisition; these holy and enlightened Fathers, maturely weighing all
the circumstances of the case, learnedly concluded that Antonio Moro, being a
foreigner and a traveller, had either learnt the art magic, or obtained in
England some spell or charm, wherewith he had bewicht the King: Nor let the
heretical reader treat this story as a fiction, or think that the Fathers
according to the premises, on which their judgments then were and still are
formed, reasoned much amiss; for a disbelief in witches is a species of
criminal infidelity to the present moment condemnable at that sacred tribunal,
of which I could give a late very notable example, if it was proper to make
public a gentleman's disgrace, for which he has suffered punishment, and of
which it is hoped he has duly repented. If Antonio had contended that he
practiced no other charms upon Philip, than those of his art, which over some
minds has a kind of bewitching influence, such a plea would scarce have passed
with his judges, whose hearts were far out of reach of such mechanical
fascination; and as little would it have served his cause to plead the natural
gaiety and good humor of the Monarch, such an argument would have been fairly
set down amongst those quae non admittuntur; so that his condemnation would
have been inevitable; for as it is hard to suppose how any man could daub the
fingers of a King of Spain with carmine, unless by the correspondence and
conspiracy of the Devil, or some of his agents in witchcraft, no doubt the
tragedy of poor Torregiano would have been revived on this occasion, had not
the same Devil, in the shape of one of Philip's ministers, luckily snatched
Antonio from his fate, whilst the tortures were preparing to force out the
impious secrets of his black and diabolic art: This same minister of Philip, or
I should rather say of the Devil, spirited away his brother imp of darkness to
Brussels without loss of time, upon the feigned pretense (which on such
occasions is readily enough supplied to the wicked) of an immediate and
pressing avocation. It was in vain that Philip moved him to revoke his
resolution, in vain that he solicited him by letters under his own hand,
expressed in terms the most kind and condescending, and declarations even of
affection to his person, as well as of esteem for his talents; the terrors of a
tribunal, from which even the Royal hand, that he had so familiarly treated,
could not snatch him, weighed down all the caresses, all the solicitations of
the King, and he departed, loaded with the rewards of Philip's munificence, and
penetrated with the proofs of his complacency and indulgence. He left many
portraits and some historical pieces in the Royal collection, but most of them
perished at the Pardo.

As the elder Coello supplied the loss of Antonio Moro in the list of Philip's
painters, so that of El Mudo was filled by Luqueto, or Lucas Cambiaso, or
according to Spanish orthography Cangiaso, of Genoa, one of the most celebrated
painters of his time: His principal work at the Escorial is the roof of the
choir, for which it is recorded that he received the sum of 12,000 ducats; a
work of infinite labor, consisting of a vast multitude of the blessed, received
into heaven, with a great host of angels surrounding the holy Trinity, placed
in the center of the groupe: The disposition of these figures is void of all
grace or art as to picturesque effect, being seated regularly upon benches one
behind the other, a direct counterpart of the reverend Fathers below: The whole
composition presents to the spectator's eye one living range of heads, amongst
these the painter has taken the liberty of introducing his own and that of his
friend Fra. Antonio de Villacartin. Considering it as a pavement of faces,
worked by the square yard, Lucas Cangiaso has executed his commission like an
able and honest mechanic; the honor of the design is due to certain
Theologians of the time, who, regarding the beauty of effect with pious
contempt, considered only how to dispose the assembly in decent form and order,
most resembling, as I before observed, the congregation of the monks in the
choir. King Charles the IId would have engaged Luca de Jordano to undertake the
re-painting it to dispose it after his own fancy and design; but that painter
excused himself from the task, probably for other reasons than the respect he
pretended to entertain for the merit and superior excellence of the original.
Lucas Cangiaso was accompanied out of Italy by Lazaro Tabaron and his brother
Horatio Cangiaso, on whom Philip settled proportionable appointments. Lucas
died at the Escorial much enriched by the munificence of the King, by whom he
was highly favored.

Mateo Perez de Alesio, a Roman by birth, was amongst the many eminent
foreigners, that migrated into Spain during the reign of Philip, though I do
not find that he came thither by invitation of the King, or that he executed
any thing at the Escorial: His great work was a magnificent fresco on the
subject of St. Christopher in the cathedral of Seville, which those, who have
visited that church, speak of with rapture. It will be sufficient for me to
observe of this artist (whose history authors of better information have
already recorded) that after abiding some time in Spain, where he was held in
universal estimation, he departed for Italy, heartily declaring, that a country
in possession of so great a living master as Luis de Vargas, then residing at
Seville, of which place he was native, could not be benefited by his talents,
nor needed his assistance; and so high was the opinion he conceived of Vargas's
superior merits, that one day, whilst he was contemplating a picture by that
artist of Adam and Eve, and observing upon the masterly foreshortening of some
of the parts, that single limb, said he, pointing to the leg of Adam, is more
worth than my whole Saint Christopher; alluding to the great fresco painting
abovementioned: On which artist of the two this testimony reflects most honor
I leave with the reader to determine.

Federico Zucaro is well known to all, who are conversant in the histories of
the Italian masters; the dissatisfaction that his performances in Spain gave to
Philip is no less notorious; insomuch that his works were removed out of the
Escorial by order of that King, and his fresco paintings in the cloister
replaced by others of Peregrino Tibaldi. Whether Philip's expectations were
raised too high by the report his emissaries in Italy had made of Zucaro's
talents, or whether the vanity of the man disgusted him, which might well be
the case, so it was, that of all the artists employed at the Escorial, he alone
fell short in execution and failed of success. At the same time, that Philip
dismissed him from his service, he compensated him in so princely a manner for
his undertaking, that I am inclined to think upon the evidence of some letters,
which passed between the King and his ambassador at Rome Don Juan de Zuniga and
the Conde de Olivares, that the payments made to Zucaro were larger, than to
any other painter, which came into Spain; but however he might profit in
respect of interest, he certainly was a considerable loser in point of
reputation by his adventure: Sen^or, says Zucaro, as he was displaying a
painting of the Nativity for the great altar at the Escorial, you now behold
all that art can execute; beyond this, which I have done, the powers of
painting cannot go: The King was silent for a time, and so unmoved, that
neither approbation nor contempt could be determined from the expression of his
countenance; at last, preserving still the same indifference, he asked if those
were eggs, which one of the shepherds, in the act of running, carried in his
basket; the painter answered him they were: It Is well he did not break them,
said the King, and turned away; the picture was dismissed. Upon another
occasion, when Philip expressed his dissatisfaction with a composition Zucaro
had made upon the subject of the Visitation, he excused himself by saying it
was painted by his scholars; Philip desired him to paint the same subject with
his own hand; he did so, and the second work fell short of the first, and
Philip remained still more dissatisfied than before. At length he gave him his
dismission, paying him, as I before observed, with an extraordinary
munificence. Antonio El Obrero, who had been instrumental in recommending him
to the King, kissed his Majesty's hand on the occasion, and returned him thanks
for his extraordinary bounty to Zucaro: It is not Zucaro, replied the King,
that is in fault, the blame is their's, who recommended him. Peregrin Tibaldi,
or Peregrin of Bologna, was a copyist of the grand style of Michael Angelo,
and, as Palomino informs us, his scholar; but according to the testimony of
Zanoti, whose authority is to be preferred, he studied under Bagnacabalo.
Philip sent for him to paint the lower cloister of the Escorial in fresco,
having expunged the unsuccessful attempts of Zucaro; Peregrino acquitted
himself of this invidious task to the entire satisfaction of his royal
employer; the figures are models of correctness, and drawn in a free and
masterly style, with great attention to truth and nature: In these paintings he
has treated the subjects of the Purification, the Flight into Egypt, the
Slaughter of the Innocents, Christ in the Temple, the Temptations in the
Wilderness, the Election of the Apostles, the Resurrection of Lazarus, the
Expulsion of the Money Changers out of the Temple and the various passages of
the Passion and Resurrection of the Savior, with other subjects of sacred
history. The cloister is of the conventual sort, sad and gloomy, and neither
very spacious nor lofty; it was, when I saw it, very uncleanly, and I found it
in the same condition upon repeated visits: The frescos have received great
injury, not only from time and climate, but from actual violence and notorious
want of care; their effect in my opinion is by no means pleasing, whether owing
to the cause abovementioned, or the dry harsh uniformity of the coloring, of
a red and bricky hue, unrelieved by any accompaniment, or compartment, and the
sizes disproportionate to the cloister, which as I before observed is neither
lofty nor wide: I have no doubt they would make a conspicuous figure as
engravings, and the date of their existence might be thereby prolonged; but
that I conceive will reach its final period without reprieve of this, or any
other sort. Several paintings of Peregrino are to be seen in the great church,
particularly a St. Michael with the Fall of the Angels, a Martyrdom of San
Lorenzo and two very grand compositions of the Nativity and Adoration, which he
executed to replace those of Zucaro on the same subjects, which Philip had
rejected: The paintings in the Sagrario are by Peregrino on the subject of
Abraham and Melchisedech; but what above all things else establishes his
reputation in Spain is the cieling of the Library: In this composition the
painter has personified the Arts and Sciences in different compartments; the
four Doctors of the church, with several eminent ancient philosophers,
Socrates, Plato, Aristotle and Seneca, accompanied with all their proper
attributes and insignia, interspersed with many beautiful groupes of children
and figures in the nude, supporting the cornice and festoons, in various
postures and foreshortenings of grand force and expression in the style of
Michael Angelo, in perfect drawing and admirable perspective. Peregrino was
liberally rewarded by Philip and returning to Italy died at Milan in 1600, aged
73 years.

In the same year died Romuh Cincinnato the Florentine; he also was one of
Philip's painters, and contributed to illuminate this era of arts and sciences
by a residence of many years in Spain, during which he made many excellent
paintings, particularly in fresco, not only in the Escorial, but also at
Guadalaxara in the palace of the Duque del Infantado, a grandee of an
illustrious family. In the Escorial part of the great cloister is painted by
Romulo Cincinnato; in the church there are several of his paintings,
particularly one of San Geronimo reading, and another of the same Saint,
dictating to his disciples, and in the choir two fresco paintings, taken from
passages in the life of San Lorenzo; also a picture in the chapel of San
Mauricio, appertaining to that church: In the Jesuits' church at Cuenca there
is a Circumcision of his painting greatly celebrated, particularly for the
admirable effect in the foreshortening of one of the figures, which is
represented with his back turned to the spectator; of this he was so conscious,
that he is reported to have declared that he prized one limb of this figure
above all his paintings in the Escorial. He died in the year 1600 in an
advanced age universally esteemed and lamented.

In this year Caesar Arbasia came into Spain upon the invitation of Pablo de
Cespedes canon of Cordova, with whom he had formed an intimacy at Rome: He
remained in Cordova long enough to paint the cieling of the cathedral and
returned into Italy.

Bartolome de Carducho accompanied his master Zucaro into Spain and was
employed in the Escorial: He was a native of Florence and of great eminence in
his art; he was concerned with Peregrin de Bolonia in painting the famous
cieling of the library; the figures of Aristotle, Euclid, Archimedes and Cicero
are his, and do him high honor both for their execution and design: Part of
the fresco in the cloisters is of his painting, and gave entire satisfaction to
Philip, who rewarded him with two hundred ducats over and above his salary, and
when Carducho was invited into France by order of his most Christian Majesty,
Philip expressed such regret at the proposal of his departure, that he excused
himself to the French Ambassador ^n the handsomest manner he could, and
continued in Spain. There is no doubt but Carducho passed some time at
Valladolid, where several of his pictures are remaining; he painted also some
pictures for the palace of Madrid, particularly one of the Last Supper, and
another on the subject of the Circumcision, which is an excellent performance;
but the picture, which of all others establishes his reputation in Spain, is a
Descent from the Cross, which now hangs in a small chapel near the side door of
the church of San Phelipe el Real in Madrid; a piece of such superior
execution, that it may well be taken for one of Raphael's. In the church of San
Geronimo in the second chapel on the right hand there is an excellent figure of
San Francisco, the seraphic Patriarch, in which according to custom he is
represented wounded; there is also in the chapel of the old palace at Segovia a
very respectable composition of this painter on the subject of the Adoration of
the Magi, and another over it with the supposed representation of the Padre
Eterno. Carducho continued in Spain several years after the death of Philip the
second, and was appointed by the succeeding King Philip the third to paint a
gallery in the palace of the Pardo; the subject was to be taken from the life
and actions of the Emperor Charles: Carducho begun the work, but died at the
Pardo, aged 50 years, before he had made any great progress in the completion
of it. His brother Vicencio, who had studied with him, undertook to finish the
gallery, which he did, but took the history of Achilles instead of that of
Charles the Vth. Bartolome Carducho was not only an eminent painter, but a
statuary and architect; he was also a man of an exemplary character, patient
and content with a little, a hard student and exceedingly industrious in his
profession: He was much in favor with Philip the IId and his son, but he does
not appear to have shared much of their liberality, though we hear of a
gratuity from Philip the IId, of which I have already taken notice. He died in
the year 1610.

I have now enumerated the most eminent painters employed by Philip the IId in
the Royal monastery of San Lorenzo; it remains to say something of the
contemporary artists, who were not engaged in his service at the Escorial; and
of these one of the first in time and of the most distinguished in point of
merit was the celebrated Blas de Prado, a Castilian, born in the neighborhood
of Toledo, and educated in the academy of Berruguete. Some of his paintings are
to be found in the city of Toledo, particularly in the chapel dedicated to San
Blas, but in general they have suffered great injury by length of time and
unfavourable exposures; in the churches and convents at Madrid I have been
shown some compositions of Blas de Prado, particularly in the parish church of
San Pedro a Descent from the Cross, which is evidently the work of a great
master. In the early part of his life, he passed into Africa upon the
solicitation of the Emperor of Morocco to take a portrait of his daughter, and
passed some time at that court in high favor; returning into Spain much
enriched by his expedition Blas de Prado died at the age of 60 in the year 1557
in the city of Madrid.

Sofonisba Angusciola of Cremona, with her three sisters, passed some years in
Spain in the household of Queen Isabella: I have seen a letter written by
Sofonisba to Pope Pius the fourth, dated from Madrid the 17th of September
1561, transmitting a portrait of the Queen above mentioned, the receipt of
which his Holiness acknowledges by an answer from Rome of the 15th day of the
succeeding month, highly extolling her performance, and assuring her that he
has placed it amongst his most select pictures, expressing at the same time
much paternal affection for the illustrious lady, which it so exactly
represents. Palomino thinks, that Sofonisba died at Madrid in 1575, aged
somewhat more than fifty years; this circumstance he mentions doubtfully, but
perhaps it is cleared up by Vasari, whose account of her I have not read. These
examples will serve to show that the fair sex had their share of fame at this
illustrious era of the arts; the religious orders also subscribed to the
national stock of genius many eminent names; in particular Father Nicolas
Fattor, a Franciscan monk, born in the city of Valencia; Pablo de Cespedes of
Cordova, a dignitary in that church, Father Francisco Galeas, of the order of
Carthusians, a native of Seville, and Father Juan de la Miseria, a Carmelite
friar, by birth a Neapolitan; of these Cespedes was the most eminent, a man of
such diffusive talents, that there is scarce a branch of literature in which he
was not profoundly versed: He had a deep knowledge of the oriental and classic
languages, and spoke several of the living ones: He composed many works, which
his modesty withheld from the world, and some, that he published: Amongst the
latter is a treatise on the antiquities of his church, proving it to have been
a temple of Janus, and explaining many emblems and inscriptions in proof of his
position. In the art of painting, whether in respect of theory or practice,
Cespedes holds his rank with the very first names Spain has to boast of; in
pursuit of this study he went twice to Rome, and formed his style upon the
model of the great Michael Angelo, not in painting only, but in architecture
and sculpture also; in both which, by the happy fertility of his genius, he
acquired great fame. It was his practice to model the heads of his principal
figures, when he was engaged in any great historical composition, and several
of these are yet to be found in his native city of Cordova. When he was at Rome
he supplied a head to a famous antique trunk of his countryman Seneca in white
marble, and acquitted himself so happily in this arduous undertaking, that he
was generally thought to have excelled the original, and, in testimony of his
triumph, the Romans caused to be engraved upon it the following words -- Victor
it Spagnuolo. He composed a treatise, in which he compares the ancient and
modern art and practice of painting: His contemporaries speak of this work in
high strains, but it is unfortunately lost to the world, together with one in
verse on the general subject of painting; for the talents of this extraordinary
man, amidst the circle of arts and sciences, which they embraced, are reported
to have excelled in that of poetry. Cespedes composed several pictures during
his residence at Rome, and in the church of the Holy Trinity he was employed
amongst the principal artists of the time, and left there some paintings in
fresco of distinguished excellence: Amongst these artists Federico Zucaro was
engaged, with whom Cespedes formed an intimate and lasting friendship; as I
have been led to give some instances of Zucaro's vanity on a former occasion, I
am more happy in recording, to the credit of his candor and modesty, that,
when he was applied to by the Bishop and Chapter of Cordova for a painting of
Santa Margarita, to be affixed to the high altar of the cathedral, he
peremptorily declined the commission, giving for answer, that while Pablo de
Cespedes was in Spain, there would be no occasion to send into Italy for
pictures: Though the works of Cespedes are dispersed in Seville and the cities
of Andalusia, it is in Cordova, that we must expect to find his principal
performances, particularly his famous composition of the Last Supper in the
high church: Palomino gives this picture great commendation for the nice
discrimination of characters in Christ and his disciples, and relates a
circumstance of the disgust, which Cespedes conceived from the silly adoration
of some of his countrymen, who were so enchanted with the execution of some
vases and jars of porcelain introduced into the piece, that they totally
overlooked the superior parts of the composition, and, this being repeated upon
several visits by the mob of spectators, which the fame of so great a work drew
together, it angered him to that degree, that he would have proceeded to strike
out all these subservient ornaments from his piece, is he had not been diverted
from his purpose by the entreaties of his friends and the submission of these
false and contemptible admirers. As a colourist, Spain never produced a painter
superior to Cespedes: In anatomy, drawing and perspective he was peculiarly
correct: His angels in the Martyrdom of Santa Catalina, a picture which he
painted for the late Jesuits' college at Cordova, are touched with all the
coloring and effect of Coregio, whom he much resembled in those particulars.
This great man is no less celebrated for his extraordinary virtue, modesty and
humility, than for the variety and extent of his genius; he died at Cordova in
1608, being turned of seventy, and is interred in the cathedral under a stone,
on which the following words are engraved, viz. Paulus de Cespedes, hujus almae
ecclesiae Porcionarius. Picturae, sculpturae, architecturae, omniumque bonarum
artium, variarumque linguarum peritissimus, hic situs est, obiit anno Dom.
MDCVIII. septimo Kalendas Sextilis. Of the other religious artists before
mentioned Father Nicolas Fattor died in the year 1588, after being admitted to
a conversation in person with our Lady of Atocha: Francisco Galeas died in
1614, and Juan de la Miseria two years after him: This last-mentioned person
traveled into Spain, as a hermit, to visit the tomb of the holy apostle Saint
James, and, coming afterward to Madrid, was taken into protection of the
court, and received into the house of Alonso Sanchez Coello, painter and
favorite of Philip the IId, with whom he studied several years, and painted
many excellent pictures, chiefly portraits; amongst these one, which he was
admitted to draw of the person of Santa Teresa the nun, by which he gained
great reputation; and another of the most blessed Virgin, with which he is said
to have performed many miracles.

Luis de Vargas was one of the greatest painters of the sixteenth century; he
was born in Seville, and studied painting in Italy, as well as in his own
country; he returned to Seville, after seven years residence at Rome, and,
finding himself excelled in his art by Antonio Florez and Pedro Campana, he
returned without delay back to Rome, and, after serving another apprenticeship
of seven years to his art, returned so complete a master, that the famous Perez
de Alesio, contemplating his picture of our First Parents in the cathedral of
Seville, exclaimed in rapture at the performance, that one limb of the Adam of
de Vargas was worth more than the whole composition of his colossal Saint
Christopher; and, returning into Italy soon after, gave that remarkable
testimony of his own candor and the merit of de Vargas, of which we have
before taken notice.

There are several paintings by de Vargas in the famous cathedral of Seville,
particularly in the tower, which was his last work. Luis de Vargas was not less
remarkable for his devotion, than for his talents, and, following the example
of the great emperor Charles, he used at his private hours to deposit himself
in a coffin, which he kept in his closet, and in that posture pursue his
meditation upon death: This event, for which he used such edifying preparation,
took place in the year 1590.

In endeavoring to apportion their due degrees of merit to the several Spanish
painters of this era, so fruitful in arts, I sensibly feel the insufficiency
of description, and have more than once desisted from my work in despair of
giving any thing to the world worth its notice and acceptance. The description
of a picture, like that of a battle, rarely brings its object before the
reader, though it be ever so scientifically executed: I know no method of
speaking intelligibly on the subject of any particular Spanish painter, whose
name and character are unknown to the rest of Europe, except by comparing him
with some artist of general notoriety; and yet Spain has produced some, whose
manner is so much their own, that it will not be illustrated by any known
comparison; of this sort was the great artist whom I am next to mention, Juan
Baua. Juanes, a native of Valencia; a man, whose celebrity would rank with that
of the first artists of the age of Leo X, if his works laid in the track of
travelers, or by happy emancipation could be set at liberty, and made to
circulate through the cabinets of Europe. Juanes, like Morales, selected his
subjects, without an instance to the contrary, from the most sacred passages of
revelation; but his life, unlike that of Morales, was in unison with the purity
and austerity of his taste; prepared by confession and fasting, he first
approached the altar before he visited the easel; painting with him was an act
of piety and devotion: The characters, which filled his canvass, were of the
holiest sort, and, as he gave them life, he gave them adoration: As the
exercise of his art was in him an office of devotion, so his moderation kept
him from engaging in any private commissions with a view to gain; and I am
inclined to doubt if any picture of Juanes is at this hour in lay possession:
Both Pacheco, and Laurentio Surio give him high encomiums; these he most
unquestionably merits, but credulity will never go such lengths upon their
authority, or that of Palomino, as to rank him not only before Morales, but
above Rafael himself: As there is much to be ascribed to national prejudice, so
there is something to be excused in it: Certain it is, the pictures of Juanes
are finished with astonishing truth, coloring and beauty; though they are
labored to a minuteness, that lets not even a hair escape, still their force
is unimpaired, and the sublimity of design suffers no prejudice by the delicacy
of its execution; as every work is the work of the heart, nothing is neglected
or left, every figure is labored into life, and the labor is the labor of
love, not the task of the hireling: It is greatly to be lamented, that these
precious remains are shut in the convents of Valencia, without any hope of
delivery and that free display, of which the mortmain of superstition seems for
ever to deprive them. In the sacristy of the church of San Pedro in Valencia
there will be found a Christ by Juanes, a San Sebastian and a San Francisco de
Paula in the convent of the last-named order: In the chapel of San Francisco de
Borja there is a Santa Ines, and in the chapel of Santo Thomas de Villanueva,
belonging to the Augustine monks of San Julian, there are three grand
compositions by this master; that in the middle on the subject of the Nativity,
with the Martyrdom of Santa Ines on one side and the Burial of a devout priest
of that chapel, named Moses Bauta. Agnesio on the other side. As soon as you
enter the cathedral of Valencia, on your left hand hangs a picture of the
Baptism of Christ in the river Jordan by this artist; he has introduced the
persons of some Saints, present at this scene, by privileged anachronism; as
Rafael has done in his famous Madona del Pez in the Escorial: This composition
of Juanes is entirely in the style of the great master abovementioned; the
heads are excellent, the expression just and natural, and the execution
delicate in the highest degree; the glory above, with the Padre eterno and the
groupe of Seraphim is managed with infinite art and effect. That Juanes was a
copyist of Rafael appears from the example of a Holy Family, painted by him,
now in the cathedral of Valencia, in which the Nino Jesus is an exact
transcript of that in Rafael's Madona del Pez, but touched with all the spirit
of an original; many other paintings of Juanes will be found in Valencia; but
care must be taken to distinguish his true pictures, as several of his scholars
have passed their works under his name; that, for which he is chiefly
celebrated, is his composition on the subject of the Immaculate Conception in
the late college of the Jesuits in that city; this picture is the object of
general veneration, and by the devout and credulous considered as an actual
original, or very little removed from an original; for the tradition runs, that
it was painted by the order of Father Martin Alberto, to whom the blessed
Virgin condescended to appear on the eve of the Assumption, and required the
holy Father to cause her portrait to be taken in the dress she then wore, which
was a white frock, or tunic, with a blue cloak, together with the following
accompaniments, viz. at her feet the moon, over head the Padre eterno and her
most blessed Son, in the act of placing a crown on her head, with the Holy
Ghost, in the form of a dove, hovering over the groupe. Alberto, who was all
obedience to the sacred visitor, communicated to Juanes the honorable office
of fulfilling the commands, which he himself was unable to execute: the devout
painter sat to work with extraordinary preparations for the task, and, having
sketched a groupe after the description of Alberto, presented it to the Father
for his opinion; the first design being found imperfect and unlike, Juanes was
incited to address himself to the undertaking with fresh and more elaborate
acts of penitence and contrition; no austerities deterred Juanes; whilst the
Father assisted him with his prayers the work succeeded, for every touch was
sanctified, and his pencil, like a sword blessed and made invincible by the Pope,
never missed its stroke. Some intervals there were, in which the work stood
still, and then the painter would sit looking and pondering on his canvass,
till the happy inspiration seized him and the prayers of Father Alberto gave
him fortitude and vigor to resume the task. Pacheco relates an anecdote so
much to the credit of the parties concerned, that it would be wrong to omit it;
which is, that the pious Juanes, being one day seated on a scaffold at work
upon the upper parts of this picture, the frame gave way, and the painter,
being in the act of falling, the holy personage, whose portrait he had
finished, stepped suddenly forward out of the canvass, and, seizing his hand,
preserved him from the fall: This being done, and Juanes safe landed on the
floor, the gracious Lady with all possible composure returned to her post, and
has continued there ever since, dispensing her favors to her supplicants and
worshippers, and is universally believed, upon the testimony of Alberto, to be
an exact counterpart of the original; and indeed, if we admit the circumstance
of the rescue, I do not see how we can dispute the likeness, which I should
guess, from the same circumstance, had not erred on the unfavourable side: With
legends of this sort Pacheco's book is filled; a specimen or two will serve to
show the credulity and superstition of the time: I shall give this very
sparingly, and I hope without offense to the opinions of any reasonable man.
This great artist died in 1579, in the town of Bocairente in Valencia, after
having painted the great altar of that church, which was his last work. In the
year 1581 his body was removed agreeable to his last will and testament to the
parish church of Santa Cruz in Valencia from that of Bocairente attended by a
considerable train of secular priests and others. Reduced by religious
austerities and mortifications, he died at the age of fifty-six years: By his
piety he merited a place in the calendar of Saints, by his genius a name
amongst the first class of his art; high in the school of Rafael at least, if
not on a level with the great master himself.

Juan Labrador a Spaniard, was a scholar of the Divino Morales and the best
painter of fruits and flowers and of still-life in general, that Spain ever
produced; he died in 1600 at Madrid at a very advanced age.

Juan Pantoia de la Cruz was born in Madrid, and studied under the celebrated
Alonso Sanchez Coello, whom he succeeded as painter of the chamber to Philip
the IId; he chiefly excelled in portraits and died in 1610.

I have now nearly enumerated the principal artists, who flourished in Spain
during the reign of Philip the second; that prince died in September 1598, at
his favorite monastery of San Lorenzo in the most deplorable and loathsome
state of misery, to which human nature can be reduced before its actual
dissolution: It must be acknowledged he was a liberal protector of the arts;
the great work of the Escorial, in which his pride and superstition engaged
him, gave occupation and display to many eminent men: The genius; which this
encouragement called up, appears to have lost none of its force during the
reign of his son and successor Philip the IIId. Artists of distinguished
abilities will be found in this period. Bartolome Gonzalez, a native of
Valladolid and a disciple of Patricio Caxes, came to Madrid in 1606, and was
made King's painter upon his arrival; he made many portraits of the Austrian
family for the palace of the Pardo in a very excellent style; though he was of
an advanced age, when he entered into the service of King Philip the IIId. for
he died at the age of sixty-three, in the year 1611, in the city of Madrid.

Juan de Solo and Juan de Chisinos were natives of Madrid, both eminent artists
and both died in the year 1620. In the same year died El Doctor Pablo de las
Roellas of Seville, and the Cartusian monk Padre Luis Pasqual Gaudin, born at
Villafranca in Biscay; the former of these was a scholar of Titiano's, and left
many respectable monuments of his art at Cordova and Seville. Phelipe de Liano
was born at Madrid, was a scholar of Alonso Sanchez Coello, and became so
famous for portraits of a small size, which he executed with such spirit, that
he got the name of El Ticiano Pequino; he died in 1625: This year was also
fatal to the famous Patricio Caxes, a noble Florentine, in the service of
Philip the IIId. who engaged him to paint the Queen's gallery at the Pardo in
fresco. The story which Caxes chose was that of Joseph and the wife of
Potiphar, a subject not very flattering to female delicacy, but it perished
with many other works of art in the lamentable fire, which consumed that palace.

Dominico Teotocopoli, commonly called El Greco, flourished in this era; there
are many remains of his art, both as painter, staruary and architect in the
cities of New Castile. He came so near the manner of his master Titiano, that
many of his pictures have passed upon the world under that character; this it
seems was not fame sufficient for the vanity of Dominico; but in his efforts at
originality he has exposed himself to the ridicule of all good judges: When he
departs from Titiano, he departs from nature and substitutes in her stead an
extravagance of design, with so faulty a mode both of coloring and drawing,
that he is no longer the same master: Of this sort are his paintings in the
convent of Donna Maria de Aragon at Madrid, and the picture which he drew for
the Escorial by order of Philip the IId. on the subject of the martyrdom of San
Mauricio and his companions: Philip was too good a judge not to see the
extravagance of his composition, and refused it a place in his collection;
Dominico Greco made humble suit to save the credit of his work, and it is
likely was convinced of the errors, into which he had been led by an
affectation of singularity, for he made some corrections; after which his
picture was, with some degree of difficulty, admitted to a place, though not
very conspicuous in the Sala de Capitulo; whilst Romulo Cincinnato was deputed
in his stead to the more honorable task of painting an altar-piece for the
chapel of the Saint above mentioned. In the cathedral of Toledo there are some
pictures by Dominico in his best manner, which are admirable performances;
particularly a grand composition on the parting of the raiment of our Savior
before his crucifixion, which hangs in the sacristy, and is so entirely in the
style and manner of Titiano, that his reputation could have suffered no injury
by its adoption. In the same place are the twelve Apostles by the same master,
but in an inferior style. In the parish church of Santo Tome is a very capital
picture of Dominico's on the interment of Don-Gonzalo Ruiz of Toledo; this
illustrious person, who was Conde de Orgaz, founded an Augustine convent under
the title of San Estevan in the city of Toledo, in commemoration of which pious
act Dominico has represented San Augustine and San Estevan in the act of placing
his body in the tomb: This picture cost the Cardinal Archbishop of Toledo, Don
Gaspar de Quiroga, two thousand ducats, a great sum in the year 1584, when it
was executed at the suit of the parish priest of Santo Tome and put up in that
church, which, as well as the convent before mentioned, was founded by this
noble and devout person: This picture, and that on the parting of our Savior's
raiment are the most capital performances of this author in Spain; there are
various others however both at Toledo and Madrid, but chiefly at the former
city, which would well repay the curiosity of a traveller: At Illescas, which
is half way between the said cities, the church of the Hospital de la Caridad
was designed by Dominico, and is, with its altars, carvings and paintings, a
very respectable proof of his merit, in the several elegant arts which he
professed: He was near eighty years old, when he died at Toledo in 1635, and
was interred in the parish church of San Bartolome. Dominico Greco was the
first painter in Spain, who had the spirit to oppose the exaction of a royal
tax upon the pictures painted and sold by living masters, which he litigated
and obtained a favorable decree.

Diego de Romulo Cincinnato was son and scholar of the elder Romulo, painter to
Philip the IId; he entered into the service of Don Fernando Enriquez de Ribera,
third Duke of Alcala, and went with him to Rome, when he was appointed
ambassador extraordinary from Philip the IVth, for the purpose of doing homage
to Pope Urban the VIIIth; he painted his Holiness three several times, and so
much to his satisfaction, with such applause from all the artists at Rome, that
he was rewarded with many handsome presents and made a Knight of Christ in
Portugal, where the ceremony was performed by Cardinal Trexo Parriagua, a
Spaniard: This was done in presence of the Duke of Alcala, his patron, in the
house of the Cardinal beforementioned, who gave him a gold chain and the medal
of the order: This passed in December of the year 1625, and in the year
following this ingenious artist died in the city of Rome, and was buried in the
church of San Lorenzo, with all the ceremonials due to a Knight of the order
and a man of so distinguished a genius. Philip the IVth of Spain had the
consideration to solicit his Holiness to transfer the dignity of Knight of
Christ to Francisco the brother of Diego, which was accordingly done.

Francisco and Juan Ribalta were father and son, born in Valencia, and painters
of such equal eminence, that it is exceedingly difficult to distinguish their
respective hands; the father's pictures are however rather more finished than
those of the son's, which, on their part, have the advantage in force and
effect: In many of his pictures he appears to have proposed his countryman
Juanes for his model, and sometimes paints so like his contemporary Vicencio
Carducho the Florentine, as scarce to be distinguished from him; of this sort
is his picture of the Last Supper on the high altar of the college of the
Patriarch in Valencia, which, if compared with that of Carducho on the same
subject upon the high altar of the church of the nuns of Corpus Christi in
Madrid, will be found so exactly corresponding in style and manner, that both
might pass for the work of either master. One of the best works of Ribalta in
Valencia is a dead Christ in the hall of the chapter house of the Carmelitish
convent, copied from Sebastian del Piombo, the original of which is in the
Royal collection: In this same place are two other copies from Piombo of
admirable execution. It is related of Francisco Ribalta, that, having painted a
crucifixion for the Pope's nuncio in Spain, the picture was carried to Rome,
and, upon being shown to an eminent painter in that city, he immediately
exclaimed -- O Divino Rafaelo! judging it to be a capital performance of that
master; upon being told of his mistake by the nuncio, he proceeded to examine
it afresh with great attention, and concluded with a common Spanish proverb,
Que verdaderamente donde yeguas hay patros nacen; viz. Where there are mares
there will be colts; importing, that all countries may at times produce
extraordinary men. Francisco Ribalta died in Valencia in 1600, and his son in
1630; he had the honor of being the first master of Ribera called Span^olet.

Adriano of Cordova was a lay brother of the barefooted Carmelites; his works
are few and confined to the city abovementioned; the chief composition is a
crucifixion, in which he has introduced the mother of Christ, San Juan and la
Magdalena, with other figures of half length, in the manner of Rafael Sadeler,
to whom he was greatly attached; this picture is in the antichamber to the
sacristy of the Carmelitish convent at Cordova, in which city Adriano died in
the year 1630. This artist was so diffident of himself, that he used to deface
or destroy his pictures, as soon as he had executed them; and so general was
this practice with him, that his friends took occasion to intercede with him
for the preservation of his valuable productions in the name of the souls in
purgatory, knowing his attachment to the holy offices in their behalf: By this
mode of exorcism, the destroying spirit, which his self-dissatisfaction had
conjured up, was kept in cheek, and thanks to the souls in purgatory! some very
valuable pictures were rescued from extinction by their influence and authority.

Vicencio Carducho, a Florentine, the brother and scholar of Bartholome
Carducho, was King's painter in the reigns of Philip the IIId and IVth: He was
in singular esteem and favor with those princes and employed in many eminent
works at the palace of the Pardo; the works of this master are to be found in
all the cities of Castile, in Toledo, Salamanca, Segovia, Alcala and
Valladolid, as well as in Madrid, where he died in 1638; this date is
ascertained by the following memorandum, inscribed on a picture of San
Geronimo, in the great church of Alcala de Henares -- Vincentius Carduchi
Florentinus, hic vitam non opus finin anno 1638. He died at the age of 70
years: He instructed the famous Rizi, who was painter to Philip the IVth and
Charles the IId, and formed many other disciples in his academy.

Philip the IIId died and was succeeded in 1621 by his son Philip the IVth, a
great patron of the arts, in whose time flourished men of very illustrious
talents. In 1623 Charles Prince of Wales came to Madrid, upon a youthful sally
of gallantry, to throw himself at the feet of the Infanta, sister of Philip,
and conclude, as he believed, a treaty of marriage, which had been long in
dependence and obstructed by many difficulties and delays: In this expedition
he was accompanied by Pedro Pablo Rubens of Antwerp: This great master was then
in his forty-sixth year; had concluded a long course of study in Italy, being
in high estimation, upon his return to Flanders, and greatly in favor with the
Archduke Albert and the Infanta Donna Isabel Clara Eugenia his spouse; he had
painted several pictures by order of the Emperor and of the King of England,
and had visited Paris, where, by order of Mary of Medicis, he had executed his
famous paintings for the Luxembourg palace with great credit and success.
Charles had an early passion for the arts, and was greatly attached to his
fellow traveller; the honors, which the King of Spain lavished upon his Royal
visitor with all the profuse magnificence, that Spanish gallantry could devise,
extended themselves to the person of his ingenious companion. Olivares, then
the minister of Spain, had splendour, and Philip was in possession of taste:
Rubens was in turns caressed by both; the Royal collections of the Escorial,
Pardo and Madrid opened to his view an inexhaustible magazine of arts. Mr.
Horace Walpole is mistaken in thinking Rubens was in Spain, during the
administration of the Duke of Lerma: This was not so. Rubens had studied
Titiano and Pablo Verones at Venice with distinguishing attention; the cabinets
of Philip now displayed such superb compositions of these masters, particularly
of Titiano, as equally captivated both the painter and the Prince; Rubens, by
order of the Catholic King, copied the Europa, the Baths of Diana, and several
other pictures of Titiano, which Charles had particularly admired; when these
copies were finished, it was expected, that Philip should present them to the
Prince of Wales, and the compliment would surely have been a worthy one both to
Charles and to his favorite artist; but the generosity of Philip meditated
greater lengths, and in truth it scarce knew any bounds toward his princely
guest: He retained to himself the copies and sent to Charles the originals. It
is proper in this place to observe, that these valuable originals returned
again to the possession of the King of Spain, when Charles, by the instigation
of Buckingham, made occasion to dissolve his engagements with the Infanta: to
reject the sister and yet to retain the presents of the Catholic monarch would
have been a conduct irreconcilable to the spirit and principles of Charles;
though his attachment to the arts was as ardent as any man's, he had the
sentiments of a gentleman and pride of honor superior even to his love of the
art of painting. In the event of things it has come to pass, that Charles,
instead of taking from the Royal stock in Spain, has been the means of some
additions to it of the highest value. Charles, having taken his departure for
England, and the high punctilio of the Spanish monarch having supported ifself
to the latest moment of his abode, by erecting a pillar on the spot, where they
parted, Rubens at the same time returned to Flanders; and Philip, having now
completed his hunting-seat of the Torre de la Prada, in the neighborhood of
Madrid, applied to that artist for several pictures in character with the
palace, with exact descriptions of the sizes of the canvasses and the rooms and
positions in which they were to be hung; all these were executed by Rubens, and
transmitted to the King, who highly approved of them: many of the dogs and
other animals in these hunting-pieces were put in by his scholars Azneira and
Pedro de Vos, who excelled in that branch of the art. About this time the Conde
Duque de Olivares, Philip's minister, had completed his foundation of a
convent of barefooted Carmelites, at the little town of Loeches, in the
neighborhood of Madrid, now belonging to his Excellency the Duque de Alba.
Philip, to do a grace to his favorite and to make a merit with the religious
of that order, commissioned Rubens for some pictures, which he executed in his
grandest style, and richest glow of colors: Two of these, which flank the
altar, are of considerable dimensions, and, in point of execution, not to be
exceeded by any of the master; the first is an allegorical composition on the
Triumph of Religion, which he has personified and habited very gracefully: This
figure is seated in a superb triumphal carr, drawn by four angels, with others
in attendance, bearing the cross and other symbols, properly in character; four
figures, that express the various characters of Infidelity, or Ignorance, over
which Religion is supposed to triumph, follow the carr, like slaves or
captives, bound with chains; whilst the piece is crowned with beautiful
cherubims, that hover over the groupe, with chaplets of various descriptions in
their hands, disposed with singular art and astonishing effect: The other,
which companions it in size, is the Interview of Abraham and Melchisedech, who
offers him bread and the tenth of the spoils; in the drapery of the priests,
and the armor of the soldiers, Rubens has exhausted every resource, that his
fund of coloring could supply; there are two other pictures in this small but
precious collection of the same author, and of equal size and excellence with
the above, that cannot be passed over in silence; they hang in the choir, that
on the lefthand represents the four Doctors of the church with Santo Thomas,
San Buenaventura and Santa Clara; its companion on the opposite side represents
the Four Evangelists, with their proper emblems, compositions of unspeakable
majesty and expression: The original sketch of this latter piece is preserved
in the Sitio of the Buen Retiro, that of the Doctors in the palace of Madrid.
It is painful to observe, that these magnificent performances are suffering
daily for want of new straining and the obvious repairs, which, if not speedily
applied, these monuments of art will be in ruin: In the nave of the church
there are two other large compositions by Rubens, the one of Elias and the
Angel comforting him in the desert, the other of the Israelites gathering
manna; the fcenery in both these pictures is uncommonly beautiful, so is the
sky in the latter: The drapery of Elias is finely disposed; but, as the painter
has neglected to dreis the Prophet in the habit of a Carmelite, the holy
Fathers, who claim him as the founder of their order, are not a little
scandalized by the omission. I cannot inform myself upon what proofs these
rigid devotees carry up the pedigree of their order to the asoresaid prophet;
but, whatever, flaws a scrupulous enquirer might find in their title, this I am
sure of, that the strength of their faith can make up for the weakness of the
authority: The Angel in this piece is colored to a miracle, and, as the
Fathers do not claim to derive from him, there is no exception to the habit,
which the painter has thought fit to give him. The figures in these pieces are
above natural size.

The three great kingdoms of Europe (Spain, France and England) were at this
time governed by the ministers Olivares, Richelieu and Buckingham; it was the
reign of favorites: Buckingham, who had more caprice and less genius than
either of his contemporaries, had nevertheless contracted a great esteem for
Rubens, during their expedition to Madrid; this was not directed to his
professional talents, but to those qualities and good conduct, which
undoubtedly he had, and which Buckingham sagaciously enough determined to call
forth, when any great occasion should present itself: Such was now in view;
Buckingham was at Paris, negociating a marriage between Charles, who had lately
succeeded to the throne, and the princess Mary, whom that prince had seen at
Paris in his way to Spain, and of whose beauty and attractions we have such
striking testimonials under the hand of Vandyke. Though Buckingham at Madrid
had wantonly avowed eternal enmity to the minister of Spain, he now entered
upon a correspondence with Rubens on the means of reconciling the kingdoms, and
this produced the second visit, which that artist paid to Madrid in quality of
ambassador extraordinary from the court of Brussels in the year 1628. He staid
nine months in Madrid on this negotiation, and, being at times confined to his
chamber by the gout in his feet, he took the opportunity of working at his
easel; in which time he completed eight grand pictures for the great saloon of
the palace, of which his famous Rape of the Sabines was one, and also his
Battle of the Romans and the Sabines. In this period, such was the rapidity of
his pencil, that he took five several portraits of King Philip, one of which is
equestrian and grouped with several other figures; a magnificent performance,
and for which he received a magnificent reward, with the honor of knighthood,
of naturalization and the golden key, as gentleman of the chamber. He painted
the Infanta a half-length, and the King of the same size by commission from the
Arch-duchess Isabella; he made five or six other portraits of illustrious
persons.

Superior to the little vain punctilios of his art, he returned with ardour to
his task of copying the most capital works of Titiano in the royal possession,
such as the Venus and Adonis, the Venus and Cupid, the Adam and Eve and many
others, with several portraits, particularly of the Landgrave, the Duke of
Saxony and the great Alva; he made a considerable addition to his grand
composition on the Adoration of the Magi, which now holds so conspicuous a
place in the Madrid collection; of all the crown of Spain possesses of the
works of this eminent master, this picture of the Adoration appears to me the
most superb and brilliant; and his dead Christ in the Sala del Capitulo of the
Escorial the most touching and expressive: I have never yet sound any picture,
that speaks so strongly to the passions as this last: Amongst the capital
performances of Rafael, Titiano and others, this composition has attracted, and
will probably continue to attract little notice or applause, but I am bold to
believe every spectator, who shall review this wonderful collection with
independent taste and determination not to be told what he is to feel, and
where he is to admire, and will stop a while to contemplate the tragic
spectacle of a mangled Savior, surrounded by a groupe of such mourners, as
seem to feel a sorrow, like the object, which creates it, more than human, will
own with me that Rubens in this affecting piece has touched the passions with
something more than a painter's, with a poet's hand. Contemplating this
picture, I could not help calling to mind the bitterness of Mengs' criticism,
when he is comparing Rubens' copy of Titiano to a Dutch translation of an
elegant author; and in this train of thinking I could not avoid drawing a
comparison in my mind between the piece before me and that, which Mengs himself
has composed on the like subject: The scene is the same, the actors the same,
and the catastrophe not to be diversified: But with Mengs all is lifeless, cold
and flat; methodized by art and measured by rule; the groupe of an academy,
sitters for attitudes and hirelings for sorrow; the dead body of the Christ is
laid out and in like manner exposed to view in the one case as in the other,
but what a contrast! Mengs has indeed labored hard to make a beautiful corpse;
he has rounded the muscles, and polished the skin, and given it such a hue,
that it ceases to be flesh, and is a shining waxen figure with no trace of pain
or sufferings past; look upon the other, and you contemplate, as it should
seem, the very person, who himself bore our sorrows on the tree, by whose
stripes we are healed: Yet Mengs is the author, whom courtly prejudice has put
above comparison in Spain, whom not to admire is treason against state, and
whose worship is become canonical, a part almost of the orthodox idolatry of
their religion: Mengs is the critic, who, professedly treating of the
collection of pictures in the palace at Madrid, can afford no commendation or
description of Reubens's capital picture of the Adoration and records his name
apparently with no other view but to make a needless sacrifice of it to that of
Titiano, whom it seems he had had the temerity to copy.

It is hardly to be believed, that Rubens during these nine months finished
several other considerable pictures, particularly his Martyrdom of the apostle
San Andres, which now makes the altar-piece of the Flemish chapel, an
enchanting composition. I have related that he arrived in Spain in the year
1628; on the 26th of April in the year following he took his departure, not
without many distinguishing tokens of favor from his Catholic Majesty, by
whose order the Conde Duque de Olivares presented Rubens with a ring worth two
thousand ducats; he was also made secretary to the privy council at the court
of Brussels for his life, with the succession to his son Alberto, a very
considerable benefice. Having now attended him to the time of his leaving
Spain, I shall commit him for the remainder of his career to his more professed
biographers, observing only, that he formed a sriendship in Madrid with the
great Spanish painter Diego Velazquez de Silva, which friendship was continued
by a correspondence, that lasted many years.

Juan del Castillo of Seville was a painter of eminence and in great repute as
a master and instructor in the art; he had the double honor of being disciple
of Luis de Vargas, and teacher of Bartolome Murillo; the famous Alonso Cano,
and Pedro de Moya were likewise his scholars: He died at Cadiz, aged 56, in the
year 1640.

At this period of time, under the fostering auspices of Philip the fourth,
such a host of artists present themselves to my view, that, whilst I perceive
the impracticability of recording all, I feel repugnance at omitting any; as I
would not willingly present to the public a mere catalogue of painters and
their works, so neither would I strain the truth of circumstances by
endeavoring at variety. In this dilemma therefore I have judged it best to
select some of the most eminent, and pass over the less interesting in silence;
amongst the former Eugenio Caxes undoubtedly deserves a place, if it were only
that he was found worthy to be of the list of King's painters, and to enter
into competition with the celebrated Velazquez in the branches both of
historical and portrait painting: Though he was a native of Madrid, yet his
father Patricio, by whom he was educated in his art, was a Florentine: Philip
the fourth sat in person to Eugenio, but what became of the picture, or
whether it is in existence, I have not been able to discover; it was his fate,
with many others, to be eclipsed by the superior luster of Velazquez's talents,
and from the time that artist entered into the royal service and employ,
Eugenio principally employed his talents in painting for the convents and
churches, who, in emulation of the court, held forth a very liberal
encouragement to the arts: The convent of San Phelipe in the city of Madrid
contained the chief collection of this master's works, where they perished by
fire together with the convent itself in 1718: He was jointly engaged with
Vicencio Carducho in the frescos of the Pardo, where the like fatal accident
again consumed his labors with many others equally to be lamented: He died in
1642, at the age of sixty-five.

In the same year died Pedro Orrente, by others called Pedro Rent, born in
Murcia, and Familiar of the Inquisition in that city, a disciple of Bassan, and
protected by the minister Olivares, who employed him in the paintings, then
collecting at the palace of the Buen Retiro: Many of his works are to be found
in Valencia and Cordova, and some at Toledo, particularly a Santa Leocadia
coming out of the sepulcher, over the door of the sacristy of the cathedral,
and in the chapel de los Reyes nuevos belonging to the said church a Nativity,
which companions an Adoration of the Magi by Caxes beforementioned; both which
are excellent compositions and finely executed: He colored in the style of his
master, but in his choice of nature did not imitate his vulgarity of taste; in
correctness of drawing he has been rarely exceeded: He was buried in the parish
church of San Bartolome at Toledo, in which he died far advanced in years, and
is deservedly to be numbered amongst the most eminent Spaniards of his
profession.

Francisco Fernandez and Alonso Vazquez, were the favorite disciples, the one
of Carducho and the other of the celebrated Luis d^ Vargas: Vazquez was a
native o^ Ronda, and practiced his art it the city of Seville: His figures in
the nude are drawn with great truth and anatomical skill; they are slight and
sketch-like, bu^ executed with effect and force^ whilst he was painting in
Seville^ Francisco Pacheco (from whos^ treatise some of these anecdote^ are
drawn) was keeping an academy in that city, with great reputation and success;
Velazquez, wh^ afterward rose to such high honors and favor with his King^
was a disciple of Pacheco's at thi^ time, Vazquez and Pacheco were rival
artists and painted some pictures professedly in competition for the cathedral
of the convent of barefooted Carmelites, and other places; the manner of
Pacheco, though learned and correct, was harsh and dry in the extreme, so that
Vazquez was much the more popular painter of the two; and young Velazquez, who
about this time married Pacheco's daughter, did not think fit to espouse his
taste and formed himself upon other models. There is a little couplet upon a
crucifix of Pacheco's, which satyrizes this harshness of manner with so much
smartness, and such neatness of versification, that I present it in the
original to the reader: Quien os puso assi, Sen^or,
Tan desabrido y tan seco,
Vos me direis que el amor.
Mas yo digo, que Pacheco.
Nothing can be more musical than the chime of the words, but the idea cannot
be well conveyed in English. It seems natural for academicians like Pacheco,
who are so much concerned in the grammar of their art, to contract a stiff
pedantic style, as was the case, but his pictures are said to be good studies,
and, if he was not a painter of the first manner, he appears to have been a
great master and author in his art. He was a man of liberal sentiments, strict
morals and uncommon medesty: He died in Seville in 1654, having survived his
competitor Vazquez four years. As to Francisco Fernandez, who was
unquestionably one of the first artists of his time, he died in 1646 at Madrid,
of which place he was a native, being killed by Francisco de Baras in a sudden
fit of passion, at the age of forty-two years, universally regretted.

Joses de Ribera, known to Europe by the name of Il Spagnoleto, was a native of
Xativa in the kingdom of Valencia; a country rich in natural productions and of
a most happy temperature in point of climate: In this particular it has been
frequently compared to Greece, and, like Greece, has been found uncommonly
preliric in giving birth to men of genius and talents. How far the growth and
culture of the human mind may, like vegetable nature, depend upon the skiey
influences, there is no need at present to enquire; the seeds of genius, like
those of any other tender plant, may well be supposed susceptible of nutrition,
advancement or repression, by the operations of the atmosphere; and if this
obtains in the general, I think we may conclude for it more strongly in favor
of the particular art now under consideration, than of any other perhaps in the
whole catalogue of human study or invention: Painting, which is an operation
manual as well as mental, demands the joint vigor and exertion of body and
mind; it should seem that there is in demand a force of atmosphere to brace the
corporeal system and at the same time such a degree of genial warmth and
relaxation of climate, as shall give imagination its full play and scope; these
can only be obtained in those happy latitudes, where our scene is now laid. It
is needless perhaps to observe, that there must be proper lights for the
creation of the art and there should be a commodious temperature for their
preservation and continuance: These are to be had in their highest perfection
in Spain, as well as Greece. If the Icelander in his native climate ever should
experience the impulse of a painter's genius, the year itself would not supply
many hours in which his fingers could obey its summons; and in the other
extremity of climate, where every fiber is unstrung by relaxation, all, who
have experienced, know the inaptitude both of mind and body toward any action
or employ of either; unfit alike for arts and arms, the emasculate and soft
inhabitant sinks into sloth and slumbers away a life, that scarce deserves a
better name than vegetation. Upon the whole I think we may admit, that there
are some portions of the habitable earth, where nature has declared herself
against the production of painters, and no portion yet discovered where an
assemblage of more happy requisites ever centered, than in the climate and
country, in which the artist now before us had his birth.

It may be proper to observe, that, although there cannot be found amongst the
Spanish painters a greater instance of poverty in the extreme, than what Ribera
experienced, yet his pretensions in respect of family were as high and his
blood as pure as most in Spain: This pride of pedigree is there to the full as
much at heart, and as ceremoniously maintained amongst men in the last degree
of worldly misery, as it is with the rich and great. To enumerate a line of
ancestors, unadulterated with Moorish or Jewish blood, and not made vile by any
ignoble and dishonorable trades, is the glory of an old Castilian, though in
rags and wretchedness: The house of Ribera, though it had branched into Valencia,
was in its original rooted in the pure terra firma of Old Castile; and I dare
say his parents would as soon have brought up their son to the occupation of a
hangman, as apprenticed him to the trade of a shoemaker: This is amongst the
occupations, which an old Spaniard calls dishonest, and by which he would as
effectually pollute his blood, as an Indian would forfeit his cast by eating
hog's-flesh out of the unclean platter of a Portuguese: To be a mender of
shoes, or in vulgar phrase a cobbler, is no degradation to a Spaniard's dignity;
but to be a maker of them in the first instance is corrupt and vile, and such
an artisan cannot consort or intermarry with the persons, that are
uncontaminated with any thing but poverty and ver min.

With these principles, and no other earthly possession for his inheritance
young Ribera entered himself a disciple of Francisco de Ribalta, as I have
already related; how long he continued, or how far he proceeded to form the
peculiarities of his taste under the tuition of this master, I cannot precisely
ascertain; he was certainly very young, when he first went to Rome, because it
was there he first received the puerile appellation of Il Spagnoleto, or the
Little Spaniard; and that this was in early time is also manifest from other
reasons: As for his singularity in choosing subjects of terror and expressions
of pain, that was not owing to the infusions of precept, or the effect of
imitation, but was in him at once characteristic and original. He had a strong
mind hardened by adversity and naturally superior to those passions, which,
though soft and enervating, have operated to produce the beautiful in art. In
the sublime and terrific Ribera stands forth as a great master: In tragic
compositions, the distortions of agonized nature, and in the strong and
horrible reliefs of the deepest lights and shades he is eminently
distinguished: England is in possession of so many examples in this cast of the
author, that I shall not enter into a minute description of his works in Spain;
but I cannot dispense with myself from observing, that he is capable of
expressing his ideas with uncommon elegance and delicacy: Some of the
characters of his Baptist, some Magdalens and Madonas, which I have met, are
equal in grace and tenderness of expression to the best heads of Guido and
Guercino: I confess my surprise was great in discovering him in a character,
which was new and unknown to me before I went to Spain; at the same time in a
private closet at the Escorial, where there is an altar belonging to the Prior,
and to which admittance is rarely allowed, I felt equal surprise and delight at
being shown a small Holy Family by Michael Angelo Bonarota, finished and
colored to a miracle. In this inestimable little piece the face of the Madona
is of a most singular cast, such as I had never before seen; extremely
beautiful, but not by the result of the correctest symmetry of seatures; for
the face is lengthened beyond its proportion, by which and other means, with a
peculiar action of the eyes and muscles an expression is obtained, which at the
same time that it exceeds nature, does not violate it; appearing to be at once
above, and yet within it.

Young Ribera, though suffering the extreme of poverty, felt within himself
such powers of genius, as were superior to depression, and in the school of
Ribalta meditated an excursion to Rome, there to receive the last finishings of
education in his art: Thither he repaired, and, enlisting himself in the
academy, pursued his studies with an industry, which knew no remission, but
whilst he was in pursuit of the scanty necessaries for the demands of life;
these he obtained by the sale of some of his sketches and drawings in the
academy. Without friends and at times almost without food or raiment, he
persisted in his course with a stubborn virtuous perseverance, which nothing
could divert from its object; if such a mind and imagination are found to
delight in images of savage greatness and terrific sublimity, it is little to
be wondered at, and a greater proof of his excellence cannot be given, than the
high estimation, in which his pieces of the character abovementioned continue
to be held, notwithstanding the false effeminate delicacy of modern taste and
fashion in pictures, now prevailing in England, which discourages all attempts
at tragedy in painting and shrinks from an Ugolino and Prometheus with as much
dread and horror, as a modern petite maitresse would from the spectacle of a
bullfight. Such an academician as young Ribera could not long remain
undistinguished in the mass of common students; Rome was not a place, where
merit could be long hidden, nor was his merit of a sort, that could be
concealed any where; his fellow-students and teachers soon discovered the
superiority of his talents, and par excellence gave him the name of Il
Spagnoleto; and a certain Cardinal, one day passing in his coach, observed a
tattered figure employed in painting a board, affixed to the outside of one of
the ordinary houses in the streets of Rome; the youth and wretchedness of the
spectacle engaged his pity, and the singular attention, with which he pursued
his work, attracted his curiosity. It was Il Spagnoleto in the act of earning
his bread, of which his appearance made evident he was absolutely in want. The
Cardinal called him to his coach-side and, ordering him to his palace,
immediately domiciliated the lucky youth. Here he lived in ease and affluence;
but that virtue, which the frowns of fortune could not shake, was no proof
against her caresses: Young Ribera became a slave to pleasures, of which he had
not before even speculative, enjoyment; but his virtue, though repulsed, was
not subdued; his apostasy from the purity of his native principles pressed upon
his conscience, and the ruin, which his genius was now menaced with, alarmed
his pride of nature; with one gallant effort he burst the shackles of
temptation, and, sallying out of the palace of the Cardinal, reassumed his
dignity of soul, and poverty at once: Perhaps the history of human nature will
afford few examples of so strong an act.

He had now all his former miseries to encounter with the aggravating contrast
of experienced delights: In addition to all these he was to suffer the
reproaches of his protector, who, occasionally meeting him, upbraided his
ingratitude in the severest terms: The virtuous Spaniard made a suitable reply,
and, cheering himself with the resources of his art and the applauses of his
conscience, persisted in his poverty. The clear obscure of Caravagio became his
favorite manner, and in the language, though not with the motives, of Doctor
Young's Zanga he might have said that horrors now were not displeasing to him.
The meagre encouragement he found in Rome determined him to seek his better
fortune at Naples: For this place he set out in a ragged jacket, having pledged
his capa for a viaticum. In Naples he let himself out to a common painter for
hire: This man however had great humanity and some science; the abilities of Il
Spagnoleto surprised him; he clearly saw how superior his talents were to the
low occupation he had engaged in; a further acquaintance opened to him the
singular virtues and good qualities he was possessed of, and he soon conceived
the design of converting his servant into his son-in-law: He had an only child,
a daughter; the girl being exceedingly handsome, and the father very rich, an
abundance of suitors presented themselves to the choice of her parents, but,
the moment which Providence had decreed for rewarding the virtues of poor
Ribera being now arrived, all their pretensions availed nothing with the
father, who had determined upon his part and, calling Ribera aside, proposed at
once to bestow his daughter with the better part of his means immediately upon
him; a proposition so totally above expectation or hope staggered his belief,
and he entreated his master not to make his misery and ill fortune the object
of his raillery and ridicule; he was at a loss to think what presumption could
have escaped him to merit this rebuke; he was not conscious of having conceived
or entertained a thought, that aspired to a match so totally above his reach;
with some difficulty the father conquered his incredulity, when young Ribera,
transported with joy and gratitude, was in one moment from being the poorest
made the happiest of beings. Behold him now occupying a whole floor the palace
of the Viceroy, with all the comforts of life and the conveniences of his art
in abundance around him; at the height of his fame, in request of all the great
and eminent in Europe, and honored by his Holiness the Pope with the
knighthood of Christ. A new choice of subjects now presented themselves to the
world, and people saw, with a terror partaking of delight, martyrdoms,
executions and torments expressed to the truth, nay in some cases even
aggravated beyond it: He selected all that sacred or classic history afforded
in the terrible; all that the pagan theology or the poetical hell had
represented to appall the guilty was to be found on the canvasses of Ribera; a
martyred San Bartolome, stripped to the muscles, became a study for anatomists:
Cato of Utica in the act of tearing out his bowels brought the horror of
self-murder to the eyes and hearts of men: Hercules struggling in the throes of
death and all the tortured in the fabulous realm of Pluto were now exhibited,
like Eschylus's suries on the stage of Athens, and in some instances with the
same effects; for it is related, that a certain lady of Amsterdam named Jacoba
de Usfel having miscarried upon seeing some paintings of Sisyphus, Tantalus and
Ixion by Ribera, her husband's gallantry induced him to dispose of them, and
being carried into Italy they were purchased on the part of His Catholic
Majesty and transported into Spain, where they are now preserved in the palace
of the Buen Retiro. Many other pictures of this master were collected by the
Viceroys of Naples for the King and also for particular Grandees and brought
into Spain: In the royal collections of Madrid and the Escorial there are many;
the great altar-piece of the church of Santa Isabel on the subject of the
Conception is by Ribera, and the head of the Virgin is the portrait of his
daughter. He died at Naples in 1656, aged 67 years, leaving only one child
above mentioned, whom he married to a man of distinction in Naples. He left
behind him a tract in manuscript on the principles of the art of painting,
which is reported to have been a most elaborate and excellent composition.

Luis Tristan, a disciple of Dominico Greco, was born in a small village near
the city of Toledo: He certainly exceeded his master in correctness of drawing
and purity of taste. It does not appear that Dominico had any of the jealousies
of his art about him in his treatment of Tristan, whilst he was under his
tuition; on the contrary he took early notice of his talents, and brought them
into practice and display with all the advantages in his power to give; the
monasteries of Spain, as I have elsewhere observed, were in that period
considerable patrons of the elegant arts of painting and sculpture; most of
these religious Societies are rich, and those, whose funds did not enable them
to set the artists at work, found benefactors amongst the great, whose devotion
or vanity disposed them to beautify and enrich the churches and altars, which
they frequented, and where such donations would be accepted in the way of
atonement, or recorded as acts of voluntary piety and meritorious munificence:
The monks of La Sisla in the neighborhood of Toledo had applied to Dominico
Greco for a picture of our Lord's last supper to be painted for their
refectory, in the manner that Titiano had adorned that in the monastery of San
Lorenzo. Dominico being obliged to decline the commission on account of
indisposition, recommended his young pupil Luis Tristan to the undertaking; the
monks accepted his services, and upon delivery of the picture were with reason
satisfied with the performance; nothing remained to be adjusted but the price,
and the demand of the artist being for 200 ducats was deemed exorbitant; the
Fathers referred themselves to Dominico, who being then in a fit of the gout
was put into a coach and conveyed to the convent; as soon as he arrived there
and had deliberately surveyed the piece, he turned suddenly to his disciple and
with a menacing tone and air, lifting up his crutch, exclaimed against Tristan
for disgracing his art and all who professed it, by demanding 200 ducats for
the picture in question. The triumph of the Fathers upon this testimony of
their umpire, so decidedly as it seemed in their favor, was however soon
reversed, when Dominico directed his disciple to roll up the picture and take
it away with him to Toledo, for that he should not leave it there for five
hundred ducats; then, launching out into rapturous encomiums on the
performance, he began to put his decision into execution: Vexation and surprise
now took possession of the convicted monks, their murmuring and complaints were
changed to intercessions, and, after sufficient atonement on their part, the
money was paid and the picture surrendered to the refectory and oblivion:
Certainly it is a capital composition, and whenever the Fathers shall repent of
the bargain made by their predecessors, there is not a collector in Europe but
will give them their principal with ample interest upon their purchase. Tristan
died at Toledo in the year 1649, at the age of fifty-four, with the honor of
being imitated by the celebrated Velazquez, who declared himself his admirer
and, quitting the precepts of Pacheco, professedly modelled himself after the
style and manner of Luis Tristan.

Juan Baptista Mayno, a monk of the order of the Predicadores, was a
contemporary of Tristan and a disciple also of Dominico Greco: In the convent
of San Pedro the Martyr at Toledo there is an altarpiece in four compartments
representing the subjects of the four Pasquas, viz. the Nativity, the
Resurrection, the Descent of the Holy Ghost and the Mystery of the Holy
Trinity: There is in the same church a Saint Peter weeping, of which many
copies are dispersed through Spain; an affecting natural idea of that zealous
yet offending disciple in the moment of recollection and remorse. The college
of San Estevan at Salamanca contains some works of this master, whose
excellence as an artist and whose irreproachable sanctity gained him universal
esteem and promoted him to the honor of being drawing-master to Philip the IV
th. who was not only a lover of the arts but a proficient. Mayno was employed
by the King at the palace of the Buen Retiro, where he painted a fine
battle-piece, in which the Conde Duque de Olivares is introduced animating the
troops to action by presenting to their view a portrait of King Philip, a
brilliant thought and a courtly compliment to both parties. Mayno died in his
sixtieth year, in the city of Toledo, in 1654.

In the same year died Pedro Nun^ez a native of Madrid, of whose celebrity
there needs no better testimony, than his being one in the following groupe of
artists, recorded by the famous Lope de la Vega in the following lines: Pero
porque es razon que participe
L'el Laurel la pintura generosa
Juntos llegaron a la cumbre hermosa
Sulcando varios mares.
Vincencio, Eugenio, Nun^ez y Lanchares.


INDEX TO THE FIRST VOLUME.
ANTONIO del Rincon Page 10 Torrigiano 11 Julio and Alexandro 22 Alonso
Berruguete ib. Baptisia Bergamo 24 Gaspar Becerra ib. Antonio Flores 30
Fernando Gallegos ib. Pedro Campana 31 Titiano 33 Juan Fernandez Ximenes,
commonly called El Mudo, the Dumb 69 Morales, El Divino 74 Miguel Barroso 82
Domingo Beltran ib. Teodosio Mingot 84 Luis de Carvajal ib. Alonso Sanchez
Coelio, the Elder, 84 Antonio Moro, (Sir Antony More) 95 Lucas Cambiaso, or
Luqueto 105 Mateo Perez de Alesio 108 Federico Zucaro 110 Peregrin Tibaldi, or
Peregrin of Bologna 114 Romulo Cincinnato 118 Caesar Arbasia 120 Bartolome de
Carducho ib. Vicencio de Carducho 124 Blas de Prado 125 Sosonisha Angusciola
126 Nicolas Fattor 128 Pablo de Cespedes ib. Francisco Galcas ib. Juan de la
Miseria 128 Luis de Vargas 137 Juan Bautista Juanes 140 Juan Labrador 151 Juan
Pantoia de la Cruz ib. Bartolome Gonzalez 153 Juan de Solo ib. Juan de Chisions
ib. El Docter Pablo de las Roellas 154 Padre Luis Pasqual Gaudin ib. Phelipe de
Liano, (or El Titiano pequeno) ib. Patricio Caxes ib. Dominico Teotocopoli, or
El Greco 155 Diego de Romulo Cincinnato 160 Francisco and Juan Ribalta 162
Adriano of Cordova 165 Vicencio Carducho 167 Pedro Pablo Rubens 169 Juan del
Castillo 199 Eugenio Caxes 190 Pedro Orrente 192 Francisco Fernandez 193 Alonso
Vasquez ib. Francisco Pacheco 194 Josef de Ribera, or Il Spagnoletto 197 Luis
Tristan 218 Juan Baptisia Mayno 223 Pedro Nun^ez 225
END OF THE FIRST VOLUME.

