THE OBSERVER: BEING A COLLECTION OF MORAL, LITERARY AND FAMILIAR ESSAYS.

VOLUME THE FIRST.

-- MULTORUM PROVIDUS URBES
ET MORES HOMINUM INSPEXIT. --
(HORAT.) LONDON: PRINTED FOR C. DILLY IN THE POULTRY. M.DCC.LXXXVI.

CONTENTS OF THE FIRST VOLUME.
NUMBER I. INTRODUCTORY paper. Quotation from Spectator No 124. Some
description of the present work, particularly of the literary anecdotes of
Greece PAGE 1 NUMBER II. Sect of the Dampers described. Quotation from Pliny's
letters PAGE 7 NUMBER III. Love of praise. Instances of flattery in the
dedication of Sepulveda to the present king of Spain, also in Ben Jonson's
masks in the court of James I. That poet an imitator of Aristophanes. Vanity
of authors in prefixing their prints to their works. Portrait of a citizen on
horseback. Anecdote of a dancing master and his scholar PAGE 19 NUMBER IV.
Visit to Sir Theodore and Lady Thimble: their country house and family
described PAGE 27 NUMBER V. Visit continued. Calliope reads part of an epic
poem. Dr. Mac-Infidel discourses against Christ's miracles PAGE 35 NUMBER VI.
Conversation with Calliope subsequent to Dr. Mac-Infidel's discourse, and two
letters from Captain Henry Constant to that young lady PAGE 44 NUMBER VII.
Athenian Vision PAGE 54 NUMBER VIII. Athenian Vision concluded PAGE 64 NUMBER
IX. Calliope's interview and reconciliation with Captain Constant described, in
a letter from that young lady PAGE 75 NUMBER X. History of Pythagoras PAGE 84
NUMBER XI. The same continued to his death PAGE 92 NUMBER XII. Pythagoras
compared with Christ; the heathen argument against revealed religion PAGE 101
NUMBER XIII. Defense of Christ's miracles against modern cavils, particularly
of the supernatural darkness at the Passion PAGE 113 NUMBER XIV. Abstract of
the history of Athens from its origin to the time of Erecthonius, founder of
the Eleusynian mysteries and the Panathenaea PAGE 124 NUMBER XV. Short account
of the Mysteries: Athenian history brought down to the siege of Troy, and death
of Menestheus PAGE 132 NUMBER XVI. The Iliad of Homer described. Athenian
history carried on to the conclusion of the decennial archons PAGE 143 NUMBER
XVII. Remarks upon the laws of Draco. Life and actions of Solon to the time of
his leaving Athens after the publication of his laws PAGE 153 NUMBER XVIII.
History of Athens continued to the death of Solon; character of that eminent
citizen. Usurpation of Pisistratus PAGE 164 NUMBER XIX. Of the public library
founded at Athens by Pisistratus; account of that and the Alexandrian libraries
PAGE 174 NUMBER XX. Danger of sudden elevation. Quotation from Ben Jonson's Sir
Epicure Mammon. Letters from Pisistratus to Solon, and Solon to Pisistratus in
answer. Anecdotes of the latter PAGE 184 NUMBER XXI. On the subject of
divorces, with ironical rules for their further propagation and encouragement
PAGE 195 NUMBER XXII. Tragic story of Abdullah and Zarima PAGE 205 NUMBER
XXIII. Upon resignation to Providence. Diary of Chaubert the misanthrope PAGE
214 NUMBER XXIV. Chaubert's diary concluded. Translation of a fragment of
Philemon, a Greek comic poet PAGE 225 NUMBER XXV. Character of Vanessa; visit
to that lady, with a conversation piece PAGE 232 NUMBER XXVI. Character of
Leontine. Remarks upon duelling. Precepts for disputants PAGE 244 NUMBER XXVII.
Tragic story of a Portuguese gentleman, who died by the rack PAGE 256 NUMBER
XXVIII. On the practice of puffing. Enumeration of persons addicted to this
practice PAGE 267 NUMBER XXIX. Remarks on the state of society in France,
Spain, and England, with the causes which obstruct its enjoyment in this
country PAGE 276 NUMBER XXX. On Gaming PAGE 286
THE OBSERVER.
No I.
WHEN a man breaks in upon a company of strangers, to which he is not invited,
the intrusion does or does not demand an apology, according to the nature of
the business which brings him thither: If it imports the company only, and he
has no interest in the errand, the less time he spends in ceremony the better;
and he must be a very silly fellow indeed, who stands shuffling and
apologizing, when he ought either to warn people of their danger, or inform
them of their good fortune: But where this is not the case, and the man, so
intruding, has nothing more to say for himself, than that he is come to sit
down in their company, to prattle and tell stories, and club his share to the
general festivity of the table, it will behove him to recommend himself very
speedily to the good graces of his new acquaintance; and if his conversation
furnishes neither instruction nor amusement, if he starts no new topics, or
does not talk agreeably upon old ones, it is well if he does not make his exit
as abruptly as he entered.

In like manner, every author finds a material difference in his first
approaches to the public, whether his subject recommends him, or he is to
recommend his subject: If he has any thing new in art or science to produce,
any thing important to communicate for the benefit of mankind, he need be under
no difficulty in demanding their attention to a business, which it is so much
their interest to hear and understand; on the contrary, if he has nothing to
tell his readers, but what they knew before he told it, there must be some
candor on their part, and great address on his, to secure to such an author a
good reception in the world.

I am at this instant under all the embarrassments incident to a man in the
last-mentioned predicament: I am exceedingly desirous to make my best bow to
the good company I am intruding myself upon, and yet equally anxious, that in
so doing I may neither make my first advances with the stiff grimace of a
dancing master, nor with the too familiar air of a self-important. As I pretend
to nothing more in these pages, than to tell my readers what I have observed of
men and books, in the most amusing manner I am able, I know not what to say to
them more than humbly to request a hearing; and, as I am in perfect charity and
good humor with them, sincerely to hope that they on their parts will be in
like good humor and charity with me.

My first wish was to have followed the steps of those Essayists, who have so
successfully set the fashion of publishing their lucubrations from day to day
in separate papers. This mode of marching into the world by detachments has
been happily taken up by men of great generalship in literature, of whom some
are yet amongst us. Though Mr. Addison, in his Spectator, No 124, has asserted,
that a man who publishes his works in a volume, has an infinite advantage over
one who communicates his writings to the world in loose sheets and single
pieces, it does not appear that he is serious in his assertion; or, if he is,
it is plain that his argument draws one way and his example another; I must
confess, says he, I am amazed that the press should be only made use of in this
way by news-writers and the zealots of parties; as if it were not more
advantageous to mankind to be instructed in wisdom and virtue, than in
polities; and to be made good fathers, husbands, and sons, than counselors and
statesmen. This will suffice to convince us that Mr. Addison saw the advantages
of this mode of publication in such a light as led him to make choice of it
himself, and to recommend it to others; for it is not to be supposed, that he
would have prefixed a motto to this very paper, purporting that a great book is
a great evil, and then argued seriously in recommendation of that evil.

Some of the most pleasing volumes now in our hands are collections of essays
published in this manner, and the plan is still capable of a variety, that is
in no danger of being exhausted; add to this, that many years have now elapsed
since any papers of this sort have been published: the present time therefore
on this account, as well as from other circumstances peculiar to it, may seem
favorable to the undertaking: but there are good reasons, why writers have
desisted from pursuing any further these attempts of working through a channel,
which others are in possession of, who might chance to levy such a toll upon
their merchandise as would effectually spoil their market.

The miscellaneous matter I propose to give in these sheets naturally coincides
with the method I have taken of disposing them into distinct papers, and I
shall proceed to publish in like manner till my plan is completed, or till any
unforeseen event cuts short the prosecution of it. For me to conceive, in an
age so enlightened as the present, that I can offer any thing to the public,
which many of my readers will not be as well informed of as myself, would be a
very silly presumption indeed: simply to say that I have written nothing but
with a moral design would be saying very little, for it is not the vice of the
time to countenance publications of an opposite tendency; to administer moral
precepts through a pleasing vehicle seems now the general study of our
Essayists, Dramatists, and Novelists. The Preacher may enforce his doctrines in
the style of authority, for it is his profession to summon mankind to their
duty; but an uncommissioned instructor will study to conciliate, whilst he
attempts to correct. Even the Satirist, who declares war against vice and
solly, seldom commits himself to the attack without keeping some retiring-place
open in the quarter of panegyric; if he cuts deep, it is with the hand of a
surgeon, not of an assassin. Few authors now undertake to mend the world by
severity, many make it their study by some new and ingenious device to soften
the rigor of philosophy, and to bind the rod of the moralist with the roses of
the muse.

I have endeavored to relieve and chequer these familiar essays in a manner
that I hope will be approved of; I allude to those papers, in which I treat of
the literature of the Greeks, carrying down my history in a chain of anecdotes
from the earliest poets to the death of Menander; to this part of my work I
have addressed my greatest pains and attention. I believe the plan is so far my
own, that nobody has yet given the account in so compressed and unmixt a state
as I shall do, and none I think will envy me the labor of turning over such a
mass of heavy materials for the sake of selecting what I hoped would be
acceptable in the relation. Though I cannot suppose I am free from error, I can
safely say I have asserted nothing without authority; but it did not suit the
purpose of the work to make a display of those authorities, as it was my wish
to level it to readers of all descriptions. The translations I shall
occasionally give will be of such authors, or rather fragments of authors, as
come under few people's review, and have never been seen in an English version;
these passages therefore will have the merit of novelty at least with most
readers, and if I succeed in naturalizing to any degree authors, whose names
only float amongst us, I shall not think that what has been the heaviest part
of my undertaking has been the most unprofitable. As I mean this to be a kind
of liber circumcurrens, I have thought it not amiss to entitle it The Observer.

No II.
THERE is a pretty numerous sect of philosophers in this kingdom, whom I cannot
describe by any apter denomination, than that of Dampers. They are to be known
in society by a sudden damp, which they are sure to cast upon all companies,
where they enter. The human heart, that comes within their atmosphere, never
fails to be chilled; and the quickest sense of feeling is as effectually
benumbed, as the touch is with the torpedo. As this sect is of very ancient
standing in the world, and has been taken notice of by several heathen writers,
I have sometimes thought that it might originate in the school of Thales, who
held water to be the first principle of all things. If I were certain that this
ancient philosopher always administered his water cold to his disciples, I
should incline to think the present sect of Dampers was really a branch from
the Thalesian root, for it is certain they make great use of his first
principle in the philosophy they practice.

The business of these philosophers in society is to check the flights and
sallies of those volatile beings, who are subject to be carried away by
imagination and fancy, or, in other words, to act as a counterpoise against
genius; of the vices of mankind they take little notice, but they are at great
pains to correct their vanity. They have various receipts for curing this evil;
the ordinary method is by keeping stern silence and an unmoved visage in
companies which are disposed to be cheerful. This taciturnity, if well kept up,
never fails in the end to work a cure upon festivity according to the first
principle of Thales: if the Damper looks morose, every body wonders what the
moody gentleman is displeased with, and each in his turn suspects himself in
the fault; if he only looks wise, all are expecting when the dumb oracle will
utter, and in the mean time his silence infects the whole circle; if the Damper
seasons his taciturnity with a shrug of the shoulders, or a shake of the head,
judiciously thrown in, when any talkative fellow raises a laugh, it is ten to
one if the mortified wit ever opens his mouth again for that evening; if a
story is told in his company, and the teller makes a slip in a date, or a name,
a true Damper may open, provided it is done agreably to the rules of his order,
by setting the story-teller right with much gravity, and adjusting the mistake
so deliberately, that the spirit of the story shall be sure to evaporate,
before the commentator has properly settled his correction of the text. If any
lucky wit chances to say what is called a good thing, and the table applauds,
it is a Damper's duty to ask an explanation of the joke, or whether that was
all, and what the other gentleman said, who was the butt of the jest, and other
proper questions of the like sort. If one of the company risques a sally for
the sake of good-fellowship, which is a little on the wrong side of truth, or
not strictly reducible to proof, a Damper may with great propriety set him
right in the matter of fact, and demonstrate, as clear as two and two make
four, that what he has said may be mathematically confuted, and that the merry
gentleman is mistaken. A Damper is to keep strict watch over the morals of the
company, and not to suffer the least indiscretion to escape in the warmth of
conviviality; on this occasion he must be ready to call to order, and to answer
for his friend to the company, that he has better principles than he affects to
have; that he should be sorry such and such an opinion went out against him;
and that he is certain he forgot himself, when he said so and so. If any glance
is made at private characters, however notorious, a Damper steps in with a
recommendation of candor, and inveighs most pathetically against the sin of
evil-speaking. He is never merry in company, except when any one in it is
apparently out of spirits, and with such an one he is always exceedingly
pleasant.

A Damper is so professed an enemy to flattery, that he never applies it in ever
so small a degree even to the most diffident: he never chears a young author
for fear of marring his modesty, never sinks truths because they are
disagreable, and if any one is rashly enjoying the transports of public fame on
account of some successful production in art or science, the Damper kindly
tells him what such and such a critic has scoffingly said on the occasion, and,
if nothing better offers, lowers his triumphs with a paragraph from a
news-paper, which his thoughtless friend might else have overlooked. He is
remarkably careful not to spoil young people by making allowances for spirits
or inexperience, or by indulging them in an opinion of their persons or
accomplishments. He has many excellent apothegms in his mouth ready to
recommend to those, who want them, such as to be merry and wise; -- a grain of
truth is better than an ounce of wit; -- a fool's bolt is soon shot, but a wise
man keeps his within the quiver; -- he that was only taught by himself had a
fool to his master; -- and many more of the like sort.

The following letter will serve to show in what sort of estimation this sect
of Dampers was held by a Roman author, who was one of the finest gentlemen of
his time.

PLINY to RESTITUTUS MELMOTH's Translation.
.
I cannot forbear pouring out my indignation before you in a letter, since I
have no opportunity of doing so in person, against a certain behavior which
gave me some offense in an assembly, where I was lately present. The company
was entertained with the recital of a very finished performance; but there were
two or three persons among the audience, men of great genius in their own and a
few of their friends estimation, who sat like so many mutes, without so much as
moving a lip or a hand, or once rising from their seats, even to shift their
posture. But to what purpose, in the name of good sense, all this wondrous air
of wisdom and solemnity, or rather indeed (to give it its true appellation) of
this proud indolence? Is it not downright folly, or even madness, thus to be at
the expense of a whole day merely to commit a piece of rudeness, and leave him
an enemy, whom you visited as a friend? Is a man conscious that he possesses a
superior degree of eloquence than the person whom he attends upon on such an
occasion? So much the rather ought he to guard against every appearance of
envy, as a passion that always implies inferiority, wherever it resides. But
whatever a man's talent may be, whether greater or equal or less than his
friend's, still it is his interest to give him the approbation he deserves: if
greater or equal, because the higher his glory rises, whom you equal or excel,
the more considerable yours must necessarily be; if less, because if one of
more exalted abilities does not meet with applause, neither possibly can you.
For my own part, I honor and revere all, who discover any degree of merit in
the painful and laborious art of oratory; for eloquence is a high and haughty
dame, who scorns to reside with those that despise her. But perhaps you are not
of this opinion; yet who has a greater regard for this glorious science, or is
a more candid judge of it than yourself? In confidence of which, I chose to
vent my indignation particularly to you, as not doubting you would be the first
to share with me in the same sentiments.

Farewell.

The Romans were much in the habit of reading their unpublished performances to
select parties, and sometimes no doubt put the patience and politeness of their
hearers to a severe trial: I conceive that this practice does not obtain to any
great degree amongst us at present; neither is it a thing to be recommended to
young authors, except under peculiar circumstances; for they certainly expose
themselves and their hearers to a situation very delicate at best, and which
sometimes leads to unpleasant consequences. I am aware how much is to be
expected from the judicious remarks of a critic, who will correct with all the
malice of a friend; yet a man so qualified and disposed is not easily found,
and does not often fall within the list of an author's acquaintance; men, who
read their works in circles, or to any but the most select friends, read for no
other purpose but for admiration and applause; they cannot possibly expect
criticism, and it is accordingly agreed upon by all, but the sect of the
Dampers, either to keep out of such circles, or to pay their quota when the
reckoning is cast up. Few, but men of quick and lively parts, are forward to
recite in such societies, and these are the very men, who are most pained by
neglect; for I think it is a remark, with as few exceptions to it as most
general remarks have, that brilliant talents are attended with extreme
sensibility, and the effects of sensibility bear such resemblance to the
effects of vanity, that the undiscerning multitude are too apt to confound
them. These are the men, who, in their progress through life, are most
frequently misunderstood, and generally less pitied than they ought to be.

Now a Damper will tell you that he is consulting such a man's good, and
lowering his vanity, when he is sporting with his feelings, and will take merit
to himself for the discipline he gives him; but humanity will reflect, that the
same spirits, which are prone to exult upon success, are proportionably
agonized by the failure of it, and will therefore prompt us to a gentler
treatment of such persons.

The sums which are expended in this nation upon those refined enjoyments,
which are produced by the expertness of the hands and the ingenuity of the
head, are certainly very great; and men are therefore apt to exclaim, "See what
encouragement this country gives to arts and sciences!" If money were the
standard measure of encouragement, there could be no dispute in the case; but
so long as men have a feeling for their pride, as well as for their pocket,
money alone will not encourage and promote the genius of a nation; it is the
grace of doing a favor, which constitutes its merit; it is from the manners of
the great that the man of rising talents is to draw that inspiriting
consideration of himself, that stimulating pride of nature, which are to push
his efforts toward perfection.

A limner will take a canvass and chalk out a man's face he has never seen
before, and hang on his robes, or his garter, if he has one, or will put a
horse in his hand, if he likes it better, or make a battle in the back ground,
if he was ever within hearing of one, and when the job is finished will be paid
the price of his labor, like any other mechanic; the money he may spend or put
to use, and, if customers come in, he may raise his price upon them, and the
world may call those profits an encouragement; but the painter is still a
tradesman, and his fitter, not a patron, but a customer: The mercer, whose
damask clothes the walls of the nobleman's saloon, and the artist, whose
pictures hang round it, are in the same predicament as to encouragement, whilst
neither of them are admitted into the house they contribute to adorn.

As I have made this remark with a reference to the Dampers in high life, I am
aware that there are many eminent encouragers of the arts and sciences amongst
the rich and liberal; nay so general is their protection, that it comprehends a
numerous importation of exotic tooth-drawers, dancers, and milliners, who find
that England is the nursery of genius: even the magnifying philosopher of
Piccadilly (unless he multiplies as well as magnifies) has shown his wonders so
frequently and to such prodigious numbers, that it is to be doubted, if they
shall continue to be wonders much longer.

There were men in ancient Greece no doubt, who talked, though Zeno chose to
hold his tongue, when certain ambassadors had invited him to supper, that they
might report his sayings to their sovereign; What shall we say of you to our
master? the foreigners demanded; Say that I had the wisdom to hold my tongue,
replied the Stoic. Though I am clearly of opinion that this great master of
silence was an intolerable Damper, and made a very poor return to these same
hospitable ambassadors for their good entertainment of him, yet I am not quite
so ready with my answer to a certain female correspondent, who in consequence
of some discourse upon Dampers the other day, in a company where she was
present, favored me with the following short, but curious, epistle.

Sir,
I HAVE the misfortune to be married to an elderly gentleman, who has taken
strange things in his head of late, and is for ever snubbing me before folks,
especially when the Captain is in company. 'Twas but the other night he broke up
a party of hot-cockles in the back parlour, and would not let the Captain take
a civil salute, though I assured him it was only a forfeit at questions and
commands.

I don't know what he means by saying he will put a spoke in my wheel, but I
suspect it is some jealousy matter.

Pray, Sir, is not my husband what you call a Damper?

Yours, LUCY LOVEIT.


No III.
THE desire of praise is natural, but when that appetite becomes canine, it is
no longer in nature: a taste of it is pleasant to most men; temperance itself
will take a little, but the stomach sickens with a surfeit of it, and the
palate nauseates the debauch.

Let the passion for flattery be ever so inordinate, the supply can keep pace
with the demand, and in the world's great market, in which wit and folly drive
their bargains with each other, there are traders of all sorts; some keep a
stall of offals, some a storehouse of delicacies; a squeamish palate must be
forced by alluring provocatives, a foul feeder will swallow any trash that he
can get hold of.

In a recent publication of the history of the Emperor Charles the Fifth,
written by Sepulveda of Cordova (a contemporary and favorite of that famous
monarch,) the Academy of History at Madrid in their dedication to his present
Catholic Majesty, address him in the following words -- Nam quem tu, Carole
Rex, ut nomine refers, ita etiam bellica laud jampridem aemularis. When these
courtly academicians have thus mounted their peaceable sovereign on the
war-horse of the victorious Charles, they seriously proceed to tell him, that
being fully equal to his predecessor in his martial character, he is out of all
distance superior to him in every other kingly quality; more wise, more
politic, more magnanimous, and (as the present work can testify) a greater
friend to learning than all that ever went before him, and, if they may risque
a prediction, there will probably be none to come in competition with him
hereafter.

If his Catholic Majesty shall ever come to an understanding of this paragraph,
and strike a fair comparison between himself and his illustrious namesake, I
should not be surprised if the next work his academicians shall be employed in
proves the fortifications of Ceuta.

When I compare the state of flattery in a free country with that, which
obtains in arbitrary states, it is a consolation to find that this mean
principle is not natural to mankind; for it certainly abates in proportion as
independency advances. This will be very evident to any one, who compares the
flattery of Elizabeth's and James's days with the present. Ben Johnson for
instance was a surly poet, yet how fulsome are his masks! In his News from
the New World he says of James -- Read him as you would do the book
Of all perfections, and but look
What his proportions be:
No measure that is thence contrived,
Or any motion thence derived,
But is pure harmony.


This poet, though he was rather a clumsy flatterer of his prince, was
ingenious enough in the mode he took for flattering himself, by introducing a
kind of chorus, wherein he takes occasion to tell his hearers, that careless of
all vulgar censure, as not depending on common approbation, he is confident his
plays shall super-please judicious spectators, and to them he leaves it to work
with the rest by example, or otherwise. It is remarkable that this passage
should be found in his Magnetic Lady, and that he should speak with such
confidence of one of his worst productions, as if he was determined to force a
bad comedy upon the hearers by the authority of his own recommendation. This is
an evident imitation of Aristophanes, who in his comedy of The Clouds holds the
same language to his audience, fairly telling them he shall estimate their
judgment according to the degree of applause they shall bestow upon his
performance then before them: in conclusion he inveighs against certain of his
contemporaries, Eupolis, Phrynichus, and Hermippus, with whose comedies if any
of his audience is well pleased, that person he hopes will depart from his
dissatisfied; but if they condemn his rivals, and applaud him, he shall think
better of their judgment for the future. Act 1. Sc. 6.

The caution authors now proceed with shows the refinement of the times; still
they can contrive in a modest way to say civil things of themselves, and it
would be hard indeed to disappoint them of so slight a gratification -- for
what praise is so little to be envied, as that which a man bestows on himself?
Several of our diurnal Essayists have contrived under the veil of fiction to
hook in something recommendatory of themselves, which they mean should pass for
truth; such is the intelligent taciturnity of the Spectator, and the solemn
integrity of the Guardian.

The latter in one of his papers notices the ambition of some authors to prefix
engravings of their portraits to their title pages; his ridicule has not quite
laughed this fashion out of countenance, for I perceive it is still in
existence, and I frequently meet the face of an old acquaintance looking
through the windows of a bookseller's shop. One very ingenious gentleman, whose
beauty is amongst the least of his recommendations, has very prudently stamped
his age upon his print. In the same shop window with this gentleman I observed
with great pleasure an elegant author standing by him, as erect as a dart, firm
and collected in the awful moment of beginning a minuet. I own I regret that
the honest butler, who has regaled the age with a treatise on ale and strong
beer, has not hung out his own head in the front of his book, as a sign of the
good entertainment within.

But of all the instances of face-flattery I have lately met with, that of a
worthy citizen surprised me most, whose compting-house I entered the other day,
and found an enormous portrait of my friend in a flaming drapery of blue and
gold, mounted upon the back of a war-horse, which the limner has made to rear
so furiously, that I was quite astonished to see my friend, who is no great
jockey, keep his seat so steadily: he confessed to me that he had consented to
be drawn on horseback to please his wife and daughters, who chose the attitude;
for his own part it made him quite giddy to look at himself, and he frequently
desired the painter not to let the horse prance so, but to no purpose.

Too great avidity of praise will sometimes betray an author into a studied
attempt at fine writing, where the thought will not carry the style; writers of
this sort are like those tasteless dabblers in architecture, who turn the
gable-ends of barns and cottages into castles and temples, and spend a world of
plaistering and pains to decorate a pig-stye. They bring to my mind a
ridiculous scene, at which I was present the other day; I found a lady of my
acquaintance busily employed in the domestic education of her only son; the
preceptor was in the room, and was standing in an attitude very much resembling
the erect gentleman I had seen that morning in the bookseller's window: The boy
kept his eyes fixed, and seemed to govern his motions by certain signals of the
feet and arms, which he repeated from the preceptor. In the course of my
conversation with his mother, I chanced to drop my glove upon the floor, upon
which he approached to pick it up, but in a step so measured and methodical,
that I had done the office for myself, before he had performed his advances. As
I was about to resume the conversation, the mother interrupted me, by desiring
I would favor her so far as to drop my glove again, that Bobby might have the
honor of presenting it to me in proper form: All this while the boy stood as
upright as an arrow, perfectly motionless; but no sooner had I thrown down my
gauntlet, than he began to put one foot slowly in advance before the other;
upon which the preceptor of politeness cried out, One! -- First position! --
The boy then made another movement of his feet, upon which the master repeated
-- Two! -- Second position! -- This was followed by another, and the echo again
cried out -- Three! very well -- Third position! Bend your body slowly! -- At
the word of command the automaton bent its body very deliberately, its arms
hanging down in parallel perpendiculars to the floor, like the forelegs of a
quadruped. The glove being now taken up by the right hand, was placed with
great decorum upon the back of the left hand; the trunk of the animal was
slowly restored to its erect position, and the glove presented with all due
solemnity. As I was in hopes the ceremony was now over, upon hearing the
teacher cry bravo! I thought it time to make my compliment of Thank you, pretty
Master! but I was again in a mistake, for the mother begged me not to hurry her
dear Bobby, but allow him time to make his bow, and still hold the glove in my
hand: This was an operation of no slight consequence, for in the time it took
him up, a nimble artist might have made the glove: At last however it was over,
and the boy was putting himself in order of retreat, when the master observing
that I had omitted the necessary bend of my wrist upon receiving the glove, for
want of which the whole had been imperfect, proposed a repetition of the
maneuver, in which Bobby should be the dropper, and himself the picker up of
the glove. This proposal struck me with such horror, that taking a hasty leave
of the lady, in which, first, second and third position were probably huddled
all together, I departed, repeating to myself in the words of Foigard, All this
may be very fine, but upon my soul it is very ridiculous.

No IV.
LADY THIMBLE is one of those female pedants, who with quick animal spirits, a
pert imagination, great self-conceit, and a homely person, sets herself up for
a woman of talents: She has as much of the learned languages, as a
boarding-school girl carries home of French upon her first holidays, when Miss
assures you she can call for what she wants, and, though she wont utter a word
in the parlour from pretended modesty, insults the ignorance of the chambermaid
with an eternal jargon of bad grammar, worse pronounced. This learned lady is
the only child of a wealthy trader of the city of London, who, having never
advanced in his own education beyond the erudition of the compting-house, took
care his daughter should be instructed in every thing he did not understand
himself, and as the girl grew exceedingly vain of the applause of the
pedagogue, who read to her, the merchant grew as vain of the scholarship of his
child, and would listen to the sound of Latin or Greek with as much
superstitious respect, as a Gentoo does to the Shanscrite language of the
Brahmins.

Miss in the mean time became an insufferable slattern in her clothes and
person, her handkerchiefs and aprons were full of iron-moulds from the
drippings of the inkhorn, and her stockings full of holes from her neglect of
the needle: These were in fact badges of affectation rather than of oversight,
and you could not pay your court to her better than by rallying her about them.
She wore a head of false hair, not because her own was thin, but because a wig
was thrown on in an instant; this was sometimes done with a negligence, that
seemed studied, and when the learned Ventosus vouchsafed to visit her, she was
sure to wear her wig awry, as Alexander's courtiers did their heads, in honor
of her guest: There was indeed an unseemly humor settled in her nose, but this
she got by studying Lock upon the human understanding after dinner; before she
could develope the whole doctrine of innate ideas, the humor deepened many
shades, which however on the whole may be allowed to be getting off pretty well
for a student in metaphysics. No face could bear the addition of a red nose
better than Lady Thimble's: but a more alarming accident had befallen her in
her astronomical studies, for as she was following a comet in its perihelion
through the solutions of Sir Isaac Newton, her cap caught fire, and she was
forced to break off in the midst of a proposition, by which means she dropped a
stitch in the demonstration, and never was able to take it up again; her skin
being cruelly scorched by this system of the comets, she wears a crimson scar
upon her cheek, not indeed as an ornament to her beauty, but as a trophy of her
science.

Her works are pretty voluminous, especially in manuscript; but censorious
people affect to whisper, that she performed one work in concert with the
pedant her master, and that, though this composition was brought secretly into
the world, it is the only one of her producing, that bids fair for posterity:
This story and the remark upon it, I had from a lady, who is one of her
intimate friends, but she assured me she gave no credit to it herself, and
considered all such scandalous insinuations as the effects of malice and envy.

At the age of seven and twenty, by the persuasion of her father, she was
joined in the bands of wedlock to Sir Theodore Thimble: This gentleman had been
lately dubbed a knight for his services to the crown in bringing up a county
address; his father, Mr. David Thimble, had been an eminent tailor in the
precincts of St. Clements, in which business he had by his industry and other
methods raised a very respectable fortune in money, book-debts and remnants: In
his latter years Mr. Thimble purchased a considerable estate in Essex with a
fine old mansion upon it, the last remaining property of an ancient family.
This venerable seat during the life of Mr. Thimble remained uncontaminated by
the presence of its possessor, but upon his death it fell into the occupation
of young Theodore, who disdaining the cross-legg'd art, by which his father had
worked himself into opulence, set out upon a new establishment, and figured off
as the first gentleman of his family: He served as sheriff of the county, and
acquired great reputation in that high office by the elegant and well cut
liveries, which he exhibited at the assizes; a lucky address from the county
gave him a title, and the recommendation of a good settlement procured him his
present lady, whom we have been describing.

As I have been in long habits of friendship with the worthy citizen her
father, I could not resist the many pressing invitations he gave me to pay a
visit to his daughter and Sir Theodore at their country seat, especially as he
prefaced it by assuring me I should see the happiest couple in England; and
that, although I had frequently opposed his system of education, I should now be
convinced that Arabella made as good a housewife and understood the conduct of
her family as well, as if she had studied nothing else, and this he was sure I
would confess, if he could prevail with me to accompany him to her house.

On the day following this conversation we set out together, and in a few hours
found ourselves at the promised spot: As I remembered this fine old mansion in
the days of its primitive simplicity, when I was ushered to its gate through a
solemn avenue of branching elms, that arched over head in lofty foliage, and
formed an approach in perfect unison with the ancient fashion of the place, I
must own I was much revolted to find that Sir Theodore had begun his
improvements with a specimen of his father's art, by cutting an old coat into a
new fashion: My favorite avenue no longer existed; the venerable tenants of the
soil were rooted up, and a parcel of dotted clumps, composed of trumpery
shrubs, substituted in their places; I was the more disgusted, when I perceived
that by the nonsensical zigzaggery of the road, through which we meandered, I
was to keep company with these new-fashioned upstarts through as many
parallels, as would serve for the regular approaches to a citadel. At one of
these turnings however I caught the glimpse of a well-dressed gentleman
standing in a very becoming attitude, who I concluded must be the master of the
mansion waiting our approach; and as I perceived he had his hat under his arm,
expecting us with great politeness and civility, I instantly took mine from my
head, and called to our driver to stop the carriage, for that I perceived Sir
Theodore was come out to meet us. My companion was at this time exceedingly
busy in directing my attention to the beauties of his son-in-law's
improvements, so that I had stopped the chaise before he observed what I was
looking at; but how was I surprised to find, in place of Sir Theodore, a leaden
statue on a pair of scates painted in a blue and gold coat, with a red
waistcoat, whose person upon closer examination I recollected to have been
acquainted with some years ago amongst the elegant group, which a certain
celebrated artist exhibits to the amusement of stage-coaches and country
wagons upon their entrance into town at Hyde-park Corner! I was happy to find
that this ridiculous mistake, instead of embarrassing my friend, occasioned
infinite merriment, and was considered as so good a joke by all the family upon
our arrival, that I am persuaded it was in the mind of the improver when he
placed him there; for the jest was followed up by several other party-colored
personages cast to the life, gentlemen and ladies, who were airing themselves
upon pedestals to the no small delight of my companion; and though most of
these witticisms in lead were of the comic cast, one group, of a mountebank in
the act of drawing an old woman's tooth, was calculated to move the contrary
passion; and this I observed was the last in the company, standing in view from
the windows of the house, as the moral of the fable. We now entered a Chinese
fence through a gate of the same fashion, to the side of which was affixed a
board, on which I observed at some distance a writing in fair characters; this
I suspected to be some classical text, which my Lady had set up to impress her
visiters with a due respect for her learning, but upon a near approach I found
it contained a warning to all interlopers, that men-traps and spring-guns were
concealed in those walks.

In this dangerous defile we were encountered by a servant in livery, who was
dispatched in great haste to stop our driver, and desire us to alight, as the
gravel was newly laid down, and a late shower had made it very soft; my friend
readily obeyed the arrest, but I confess the denunciation of traps and guns was
so formidable to my mind, that I took no step but with great circumspection and
forecast, for fear I was treading on a mine, or touching a spring with my foot,
and was heartily glad, when I found myself on the steps, though even these I
examined with some suspicion before I trusted myself upon them.

As we entered the house, my friend the merchant whispered me, that we were now
in my Lady's regions; all without doors was Sir Theodore's taste, all within
was here is: -- But as here a new scene was opened, I shall reserve my account to
another paper.

No V.
OUR visit to Sir Theodore and Lady Thimble being unexpected, we were shown
into the common parlour, where this happy couple were sitting over a good fire
with a middle-aged man of athletic size, who was reposing in an elbow chair in
great state with his mull in his hand, and with an air so self-important, as
plainly indicated him to be the dictator of this domestic circle.

When the first salutations were over, Lady Thimble gave her orders to the
servant, in the style of Lucullus, to prepare The Apollo, declaring herself
ashamed to receive a gentleman of talents in any other apartment; I beseeched
her to let us remain where we were, dreading a removal from a comfortable
fireside to a cold stately apartment, for the season was severe; I was so
earnest in my request, that Sir Theodore ventured in the most humble manner to
second my suit; the consequence of which was a smart reprimand, accompanied
with one of those expressive looks, which ladies of high prerogative in their
own houses occasionally bestow to husbands under proper subjection, and I saw
with pity the poor gentleman dispatched for his officiousness upon a freezing
errand through a great hall, to see that things were set in order, and make
report, when they were ready. I could not help giving my friend the merchant a
significant look upon this occasion; but he prudently kept silence, waiting
with great respect the dreadful order of march.

My Lady now introduced me to the athletic philosopher in the elbow-chair, who
condescended to relax one half of his features into a smile, and with a
gracious waving of his hand, or rather fist, dismissed me back again to my seat
without uttering a syllable. She then informed me, that she had a treat to give
me, which she flattered herself would be a feast entirely to my palate; I
assured her Ladyship I was always happiest to take the family-dinner of my
friends, adding that in truth the sharp air had sufficiently whetted my
appetite to recommend much humbler fare, than I was likely to find at her
table. She smiled at this, and told me it was the food of the mind that she was
about to provide for me; she undertook for nothing else; culinary concerns were
not her province; if I was hungry, she hoped there would be something to eat,
but for her part she left the care of her kitchen to those who lived in it.
Whilst she was saying this methought the philosopher gave her a look, that
seemed to say he was of my way of thinking; upon which she rung the bell, and
ordered dinner to be held back for an hour, saying to the philosopher she
thought we might have a Canto in that time.

She now paused for some time, fixing her eyes upon him in expectation of an
answer; but none being given, nor any signal of assent, she rose, and,
observing that it was surprising to think what Sir Theodore could be about all
this while, for she was sure The Apollo must be ready, without more delay bade
us follow her; Come, Sir, says she to me, as I passed the great hall with an
aching heart and chattering teeth, you shall now have a treat in your own taste;
and, meeting one of the domestics by the way, bade him tell Calliope to come
into The Apollo.

When I set my foot into the room, I was immediately saluted by something like
one of those ungenial breezes, which travelers inform us have the faculty of
putting an end to life and all its cares at a stroke: A fire indeed had been
lighted, which poor Sir Theodore was soliciting into a blaze, working the
bellows with might and main to little purpose; for the billets were so wet,
that Apollo himself with all his beams would have been foiled to set them in a
flame: The honest gentleman had taken the precaution of opening all the
windows, in spite of which no atom of smoke passed up the chimney, but came
curling into the room in columns as thick, as if a hecatomb had been offering
to the shrine of Delphi; indeed this was not much to be wondered at, for I soon
discovered that a board had been fixed across the flue of the chimney, which
Sir Theodore in his attention to the bellows had neglected to observe: I was
again the unhappy cause of that poor gentleman's unmerited rebuke, and in terms
much severer than before; it was to no purpose he attempted to bring Susan the
house-maid in for some share of the blame; his plea was disallowed; and though
I must own it was not the most manly defense in the world, yet, considering the
unhappy culprit as the son of a tailor, I thought it not entirely inadmissible.

When the smoke cleared up I discovered a cast of the Belvidere Apollo on a
pedestal in a niche at the upper end of the room; but, if we were to judge by
the climate, this chamber must have derived its name from Apollo, by the rule
of lucus a non lucendo: As soon as we were seated, and Lady Thimble had in some
degree composed her spirits, she began to tell me, that the treat she had to
give me was the rehearsal of part of an epic poem, written by a young lady of
seventeen, who was a miracle of genius, and whose talents for composition were
so extraordinary, that she had written a treatise on female education, whilst
she was at the boarding-school, which all the world allowed to be a wonderful
work for one of such an early age. There was no escape, for Calliope herself
now entered the room, and dinner was put back a full hour for the luxury of
hearing a canto of a boarding-school girl's epic poem read by herself in the
presence of Apollo. The Scottish philosopher had prudently kept his post by the
parlour fire, and I alone was singled out as the victim; Sir Theodore and his
father-in-law being considered only as expletives to fill up the audience.
Calliope was enthroned in a chair at the pedestal of Apollo, whilst Lady
Thimble and I took our seats opposite to the reader.

I was now to undergo an explanation of the subject matter of this poem; this
was undertaken and performed by Lady Thimble, whilst the young poetess was
adjusting her manuscript: The subject was allegorical; the title was The
Triumph of Reason, who was the hero of the piece; the inferior characters were
the human passions personified; each passion occupied a canto, and the lady had
already dispatched a long list; if I rightly remember we were to hear the
fourteenth canto; in thirteen actions the hero Reason had been victorious, but
it was exceedingly doubtful how he would come off in this, for the antagonist
he had to deal with was no less a personage than almighty Love himself: The
meter was heroic, and many of the thoughts displayed a juvenile fancy and wild
originality; the action was not altogether uninteresting, nor ill-managed, and
victory for a while was held in suspense by a wound the hero received from an
arrow somewhere in the region of the heart; for this wound he could obtain no
cure, till an ancient physician, after many experiments for his relief, cut out
the part affected with his scythe: Upon the whole the poem was such, that had
it not been allegorical, and had not I been cold and hungry, I could have found
much to commend and some things to admire, even though the poetess had been twice
as old and not half so handsome, for Calliope was extremely pretty, and I could
plainly discover that nature meant her to be most amiable and modest, if
flattery and false education would have suffered her good designs to have taken
place; I therefore looked upon her with pity, as I do on all spoilt children;
and when her reading was concluded, did not bestow all that praise, which, if I
had consulted my own gratification more than her good, I certainly should have
bestowed; the only occasion, on which I think it a point of conscience to
practice the philosophy of the Dampers.

At length dinner was announced, and being a part of Lady Thimble's domestic
economy, which she had put out of her own hands, as she informed us, and in
which I suspect the athletic philosopher had something to say, it was
plentifully served. Sir Theodore and my friend the merchant plied him pretty
briskly with the bottle; but as a stately first-rate ship does not condescend
to open her ports to the petty cruisers that presume to hail her, in like
manner this gigantic genius kept the oracle within him muzzled, nor
condescended once to draw the tompion of his lips, till it happened in the
course of many topics, that Lady Thimble, speaking of the talents of Calliope,
observed that miracles were not ceased: How should that thing be said to cease,
replied the oracle, which never had existence? The spring was now touched, that
put this vast machine in motion, and, taking infidelity in miracles for his
text, he carried us, in the course of a long uninterrupted harangue, through a
series of learned deductions, to what appeared his grand desideratum, viz. an
absolute refutation of the miracles of Christ by proofs logical and historical.
Whilst this discourse was going on, I was curious to observe the different
effects it had on the company: Lady Thimble received it with evident marks of
triumph, so that I could plainly see all was gospel with her, and the only
gospel she had faith in: Sir Theodore wisely fell asleep; the merchant was in
his compting-house, -- His mind was tossing on the ocean:
There, where his argosies with portly sail,
Like Seigniors and rich Burghers on the flood,
Or as it were the pageants of the sea,
Did overpeer the petty traffickers --
But all this while the young unsettled thoughts of Calliope were visibly
wavering, sometimes borne away by the ipse dixit of the philosopher and the
echo of Lady Thimble's plaudits; sometimes catching hold of Hope, and hanging
to the anchor of her salvation, Faith; at other times without resistance
carried down the tide of declamation, which rolled rapidly along in provincial
dialect, like a torrent from his native Highland craggs, rough and noisy; I saw
her struggles with infinite concern; the savage saw them also, but with
triumph, and, turning his discourse upon the breach he had made in her belief,
pressed the advantage he had gained with devilish address; in short a new
antagonist had started up, more formidable to Reason than all the fourteen,
from whose attack she had brought her hero off with victory; and that champion,
which had resisted the arrows of all-powerful Love, was likely now to fall a
victim to the pestilential breath of Infidelity. In this dilemma I was doubtful
how to act; I did not decline the combat because I dreaded the strength of this
Goliath of the Philistines, for I knew the weapons might be confided in, which
the great captain of salvation had put into my hands; but I disdained to plead
before a prejudiced tribunal, in which the mistress of the mansion sat as
judge; and as sleep had secured one of the company out of harm's way, and
another was upon an excursion from which I did not wish to bring him home,
there remained only Calliope, and I determined within myself to take occasion
of discoursing with her apart, before I lest the house next morning.

No VI.
I HAD resolved to have some conversation with Calliope after the athletic
philosopher's harangue against the evidences of the Christian religion: I was
at the pains of putting my thoughts together in writing before I went to bed,
for I judged it best to give them to Calliope in such a form, as she might
hereafter at any time refer to and examine.

I had the satisfaction of an hour's conversation with that young lady next
morning, before the family had assembled for breakfast: I could observe that
something dwelt upon her mind, and demanding of her if I was not right in my
conjecture, she answered me at once to the point without hesitation -- "I
confess to you," says she, "that the discourse which Dr. Mac-Infidel yesterday
held, has made me thoroughly unhappy; things, which are above reason, I can
readily suppose are mysteries, which I ought to admit as matter of faith in
religion; but things contrary to reason, and facts which history confutes how
am I to believe? What am I to do in this case? Have you any thing to oppose to
his argument? If you have, I should be happy to hear it; if you have not, I
pray you let us talk no more upon the subject." -- I then gave the paper into
her hand, which I had prepared, and explaining to her the reasons I had for not
taking up the dispute before our company yesterday, desired her to give my
paper a serious reading; if there was any thing in it, that laid out of the
course of her studies, I would gladly do my best to expound it, and would show
her the authorities to which it referred: She received my paper with the best
grace in the world, and promised me that she would consider it with all the
attention she was mistress of.

In our further discourse it chanced, that I let drop some expressions in
commendation of her understanding and talents, upon which I observed she gave
me a very expressive look, and when I would have spoken of her poem, she shook
her head, and, hastily interrupting me, desired I would spare her on that
subject; she did not wish to be any more flattered in a folly she had too much
cause to repent of; she had burnt the odious poem I was speaking of, and,
bursting suddenly into a flood of tears, protested she would never be guilty of
writing another line of poetry, while she lived.

No words of mine can paint the look and action, which accompanied these
expressions; much less can I describe the stroke of pity and surprise, which
her emotion gave me. It was evident she alluded to something that had occurred
since the reading of the poem; I recollected she was absent all the latter part
of the evening, and I felt an irresistible propensity to enquire into the cause
of her affliction, though the shortness of our acquaintance gave me no right to
be inquisitive; she saw my difficulty, for her intuition is very great; after a
short recollection, which I did not attempt to interrupt -- "I know not how it
is," says she, "but something tells me I am speaking to a friend." -- Here she
paused, as doubting whether she ought to proceed or not, and fixed her eyes
upon the floor in evident embarrassment; it will readily be supposed I seized
the opportunity to induce her to confide in me, if there was any service I
could render toward alleviating the distress she was evidently suffering -- "I
have no right to trouble you," says she, "but that fatal argument I heard last
night has so weakened the resource, to which my mind in all afflictions would
else have naturally applied, that I really know not how to support myself, nor
where to look for comfort, but by throwing myself upon your friendship for
advice, as the most unhappy of all beings. You must know I have the honor to
be the daughter of that gallant sea officer Captain --." Here she named an
officer, who will be ever dear to his country, ever deplored by it, and whose
friendship is at once the joy and the affliction of my life. I started from my
seat; the stroke I felt, when she pronounced a name so rooted in my heart, was
like the shock of electricity; I clasped her hands in mine, and pressing them
exclaimed -- 'You have a father' -- here I stopped -- the recollection checked me
from proceeding -- for it was false. -- 'No, no, my child,' I said, 'you have
no father! nor had he a friend, who can replace your loss; however, pray
proceed.' -- "Implicitly," replied Calliope, (for by that name I still must beg
to call her, though that and poetry are both renounced for ever.) "As you are
the friend of my father, you must know that he lost my mother, when I was an
infant; two years are now passed since he perished; a miserable period it has
been to me; I am now under the protection of a distant relation, who is an
intimate of the lady of this house, and one whose ruinous flattery jointly with
Lady Thimble's, has conspired to turn my wretched head, and blast the only hope
of happiness I had in life: These learned ladies, as they would be thought, put
me upon studies I was never fitted to, gave me this silly name Calliope, and
never ceased inflaming my vanity, till they persuaded me I had a talent for
poetry: In this they were assisted by Mac-Infidel, who lives in great intimacy
with Lady Thimble; the adulation of a learned man, (for that he surely is,)
intoxicated me with self-opinion, and the gravity of his character completed
the folly and destruction of mine." 'What do I hear,' said I, interrupting her,
'the destruction of your character?' -- "Have patience," she replied; "when I
disclose the sorrows of my heart, you will own that my destruction is
complete." -- Melancholy as these words were, the deduction notwithstanding
that I drew from them was a relief, compared to what at first I apprehended. --
"Alas! Sir," resumed Calliope, "I have lost the affections of the most amiable,
the most beloved of men: He was my father's darling, and from a boy was
educated by him in the profession of the sea; he shared every service with my
father except the last fatal one, in which your friend unhappily was lost;
Providence, that ordained the death of the one, has in the same period enriched
the other; he is lately returned from the West Indies, and by his duty has been
confined to the port he arrived in, so that we have not met since his return to
England: Here is the first letter he wrote to me from Plymouth; read it, I
beseech you, and then compare it with the fatal one I received last night."
Calliope put a letter into my hands, and I read as follows. --

MY DEAREST NANCY!
I have this instant brought my frigate to an anchor, and seize the first
moment, that my duty permits, to tell the loveliest of her sex, that I have
luckily come across a prize, that makes a man of me for life; A man did I say?
Yes, and the happiest of men, if my dear girl is still true, and will consent
to share the fortune of her faithful Henry.

I cannot leave Plymouth this fortnight, therefore pray write to me under cover
to my friend the Admiral.

Yours ever, HENRY CONSTANT.


When I had returned this letter to Calliope, she resumed her narrative in the
following words: "The joy this letter gave me set my spirits in such a flow,
that in the habit I was of writing verses, I could not bring my thoughts to run
in humble prose, but giving the reins to my fancy filled at least six sides
with rhapsodies in verse; and not content with this, and foolishly conceiving
that my poem would appear at least as charming to Henry, as the flattery of my
own sex had persuaded me it was to them, I enclosed a fair copy and sent it to
him in a packet by the stage-coach; the next return of the post brought me this
fatal letter I received last night."

MADAM,
Though there cannot be in this world a task so painful to me, as what I am now
about to perform, yet I think it an indispensible point of honor to inform my
late most lovely and beloved Nancy, that if I am to suppose her the author of
that enormous bundle of verses I have received from her hand, it is the last
favor that hand must bestow upon her unhappy Henry.

My education you know; for it was formed under your most excellent father; I
served with him from a child, and he taught me, not indeed the knack of making
verses, but what I hope has been as useful to my country, the duties of an
officer. Being his daughter, I had flattered myself you would not like me the
less for following his profession, or for being trained to it under his
instruction. But alas! Nancy, all these hopes are gone. My ignorance would only
disgrace you, and your wit would make me contemptible; since you are turned
poetess, how can my society be agreeable? If those verses you have sent me are
all of your own making, you must have done little else since we parted, and if
such are to be your studies and occupations, what is to become of all the
comforts of a husband? How are you to fulfill the duties of a mother, or manage
the concerns of a family? No, no; may heaven defend me from a learned wife! I
am too proud to be the butt of my own table; too accustomed to command, to be
easily induced to obey; let me ever live a single man, or let the wife I choose
be modest, unpretending, simple, natural in her manners, plain in her
understanding; let her be true as the compass I sail by, and (pardon the
coarseness of the allusion) obedient to the helm as the ship I steer; then,
Nancy, I will stand by my wife, as I will by my ship, to the latest moment I
have to breathe. For God's sake what have women to do with learning? But if
they will step out of their own profession and write verses, do not let them
step into ours to choose husbands; we shall prove coarse messmates to the muses.

I understand so much of your poetical epistle, as to perceive that you are in
the family of Sir Theodore and Lady Thimble: Three days of such society would
make me forswear matrimony for ever: To the daughter of my friend I must for
ever speak and act as a friend; suffer me then to ask if any man in his senses
will choose a wife from such a school? Oh grief to think! that one so natural,
so sincere and unaffected as was my Nancy, could be the companion of such an
ugly petticoated pedant as Lady Thimble, such a tame hen-pecked son of a tailor
as Sir Theodore!

As for the volume of verses you have sent me, I dare say it is all very fine,
but I really do not comprehend three lines of it; the battles you describe are
what I never saw by sea or land, and the people who fight them such as I have
never been accustomed to serve with; one gentleman I perceive there is, who
combats stoutly against Love; it is a good moral, and I thank you for it; cost
what it may, I will do my best to imitate your hero.

Farewell. I must be only your most faithful friend, HENRY CONSTANT.


No VII.
Magnum iter ad doctas proficisci cogor Athenas.
(PROPERT.)
I WAS agreeably surprised the other day with an unexpected visit from a
country friend, who once made a considerable figure in the fashionable world,
and, with an elegant taste for the fine arts, is possessed of many valuable
paintings and sculptures of his own collecting in Italy: He told me, that after
six years absence from town, he had made a journey purposely to regale his
curiosity for a few days with the spectacles of this great capital, and desired
I would accompany him on his morning's tour to some of the eminent artists, and
afterward conduct him to the theater, where he had secured himself a seat for
the representation of Mr. Southern's tragedy of the Fatal Marriage. Though I
had just been honored with a card from Vanessa, purporting that she should
hold The Feast of Reason that evening at her house, where my company was
expected, I did not hesitate to accept the invitation of my country friend, and
excuse myself from that of Vanessa, though I must confess my curiosity was
somewhat roused by the novelty of the entertainment to which I was bidden. Our
day passed so entirely to the satisfaction of my candid companion, that, when
we parted at night, he shook me by the hand, and with a smile of complacency
declared, that a day so spent would not disgrace the diary of Pericles.

When I had returned to my apartment, this allusion of my friend to the age of
Pericles, with the recollection of what had passed in the day, threw me into a
reverie, in the course of which I fell asleep, whilst my mind with more
distinctness than is usual in dreaming, pursued its waking train of thought
after the following manner.

"I found myself in a stately portico, which being on an eminence, gave me the
prospect of a city, enclosing a prodigious circuit, with groves, gardens, and
fields, seemingly set apart for martial exercises and sports; the houses were
not clustered into streets and alleys like our great trading towns, but were
placed apart and separated without any regular order, as if each man had
therein consulted his own particular taste and enjoyments. I thought I never
saw so delightful a place, nor a people who lived so much at their ease: I felt
a freshness and salubrity in the climate, that seemed to clear the brain, and
give a spring to the spirits and whole animal frame: The sun was bright and
glowing, but the lightness of the atmosphere and a refreshing breeze qualified
the heat in the most delicious manner. As I looked about me with wonder and
delight, I observed a great many edifices of the purest architecture, that
seemed calculated for public purposes; and wherever my eye went, it was
encountered by a variety of statues in brass or marble; immediately at the foot
of the steps, leading to the portico, in which I stood, I observed a figure in
brass of exquisite workmanship, which by its attributes I believed designed to
represent the heathen deity Mercurius. In the center of the city there was an
edifice enclosed within walls, which I took to be the citadel; a rapid stream
of clear water meandered about the place, and was trained through groves and
gardens in the most picturesque and pleasing manner, while the prospect at
distance was bounded by the sea.

"As I stood wrapped in contemplation of this new and brilliant scenery,
methought I was accosted by a middle-aged man in a loose garment of fine
purple, who wore his hair after the manner of our ladies, braided and coiled
round upon the crown of his head with great care and delicacy to a considerable
height; and (which I thought remarkable) he had fastened the braids in several
places with golden pins, on which were several figures of small grasshoppers of
the same metal; behind him walked a servant-youth, or slave, carrying a light
wicker chair for his master to repose in, a custom that seemed to me to argue
great effeminacy; and looking about me I found it was pretty universal, many of
the bettermost sort of citizens being seated in the streets, conversing at
their ease, though there was certainly nothing in the climate, that made such
an indulgence necessary.

"As I was eyeing this gentleman with a surprise, that I must own had some
small tincture of contempt in it, he turned himself to me, and in the most
complaisant manner imaginable accosted me in my own language, telling me, he
perceived I was a stranger in Athens, and if I was curious to see what was
remarkable in the place, he was ready to dedicate the day to my service. To
this courteous address I returned the best answer I was able, adding that every
thing was new to me and many things appeared admirable. You will say so,
replied he, before the day is past, and yet I cannot show you in the space of a
day the hundredth part of what this city contains worth a stranger's
observation: Of a certain Arts and Sciences are now carried to their utmost
pitch, and no future age I think will succeed, in which the glory of the
Athenian commonwealth, and the genius of its citizens shall be found superior
to their present luster.

"The portico, in which you stand, continued the Athenian, is what we call
P^cile, or the painted Portico; the brazen statue at the foot of the steps was
raised by the nine Archons in honor of Mercurius Agoraeus, or the Forensal;
and dedicated by them to the tribes: That by its side is the statue of Solon,
the other at some distance is the lawgiver Lycurgus. The gate before you, on
which you see those warlike trophies, was so adorned in memory of the defeat of
Plistarchus, who was brother of the famous Cassander, and commanded his cavalry
and auxiliary troops in the action recorded. These paintings behind you, with
which the portico is furnished and from which it has its name, are all upon
public subjects in commemoration of wise or valiant citizens: The pictures on
your right hand are by the celebrated Polygnotus, these on your left by Micon,
equal to his rival in art, but not in munificence; for Polygnotus would accept
no other reward for his works, than the fame inseparable from such eminent
performances; Micon on the contrary was paid by the state. There are several
others by the hands of our great masters, particularly that incomparable piece,
which represents the field of Marathon, a composition by the great Panaenus,
brother of the statuary Phidias; but this, as well as the others, will demand a
more particular description.

"Examine this composition on your right; it is the work of Polygnotus; you see
two armies drawn up front to front and on the point of engaging; these are the
Athenians, the adverse troops are the Lacedaemonians; the scene is Oenoe; such
is the contrivance of the artist, that you are sure victory is to declare for
the Athenians, though the battle is not yet commenced.

"In the opposite piece you see the battle of Theseus with the Amazons; a
capital composition by Micon; these warlike ladies are fighting on horseback;
with what wonderful art has the master expressed the character of athletic
beauty without deviating into vulgarity and grossness! If you recollect the
Lysistrata of Aristophanes you will meet an elogium on this picture; it is thus
the sister arts encourage and support each other.

"Now turn to Polygnotus's side and look at that magnificent piece of art: The
painter has chosen for the subject of his composition the council of the
Grecian chiefs upon the violence done to Cassandra by Ajax after the capture of
Troy; you see the brutal character of the man strongly expressed in the hero of
the piece; amongst that group of Trojan captives Cassandra is conspicuous; that
figure, which represents Laodice, is worth your notice, as being a portrait of
Elpinice a celebrated courtesan: Scrupulous people have taken offense at it,
but great painters will indulge themselves in these liberties, and are fond of
painting after beautiful nature; of which I could give you innumerable examples.

"Now let us in the last place regale our eyes with this inestimable battle of
Marathon by Panaenus: What think you of it? Was it not a reward worthy of the
heroes, who preserved their country on that glorious day? Which party is most
honored by the work, the master who wrought it, or the valiant personages who
are recorded by it? It is a question difficult to decide. You will observe
three different groups in this superb composition, describing three different
periods of the action: Here you see the Athenians and their allies the
Plataeans just commencing the action. -- There, further removed in perspective,
the barbarians are defeated; the slaughter is raging, and the Medes are
plunging desperately into the marshy lake to avoid their pursuers; examine the
back ground, and you see the Phoenician galleys; the barbarians are making a
bold attack, and the sea is covered with wrecks: All mouths are open in
applause of this picture, and it was but the other day, that the great orator
Demosthenes referred to it in a solemn harangue upon Neaera, as did Eschines in
his pleading against Ctesiphon. All our Captains are taken from the life; that
General who is encouraging his troops is Miltiades; he is the hero of the
piece, and I can assure you the resemblance is in all points exact: This is the
portrait of Callimachus the Polemarck: There you see the hero Echetlus, and
this is the brave Epizelus; that Athenian, who is valiantly fighting, is
Cynaegirus himself, who lost both his hands in the action; there goes an
extraordinary story with that dog, which is by his side, and has seized the
dying barbarian by the throat; the faithful creature would not forsake his
master; he was killed in the action, and is now deservedly immortalized in
company with the illustrious heroes, who are the subject of the piece. Those
splendid warriors in the army of the Medes, who are standing in their chariots,
and calling to their troops, are the generals Datis and Artaphanes. They are
drawn in a proud and swelling style, and seem of a larger size and proportion
than our Athenian champions; and the fact is, that this group was inserted by
another master; they are by the hand of Micon, and perhaps do not exactly
harmonize with the rest; the silly Athenians were piqued at their appearance,
and in a fit of jealousy punished Micon by a fine for having painted them too
flatteringly; the painter suffered in his pocket, but the people in my opinion
were disgraced by the sentence: This circumstance has given occasion for many
on the part of Micon to contest the honor of the painting with Panaenus, who
in justice must be considered as principal author of the work; and in course of
time it may happen, that posterity will be puzzled which master to ascribe it
to.

"There are many more pictures well deserving your attentive notice,
particularly that by Pamphilus, which represents Alomena with the Heraclidae
asking aid of the Athenians against Eurystheus; and this inspired old figure by
Polygnotus with a lyre in his hand, which is the portrait of no less a person
than the great Sophocles; -- but come, let us be gone, for we have much besides
to see; and I perceive Zeno coming this way with his scholars to hold his
lectures in this portico; and I for one must confess I am no friend to the
Stoics, or as we call them the Zenonians.

No VIII.
Ad vetustissimam et sapientissimam et diis carissimam et communem amasiam,
hominumque ac Deorum terram, Athenas mittebaris.

(LIBANIUS IN ORATIONE.)
"FROM the painted portico, in which my last was dated, my Athenian conductor
took me to the Ptolemaic Gymnasium, in which I observed several statues of
Mercury in marble, and others of brass, which he explained to me to be of
Ptolemy the founder, Juba and Chrysippus the philosopher. There was one of
Berosus the astrologer with a tongue of pure gold, in commemoration of his
divine predictions: On one hand of me stood the doric temple of Theseus,
enriched with some inestimable paintings of Micon, particularly one upon the
subject of the fight of the Lapithae and Centaurs: on the other hand was the
ancient temple of the Dioscuri, in which I was shown many capital pictures by
Polygnotus; it is here, says my conductor, we administer to the Athenian youth
that solemn oath, which binds them not to desert their ranks in action, but to
perish, when necessity so requires, in defense of their country; the form is
rather long, says he, but this is the substance of the oath. The Prytaneum, or
Courthouse, was now in view, where the magistracy of the city assemble for the
dispatch of public business: Here I saw the venerable laws of Solon in a chest
of stone, the statues of Pax and Vesta, and (which were more interesting to me)
the figures of Miltiades and Themistocles of exquisite workmanship in pure
marble; in this place all those citizens, and the posterity of those, who have
deserved well of the state, receive their public doles or allowance of bread in
cakes composed of meal, oil, and water; here also I saw the perpetual fire upon
the altar of Vesta, and the celebrated image of the Bona Fortuna of the
Athenians. In the adjoining temple of Lucina I was shown the famous statues of
that deity clothed in drapery to the feet: My guide now carried me to the great
temple of Olympian Jupiter, founded by the tyrant Pisistratus, and perfected by
his sons and successors; I observed to my conductor, that I had seen no temple
in Athens, except this, with interior columns; he informed me that the great
span of the roof made it necessary in this instance, but that it was contrary
to their rule of architecture and obtained in no other: He further told me that
the city had expended ten thousand talents in this edifice: The image of the
god was cut in ivory and gold; to every column was affixed a brazen statue,
representing the colonial cities of the Athenian empire. The display of
statuary exceeded all description or belief, nor was the painter's art wanting
in its share of the decoration; for wherever pictures could be disposed, and
particularly about the pedestal of the statue of Jupiter, the most capital
paintings were to be seen.

"My sight was now so dazzled with the display of brilliant images, and my mind
so overpowered with the miracles of art, which had passed in review, that I
beseeched my guide to carry me either to some of those groves, which were in my
eye, where I could meditate on what I had seen, or to spectacles of any other
sort according to his choice and discretion, for otherwise I should apprehend,
from the variety of objects, I should retain the memory of none. He told me in
reply, that this was his intention, observing that the proportion I had seen
was very small indeed to what the city contained; there was however one more
statue, which he could not dispense with himself from showing me, being a model
of beauty and perfection; and having so said methought he took me into a
neighboring garden, and in a grove of cypress and myrtle presented to my view
the most exquisite piece of sculpture I had ever beheld. -- This, says he, is
the Venus called Celestial, the workmanship of the immortal Alcamen. -- After I
had contemplated this divine original with astonishment and rapture, I was
satisfied within myself, that we are mistaken in supposing it has descended to
us, and I now acknowledge that our celestial Venus is a copy far inferior to
its inimitable prototype. Having examined this statue for some time, I turned
to my conductor and said: -- Let us gratify our senses in some other way; I
have seen enough of art.

"It is impossible to avoid it, replies he, in this city, and so saying led me
into the Lyceum; this Gymnasium, says he, has been lately instituted by
Pericles, and these plantations of plane-trees are of his making; so are these
aqueducts; the Lyceum was originally dedicated to Pastoral Apollo, and owes its
foundation and beauty in the first instance to the elegant Pisistratus, who
from the surprising resemblance of their persons we now call the elder
Pericles. The place is delightful, and before you leave it take notice of this
statue of Apollo; the artist has described him in the attitude of resting after
his daily course; you see he leans against a column; his right arm bent over
his head, and in his left he holds his bow; it is a first-rate piece of
sculpture. Leaving the Lyceum my conductor took me by the way of the Tripods;
here he showed me the inimitable satyr in brass, the boasted masterpiece of
Praxiteles, and the Cupid and Bacchus of Thymilus; we were now close by the
theater, in the portico of which I was shown the statue of Eschylus, and two
pedestals for the statues of Sophocles and Euripides, then under the artists
hands, although both those poets were now living: The doors of the theater were
not yet opened, and the temple of Venus being near at hand, methought we
entered, and I beheld the beautiful Cupid crowned with roses, painted by
Zeuxis; from hence I could see the works, that Pericles had been carrying on
upon the citadel, but this we did not enter.

"Methought I was now carried into the theater amidst a prodigious crowd of
people; the comedy of the night was entitled The Clouds, and the famous
Aristophanes was announced to be the author of it. It was expected that
Socrates would be personally attacked, and a great party of that philosopher's
enemies were assembled to support the poet. I was much surprised, when my
companion pointed out to me that great philosopher in person, who had actually
taken his seat in the theater, and was sitting between Alcibiades and Antipho
the son of Pericles; by the side of Alcibiades sat Euripides, and at Antipho's
left hand sat Thucydides; I never beheld two more venerable old men than the
poet and historian, nor such comely persons as Alcibiades and Antipho: Socrates
was exceedingly like the busts we have of him, his head was bald, his beard
bushy, and his stature low; there was something very deterring in his
countenance; his person was mean and his habit squalid; his vest was of loose
drapery, thrown over his left shoulder after the fashion of a Spanish Capa, and
seemed to be of coarse cloth, made of black wool undyed; he had a short staff
in his hand of knotted wood with a round head, which he was continually rubbing
in the palm of his hand, as he talked with Alcibiades, to whom he principally
addressed his discourse: Thucydides had lately returned from exile upon a
general amnesty, and I observed a melancholy in his countenance mixed with
indignation; Euripides seemed employed in examining the countenances of the
spectators, whilst Antipho with great modesty paid a most respectful attention
to the venerable philosopher on his right hand. Whilst I was engaged in
observing this respectable group, my conductor whispered the following words in
my ear -- This is the second attack from the same hand upon Socrates; that of
last year was defeated by Alcibiades; but if this night's comedy succeeds, I
predict that our philosopher is undone: and in truth his school is much out of
credit; for some of the worst characters of the age have come out of his hands
of late.

"When the players first came on the stage there was so great a murmur in the
theater, that I could scarce hear them; after a short time however the silence
became pretty general, and the plot of the play, such as it was, began to open;
I perceived that the poet had devised the character of an old clownish father,
who being plunged in debt by the extravagancies of a flanting wife and a
spendthrift son, who wasted his fortune upon race-horses, was for ever puzzling
his brains to strike upon some expedient for cheating his creditors. With this
view he goes to the house of Socrates to take counsel of that philosopher, who
gives him a great many ridiculous instructions, seemingly not at all to the
purpose, and amongst other extravagancies assures him that Jupiter has no
concern in the government of the world, but that all the functions of
providence are performed by The Clouds, which upon his invocation appear and
perform the part of a chorus throughout the play: The philosopher is
continually foiled by the rustic wit of the old father, who, after being put in
Socrates's truckle bed and miserably stung with vermin, has a meeting with his
creditors, and endeavors to parry their demands with a parcel of pedantic
quibbles, which he has learnt of the philosopher, and which give occasion to
scenes of admirable comic humor: My conductor informed me this incident was
pointed at Eschines, a favorite disciple of Socrates; a man, says he, plunged
in debts and a most notorious defrauder of his creditors. In the end the father
brings his son to be instructed by Socrates; the son, after a short lecture,
comes forth a perfect Atheist, and gives his father a severe cudgelling on the
stage, which irreverend act he undertakes to defend upon the principles of the
new philosophy, he had been learning. This was the substance of the play, in
the course of which there were many gross allusions to the unnatural vice, of
which Socrates was accused, and many personal strokes against Clisthenes,
Pericles, Euripides, and others, which told strongly, and were much applauded
by the theater.

"It is not to be supposed, that all this passed without some occasional
disgust on the part of the spectators, but it was evident there was a party in
the theater, which carried it through, notwithstanding the presence of Socrates
and the respectable junto that attended him: For my part I scarce ever took my
eyes from him during the representation, and I observed two or three little
actions, which seemed to give me some insight into the temper of his mind
during the severest libel, that was ever exhibited against any man's person and
principles.

"Before Socrates appears on the stage, the old man raps violently at his door,
and is reproved by one of his disciples, who comes out and complains of the
disturbance; upon his being questioned what the philosopher may be then
employed upon, he answers that he is engaged in measuring the leap of a flea,
to decide how many of its own lengths it springs at one hop; the disciple also
informs him with great solemnity, that Socrates has discovered that the hum of
a gnat is not made by the mouth of the animal, but from behind: This raised a
laugh at the expense of the naturalists and minute philosophers, and I observed
that Socrates himself smiled at the conceit.

"When the school was opened to the stage and all his scholars were discovered
with their heads upon the floor and their posteriors mounted in the air, and
turned toward the audience, though the poet pretends to account for it, as if
they were searching for natural curiosities on the surface of the ground, the
action was evidently intended to convey the grossest allusion, and was so
received by the audience: When this scene was produced I remarked, that
Socrates shook his head, and turned his eyes off the stage; whilst Euripides
with some indignation threw the sleeve of his mantle over his face; this was
observed by the spectators, and produced a considerable tumult, in which the
theater seemed pretty fairly divided, so that the actors stood upright, and
quitted the posture they were discovered in.

"When Socrates was first produced standing on a basket mounted into the
clouds, the person of the actor and the mask he wore, as well as the garment he
was dressed in, was the most direct counterpart of the philosopher himself,
that could be devised. But when the actor, speaking in his character, in direct
terms proceeded to deny the divinity of Jupiter, Socrates laid his hand upon
his heart, and cast his eyes up with astonishment; in the same moment
Alcibiades started from his seat, and in a loud voice cried out -- Athenians!
is this fitting? Upon this a great tumult arose and very many of the spectators
called upon Socrates to speak for himself, and answer to the charge; when the
play could not proceed for the noise and clamor of the people, all demanding
Socrates to speak for himself, the philosopher unwillingly stepped forward, and
said -- You require of me, O Athenians, to answer to the charge; there is no
charge; neither is this a place to discourse in about the gods: Let the actor
proceed! -- Silence immediately took place, and Socrates's invocation to The
Clouds soon ensued; the passage was so beautiful, the machinery of the clouds
so finely introduced, and the chorus of voices in the air so exquisitely
conceived, that the whole theater was in raptures, and the poet from that
moment had entire possession of their minds, so that the piece was carried
triumphantly to its period. In the heat of the applause my Athenian friend
whispered me in the ear and said -- Depend upon it, Socrates will hear of this
in another place; he is a lost man; and remember I tell you that if all our
philosophers and sophists were driven out of Attica, it would be happy for
Athens. -- At these words I started and awaked from my dream.

No IX.
CALLIOPE has favored me with the following letter; it is dated from the house
of a worthy clergyman, a friend of her father's, who with an exemplary wife
lives upon a small country vicarage in primitive simplicity, where that
afflicted young lady took shelter.

SIR,
AFTER you left me at Lady Thimble's, I seized the first moment, that the
anguish of my mind permitted me to make use of, to put myself in readiness for
taking my final leave of that family, and, according to the plan we had
concerted, came without delay to this place, where, if any thing could have
given absolute peace to my mind, the consolation of these excellent people, and
the serenity of the scene must have done it. As it was, I felt my afflictions
lighten, my self-reproach became less bitter, and, whilst the vanity, which
flattery had inspired me with, has been cured by their admonitions, the doubts
that infidelity had raised have been totally removed, and truth made clear to
my eternal comfort and conviction. Had it not been for this, I should have been
given up to despair; for as I heard no more from Captain Constant, I was
convinced he had renounced me for ever; in the mean time I wrote many letters,
but sent none to him; some of these letters were written in a high tone, most
of them in an humble one, and in one I gave a loose to passion and despair in
expressions little short of phrensy; all these I constantly destroyed, for as I
had not the heart to write angrily to him, so I dreaded to appear mean in his
eyes, if I was too plaintive; nay I was not sure, since his fortune had become
so superior to mine, but I might lay myself open to a charge of the most
despicable nature.

Thus my time passed, till yesterday morning, upon observing the house in one
of those bustles, which the expectation of a visiter creates in small families,
I found my good hostess deeply engaged with her pastry, and hav^ng myself
become a considerable adopt in the art under her tuition, I was putting myself
in order to assist her in her preparations, when turning to me with a smile,
which seemed to spring from joy as well as benevolence -- Come, my dear child,
says she, I have been at work this hour; and if you had known it was to
entertain a friend of your father's, I am persuaded you would not have let me
been so long beforehand with you. -- I asked her who it was she expected -- No
matter, she replied, fall to your work, and do your best, like a good girl, for
your mistress's credit as well as your own. -- The significant look, with which
she accompanied these words, set my heart into such a flutter, that my hands no
longer obeyed me in the task I undertook, till having spilt the milk,
overthrown the eggs, and put every thing into the same confusion with myself, I
burst into a flood of tears, which ended in a strong hysteric fit. My screams
brought the good man of the house and every body in it to my assistance; but
judge of my condition betwixt joy, astonishment and terror, when the figure of
my beloved Constant presented itself to my eyes; My God! he exclaimed, and
started back aghast, then sprung to my assistance, and, clasping me in his
arms, lifted me at once from the floor and ran with me into the parlour, where
there was a couch -- My life! my soul! -- was all he could say, for he was like
a man beside himself with fright and agony, till I recovered; this was at last
effected by a plentiful relief of tears, and then I found myself alone with my
beloved Henry, my head reclined upon his neck, and him supporting my whole
weight in his arms, whilst he knelt on one knee at my feet; no sooner had I
recollected myself, than the blood, that had been driven from my cheeks during
my fit, rushed back again with violence and covered me with blushes. Henry's
transports now became as vehement as his terrors had been, and loosing his hold
of me for a moment, whilst he fixed his eyes upon me with an ardour, that
confounded me so as almost to deprive me of speech or motion, he again caught
me in his arms, and pressing me eagerly to his breast, almost smothered me with
caresses. He then quitted me altogether, and throwing himself on his knees at
my feet, entreated me to forgive him, if he had offended me; he had been
distracted between joy and terror, and scarce knew what he had done; he
proceeded to account for the motives of his conduct toward me, both when he
wrote the letter to me from Plymouth, and for every moment of his time since:
That he had set off for London the very day he wrote, had sought you out, and
conversed fully with you upon the effects his letter had produced; that,
hearing I was come to this place, he would have followed me with an immediate
explanation, if you had not prevailed with him to the contrary (for which
advice I cannot now find in my heart to condemn you), that however he had
placed himself within two miles of me in a neighboring village, where he had
daily intercourse with the worthy Vicar, who gave him punctual intelligence of
the state of my mind and the total revolution effected in it; that what he
suffered during this state of trial and suspense no words of his could paint,
but the accounts he received of me from this good man and the benefits he knew
I was gaining by his counsel and conversation, kept him from discovering
himself, till he had permission for so doing; that he threw himself upon my
candor and good sense for justification in the honest artifice he had made use
of, and now that I added to my good qualities those religious and domestic
virtues, which the society of unbelieving pedants had obscured, but not
extinguished, he hoped there was no further bar in the way of our mutual
happiness; but that I would condescend to accept a man whose heart and soul
were devoted to me, and who had one recommendation at least to offer in his own
behalf, which he flattered himself no other person could produce, and which he
was sure would have some weight with me: So saying, he put a letter into my
hands, which I had no sooner glanced my eye upon than perceiving it was the
well-known handwriting of my ever honored and lamented father, I sunk back
upon the couch and dissolved again into tears: Even the manly heart of my Henry
now gave way, and the sad remembrance of his departed friend melted his brave
bosom into all the softness of a woman's. -- Then, Sir, Oh then indeed I loved
him, then he triumphed in my heart; how dear, how noble, how almost divine did
he then appear! his eyes, whose ardent raptures had affrighted me, now, when I
saw them bathed in tears, inspired me with the purest passion, and
contemplating him with the affection of a sister, not regarding him as a lover,
I cast off all reserve, and following the impulse of the soul, Dearest and best
of men! I cried -- and sunk into his arms.

Thus, Sir, you have the full and unreserved account, to which your friendship
is entitled; still there remains one act of kindness in your power to show me,
and which my Henry jointly with myself solicits, which is, that you would stand
in the place of your deceased friend upon our marriage, and complete the kind
part you have taken in my welfare, by joining my hand with that of the most
deserving man on earth.

I had almost forgot to mention to you a circumstance, that passed as we were
sitting at table after dinner, and by which our good friend the Vicar
undesignedly threw me into a confusion, that was exceedingly distressing, by
repeating some verses from Pope's Essay on Man, in which he applied to me to
help him out in his quotation: I certainly remembered the passage, and could
have supplied his memory with the words; but Henry being present, and the
recollection of what had passed on the subject of poetry rushing on my mind at
the same time that I thought I saw him glance a significant look at me, threw
me into such embarrassment on the sudden, that in vain endeavoring to evade
the subject, and being pressed a little unseasonably by the Vicar, my spirits
also being greatly fluttered by the events of the morning, I could no longer
command myself, but burst into tears, and very narrowly escaped falling into a
second hysteric. Nothing ever equalled the tenderness of Henry on this
occasion; nay I thought I could discover that he was secretly pleased with the
event, as it betrayed a consciousness of former vanities, and seemed to prove
that I repented of them: Whatever interpretation he might put upon it, still I
could not bring myself to repeat the verses; and believe I shall never utter
another couplet whilst I live; I am certain I shall never make one.

I enclose you a copy of my father's letter to Henry;

And am, Sir, Your sincere friend, And most obliged servant, ANNE --.


Though the letter, of which my amiable correspondent has enclosed a copy, is
hastily written in the bustle and hurry of service, yet as it breathes the
sentiments of the friend, the father, and the hero, and as every relick of so
venerable a character is, in my opinion at least, too precious not to be
preserved, I shall take permission of the reader to subjoin it.

Dear Harry,
This perverse wind has at last taken shame at confining so many brave fellows
in port, and come about to the cast, so that we are all in high spirits getting
under weigh: The Commissioners yacht is along-side and I drop these few lines
by way of farewell to assure my brave lad, that whether we meet again, or not,
you shall not hear a bad account of your old shipmate, nor with God's blessing
of his crew. I think we shall soon come into action, and that being the case,
do you see, few words and fair-dealing are best between friends: You tell me, if
you get a prize, you mean to marry Nancy; that is honest, for the girl is
cruelly in love with you, and I like her the better for it; a seaman's daughter
should be a seaman's friend, and without flattery I don't believe a braver lad
ever trod a plank in the king's service than yourself -- so enough of that, you
have my consent, and with it all the fortune I have to bestow, which is little
more than my blessing.

There is one thing however I must warn you of, which is, that the girl, though
of a good nature in the main, has got a romantic turn in her head and is
terribly given to reading and making verses and such land-lubbers trash, as
women and sailors have nothing to do with; now I would not have you make a fool
of yourself, Harry, and marry a learned wife, though she was of my own
begetting. If therefore Nancy and you come to an understanding together, when
my old carcass shall be feeding the fishes, remember it is on this express
condition only, which I charge you on your honor to observe, that you burn her
books, as I will do if ever I get at them, and never yoke with her till she has
renounced these vagaries of poetry, which if you cure her of you have my free
leave to make her as good a husband as you can, and God bless you with her: and
this you will observe and obey as the last will and testament of him who is

Yours till death, * * * * * *.
P. S. Remember I tell you, Harry, this old ship is damned crank and leewardly;
but our wiseacres would not take her down, so they must stand by the
consequences; she is a fine man of war at the worst, and if she comes
along-side of the Monsieurs, will give their first-rates a warming. Hurrah! we
are under sail!




No X.
UPON revising what I wrote for Calliope in answer to Dr. Mac-Infidel's
discourse against Christ's miracles, I find the argument so connected with
certain passages in the life of the great heathen philosopher Pythagoras, which
the adversaries of Christianity have set up against the scriptural records of
the Messiah, that I have been tempted to enlarge upon what I gave to that young
lady by prefacing it with an account of what I find curious in the relations of
the sophists and biographers touching that extraordinary man.

The variety of fictions, which the writers, who treat of Pythagoras, have
interspersed in their accounts, makes it difficult to trace out any consistent
story of his life: His biographers agree scarcely in any one fact or date:
Porphyry says he was born at Tire; Jamblichus will have it to be at Sidon,
probably as being the more ancient city; Josephus says it is as hard to fix the
place of his nativity, as Homer's, or to ascertain the year of his birth.
Jamblichus, glancing at the gospel account of the birth of Christ, says, that
when the mother of Pythagoras was with child of him, her husband being ignorant
of her pregnancy, brought her to the oracle at Delphi, and there the prophetess
told him the first news of his wife's having conceived, and also that the
child, she then went with, should prove the greatest blessing to mankind; that
her husband thereupon changed her name from Parthenis to Pythais, and, when the
child was born, named him Pythagoras, as being foretold by Apollo Pythius, for
so, says he, the name signifies; and adds, that there can be no doubt, but that
the soul of the child was one of Apollo's companions in heaven, and came down
by commission from him. When this and many other fables are cast out of the
account it is most probable that Pythagoras was born at Samos in the 3d year of
Olymp. XLVIII, 586 years before Christ, being the son of Mnesarchus, an
engraver of seals, which Mnesarchus was descended from Hippasus of Phlius, and
his mother Pythais from Ancaeus, one of the planters of Samos.

Nature bestowed upon Pythagoras a form and person more than ordinarily comely;
he gave early indications of a mind capable of great exertions, and ambitious
of excelling in knowledge: The Greeks had now begun to open schools for the
public instruction of youth; the rudiments of science were taught in these
seminaries to a degree sufficient for the common purposes of liberal education,
but the last finishing for such as aspired to be adepts in the superior
learning of the times was only to be obtained amongst the Egyptian and Chaldean
sages; to them was the great resort of literary travelers; from their source
Greece had derived her systems of theology and natural philosophy. The
Egyptians were in possession of many ancient traditions of Mosaical origin,
though disguised by emblems and hieroglyphics, which Greece in adopting was
never able to develope, and of which it is probable the Egyptians themselves
had lost the clue: The Greeks, ever since the time of Cecrops, had been
progressively erecting a fabulous and idolatrous system of theology upon this
foundation. The Egyptians in very early time under certain types and symbols
had shadowed out the attributes of the deity, the great events of the deluge
and repeopling of the earth, and these being received by the Greeks in a
literal sense, generated in the end a multitudinous race of deities with a
thousand chimerical rites and ceremonies, which altogether formed so puzzling a
compound of absurdity, that no two thinking heathens agreed in the same creed:
Still they went on accumulating error upon error; every philosopher, who
returned from Egypt, imported some addition to the stock, till Olympus was
crowded with divinities. If the heathens had ever defined their religion, and
established it upon system, they would have destroyed it; but whilst every man
might think for himself, and every man, who thought at all, got rid of his
difficulties by supposing there was some mystery in the case, which he either
did not trouble himself to interpret, or interpreted as he saw fit, the
imposing fabric stood, and, magnified through the mists of error, appeared to
have a dignity and substance, which upon examination and scrutiny would have
vanished.

The parents of Pythagoras put him first under the tuition of Pherecydes of
Syrus: Pherecydes did not die till Olymp. LXVI, so that Diogenes Laertius must
be flagrantly mistaken in saying that Pythagoras studied under this philosopher
till his death: He was very young when he went into Syria for this purpose, for
he returned to Samos to his parents, and after studying some time under
Hermodamas there, set out upon his travels into Egypt at the age of eighteen.
At this early age he had acquired all the erudition the philosophers of Greece
could give him; he had already visited many cities of Syria, and performed his
initiations: It is said he had consulted Thales in person, and been advised by
that sage to prosecute his studies amongst the learned Egyptians; but this is
doubtful; it is altogether improbable that he should depart from Samos at the
age of eighteen upon the patriotic motive ascribed to him by Laertius of
avoiding the growing tyranny of his countryman Polycrates; especially when the
same biographer informs us, that he took letters of recommendation from
Polycrates to King Amasis, desiring him to give order for Pythagoras's being
instructed by the Egyptian priests.

With this letter Pythagoras repaired to Amasis, and obtained an order to the
priests, agreeable to the request of Polycrates; with this he went first to the
priests of Heliopolis; they declined the execution of it by referring him to
their brethren at Memphis, as being their seniors in the sacerdotal rank; these
again evaded the order and dispatched him to the Diospolites; he found these
sages as little disposed to compliance as the priests of Heliopolis or Memphis;
however, as the king's command was urgent, they did not think fit absolutely to
disobey it, but took a method, which they thought would answer the same purpose
and began by deterring and alarming the inquisitive youth by their preparatory
austerities; but they had no common spirit to deal with; Pythagoras had a
constitution, that could endure hardships, and an ambition that nothing could
daunt; he submitted to the ceremony of circumcision, and was initiated into
their sacred rites, unintimidated by all the horrors, with which they contrived
to set them forth. They began then to regard him with more benignity and
respect, and when they found him learning their language with surprising
rapidity, and conforming to their discipline with the most rigid exactness,
they looked upon him with surprise and admiration; they now resolved to hold
nothing back from talents so extraordinary and temper so conformable; he learnt
their three sorts of letters; they admitted him to their sacrifices, and
disclosed the most secret rites of their religion, mysteries never before
imparted to any foreigner. He resided in Egypt a long time, during which he
read the books of the ancient priests, and in them he discovered the sources of
the Grecian theology, and how erroneous the system was, which they had derived
from these sources; he is supposed henceforth to have held the gods of the
heathen in contempt, and to have entertained suitable ideas of The One Supreme
Being.

Having perfected himself in the geometry and astronomy of the Egyptians, and
acquired the observations of infinite ages, (as Valerius Maximus expresses it)
he determined upon exploring new and more distant scenes in search of
knowledge, and from Egypt went to Babylon; his recommendations from Egypt
secured him a reception by the Chaldees and Magi; here he was a disciple of
Nazaratus the Assyrian, and we are told by Porphyry, that he was purified by
Zabratus from all defilements of his former life; by what particular modes of
discipline this purification was effected Porphyry does not explain. From
Babylon he pushed his travels into Persia, and was instructed by the Magi in
their religion and way of living; from them he received those rules of diet,
which he afterward prescribed to his disciples, with various opinions of
things clean and unclean, which were amongst his maxims: These conform to the
present practice of the Brahmins, which may well be supposed to have been
inviolably preserved through that separated and sacred Cast from times of high
antiquity; for what invention can be devised to secure the longevity of any
system better than that upon which the sacerdotal order of Brahmins is
established? By the Persian Magi he was instructed in many particulars of
Jewish knowledge, chiefly their interpretations of dreams. We have Cicero's
authority for this part of his travels ( de fin. lib. v.) and Valerius Maximus
says the Persian Magi taught him a most complete system of ethics; that they
likewise instructed him in the motions and courses of the heavenly bodies,
their properties and effects, and the influence every star respectively is
supposed to have.

In the course of these travels he passed more than twenty years; he then
turned his face homewards, taking the isle of Crete in his way: here and at
Lacedemon he perused their famous codes of laws, and having now completed the
great tour of science, and stored his mind with all the hidden treasures of
oriental knowledge, he presented himself for the first time to the admiring
eyes of Greece assembled at the Olympic Games.

A spectacle no doubt it was for universal admiration and respect; an
understanding so enriched and full in its meridian vigor was an object, that
the wisest of his contemporaries might look up to with veneration little short
of idolatry. Pythagoras in this attitude, surrounded by the Grecian sages on
the field of the Olympic Games, whilst every eye was fixed with rapture and
delight upon one of the most perfect forms in nature, began to pour forth the
wonders of his doctrine: Astonishment seized the hearers, and almost doubting
if it was a mortal, that had been discoursing, they with one voice applauded
his wisdom, and demanded by what title he would in future be addressed:
Pythagoras answered, that their seven sages had taken the name of wise men or
sophists; for his part he left them in possession of a distinction they so well
merited; he wished to be no otherwise remembered or described, than as a Lover
of Wisdom; his pretensions did not go to the possession of it; and if they
would call him a Philosopher, he should be contented with the appellation: From
this time the name of Philosopher became a title of honor amongst the learned,
whilst that of Sophist sunk into universal contempt.

No XI.
I HAVE observed that Pythagoras on his return from the East took the island of
Crete in his way; here he visited the famous philosopher Epimenides. Porphyry
and Jamblichus must be greatly out in their chronology when they make
Epimenides one of Pythagoras's scholars; Laertius's account is more probable,
who says he was one of Pythagoras's masters, which naturally accounts for that
philosopher's seeking an interview with him in Crete, as he did afterward with
Pherecydes on his deathbed in Syria: In this interview Pythagoras no doubt
gave an account to Epimenides of the many mavelous things he had learnt in
his travels, and so far the disciple may be said to have instructed his master;
Epimenides himself was no small adept in the mavelous, and propagated a story
through Greece of his having slept fifty-seven years in a cave, and that upon
waking after his long repose he resumed his search for some sheep, which his
father had sent him upon more than half a century before; the story does not
say that he found these sheep, which probably were now become more difficult to
recover than upon his first search; he returned however to his father's house,
and was rather surprised upon discovering a new generation in possession, who
thought no more of Epimenides, than they did of his sheep: This sleeping
philosopher however filled up the gap in his life pretty well, for Xenophanes
says he lived to one hundred and fifty-seven years of age; and the Cretans, who
are liars upon record, stretch their account to two hundred and ninety-nine
years, modestly stopping short of three centuries. Deducting therefore
fifty-seven years of sleep, during which he probably made no great advances in
science, he might have occasion to go to school, when he waked, and, though an
old man, might be a young scholar under Pythagoras, if the credibility of the
above story can once be admitted.

From the Olympic Games Pythagoras repaired to Samos, and opened school in a
place called in the time of Antipho, (who is quoted by Laertius) Pythagorae
Hemicyclus. Here he began a practice he continued in Italy of retiring to a
cave without the town for the purpose of study, but in fact the idea was, like
most others of his, oriental: Hermits have it to this day, and if mortification
is used to recommend religion, solitude may be chosen to set off wisdom.
Pythagoras in a cave, visited in the dead of night with awful reverence and
credulity, might pass stories upon his hearers, which he could not risque in
the face of the sun and the streets of the city.

He was not however so far sequestered from the concerns of the world, as to
enjoy himself in his cave under the tyranny of Polycrates, now more oppressive
than at his departure for Egypt. He thereupon resolved to go into Italy, and
took Delos in his way; here he wrote the verses on the sepulcher of Apollo,
which Porphyry records: From Delos he passed to Phlius, the ancient country of
his family, and at Phlius Cicero informs us he expounded several points of his
new philosophy to the tyrant Leo, who, being struck with his doctrine, demanded
of him what branch of science he principally professed: Pythagoras replied that
he professed none, but was a Philosopher: The name was new to Leo, and he
desired to be informed of its signification, and wherein philosophers differed
from other professors of the learned sciences: Pythagoras answered, That it
appeared to him men were drawn to different objects and pursuits in life, as
the Greeks were to their Olympic Games, some for glory, some for gain; at the
same time, says he, you must have observed that others attend without any view
to either, for curiosity and amusement only; so we, who are travelers and
adventurers, as it were, from another life and another nature, come amongst
mankind, indifferent to the ordinary allurements of avarice or ambition, and
studious of nothing but of the truth and essence of things: Such may be called
Lovers of Wisdom, or in one word Philosophers; and, like the unconcerned
spectators above described, have no other interests to pursue, but the
acquisition of knowledge and the rational enjoyments of a contemplative mind.
-- In this reply he glances at his doctrine of the Metempsycosis.

In his progress toward Italy Pythagoras went to Delphi, that he might give
the more authority to his precepts upon the pretense of his having received
them from the priestess Theoclea.

In Italy he established himself for the remainder of his life, and taught
there forty years wanting one in his colleges at Metapontum, Heraclea, and
Croton. He staid twenty years at Croton before he went to Metapontum; Milo, the
famous Olympic victor, was one of his scholars at the former of these places.
The fame of his doctrines drew a prodigious resort to his college; no less than
six hundred disciples at one time attended his lectures nightly: He imposed
rules of preparation and a system of discipline for his students, admirably
contrived to inspire them with veneration for his person, and to train their
minds to the exercises of patience and respect: He prescribed a probationary
silence of five years, during which initiation they were not once admitted to
the sight of their master, who in the mean time, like an invisible and superior
spirit, governed them after the most absolute manner by mandates, which they
never heard but through the channel of his subordinate agents: At length they
were ushered with much ceremony into the awful presence. Such a course of
discipline could not fail to prepare every mind, capable of undergoing it, for
the mavelous stories, which at certain times he introduced into his lectures
touching the doctrine of the Metempsycosis, and the revelation of his own
divinity: He scrupled not to tell them, that he was the Apollo of the
Hyperboreans, and he corroborated his assertion by exposing to view his thigh
composed of solid gold; his food, which was of the simplest sort, was conveyed
to him in his recess in a manner so secret, that he was not discovered to be
subject to the common appetites and necessities of human nature; his person was
most comely and commanding, and his dress of studied cleanliness and
simplicity; he was always clad in milk-white garments of the purest wool; he
told them his soul had passed through several antecedent forms, and that it had
originally received from Mercury, when it inhabited the body of Aethalides (son
of that God) the privilege of migrating after the death of one body into that
of another, with the faculty of remembering all the actions of its praeterient
states; that these transmigrations were not immediate, but after intervals, in
which his soul visited the regions of the other world, and was admitted to the
society of departed spirits; that in virtue of this prerogative, it passed
after some time from the body of Aethalides into that of Euphorbus, who was
wounded by Menelaus at the siege of Troy, and in his person was conscious of
what had occurred in that of its predecessor; that it next appeared on earth in
the person of Hermotimus, who gave proofs of his reminiscence by appealing to
the shield suspended in the temple of Apollo by the hands of Menelaus; from
Hermotimus it passed into one Pyrrhus a fisherman, retaining the like
consciousness; and lastly it had lodged itself, where it now was, possessing
all the accumulated recollection of its past transmigrations.

Daring as these fictions were, still they were credited; for the powers of his
mind were wonderful, and the authority he had established over his hearers by
superior wisdom and ingenious device was unbounded; the curious researches of
his study in the East, and the passion he had there contracted for the
mavelous and supernatural, inspired him with the ambition of passing himself
upon the world for something above human; he had trained on the credulity of
his disciples with such art, that he found it would bear whatever he thought
proper to impose; he was sensible he transcended all men living in wisdom, and
he resolved to assume a superiority of nature also. The idea of transmigration
was not started by Pythagoras; it was of eastern origin, but too far out of
sight for any then alive to trace it to its source: He told his scholars he
should revisit the earth in two hundred and six years after his death.

Doctrines like these were hard to be received, but he so well balanced fiction
with truth, that they could not be separated at the time; the strong fortified
the weak so effectually, that both took place together; in mathematics,
astronomy, and moral philosophy, he was an unrivalled master; his golden verses
deserved the name: His principles were temperate, moral, humane, and above all
things pacifying and conciliatory: when he admitted a disciple into his
presence, he took him ever after into his most cordial friendship and
confidence, and men esteemed it the highest honor of their lives to have
passed their probation in the school of Pythagoras, and to be allowed access to
his person.

After he had staid twenty years at Croton, he removed to Metapontum, where he
had a magnificent house, which was afterward converted into a temple to Ceres,
and a school which was called the Museum: Here he was visited by the famous
Abaris, priest of the Hyperborean Apollo; and his fabulous historians give out,
that having taken Abaris's arrow, he rode upon it through the air to
Taurominium in one day, though distant from Metapontum some days sailing.
Hearing that his aged master Pherecydes was dying of a loathsome disease in
Delos, he went thither, and exerted all his art to recover him; and, when he
was dead, having buried him with all the ceremonies due to a father, he
returned to Italy. This instance of friendship is the last public action I find
recorded in his life: The manner of his death is variously reported, as well as
the age at which he died; the most probable account fixes it at eighty years;
as to the catastrophe of his death, the relation most to be credited informs
us, that one Cylon of Croton, a rich, ambitious, and disorderly man, having
offered himself to the college and been rejected by Pythagoras, was so enraged
thereby, that having collected a hired mob, he assaulted the house of Milo,
when Pythagoras and his disciples were there assembled, and burnt the house
with every body in it, two or three excepted, who narrowly escaped. Pythagoras,
to whom his disciples even in the last extremity paid a filial reverence and
attention, was solicited to make his escape; but not being willing to expose
himself to the people, as a fugitive anxious to preserve life, when his friends
were on the point of perishing, he resisted their entreaties and was burnt to
death. To this account I incline; but others contend, that he escaped from the
flames, and was killed in pursuit; some relate that he took refuge in the
Muses' Temple at Metapontum, where being kept from victuals forty days, he was
starved; and other historians with as little probability on their side say,
that being pursued into a bean-plot, he there stopped, because he would not
pass over prohibited ground, and yielded his throat to the pursuers. After his
death his surviving disciples were dispersed into Greece and the neighboring
countries.

Thus perished Pythagoras, the Samian philosopher, founder of the Italian
school, and the great luminary of the heathen world.

No XII.
HAVING in my two preceding papers been at some pains in collecting an account
of the life of Pythagoras from the many various unconnected particulars,
scattered up and down in the works of the sophists and biographers touching
that extraordinary man, I now come to my main object, in which I desire the
reader's attention, whilst I attempt to show in what manner the heathen writers
have applied these particulars in opposition to the life and actions of Christ;
this will be the subject of the present paper; in my next I purpose to conclude
by answering those arguments, on which modern cavillers have grounded their
reasonings against the gospel miracles; a subject to which I have been led by
Dr. Mac-Infidel's discourse, of which some notice has been taken in former
papers.

It has been unfortunate for Pythagoras, that the writers of Julian's time, to
pay court to the Emperor, should have corrupted their account of him with so
many fictions and absurdities; for he was truly a very wonderful man: But when
they undertook to depreciate the character of Christ, his doctrines and
miracles, by ascribing actions to Pythagoras equal, or, as they conceived,
superior to what Christ had done upon earth, they were driven to strange
resources in deifying their philosopher; for in fact the time was rather past
for those delusions; deification after death was the most that could be
attempted, and even the Julium Sidus held its place in the heavens by a
precarious tenure: At the same time an apotheosis would not serve their
purpose; it was necessary to make Pythagoras a god or the son of a god, and to
give him a supernatural birth from the womb of a virgin: Their next business
was to invest him with the power of working miracles; but here some stubborn
facts laid in their way; he had visited Epimenides in his last sickness without
being able to prolong his life; they were driven to ridiculous resources; and,
taking Abaris's arrow in aid, sent their philosopher upon it through the air
from Metapontum to Taurominium; because Christ had walked on the sea,
Pythagoras rode through the skies; because Christ had been forty days fasting
in the wilderness, Pythagoras was to be forty days without food in the Temple
of the Muses at Metapontum; because Christ descended into Hades, and rose again
from the dead, and appeared upon earth, Pythagoras descended to the shades
below, remained there a complete year, saw Homer, Hesiod, and other departed
spirits, returned upon earth wan and emaciated, and reported what he had seen
in full assembly of his disciples, whilst his mother, by his special direction
before his descent, registered upon tablets all that passed, and noted the
times of his temporary death and resurrection; to carry on the competition, he
was made to allay winds, tempests, and earthquakes, to cure diseases, whether
of mind or body, and to foretell to certain fishermen, whom he found at work,
how many fish they should enclose in their net: The reader, who has consulted
Porphyry and Jamblichus, will call to mind other coincidencies.

With what superior what incontestible strength of evidence does the disciple
of Christ meet the disciple of Pythagoras in this comparison between their
masters! The heathen teacher was almost a miracle of erudition; he traversed
the East in pursuit of science, and collected knowledge, wherever it was to be
found, with unremitting industry: Christ lived in privacy and obscurity,
educated only in the humble trade and occupation of his parents, to whom he was
obedient and devoted, till he set out upon the functions of his mission. The
person of the first was captivating and comely, not to be approached but with
awe and adoration, with preparatory penances and rigid initiations, with every
artifice to set him off that human wit could devise; the other was despised and
rejected of men; the simplest and the meekest being, that ever walked the
earth; conversing freely with all men, presenting himself to the poor and
lowly, to women and to little children; in him was no form of comeliness, that
men should desire; no artifice or trick to catch applause or to excite
surprise: If he exercised his miraculous power in healing the infirm, or
reviving the dead, he did it in silence, and under injunction of secrecy,
directing men to pay their thanks to God alone, and forbidding them even to
call him good. No magic numbers, nor mystic symbols obscured his doctrines, but
he delivered the simple system of his pure morality in little easy anecdotes,
levelled to the capacity, and fitted to the memory of the poorest and most
illiterate. From such he chose his disciples, that the wisdom of this world
might have no share in his ministry, and he rested upon the weakest agents the
task of preaching and propagating the sublimest religion. Gloomy enthusiasts
have buried themselves in deserts and caverns of the earth to brood in solitude
and spend their days in penances and prayers; ambitious innovators have been
carried to the highest pitch of human greatness by becoming founders of a new
religion; but Christ taught his disciples neither to shun society, nor to
disturb authorities; he told them indeed that they should die for the faith
they professed, but it was not the death of soldiers, but of martyrs, they
should suffer, and these precepts he confirmed by his own example, being led
like a lamb to the slaughter; if they, who profess his religion, were to
practice it, Universal Love and Benevolence would obtain upon earth.

But of the internal evidences of Christ's religion I am not now to speak; so
long as the distinctions between good and evil exist, these can need no
defense; if men agree in the one, they cannot differ or dispute about the
other. With regard to the gospel account of Christ's miracles, I may be allowed
in general to observe, that these forgeries of Porphyry and Jamblichus in
imitation of them, warrant a fair presumption, that if these writers could have
disproved the authorities of the Evangelists, and controverted the matter of
fact, they would not have resorted to so indecisive and circuitous a mode of
opposing them, as this which we are now examining: Men of such learning as
these writers, would not have risqued extravagant fictions merely to keep way
with a history, which they had more immediate means of refuting: On the other
hand, if their absurdity should lead any man to suppose, that they forged these
accounts by way of parody and in ridicule of the gospels, the accounts
themselves give the strongest evidence to the contrary, and it is clear beyond
a doubt, that both Porphyry and Jamblichus mean to be credited in their
histories of Pythagoras, as seriously as Philostratus does in his of Apollonius
Tyaneus.

This will more fully appear by referring to the circumstances, that occasioned
these histories to be written.

Christ having performed his miracles openly and before so many witnesses, it
is not found that the matter of fact was ever questioned by any, who lived in
that age: On the contrary we see it was acknowledged by his most vigilant
enemies the Pharisees: They did not deny the miracle, but they ascribed it to
the aid of the prince of the devils; so weak a subterfuge against the evidence
of their own senses probably satisfied neither themselves nor others; if it
had, this accusation of sorcery (being capital by their law, and also by that
of the Romans) would have been heard of, when they were so much to seek for
crimes, wherewith to charge him on his trial: If any man shall object, that
this is arguing out of the gospels in favor of the gospels, I contend that
this matter of fact does not rest solely on the gospel evidence, but also upon
collateral historic proof; for this very argument of the Pharisees, and this
only, is made use of by those Jews, whom Celsus brings in arguing against the
Christian religion; and those Jews on this very account rank Christ with
Pythagoras; and I challenge the cavillers against Christ's miracles either to
controvert what is thus asserted, or to produce any other argument of Jewish
origin, except this ascribed to the Pharisees by the gospel, either from
Celsus, as above mentioned, or any other writer.

Celsus, it is well known, was a very learned man, and wrote in the time of
Adrian or something later; this was not above fifty years after the date of
Christ's miracles. Celsus did not controvert the accounts of them, who were
witnesses of the miracles, nor attempt to show any inconsistence or chicanery
in the facts themselves; he takes up at second hand the old Pharisaical
argument of ascribing them to the power of the devil: In short, they were
performed, he cannot deny it; there was no trick or artifice in the
performance, he cannot discover any; the accounts of them are no forgeries, he
cannot confute them; they are recent histories, and their authenticity too
notorious to be called into question; he knows not how the miracles were
performed, and therefore they were done by the invocation of the devil; he
cannot patiently look on and see that learning, so long the glory of all
civilized nations, and which he himself was to an eminent degree possessed of,
now brought into disgrace by a new religion, professing to be a divine
revelation, and originating from amongst the meanest and most odious of all the
provincial nations, and propagated by disciples, who were as much despised and
hated by the Jews in general, as the Jews were by all other people. Unable to
disprove the account and at a loss how to parry it from hearsay, or from what
he finds in former writers, he has no other resource, but to bring forward
again those cavilling Pharisees, and roundly to assert in general terms, (which
he does more than once) that these miracles are all the tricks of a sorcerer,
and for this he expects the world should take his authority.

I have said that Celsus adduces neither oral nor written authority against
Christ's miracles; but I am well aware it may be said, (and modern cavillers
will affect to say it with triumph) that authorities are silent on the subject;
there are none which make mention of these miracles, at least none have come
down to our times. -- If this silence implies a want of collateral evidence,
which in the opinion of our modern disbelievers vitiates the authenticity of
the gospel, how much stronger would the argument have been in Celsus's time
than in ours! Why does he not avail himself of it? And why does he take such
pains to controvert accounts of which no man had ever spoken either in proof or
disproof? May it not be fairly presumed, that he forbears to urge it from plain
conviction, that it would operate the contrary way to what he wished, and that
the reason why contemporary writers were silent, was not because they were
ignorant of the facts, but because they could not confute them? Here then we
will leave the case for the present; the heathen writers, contemporary with
Christ, make no mention of his miracles; they are interested to disprove them,
and they do not disprove them; modern unbelievers think this a reason that
these miracles were never performed; Celsus writes fifty years after the time,
never urges this silence as an argument for their nonexistence, but virtually,
nay expressly, admits Christ's miracles, by setting up Pythagoras's in
competition with them.

Neither is it Pythagoras alone he compares to Christ, he states the
performances of Aristeas Proconnesius and Abaris also. Of Aristeas the first
account we have is in Herodotus, and he gives it only upon hearsay: He relates
that it was reported of him, that he died at Proconnesus, and appeared there
seven years after, and, having written some verses, disappeared; but that two
or three hundred years after he had appeared again at Metapontum, where by
special direction of Apollo he was worshipped as a god: Of Abaris, Celsus
relates, that he rode through the air on an arrow, passing over mountains and
seas in his passage out of Scythia into Greece, and back again into Scythia.

Hence it came to pass that other heathen writers, after the example of Celsus,
published their accounts of Pythagoras and Apollonius Tyaneus; not so much for
the purpose of giving the histories of those persons, as to set them up in
opposition to Christ and his disciples. Porphyry composed the history of
Pythagoras after he had written fifteen books professedly against the Christian
religion; these were suppressed by the Christian emperors who succeeded
Galienus, in whose time Porphyry wrote his history of Pythagoras in the island
of Sicily, whither he retired in disgust with the Emperor for his favor to the
Christians, and would have put himself to death with his own hand, if Plotinus
had not prevented him. Galienus soon died, and the succeeding emperors being
disposed to persecute the Christians, Porphyry published his history.
Jamblichus published his account of Pythagoras in the reign of the Emperor
Julian, with whom he was in high favor, as the letters of that Emperor
sufficiently testify. Hierocles also in the time of Dioclesian published two
books against the Christian religion under the title of Philalethes, and for
these was promoted by Galerius from being chief judge at Nicomedia to the
government of Alexandria. These books are now lost, but we are informed by
Eusebius they were mostly copied from Celsus, and set up Aristeas, Pythagoras
and Apollonius Tyaneus against Christ, whom he says the Christians, on account
of his doing a few teratyai, call a God, and concludes with these words, viz.
That it is worth considering that those things of Jesus are boasted of Peter
and Paul, and some others of the like sort, liars and illiterate and impostors;
but for these things of Apollonius, we have Maximus and Damis a philosopher,
who lived with him, and Philostratus, men eminent for their learning and lovers
of truth.

As for these witnesses to Philostratus's legend of Apollonius, Maximus's
minutes go no farther than to two or three years of Apollonius's life passed at
Aegae, when he was about twenty years old; and what he had from Damis was a
tablebook of minutes, which a nameless man, pretending to be a relation of
Damis, brought to Julia the mother and wife of Caracalla, and were by her given
to the Sophist Philostratus to dress up in handsomer language.

Such are the authorities for the legend of Philostratus, written above a
hundred years after the death of Apollonius; who died a few weeks after the
Emperor Domitian in the year of Christ 96. This Apollonius was of the sect of
Pythagoras, and the patroness of Philostratus's history was the monster Julia,
mother and wife to the detestable Caracalla.

No XIII.
IT seems natural to suppose that any great and signal revelation of the Divine
Will should be authenticated to mankind by evidences proportioned to the
importance of the communication. Christians contend that in the purity and
perfection of their religion, as it was taught by Christ, and in the miracles
which he performed on earth whilst he was teaching, full and sufficient
evidencies are found of a Divine Revelation.

As for the religion of Christ it speaks for itself, the book is open, which
contains it, and however it may have degenerated in practice through the
corruption of them who profess it, there seems no difference of opinion in the
world as to the purity and perfection of its principles: Of these evidencies
therefore, which are generally called internal, I have no need to speak.

It is not possible to make the same direct appeal to the miracles as to the
religion of Christ. Many centuries have revolved since they have ceased; nature
has long since resumed her course, and retains no traces of them; their
evidencies therefore are not, like those of Christ's religion, internal, but
historical; it must however be acknowledged, that they are historical
evidencies of the strongest sort, for the historians were eyewitnesses of what
they relate, and their relations agree.

It is easy therefore to see, that if the system of Christianity is to be
attacked, it is in this part only the attack is to be expected. This has
accordingly taken place in three different periods, and in three different
modes.

The unbelieving Jews, contemporary with Christ, before whose eyes the miracles
were performed, could not dispute their being done, but they attempted to
criminate the doer by accusing him of a guilty communication with evil spirits,
ascribing his supernatural deeds to the power of the devil. The heathens, who
had not ocular demonstration, but could not contest facts so well established,
made their attack upon his miracles, by instancing others, who had done things
altogether as wonderful, viz. Pythagoras, Abaris, Apollonius, and others.

Thus the matter rested for many ages, till modern cavillers within the pale of
the Christian church struck upon a new argument for an attack upon Christ's
miracles; and this argument having been woven into a late publication, whose
historical merit puts it into general circulation, many retailers of
infidelity, (and Dr. Mac-Infidel amongst the rest,) have caught at it as a
discovery of importance, and as they have contrived to connect it with topics
of more erudition, than the generality of people are furnished with, on whom
they practice, it has been propagated with some success, where it has had the
advantage of not being understood.

The strength of this argument lies in the discovery, that contemporary
authorities are silent on the subject of Christ's miracles: Naturalists and the
authors, who record all curious and extraordinary events of their own or of
preceding times, make no mention of the wonderful things, which Christ is said
to have done in the land of Judaea; in short, the Evangelists are left alone in
the account, and yet some things are related by them too general in their
extent, and too wonderful in their nature, to have been passed over in silence
by these authors, or in other words not to have had a place in their
collections: The elder Pliny and Seneca they tell us were living at the time of
Christ's passion; the Evangelists relate, that there was darkness over the face
of the earth when Christ gave up the ghost, and this darkness was miraculous,
being out of the course of nature, and incidental to the divinity of the
person, who was then offering up his life for the redemption of mankind;
against the veracity of the gospel account relative to this particular prodigy
the attack is pointed; and they argue, that if it extended over the whole
earth, elder Pliny and Seneca with all others who were then living, must have
noticed it; if it was local to the province of Judaea, men of their information
must have heard of it: Each of these philosophers has recorded all the great
phoenomena of nature, which his curiosity and care could get together, and
Pliny in particular has devoted an entire chapter to eclipses of an
extraordinary nature, yet does not mention this at the Passion: The defection
of light, which followed Caesar's murder was not to be compared with what the
gospel relates of the praeternatural darkness at the Passion, and yet most of
the writers of that age have recorded the former event, whilst all are silent
as to the latter -- Therefore it did not happen.

This I believe is a fair state of the argument, and, if there be any merit in
the discovery, it certainly rests with the moderns; for neither Celsus,
Porphyry, nor his disciple Jamblichus, have struck upon it, though the
first-mentioned wrote against Christianity in the time of Adrian, who succeeded
to the empire eighty years after Christ's passion; as for Seneca, he died about
thirty years, and elder Pliny three and forty years after Christ.

The fathers of the church it seems are divided in opinion as to the darkness
at Christ's passion being general to the whole earth, or local only to Judaea.
As the decision of this point does not affect the general question, the
abettors of the argument are willing to admit with Origin, Beza, and others,
that the prodigy should be understood as local to that part of the world, to
which his other miracles were confined, and to whose conviction, if it really
happened, it is natural to suppose it should be specially addressed.

Allowing this, these reasoners contend that it must of necessity have been
reported to Rome, and that report must have been known to Seneca and elder
Pliny, and, being known, must have been recorded by one or both. These
positions merit examination.

The first point to be taken for granted is, that the miracle of the three
hours darkness upon the passion of Christ must necessarily have been reported
to Rome: This report was either to come in the state dispatches of the
Procurator Pilate to the court of Tiberius, or from private communications: Of
the probability of the first case the reader must judge for himself from
circumstances; it is merely matter of speculation: It involves a doubt at
least, whether the Procurator would not see reasons personal, as well as
political, against reporting to the court an event, which at best tended to his
own crimination, and which, if he had delivered it for truth, might have
alarmed the jealousy, or roused the resentment of his sovereign. The idea
entertained by the Jews of deliverance from the Roman yoke by their expected
Messiah, was too general to have escaped the knowledge of their watchful
tyrants, and it does not seem likely any Roman governor of that province would
be forward to report any miracle, or miracles, that had reference to a person,
who having set up a new religion declared himself that very Messiah, which the
Jewish prophecies foretold should appear to extirpate the Gentile idolatry: If
this be a reason for the Roman Procurator in Judaea to be silent on the
subject, it is no less so for the people of Rome to reject the reports of the
Christians themselves, if they ventured any; and as for the unbelieving Jews,
it is not to be expected they would contribute to spread the evidencies of
Christ's divinity.

The next point to be taken for granted in the argument under examination is,
that this report, if actually made, must have been known to the philosopher
Seneca and the naturalist Pliny; and I think it may fairly be allowed, that an
event of this sort could not well fail of coming to the knowledge of Seneca,
and even of Pliny, (though he died forty-three years after the time) if the
government in Tiberius's reign had been made acquainted with it by authority,
and had taken no measures for suppressing it, or any accounts published at the
time respecting it; for after all it must be observed, that this event, not
being found in Pliny's Natural History, nor in Seneca's Enquiries, does not by
any means decide the question against any accounts being published, but leaves
it still open to conjecture, (and with some reason) that such accounts might
have been suppressed by the heathen Emperors.

But waving any further discussion of this point, we will pass to the third and
last position, in which it is presumed, that if this praeternatural eclipse at
Christ's passion was known to Seneca and Pliny, one or both must have recorded
it in their works.

This I think is begging a question very hardly to be granted; for these
writers must have stated the event, either as a thing credible, or doubtful, or
incredible; they must either have grounded it upon authority, or reported it
upon hearsay; they must have admitted it with its date and circumstances at the
very crisis when it happened, and in that case what would have been the
consequence of such a publication? The Christians would naturally have made the
application to the passion of Christ, and how dangerous was it for a heathen to
admit a fact open to such an interpretation? A Roman philosopher, giving a
serious history of extraordinary and prodigious events, would make his court
but ill to a heathen persecuting Emperor, by admitting this into the account,
unless it was to confute it: Now this does not appear to have been in
contemplation of Seneca or Pliny in any part of their writings; each of these
authors tells us what he credits and wishes to be credited, not what he
disbelieves and wishes to confute: The defection of light at the time of
Caesar's death was the creed of the court; the historians, naturalists, and
even the poets, celebrated that phoenomenon, and it did not lose in their
relations; but in the case of the darkness at Christ's death, a believer in Him
and his miracles draws a stronger argument for his belief from the silence of
Seneca and Pliny, than any caviller can urge against it from the same
circumstance: If we admit they knew it and yet did not record it, are we not
better founded in supposing they were silent, because they could not controvert
the fact, than our opponents are in saying it did not pass, because they do not
mention it? It is too much to require of witnesses, that they should depose to
a fact, which is to convict themselves: I must therefore appeal to the candid
reader, whether a philosopher writing in the court of Nero, who had charged the
Christians with the burning of Rome, and was devising terrible and unheard of
modes of torturing them upon this charge, who had beheaded Paul and crucified
Peter for preaching Christ and the redemption of mankind earned by his Passion,
whether a heathen philosopher I say writing at this very time an account of
extraordinary, but what he delivers as true, events in nature would venture
upon putting into his account a miracle, tending to confirm the divine nature
and mission of that person, whose immediate followers were then suffering under
the most determined persecution? No heathen writer in his senses would have
ventured to give such an account. Peter and Paul declared for the miracle, and
were martyred for their doctrine; the gospel account declared for the miracle
and no one Roman writer controverted the assertion; this was the time for
Seneca, for Pliny and other heathen writers to cry out against the glaring
fiction, Do the Christians say there was a general darkness when their master
expired? We appeal to the fact against them; it reached not us at Rome; the
light of that day was like the light of other days: Do they say it was partial
to Judaea only? Be it so! We meet them on their own ground; we appeal to the
Procurator Pilate, to the noble Romans resident in Judaea, to the soldiers, to
the very Centurion, who attended his execution, to witness against this
impudent attack upon men's senses. Let them pretend that he healed the sick,
cured the lame, turned water into wine, or performed a thousand other juggling
tricks, but darkness over a whole province can be confuted by the testimony of
a whole province, and to this we appeal. -- Was this said? Was this appeal
made? Strange perversion of reason to turn that into an argument against a
thing, which seems conclusive for it! at least no negative can come nearer to
conclusion, than contemporary silence in a case so open to confutation, had it
not been true.

But Seneca and elder Pliny did not see the gospel -- Let it pass; let us grant
all that the argument supposes; why are we told of no confutation of this
miracle by any heathen writer contemporary with, or posterior to the gospel
account of the Passion? The assertion of a praeternatural event, so generally
notorious, must have been open to proof. Would Celsus have overlooked it? Would
not Lucian have taken it up? Should not we hear of its having been urged by
Porphyry, who was so voluminous a controversialist? Should not we meet it in
Julian or Philostratus? Should we hear nothing, that could lead us to believe
it was controverted by Jamblichus, or Hierocles in his books entitled
Philalethes? If the silence of the heathen writers is to be appealed to for the
purpose of impeaching Christ's miracles, let the appeal be made; whilst we
confine ourselves to the defense of those miracles only, which are recorded in
the Gospels and Acts of the Apostles, neither the silence of ancient, nor the
eloquence of modern opponents, can shake the records, on which we ground our
faith.

No XIV.
THAT period of the Athenian history, which is included within the era of
Pisistratus and the death of Menander the comic poet, may be justly styled the
literary age of Greece. I propose to dedicate some of these papers to a review
of that period; but as the earlier ages of poetry, though in general obscure,
yet afford much interesting matter of enquiry, it will be proper to take up the
Athenian history from its origin, because it is so connected with the account I
mean to give, that I cannot otherwise preserve that order and continuation in
point of time, which perspicuity requires.

This account may properly be called a history of the human understanding
within a period peculiarly favorable to the production of genius; and, though
I cannot expect that my labor will in the end furnish any thing more than what
every literary man has stored in his memory, or can resort to in his books,
still it will have the merit of being a selection uninterrupted and unmixed
with other events, that crowd and obscure it in the original relations, to
which he must otherwise refer. The wars, both foreign and domestic, which the
small communities of Greece were perpetually engaged in, occupy much the
greater part of the historian's attention, and the reader, whose enquiries are
directed to the subject I am about to treat of, must make his way through many
things, not very interesting to an elegant and inquisitive mind, before he can
discover. Quid Sophocles et Thespis et Aeschylus utile ferrent. Such will not
envy me the labor of having turned over a heavy mass of scholiasts and
grammarians, or hesitate to prefer accepting the result of my enquiries to the
task of following the like track in pursuit of his own.

The Athenians were a most extraordinary people; eminent in arms and in arts:
Of their military achievements I do not profess to treat, and if the reader
takes less delight in hearing of the ravages of war than of the progress of
literature, he may in the contemplation of these placid scenes, undisturbed by
tumult and unstained with blood, experience some degree of that calm recreation
of mind, which deludes life of its solicitude, and forms the temperate
enjoyment of a contemplative man.

Ogyges is generally supposed to have been the founder of the Athenian
monarchy, but in what era of the world we shall place this illustrious person,
whether he was Noah or one of the Titans, grandson to Jupiter or contemporary
with Moses, is an enquiry, which the learned have agitated with much zeal and
very little success. It is however agreed that there was a grievous flood in
his time, which deluged the province afterward called Attica; but that happily
for King Ogyges, being a person of gigantic stature he survived the general
calamity. A period of one hundred and eighty-nine years succeeded to this
flood, in which this province remained so depopulated, that it is generally
supposed no king reigned over it till the time of Cecrops, the founder of
Athens, from him at first named Cecropia.

Cecrops made many prudent institutes for the benefit of his rising state
during a long reign of fifty years, and, by establishing the rites of
matrimony, abolished the promiscuous commerce of the sexes, in which they lived
before his time; by these and other regulations upon a general numbering of all
his subjects, he found the male adults in his dominions to amount to twenty
thousand, every person of the above description being directed to bring a stone
in his hand and cast it down in a stated place: This prince, being an Egyptian,
introduced the mythology of his native country, upon which so many Grecian
fables were formed, and from which a learned modern has with great sagacity
traced a very curious analogy with the Mosaic accounts of the early ages: The
Greeks adopted the fables without comprehending their allusions, and thereupon
formed the constitution of a religion, which kept possession of great part of
the world, till revelation dispelled its errors and enlightened the Gentile
nations. Till Cecrops erected altars to Jupiter, made libations and established
his worship, he was not known in Greece as a God: He set up the image of
Mercury, sacrificed to Saturn, Ops, Rhea, Juno, and Minerva, and was in fact
the institutor of the Pagan theology: The gods of Cecrops were soon made useful
instruments in the hand of the founder of a monarchy, for before he could
induce his people to cultivate the dry and barren country of Attica, he was
forced to play off his new machinery, by raising a contest in heaven between
Neptune and Minerva for the patronage of Cecropia, the capital of his new
empire: He found interest enough with the deities to turn their decision in
Minerva's favor; and by this contrivance he diverted his subjects from their
maritime attachments to agriculture, and particularly to the cultivation of the
olive: To strengthen still further the tutelary title of Minerva, he enforced
the dedication of the city by changing its name from Cecropia to Athenae, a
sacrifice few founders would have made, and a strong proof of his good sense
and talents for government. If the reader recollects the story Ovid relates of
Minerva's treatment of Erichthonius, Cecrops's son, he will not conceive highly
of the gratitude, or even purity of that virgin deity's character; though as we
are setting out upon the Athenian ground, it may be not very prudent to talk
scandal of Minerva; At virgo est -- negat Aglaurus, negat anguis apertus. (DAR.
PHRYG. lib. 2.

Cecrops enjoyed his new government for the space of fifty years, but his
attachment to his native soil of Egypt drew him into an unlucky expedition with
King Pharaoh, in whose company he was drowned in the Red Sea, whilst in pursuit
of the Israelites; notwithstanding which we are informed upon the authority of
the poet Euripides, that he was translated into the starry sphere, and became a
constellation of some dignity after his death; and if we consider what
obligations this prince had conferred on the gods, as well as men, we shall not
think him too highly rewarded; on the contrary we must own he was rather hardly
dealt with both by Minerva as well as Mercury; the former of which shut his son
in a chest in company with a dragon, and the latter betrayed his daughter into
a false step; an attachment, which though it does not convict her of vulgarity
of taste, certainly does no credit to the chastity of her morals, or the
gratitude of her seducer.

Cranaus succeeded on the death of Cecrops, and after a reign of nine years was
deposed by Amphictyon, who seized the throne of Athens and rendered his name
memorable to posterity by establishing the great Council or Law-Courts of the
Amphictyons, who held their meetings at Thermopylae. This prince introduced the
practice of diluting and mixing wines; a practice that obtained through all
Greece for many ages; in memory of which sober institution, Amphictyon erected
an altar to Bacchus the Upright and placed it in the Temple of the Hours: He
also consecrated an altar to the nymphs near at hand in the same temple, that
mankind might thereby be kept in mind of the gracefulness of temperance, and it
is not easy to find any instance in the pagan worship, where superstition has
been applied to more elegant or moral purposes. In small communities such
regulations may be carried into effect, where all the people are under the eye
of the sovereign, and in the same spirit of reformation Amphictyon published an
edict, that none of his subjects should indulge themselves in the use of
undiluted wine, except in one small glass after their meals to give them a
taste of the potency of the god; under this restriction he permitted the free
use of diluted wines, provided they observed in their meetings to address their
libations to Jupiter the preserver of man's health.

This virtuous usurper, after an administration of ten years, was in his turn
expelled from the throne of Athens by that Erechthonius, the son of Cecrops,
whom Minerva shut up in a chest with his companion the dragon, and committed to
the keeping of his sisters: This is the person whom Homer mentions in his
second book of the Iliad by the name of Erechtheus: He is celebrated for having
first yoked horses to a chariot, and also for introducing the use of silver
coin in Attica. Primus Erechthonius currus et quatuor ausus
Jungere Equos, rapidisque rotis insistere Victor.


But the institutions which have rendered the name of Erechthonius famous to
all posterity, are those of the Eleusynian Mysteries and the feasts of the
Panathenaea. The first of these he established in honor of Ceres, on account
of a seasonable supply of corn from the granaries of Egypt, when the city and
territory of Athens were in imminent danger of starving by an extraordinary
drought: These sacred mysteries were of Egyptian origin, and as they consisted
of forms and rites, unintelligible to the vulgar, and probably very little
comprehended even by the initiated, the secret was well kept.

As for the Panathenaea, they were instituted, as their name indicates, in
honor of Minerva, and were the great festival of the Athenians: The
celebration was originally comprised in one day, but afterward it was extended
to several, and the various athletic games and races, with the recitation of
poems, that accompanied it, attracted an immense resort of spectators. Every
species of contention, both on foot and horseback, drew the bold and adventrous
to the field of fame, whilst the prizes for music and the rival display of the
drama in aftertimes recreated the aged, the elegant, and the learned: The
conquerors in the several games gave entertainments to their friends, in which
they presided crowned with olive in honor of the guardian deity: These were
scenes of the greatest festivity, till, when Athens had submitted to the Roman
yoke, those sanguinary conquerors introduced the combats of gladiators into
these favorite solemnities. Every age had its share in contributing to the
spectacle; the old men walked in procession with branches of olive in their
hands, the young in armor with shield and spear; the laboring peasants with
spades, and their wives with water-buckets: The boys crowned with garlands, and
dressed in frocks or surplices of white, chaunted hymns to Minerva; and the
girls followed with baskets, in which the sacrificing utensils were contained.

A superstition, supported by splendour, and enlivened with festivity, was well
calculated to keep a lasting hold upon the human mind.

No XV.
THE Eleusynian Mysteries, instituted by Erechthonius, were celebrated in the
time of autumn every fifth year at Eleusis, where a great concourse of people
met upon the occasion: The ceremonies of initiation were preceded by
sacrifices, prayers, and ablutions; the candidates were exercised in trials of
secrecy and prepared by vows of continence; every circumstance was contrived to
render the act as awful and striking as possible; the initiation was performed
at midnight, and the candidate was taken into an interior sacristy of the
temple with a myrtle garland on his head; here he was examined if he had duly
performed his stated ablutions; clean hands, a pure heart, and a native
proficiency in the Greek tongue were indispensible requisites; having passed
this examination, he was admitted into the temple, which was an edifice of
immense magnitude; after proclamation made that the strictest silence should be
observed, the officiating priest took out the sacred volumes containing the
mysteries; these books were written in a strange character, interspersed with
the figures of animals and various emblems and hieroglyphics; they were
preserved in a cavity between two large blocks of stone, closely fitted to each
other, and they were carefully replaced by the priest with much solemnity,
after he had explained what was necessary to the initiated out of them. The
initiated were enjoined to honor their parents, to reverence the immortal
gods, and abstain from particular sorts of diet, particularly tame fowls, fish,
beans, and certain sorts of apples.

When this was finished the priests began to play off the whole machinery of
the temple in all its terror; doleful groans and lamentations broke out from
the fane, thick and sudden darkness involved the temple, momentary gleams of
light flashed forth every now and then with tremblings, as if an earthquake had
shaken the edifice; sometimes these coruscations continued long enough to
discover all the splendour of the shrines and images, accompanied with voices in
concert, dancings and music; at other times during the darkness severities were
exercised upon the initiated by persons unseen; they were dragged to the ground
by the hair of their heads, and there beaten and lashed, without knowing from
whom the blows proceeded, or why they were inflicted: Lightnings and
thunderings and dreadful apparitions were occasionally played off with every
invention to terrify and astonish; at length upon a voice crying out Conx!
Ompax! the ceremony was concluded and the initiated dismissed. The garment worn
upon this occasion was not to be laid aside, whilst it would hang together, and
the shreds were then to be dedicated at some shrine, as a tattered trophy of
the due performance of the mysteries of Ceres.

These initiations were conceived to lead to the enjoyment of a happier lot in
this life, and to fit a man for a more dignified place amongst the blessed
hereafter; and they were in such general respect, that it afforded great cause
of reproach against Socrates, for having neglected his initiation. The vows of
secrecy and the penalties to be inflicted on violation, were as binding as
could possibly be devised.

Hitherto the rising state of Athens had not been engaged in war, but no sooner
was it involved in disputes with the Eleusynians on account of some praedatory
incursions, than the idea took its rise of devoting human victims to appease
the hostile divinities and to purchase conquest by the oblation of what was
dearest and most valuable in life.

As we are now approaching toward the time of Homer, who records instances of
this sort, it may be curious to mark when that savage superstition had its
origin. No example occurs to me in Grecian story antecedent to Erechthonius,
who in obedience to an oracle, sacrificed one of his daughters, and some say
all, to purchase thereby success against the Eleusynians. It is however a
matter of less wonder than regret how this idea should obtain so generally;
when a people are in the habit of making animal sacrifices a part of their
worship, and whose religion it is to believe that intercession can be made to
the gods, and favors obtained by the blood of victims taken from the brute
creation, the thought of ascending a step higher in the dignity of the oblation
naturally leads to the hope of purchasing a greater reward. With these ideas
enthusiastic spirits, like Decius and Curtius amongst the Romans, rushed upon
self-destruction, and Erechthonius, king of Athens, devoted his daughter,
Codrus himself -- If the blood of bulls and goats and the ashes of a heifer,
sprinkling the unclean, sanctifies to the purifying of the flesh, how much
more shall the blood, etc. etc. etc. There is a wild magnanimity in the idea
highly captivating; Cicero more than once alludes to this action of
Erechthonius, and in his oration for Sextus exclaims -- Shall I after so many
illustrious deeds shrink from death, which even the daughters of Erechthonius,
with all the weakness of their sex about them, resigned themselves to without
regret? Let the mind be possessed with the persuasion of immortal happiness
annexed to the act, and there will be no want of candidates to struggle for the
glorious prerogative. Erechthonius and his daughters were associated to the
deities after their death, altars were dedicated and a temple erected to them
in the citadel of Athens, where divine honors were paid to their memories. The
Eleusynians were defeated and despoiled of all they possessed, except the
mysteries of Ceres abovementioned; of these they were left in undisturbed
enjoyment: Their king Eumolpus was slain in battle, but Neptune, whose son he
was, revenged his loss by striking his conqueror dead with his trident.

Thus perished Erechthonius by immortal hands, if we take the authority of
Euripides the tragic poet, after he had reigned fifty years in Athens: In his
time the people of Attica, heretofore called Cecropians, took the name of
Athenians: Ovid, whose metamorphoses mix much ancient truth with fable, says
that this prince at his death left it doubtful with posterity, whether he
excelled most in justice as a King, or in military glory as a General.

Aegeus, the reputed father of Theseus, was the eighth king of Athens,
reckoning from Cecrops, and son of Pandion II. grandson of Erechthonius, the
crown having descended regularly from father to son through several
generations: After remaining childless for several years he consulted the
oracle at Delphi upon the mode of obtaining an heir; to a very plain question
he obtained a very obscure answer, and, not being able to solve the aenigma
himself, consulted several persons upon the interpretation of it, and amongst
others his friend Pittheus, king of Troezene, from whose sagacity he promised
himself a solution of the difficulty: This wise prince had a daughter named
Aethra, and she having admitted Aegeus to a secret consultation by night in the
fane of Minerva, proved a more able interpreter of the Delphic oracle than her
father, and put Aegeus in possession of his wishes by bearing him a son: This
son was the hero Theseus, but it cannot be disguised, that a doubt was started,
whether Neptune had not a better claim to the child than Aegeus; for the
princess Aethra is charged with admitting both visiters in the same evening,
and when the controversy lies between a mortal and an immortal lover, the most
that can be said for Aegeus is, that it leaves the case doubtful. The king of
Athens put in his claim by leaving his sword and sandals in custody of Aethra,
when he understood she was pregnant, enjoining her to let the child, if he
proved a son, remain at Troezene, until he became adult and had strength enough
to remove a block of stone, under which he deposited his pledges; on the hilt
of the sword, which was ivory, he caused to be engraved his name and titles,
and Aegeus declared he would acknowledge the bearer of those pledges and adopt
him as his heir: This being done, he returned to Athens and celebrated the
Panathenaea with uncommon splendour.

This monarch filled the throne of Athens for the space of forty-eight years
and terminated his life by casting himself into the sea, thence called Aegean,
in despair upon discovering the vessel, that brought his son Theseus from his
Cretan expedition against the Minotaur, approach the shores of Attica with
black sails, when the signal of life and victory was to be the contrary display
of white ones, which Theseus by a fatal neglect had failed to put out upon his
coming in sight of the coast.

The impatient and despairing parent precipitated himself into the ocean and
the son succeeded to his throne. There is no hero in antiquity, who for his
magnanimity, his adventures, or the exquisite beauty and perfection of his
person has been more celebrated than Theseus: In some of the actions of his
life he performed real and distinguished services to his country; in others he
appears to have been governed merely by an extravagant and wild passion for
adventure: No hero has furnished more themes to the poets, and few princes have
at times deserved better of their subjects: By his valor in action and the
terror of his name he cleared many regions of those lawless clans of robbers
and plunderers, with which they were infested to the disgrace and danger of
society: Ambitious to emulate the fame of his contemporary Hercules, he seems
sometimes to have forgotten that he had subjects under his care and command,
and roved about in quest of adventures, the general champion of distress and
the sworn exterminator of monsters and tyrants, wherever they were to be found:
Preceded by his axe-bearers in commemoration of his destruction of the robbers,
and carrying on his shoulder the ponderous club of Corynaetes, whom he
vanquished, he marched in triumph to Delphi, like another Hercules after his
labors: The bulls of Crete and Marathon and the Cremmyonian boar were
trophies, that might vie with the hydra; and Corcyon, whom he slew, was as
formidable a champion as Antaeus, and fixed the triumph of agility over
strength: He killed Procrustes, whose couch was as fatal as the den of Cacus.

Theseus upon his accession to the government of Attica reformed the state of
justice and amended the condition of his subjects by many kingly regulations;
before his time the people were dispersed about the country in small and
separated clans, more like the settlements of savages than a regular community;
the police of course was very imperfect; the laws were merely local and
arbitrary, nor did they generally agree in the same definition or distribution
of justice; to remedy these evils he enlarged his capital, assembled the people
from all parts, fixed them to a residence in Athens and established general
courts of law and justice, where all his subjects might resort to decide their
properties, or compose their wrongs, by stated rules and institutes, expounded
and administered by judges competent to their vocation.

These are services beneficial to mankind, the actions of a patriot king and
legislator, infinitely superior to the extermination of boars or bulls, the
unravelling a labyrinth, or conflicting with a wrestler. One should have
thought that the rambling spirit of Theseus might henceforward have subsided,
and, if Hercules had not been upon earth, this would probably have been the
case, and he would have descended to posterity one of the greatest characters
in ancient history; but the expedition against the Amazons drew him out upon
fresh and foolish adventures, and, though his friendship and his amors may
have furnished pleasing tales and fables to Hesiod and others, the historian
will do well to pass over this period of his life in silence and regret.

It suffices to relate that Menestheus took advantage of his absence and
established himself so firmly in power, that Theseus on his return finding it
impossible to dispossess him of his usurped authority retired to Scyros, and
there either put a voluntary end to his life, or was destroyed by Lycomedes.

In the reign of Menestheus the famous siege of Troy, memorable to all ages,
was undertaken by the joint forces of all the Grecian principalities: The
combined fleets assembled at Athens and took their final departure from that
port: Agamemnon conducted a hundred ships from Mycenae, Menelaus sixty from
Sparta, and Menestheus joined with fifty: The latter excelled all the generals
of Greece, Nestor only excepted, in military science for arranging and
disposing troops in order of battle. Homer has left this testimony in his
favor, and the authority is as indisputable as the record is immortal; the
town was taken in the last year of Menestheus's life and reign; he died in the
island of Melos, and being one of the chiefs enclosed in the Trojan horse, had
a leading share in the capture and destruction of that celebrated city. No
chief like thee, Menestheus, Greece could yield,
To marshal armies in the dusty field,
The extended wings of battle to display,
Or close the embodied host in firm array;
Nestor alone, improved by length of days,
For martial conduct bore an equal praise.
POPE.

No XVI.
THE expedition of the Greeks against Troy has supplied a subject to an heroic
poem, which remains the wonder of all time and the unrivalled standard of the
epic art. It must be owned no poet ever made a happier choice, for what could
be more interesting to a Grecian reader than the recital of an action founded
in justice and terminated in success? The event itself was magnificent; a
coalition of the Grecian states in vindication of an injured prince, who was
one of their number. Had it recorded the expedition of one great monarch
against another, it is easy to comprehend how much that brilliant variety of
character, which now gives such dramatic luster to the composition, would have
lost by the nature of such a subject; whereas the emulation of the rival
leaders constitutes that compound action, that striking contrast and
discrimination of character, which render the Iliad so peculiarly enchanting.
The justice of the undertaking fortifies the poet with a moral, which secures
the good opinion of his readers, and interests them cordially in his cause; it
is so permanent a pledge for their good wishes, that it enables him to throw
into the scale of the Trojans every episode of pity, every ornament of
magnanimity and valor, which can beautify his poem without the danger of
creating false prejudices in behalf of the offenders; in short, we can mourn
for Hector and not regret the victory of Achilles.

If Homer found these incidents ready to his hands, their combination was
supremely happy; if he created them, his invention was almost miraculous. The
period at which he wrote was no less fortunate, being neither too remote to
impair the interest of his subject, nor so near the time of the action as to
confine his fancy to the limits of strict historical truth. So wonderful an
assemblage of parts meet in this great work, that there is not a passion in the
human breast but will find its ruling interest gratified by the perusal; and it
is so happily contrived, that the combination of those parts, multitudinous as
they are, never violates the uniformity of design; the subject remains simple
and entire; our ideas never stray from the main object of the poem, though they
are continually carried out upon excursions through the regions of earth and
heaven upon the strongest pinions of fancy. The manner in which Homer employs
his deities, with the machinery that accompanies them, gives an amazing
brilliancy to the picturesque and descriptive powers of the poem; the virtues,
vices, prejudices, passions of those imaginary beings set them on a level with
human nature so far as to give us an interest in their situations, which a
juster representation of superior essences could not impart; while their
immortality and power are engines in the poet's hand, whose influence is
unlimited by the laws of nature; these extraordinary personages, at the same
time that they take a part very essential to the action of the drama, bring
about the incidents by those sudden and supernatural means, which mortal heroes
of the most romantic sort could not so readily effect. This is an advantage on
the part of a heathen poet, for which the Christian writer has no substitute;
for those moderns, who in order to create surprise have invented capricious
beings to produce extravagant events above the reach of human powers, and below
the dignity of divine, violate our reason, whilst they struggle to amuse our
fancy; but the Pagan theorist can find a deity for every purpose without giving
scandal to the believer, or revolting the philosopher.

Amongst the numberless excellencies of the Iliad there is none more to be
admired than the correct precision, with which Homer draws his characters and
preserves them uniformly through the poem; an excellence, in which Virgil and
the Roman poets in general are greatly his inferiors: With Homer's heroes we
have more than historical acquaintance, we are made intimate with their habits
and manners, and whenever he withdraws them for a time, we are certain upon the
next meeting to recognize and acknowledge the same characteristic traces that
separate each individual so decidedly from all others. -- But it is time to
return to our history.

After the death of Menestheus the crown of Athens returned into the family of
Theseus, and Demophon his son, who also was present at the siege of Troy,
succeeded to his inheritance: Oxyntes, Aphidas, and Thymaetes reigned in
succession after Demophon, and the line of the Erechthidae expired in the
person of Thymaetes. This was a remarkable revolution, for that family had
possessed the throne of Athens for a period of four hundred and twenty-nine
years. The monarchy, properly so called, was now drawing to its conclusion;
Melanthus, who succeeded to Thymaetes, was a Messenian and a descendant from
Neleus; he had been expelled from Messene by the Heraclidae, and had taken
refuge in the Athenian state; he obtained the crown by very honorable means;
Thymaetes, being challenged to single combat by Xanthus king of Boeotia,
declined the challenge; Melanthus accepted it in his stead, slew Xanthus, and
obtained the crown of Athens in reward for his success; at his death it
devolved to his son Codrus. The manner in which this prince devoted himself to
death for his country scarce needs a recital, but it is not generally known
that Codrus was in a very advanced age, when this event took place, and
moreover that the Athenians urged him to the deed upon the report of
Cleomantis, a citizen of Delphi, who made them acquainted with the answer of
the oracle touching the conditions, on which victory was to be obtained. The
Athenians, having prevailed with Codrus to embrace the fatal conditions of
their deliverance, sacrificed their aged monarch, and impressed with the
persuasion that Apollo would verify his prediction, fought and overcame their
enemy.

Codrus being dead, the government of Athens underwent a material revolution,
for the popular party, pretending a respect to his memory, put forward a decree
prohibiting any other person to reign in Athens by the title of King; the
change however for the present was more nominal than essential, for they did
not alter the succession, nor materially reduce the power of the monarchy. The
Prince, or perpetual Archon, (for each title is used occasionally) held the
government for life, subject notwithstanding to account to the state for his
administration of public affairs.

Medon, son of Codrus, succeeded to his father by this new title: Thirteen
princes reigned under this description from Medon to Alcmaeon inclusive,
comprehending a period of three hundred and seven years.

Some authorities maintain that Homer came to Athens in the time of Medon, and
was hospitably received by that prince; but it is generally thought the age of
Homer does not answer to this date, and that he was born about two hundred
years after the siege of Troy; this falls within the time of Archippus,
grandson of Medon, and third perpetual archon; in the beginning of whose reign
Hesiod was born; Homer some few years after at the close of it: Archippus
reigned nineteen years; and this era seems established by the best
chronologists.

Archippus, at the conclusion of whose administration we have placed the birth
of Homer, was succeeded by Thersippus, who held the government of Athens for a
long incumbency of forty-one years, and he was succeeded by Phorbas, who was
thirty years archon; in the period of these seventy-one years we have the
Athenian era of the life of Homer.

This however must in some degree be left to opinion, for before the
institution of the Olympiads the Grecian chronicles are so vague and obscure
that the precise age of Homer will for ever remain a subject of conjecture. The
above period has at least the merit of holding a middle place between their
opinions, who suppose he was born soon after the siege of Troy and such as
contend he was contemporary with Lycurgus. The late Mr. Robert Wood, in his
essay on the original genius and writings of Homer, inclines to think the Iliad
and Odyssey were finished about half a century after the capture of Troy; he
has offered internal evidence in support of this opinion in Homer's account of
the family of Aeneas, and his argument is acute and critical: They, who make
him contemporary with Lycurgus, have internal evidence against them, which,
though perhaps it does not serve to establish Mr. Wood's position, certainly
confutes the latter chronologists. Aristotle places Homer in the same epoch
with Iphitus and the first Olympiad, but he rests his conjecture upon the
weakest of all arguments; whilst the best authorities, as well as the majority
in number, point to the period which I have suggested; and here for the present
I will leave it.

The last but one of the perpetual archons was Aeschylus, and in the second
year of his government the Olympiads were first instituted by Iphitus at Elis;
from this period we shall proceed with greater chronological precision.

The successor of Aeschylus and the last of the perpetual archons was Alcmaeon.
The people of Athens had new-modelled their government upon the death of Codrus
by abolishing the title of King, and reducing their chief magistrate to be in
fact rather the first subject of the state, than the monarch: This regulation
appears to have been effected without any struggle on the part of the reigning
family; thirteen archons in succession had now been permitted to hold the
government for life, when upon the expiration of Alcmaeon's administration, the
people thought fit by a fresh reform to limit the duration of the chief
magistracy to the term of ten years. Charops, brother of Alcmaeon and son of
Aeschylus, was the first decennial archon; and this revolution took place in
the first year of the seventh Olympiad. Whilst the Athenian state was by these
steps enlarging its liberties, Romulus and Remus were forming the embryo of a
mighty empire fated in the course of time to become mistress of the world;
these adventurers collected a body of Latin shepherds, amongst whom they had
been educated, and, settling themselves on the Palatine Mount, became the
founders of Rome: This event is supposed to fall within the period of the
seventh Olympiad, when Charops was decennial archon. It is generally supposed
that this mighty empire was set in motion from one spark, which Greece had
scattered from the conflagration of Troy, and which lighted on the shores of
Italy, where it was kept alive for more than four centuries, till Rome was
founded; but Aeneas's Italian colonization is a very questionable point, and I
am inclined to agree with Mr. Wood in his treatise abovementioned, that the
posterity of Aeneas did not migrate into Italy, but established themselves in
the Troade and reigned over the scattered remains of the Trojans after the
destruction of Ilium.

A revolution of eighteen Olympiads produced a third change in the constitution
of the Athenian government in favor of popular freedom, by limiting the
archons to one year, making the magistracy annual: Neither was this all, for
the command was no longer lodged in the hands of one person only, but of nine,
the first of which was styled by pre-eminence Archon, and from him the year had
its name; the second, entitled Basileus, took charge of religious ceremonies,
and the Polemarc, or third in office, had the conduct of military affairs,
whilst all civil and judicial business was referred to the council of the
remaining six, called Thesmothetae. None but pure Athenians of three descents
could be chosen by lot into this council; an oath of office was administered to
them publicly in the portico of the palace, purporting that they would execute
the laws with justice and fidelity, and take no gifts either from their clients
or the people at large. When they had performed their annual functions, and
acquitted themselves without impeachment, they were in course aggregated to the
Areopagites, and held that dignity for life. Every thing relating to the care
of orphans and widows, or the estates of minors, was vested in the principal
magistrate, properly styled Archon; he had the charge of divorces and the
superintendance of the parents and children of soldiers, who fell in battle,
and of all such citizens who were maintained at the public charge.

Of these annual archons Creon was the first, and was elected about the
twenty-fourth Olympiad.

No XVII.
THE Athenian state continued to be governed by annual archons according to the
alteration made in its constitution in the twenty-fourth Olympiad, without any
thing occurring of importance to merit a recital from the time of Creon to the
administration of Draco in the thirty-ninth Olympiad. The Athenians, having
reduced the monarchical power to the most diminutive of all kingly
representatives an annual archon, had to all appearance effectually established
their liberties; but it has been the fate of freedom to be turned into abuse in
all ages, and the licentiousness of the people now seemed in more want of
reform, than the prerogative of the king had been in the most arbitrary times.
The moral purity of Draco's manners, and the stern inflexibility of his temper
fitted him for an office, that required both rigorous virtue and resolute
dispatch, for his time was short and his task laborious and full of danger: Had
his power been permanent, it is probable he would have qualified the severity
of those famous laws, which from their sanguinary nature were figuratively said
to be written in blood, and it is certain they breathe a spirit calculated
rather for the extinction of society, than for its reformation. We must however
admit the difficulty of devising any code of penal statutes, by which degrees
of punishment shall be equitably proportioned to degrees of offense. We have no
experience or history of any such code now existing, or that ever did exist. A
citizen of the world will not estimate crimes and offenses by the same rule and
standard as a citizen of any one particular community will; local circumstances
will give fainter or deeper colorings to crimes according to the peculiar
constitution of the state, against which they are committed: The Athenians in
the time of Draco were governed by annual magistrates, the administration of
these magistrates was made subject to popular enquiry upon its termination;
they had expunged from their constitution the wholesome though high-sounding
principle, that a king cannot do wrong; it was now become scarce possible that
his substitute could do right; the people sat in judgment on their governors,
and many of the most virtuous citizens in the state suffered under their
sentence: Fear restrained the timid from exertion, and the allurements of power
debauched the interested and ambitious from their duty; whilst the magistrate
aimed at popularity, the people became intolerably licentious. The rigor of
Draco impresses us with a high idea of his purity of principle; his abhorrence
of the abuses of his predecessors in office, and his indignation against the
depravity of his fellow-citizens embittered his mind, and made him rather a
misanthrope, than a statesman.

Draco seems to have considered the commission of crimes, not in proportion to
their offense against society, but according to the principle of the criminal,
holding a transgressor equally guilty, whether he broke the law in the least
tittle, or in its greatest extent; for he punished indiscriminately with death
in both cases: In this there is as little wisdom as mercy, and it is to the
honor of Solon that he revoked such undistinguishing and bloody laws. Justly
to ascertain and define the various degrees of human depravity is impracticable
for those who cannot search the human heart; nor in the nature of things is it
possible for any man, or council of men, to form a system of punishments to
meet the several degrees and definitions of crimes with proportioned
retribution: Sentence of death is at once the highest exertion of authority one
fellow creature can exercise over another and the heaviest atonement any
offender can make to the laws of that society, in which he is inlisted: Draco
excused himself from the charge of indiscriminate rigor by pleading that he
could devise no punishment greater than death; the nature of the plea gives an
insight into the character of the man, that needs no comment; it is plain
however that he had no idea of aggravating death by tortures; he did not know,
or would not practice, those detestable arts and refinements, which now prevail
in too many parts of the Christian world, of extorting criminations and
confessions by heightening the agonies of death. The short duration of his
authority, as I before observed, precipitated him upon this system of severity,
which time and reflection would probably have corrected: A hasty reformer is
equally to be dreaded with a deliberate tyrant; legal cruelty is of all most
terrible; a law once made is made to be executed; the will of the judge cannot
mitigate it, and the power of the sovereign can only release from punishment,
but not apportion or modify it: Herein consists the irreparable defect of all
established rules of fixed punishment; to include different degrees of
criminality under one and the same degree of penalty is not strict equity, but
to live without laws at the arbitrary disposal of any human tribunal is slavery
of the most insupportable sort.

By Draco's laws an Athenian was equally guilty of death, whether he pilfered a
cabbage or murdered a citizen: Horrible decree! If the principle of punishment
does not consist in revenging what is past, but in preventing the culprit from
repeating and the community from suffering the like or any other offense from
the same person, it may well be doubted if death need be inflicted in any case;
the terror of example, not the spirit of revenge, must constitute the necessity
of such a mode of punishment, if any necessity exists; but if punishments may
be devised, by which guilty persons shall be made to atone to society without
cutting them from it, and if these punishments may be such as shall deter and
terrify the evil-minded equally with death itself, policy, independent of
religion, will be interested to adopt them.

It was not to be expected that the Athenians would be remedied by such
sanguinary laws as these of Draco, and they had been in operation nearly half a
century, when Solon in the third year of the forty-sixth Olympiad found the
people in as much need of reformation, as Draco did in the beginning of the
thirty-fifth Olympiad.

Solon was of noble birth and of an elevated soul; he was a friend to liberty,
but a lover of order; descended from Codrus, he was a patriot by inheritance;
though he was a great adept in the philosophy of the times, it neither soured
his manners nor left him without attention to the public: When he withdrew
himself from the world for the purposes of study and contemplation, it was to
render himself a more useful citizen on his return to society: With a fortune
rather below mediocrity he had such a spirit of beneficence and generosity,
that he was obliged in his youth to apply himself to commerce to support his
independence: Solon's philosophy did not boast any unnatural contempt of pain
or pleasure; he affected no apathy; on the contrary, when he was reproached for
weeping at the death of his son, as if it was unbecoming of a wise man to
bewail an evil he could not remedy, he answered with a modest sensibility of
his weakness, that it was on that very account he did bewail it.

The anecdote Plutarch gives us of Solon's interview with his contemporary
Thales, and the silly method that philosopher took for convincing Solon of the
advantages of celibacy by employing a fellow to make a false report to him of
his son's death, heightens our affection for the man, without lowering our
respect for the sage: Thales in the true spirit of sophism triumphed in the
superiority of his wisdom by avoiding those connections, which soften the human
heart, and vainly supposed he sunk the dignity of Solon's character by exposing
to ridicule the tender feelings of the father.

The Athenians were exhausted by a tedious and unprosperous war with the people
of Megara; the important island of Salamis was lost, and such was their despair
of ever recovering it, that they passed a law for making it a capital offense
in any citizen to propose the retaking it; Solon, who regarded this degrading
edict with honest indignation, feigned himself insane and rushing into the
forum harangued the populace, abrogated the edict and declared war against the
Megarensians: On this occasion he addressed the people in elegiac verses of his
own composing, one hundred in number; the power of his muse prevailed, for it
was great; the people gave him the command of an expedition against Salamis, in
which he had the good fortune to reduce that island and re-annex it to his
country, which had made such public avowal of its despair.

Solon is so highly celebrated as a poet, that some ancient authorities have
equalled him to Hesiod and even to Homer: We have few and small remains, but
many testimonies of his writings; in particular we are informed, that he
composed five thousand verses on the commonwealth of Athens, recording the
transactions of his own time, not as a history in praise, but in defense of
himself, and with the view to encourage his countrymen to persist in a course
of public virtue and private morality. He wrote iambics also and odes, and
composed even his laws in verse, of which Plutarch has quoted the exordium.

He employed stratagem in the reduction of the island of Salamis, but as the
celebrated Pisistratus was joined with him in this enterprise, it must not be
disguised that some authorities give the success of the expedition to
Pisistratus; both were men of consummate address and resource, and each no
doubt had his share of merit in the service; the reputation Solon gained by
this event was still increased by his conduct in the defense of the famous
temple of Delphi against the sacrilegious Cirrhaeans; though he was only
assessor to the general Clisthenes the Sicyonian in this campaign, the
successful termination of the war by the capture of Cirrha was universally
attributed to Solon.

Athens was now rent by popular feuds and dissensions; the commonwealth was in
imminent peril, every thing tending to civil tumult and confusion, and the
people in a state little short of absolute anarchy: In this extremity every eye
was turned toward Solon and he was elected archon by the general voice of his
fellowcitizens. It was now not only in his power to make himself absolute
master of the state, and to establish that tyranny in his own person, which he
lived to see Pisistratus aspire to and obtain, but that step was also pressed
upon him by the unanimous solicitation of his friends and the public at large;
religion had its share in the temptation, for the temple of Delphi uttered its
oracular decree for his assuming the supreme power in Athens, and when he
withstood the dazzling offer he had to combat the reproaches and invectives of
all parties for refusing it. A magnanimity that was proof against temptation
was not to be shaken by calumny; supported by conscious integrity he opposed
the torrent, and contenting himself with the limited authority of an annual
magistracy, framed and published those mild and salutary ordinances, which have
endeared his name to all posterity. Amongst the pacifying measures of his
government he found it expedient to relieve the people by an ordinance for the
remission of debts of a certain description; this act raised a storm of
opposition and abuse from all the rich and usurious against his administration,
and some who had been his intimates took part in the faction, and began to
persecute him in the bitterest manner, charging him with the meanness of
exempting himself as a creditor from the conditions of the act; he soon turned
the odium of the charge upon the contrivers of it by giving public proof to the
city that he himself had been the first, who obeyed his own law, and remitted a
considerable sum to his debtors; this proof of his disinterestedness as a
creditor convinced his countrymen of his uprightness as a legislator, and he
rose the higher in their esteem for the malevolent attack he had so fully
repulsed: Reason and public gratitude at length prevailed, and the voice of
faction being put to silence, the whole care of the commonwealth was
surrendered into his hands to be regulated and reformed according to his wisdom
and discretion.

Solon, though too magnanimous to accept the title of king, was too good a
citizen to decline the trust, and now it was that he abrogated all Draco's
sanguinary laws, except those that affected murderers: This, as I before
observed, occurred in the course of the forty-sixth Olympiad; he arranged the
people into four classes according to the different proportions of their
property; he erected the principal council of the Areopagites with inferior
courts for the administration of law and justice, and published his famous
manifesto for rendering infamous all persons, who in civil seditions should
remain spectators of their country's danger by a criminal neutrality; he
enacted many wholesome regulations respecting marriages, tending to the
increase of population; he suppressed libels, and made idleness punishable by
law; he put under certain disabilities parents, who were convicted of having
grossly neglected the education of their families, and restrained by sumptuary
laws every species of public excess. Many more of his laws might be enumerated,
if it were necessary to enlarge upon facts so generally known, but it will
suffice to mention, that when he had completed his code, he bound the senators
to the observance of what it contained by the solemnest oath he could devise,
and causing his laws to be engraven on tables of wood, hung them up in the
public courts that no man might plead ignorance.

The nature of this oath is curious; the senator was led up to a ponderous
stone preserved in the forum; there the oath was publicly administered, and the
obligation of it was, that he should dedicate a piece of gold to the temple of
Delphi of equal weight with the stone if he was proved guilty of having
violated his oath: Not content with thus swearing the judges and senators to
the faithful administration of his laws, he also bound the people by oath to
their due observance, and having done all this with a temper and prudence,
particularly expressive of his character, Solon took his leave of Athens and
sat out upon his travels into Egypt.

No XVIII.
ALTHOUGH the wisdom and magnanimity of Solon are conspicuous in every action
of his life, which history has transmitted to us, nothing is more worthy of our
admiration and praise than the circumstance last recorded of his secession from
Athens.

It is not necessary to follow him in his travels, in which after some time
spent in visiting Egypt, Cyprus, and Lydia, he obeyed the summons of his
fellow-citizens and returned to Athens: That city during his absence had been
distracted by furious and contending factions: Lycurgus headed one party,
Megacles son of Alcmaeon another, and Pisistratus was leader of a third, in
which was included nearly the whole inferior order of the people: All these
parties nevertheless preserved a respect for their ancient benefactor and
lawgiver, and he spared no pains in return to assuage and compose the disorders
of the state, but in vain; age indeed had not yet deprived him of his mental
faculties, but his corporeal ones were debilitated, and the crisis called for
more activity than he was now capable of exerting; he could no longer speak in
public nor address the people in the forum, as he was accustomed to do; he
tried his influence separately and in private with the leaders of the several
factions: Pisistratus, whose manners were of the gentlest kind, affected to
receive the advice and counsels of Solon with great external respect, but
ambition had taken too firm hold of his heart and he had laid his plans too
deep to be diverted from them by the patriotic discourses of this venerable
citizen; the sagacity of Solon penetrated his designs, and when he was
convinced of his dissimulation, and saw the liberties of his country on the
point of being overthrown by this artful daemagogue, he came into open court in
military array, and presented himself to the assembly ready to head the friends
of their country, and expel Pisistratus by force of arms: The noble effort was
too late, for the spirit of the people was lost, and all men seemed disposed to
surrender themselves without resistance to the usurper. Solon, finding that he
could not rouse them to a consideration of their ancient dignity, nor inspire
them with a becoming sense of the value of liberty, laid aside his arms, and
suspending them at the door of the Courthouse, took a short but pathetic leave
of Athens, and once again retired into voluntary banishment: Whither is not
distinctly ascertained; many pressing invitations were addressed to him from
different parts, and I am inclined to think he accepted that of Croesus king of
Lydia, and that he closed an illustrious life in extreme old age in the island
of Cyprus. His ashes by his express direction were transported to his native
island of Salamis and there deposited. The Athenians erected his statue in
brass, but Pisistratus revoked his laws: The laws of Draco, notwithstanding
their severity, were in execution for a longer period than the mild and prudent
ordinances of Solon. The people it is true never wholly forfeited their respect
for this excellent person, but they were unworthy of him; even Pisistratus
amidst the struggles of ambition offered no insult to his person, and every
country, which his fame had reached, presented an asylum to the venerable exile.

As an orator Solon stands high in point of merit, and first in order of time:
As a poet, his genius was sublime, various, and fluent; in subjects of fiction
and fancy he never dealt; but, though he chose his topics with the gravity of a
statesman, and handled them with the fidelity of an historian, he composed with
ardour, and never failed to fire his hearers with the recitation of his poems:
He is supposed to have reprobated the drama, but, if this be a fact, we may
well conclude, that it was the old corrupt masque of Bacchus and the Satyrs, of
which he signified his dislike, and in this he is warranted. In two
expeditions, where he had a military command, he was eminently successful, and
gained a high degree of glory: No statesman ever stood in times more perilous,
no citizen ever resisted more alluring offers of ambition, and no legislator
ever regulated a more disorderly community: Though devoted to the study of
philosophy, and a great master in the early science of the times, he mixed with
cheerfulness in society, was friendly and convivial, and did not hold back from
those tender ties and attachments, which connect a man to the world, and which
by some have been considered incompatible with a life devoted to wisdom and
sublime philosophy: Strict in his morals as Draco, he was not like him disposed
to put criminals to death, whilst there was any hope of conducting them by
gentle measures to repentance: His modesty was natural and unaffected, and
though he was generally silent in company, his silence threw no damp upon
festivity, for it did not savor of sullenness, and he was known to be a friend
to the use of wine with freedom, but without excess: At the meeting of the
seven celebrated sages (his contemporaries and colleagues in wisdom) when they
were entertained by Periander at Corinth, the golden salver, which the Milesian
fishermen had dragged out of the sea in their net, and which the Delphic oracle
upon reference of the controversy had decreed to the wisest man of the age, was
by general suffrage given to Solon; each person, with becoming deference to the
others, had severally declined the prize, but Solon was at length constrained
to receive it by concurrent vote of the whole assembly.

Historians are not agreed upon the exact time of Solon's departure from
Athens, and some maintain that he continued there till his death; this is not
probable; but the result of the accounts puts it out of doubt that he remained
there, whilst there was any hope of composing the disturbances of the state,
and of restoring its tranquillity and freedom under the prudent regulations he
had established, when he was Archon.

But no sooner had this excellent citizen turned his back upon Athens, than all
these hopes perished and universal despair took place; the degeneracy of the
people became incurable, and no one was found with authority or zeal to oppose
the approaching revolution: Though Solon was far in the decline of life, yet if
there had been any public virtue subsisting, the liberty of Athens had not been
lost without a struggle; but, although neutrality in civil commotions had been
declared infamous and criminal by the laws of Solon, the populace through
despair or indolence declined the contest and held themselves in readiness to
receive a master in either of the contending partisans, who should prevail over
his competitors.

Fortune and superior address at length decided the prize of ambition to
Pisistratus and his party, for he possessed every qualification that could
recommend him to the public; of insinuating manners, with a beautiful and
commanding person, he was gallant, eloquent, and munificent; no man acquitted
himself more gracefully as a public speaker, and when Pericles in aftertimes
alarmed the jealousy of the Athenians, the resemblance he bore to Pisistratus
in eloquence as well as in features was so striking, that he was universally
called the Second Pisistratus, and the comic poets in their satirical allusions
exhibited him on the stage by that name and character.

Whilst these party struggles were in suspense, Pisistratus used an artifice
for recommending himself to the people, which was decisive in his favor: One
day on a sudden he rushed into the forum, where the citizens were assembled, as
if he had been flying from assassins, who were in pursuit of him, and presented
himself to public view defaced with wounds, and covered with blood; he was
mounted in his chariot, and the mules that drew him were streaming with blood
as well as himself: The crowd flocked around him, and in this situation without
wiping his wounds or dismounting from his chariot, he harangued the forum; he
told them he had that instant escaped from the assassinating swords of the
nobles, who had cruelly attempted to destroy the man of the people for his
activity in opposing the exactions of sordid creditors and usurious tyrants:
His tears, his sufferings, the beauty of his person now streaming with blood,
which he had spilt in their cause, his military services at Megara, and his
protestations of affection to the people, in whose defense he solemnly
protested a determination to persist or perish, all together formed such an
address to the passions, and presented such a picture to the eye, that were
irresistibly affecting.

Though it soon appeared in proof, that the whole was artifice, and that all
these wounds about himself and his mules were of his own giving for the
impression of the moment, still the moment served his purpose, and in the heat
of popular tumult he obtained a decree for granting him a body-guard, not armed
as soldiers, but with sticks and clubs: At the head of this desperate rabble he
lost no time in forcing his way into the citadel, and took possession of it and
the commonwealth in the same moment: He next proceeded to exile the most
powerful and obnoxious of his opponents. Megacles and Lycurgus with their
immediate adherents either fled from the city or were forcibly driven out of
it; the revolution was complete.

The tumult having subsided, Pisistratus began to look around him, and to take
his measures for securing himself in the authority he had seized: For this
purpose he augmented his body-guard, which, as they were first voted to him,
consisted only of fifty; these he endeavored to attach to his person by
liberal payments, and whilst he equipt them at all points like soldiers, he put
a cunning stratagem in practice by which he contrived to seize all the private
arms of the citizens and totally dismantled Athens: He used less ceremony with
the nobles, for he stripped them of all weapons of offense openly and by force;
and now he found himself, as he believed, in safe possession of the sovereign
power and throne of Athens.

This passed in the fifty-first Olympiad, when Comias was archon.

It rarely happens that dominion, rapidly obtained, proves firmly established.
The factions of Megacles and Lycurgus were broken by this revolution, but not
extinguished, and Pisistratus either could not prevent their re-uniting, or
perhaps over-security made him inattentive to their movements: He enjoyed his
power for a short time, and was in his turn driven out of Athens by those he
had exiled, and his effects were put up to public sale, as the property of an
outlaw.

Megacles and Lycurgus now divided the government between them; this was a
system that soon wrought its own overthrow; and Megacles, finding his party the
weaker, invited Pisistratus to return to Athens, vainly imagining he could lull
his ambition and secure him to his interest by giving him his daughter Caesyra
in marriage. Pisistratus accepted the terms, and obeyed the welcome recall, but
it was in such a manner, as might have put the weakest man upon his guard, for
his return and entrance into Athens were accompanied by one of the most
barefaced attacks upon public credulity and superstition, that is to be found
in the history of man.

He had already succeeded in several hardy stratagems, and all had been
discovered after they had served his purposes. His pretended assassination, his
contrivances for arming his bodyguard and for disarming the citizens at large,
were all well known to the people, so that he must have taken a very nice
measure of their folly and blindness, when upon his entering the city he
undertook to bring in his train a woman, named Phaea, whom he dressed in the
habit of the goddess Minerva, and imposed her on the vulgar for their tutelar
deity in person: He had instructed her how to address the people in his behalf,
commanding them to reinstate him in his power, and open the gates of the
citadel at his approach: The lady was sufficiently personable for the character
she assumed, and, as a proof of her divinity, was of colossal stature:
Extravagant as the experiment may seem, it succeeded in all points; the human
deity was obeyed, and the ingenious demagogue carried all before him: This
Grecian Joan of Arc received the adoration of the superstitious vulgar in
public, and the grateful caresses of the exulting tyrant in private: The lady
was not of very distinguished birth and fortune, for before she took upon her
the character of a goddess she condescended to the mortal occupation of a
flower-girl, and made garlands after the custom of the Greeks for feasts and
merry-makings: Pisistratus rewarded her liberally by giving her in marriage to
his son Hipparchus; a commodious resource for disposing of a cast-off goddess;
as for himself, he was engaged to Caesyra: Phaea's marriage with Hipparchus
soon convinced the world that she was a mortal, but Pisistratus gave himself no
concern to prevent the discovery; in process of time it came to pass, upon
Pisistratus's second expulsion, that Phaea was publicly impeached and condemned
upon the charge of laesae Majestatis.

No XIX.
PISISTRATUS had been five years in exile, when Megacles brought about his
recall, and vainly thought to fix him in his interest by giving him his daughter
Caesyra in marriage; such alliances rarely answer the political ends for which
they are made: Pisistratus had several sons by his first wife, and having
re-established himself in the tyranny after the manner we have been describing,
and bestowed his favorite Phaea upon his son Hipparchus, he took the daughter
of Megacles as the condition of his contract with her father, but with a fixed
determination against a second family, whose pretensions might come in
competition with those of his children by his first marriage, in whose favor
he wished to secure the succession, and who both by age and capacity were fit
for government, whenever it should devolve upon them.

Caesyra put up with her husband's neglect for some time, but at length she
imparted her disgust to her mother, and she of course communicated it to
Megacles. Justly offended by the indignity of such treatment, Megacles
immediately took his measures with the enemies of his son-in-law for his second
expulsion, prudently disguising his resentment, till he was in a condition to
put it in force: It did not long escape the penetration of Pisistratus, but
when he came to the knowledge of the conspiracy that had been formed against
his power, he found himself and party too weak to oppose it, and seizing the
hour of safety, made a voluntary abdication by retiring into Eretria without a
struggle and in the utmost precipitation.

Megacles and his friends seem to have considered this secession of Pisistratus
as decisive, or else the time did not allow them to follow it by any active
measures for preventing his return: Eleven years however passed and still he
remained an exile from Athens; old as he was, his ambition does not seem to
have cooled, nor was he idle in the interim; he had an interview with his sons
in Eretria and concerted measures with them for his restoration; he formed
alliances with several of the Grecian cities, particularly Thebes and Argos,
and obtained a seasonable supply of money, with which he enlisted and took into
his pay a considerable army of mercenaries, and began hostilities in the
Athenian state by seizing upon Marathon. This successful measure drew out many
of his secret partisans from Athens to join him in this place, where the
promising aspect of his affairs and the popularity of his character had induced
great numbers to resort to his standard: Thus reinforced he put his army in
motion and directed his march toward the city. The ruling party at Athens
hastily collected troops to oppose his approach and put them under the command
of Leogaras, who no sooner took the field against Pisistratus, than he suffered
himself and army to be surprised by that experienced general and fled in
disorder over the country; the politic conqueror stopped the pursuit and
dispatched his sons after the fugitives to assure them of pardon and
protection, if they would go back to their homes and resume their occupations
in peace like good citizens: Pisistratus was far advanced in age, and having
carried this decisive action by stratagem, took every prudent precaution for
establishing his advantage by seizing the sons of the leading partisans in
opposition to his government, and detaining them in close custody as hostages
for the peaceable behavior of their parents. He conducted himself on the
occasion with so much temper and judgment, the splendour of his talents and the
elegance of his manners reflected so much luster on his court and country, that
his usurpation was either no longer remembered, or remembered without aversion
and regret; in short, his genius for government was such that no man questioned
his right: Even Solon, with all his zeal for liberty, pronounced of
Pisistratus, that Athens would not have contained a more virtuous citizen, had
his ambition been directed to a more justifiable pursuit: He was mild and
merciful in the extreme, winning in address, an eloquent orator, a just judge,
and a munificent sovereign; in a word, he had either the merit of possessing,
or the art of dissembling, every good quality and every brilliant
accomplishment.

Having now brought down this brief recapitulation of the Athenian history to
the last period of the reign of Pisistratus, we are arrived at the point of
time, in which that remarkable era commences, which I call The Literary age of
Greece: It was now that Pisistratus conceived the enlarged and liberal idea of
instituting the first public library in Greece, and of laying it open to the
inspection and resort of the learned and curious throughout the kingdoms and
provinces of that part of the world -- Libros Athenis disciplinarum liberalium
public ad legendum praebendos primus posuisse dicitur Pisistratus tyrannus.
(Aul. Gell. cap. xvii. lib. vi.) -- Through a long, though interrupted, reign of
three and thirty years he had approved himself a great encourager of literature
and a very diligent collector of the works of learned men: The compiler of the
scattered rhapsodies of Homer, and the familiar friend of the great epic poet
Orpheus of Croton (author of the Argonautics) he was himself accomplished in
the learning of the age he lived in; and, whilst his court became a place of
resort for contemporary genius, he pushed his researches after the remains of
the ancient poets and philosophers through every spot, where the liberal
sciences had been known to flourish; collecting books in Ionia, Sicily, and
throughout all the provinces of Greece with much cost and diligence; and having
at length completed his purpose and endowed a library with the treasures of
the time, he laid it open to all readers for the edification of mankind -- Who
of those times surpassed him in learning (says Cicero) or what orator was more
eloquent or accomplished than Pisistratus, who first disposed the works of
Homer in that order of compilation we have them at this very time? ( De Orat.
iii.137.)

The institution of this library forms a signal epoch in the annals of
literature, for from this period Attica took the lead of all the provinces of
Greece in arts and sciences, and Athens henceforward became the school of
philosophers, the theater of poets, and the capital of taste and elegance,
acknowledged to a proverb throughout the world. From this period to the death
of Menander the comic poet an illustrious scene presents itself to our
observation. Greece, with unbounded fertility of genius, sent a flood of
compositions into light, of which, although few entire specimens have descended
to posterity, yet these with some fragments, and what may be further collected
on the subject from the records of the scholiasts and grammarians, afford
abundant matter for literary disquisition.

It is painful in the extreme to reflect upon the ravages of time, and to call
to mind the host of authors of this illuminated age, who have perished by the
irruptions of the barbarous nations. When we meditate on the magnificence of
the ancient buildings of Greece and Rome, the mind is struck with awe and
veneration; but those impressions are of a very melancholy cast, when we
consider that it is from their present ruins we are now measuring their past
splendour; in like manner from a few relics of ancient genius we take a
mournful estimate of those prodigious collections, which, till the fatal
conflagrations at Alexandria, remained entire and were without comparison the
most valuable treasure upon earth.

Pisistratus, as we have observed, established the first public library in
Greece; Xerxes plundered Athens of this collection much augmented by the
literary munificence of Hipparchus and the succeeding archons: Xerxes was not,
like the barbarians of the lower ages, insensible to the treasure he had
possessed himself of; on the contrary, he regarded these volumes as the most
solid fruits of his expedition and imported them into Persia, as splendid
trophies of his triumph on his return. Seleucus, surnamed Nicanor, afterward
restored this library to Athens with a princely magnanimity. The kings of
Pergamus also became great collectors, and the Pergamaean library grew into
much reputation and resort. But of all the libraries of antiquity that
collected at Alexandria by the Ptolemies of Egypt was much the most
respectable. Athenaeus says (p. 3.) that Ptolemy Philadelphus purchased the
Pergamaean library, and in particular the books collected by Nileus,
principally consisting of the Greek dramatists, which with what he got at
Athens and Rhodes, furnished the great library at Alexandria with forty
thousand volumes. This library was unhappily set on fire, when Julius Caesar
found it necessary to burn his ships in the docks at Alexandria; so Plutarch
states the case; but Aulus Gellius says they were set on fire accidentally by
the auxiliary troops -- non sponte, neque opera consulta, sed a militibus forte
auxiliariis incensa sunt. -- This misfortune was in a great measure repaired by
the library which Marc Antony presented to Cleopatra, and by subsequent
additions was increased to such an amount, that when it was at last
irretrievably destroyed by the Caliph Omar, it consisted of seven hundred
thousand volumes.

This amazing repository of ancient science was buried in ashes by the
well-known quibbling edict of that barbarous fanatic -- If, said the Caliph,
these volumes contain doctrines conformable to the Koran, then is the Koran
alone sufficient without these volumes; but, if what they teach be repugnant to
God's book, then is it fitting they were destroyed. -- Thus, with false reason
for their judge and false religion for their executioner, perished an
innumerable company of poets, philosophers, and historians, with almost every
thing elegant in art and edifying in science, which the most illuminated people
on earth had in the luxuriancy of their genius produced. In vain did the
philosopher John of Alexandria intercede to save them; universal condemnation
to the flames was the sentence ignorance denounced against these literary
martyrs. The flow of wit, the flights of fancy, and the labors of learning
alike contributed to feed the fires of those baths, in which the savage
conquerors recreated themselves after the toils of the siege. Need we enquire
when art and science were extinct, if darkness overspread the nations? It is a
period too melancholy to reflect upon and too vacant to record: History passes
over it, as over the chart of an ocean without a shore, with this cutting
recollection accompanying it, that in this ocean are buried many of the
brightest monuments of ancient genius.

It appears that at the time Terence was writing Rome was in possession of two
thousand Greek comedies; of all which, vae barbaris! not one has descended to
us, except what are found in our scanty volume of Aristophanes, and these are
partly of the old personal class. The gleanings of a few fragments from the
grammarians and scholiasts, with the translations of the Roman stage, are now
the only samples of the Greek comedy in its last purity and perfection. It is
true that writers of the lower ages, and even the fathers of the Christian
church, have quoted liberally from the new comedy of the Greeks; these
fragments are as respectable for their moral cast, as for their elegant turn of
expression; but what a poignancy do they give to our regret, when we compute
the loss posterity has suffered by the scale of these remains!

On the part of tragedy, although very many noble works have perished, yet as
some specimens of the great masters have come down to us entire, we have more
to console us in this than in the comic department. Happily for the epic muse,
the rage of ignorance could not reach the immortal poems of Homer: What other
compositions of that great bard may have been lost to the world is but a dark
enquiry at the best; many poems of an antecedent, and some of a contemporary
date, have undoubtedly been destroyed; but I am inclined to think, that from
the time when those wonderful productions of the Iliad and Odyssey were
collected and made public at Athens till the Augustan era little was attempted
in the epic branch.

No XX.
AT the same time that it is fair to suppose there must be more than ordinary
merit in men, who rise to great opulence and condition in life from low
beginnings, all the world must be sensible of the danger attending sudden
elevation, and how very apt a man's head is to turn, who climbs an eminence, to
which his habits have not familiarized him. A mountaineer can tread firm upon a
precipice and walk erect without tottering along the path, that winds itself
about the craggy cliff, on which he has his dwelling; whilst the inhabitant of
the valley travels with affright and danger over the giddy pass, and oftentimes
is precipitated from the height to perish in the gulf beneath his feet. Such
is the fate of many, who by the revolutions of fortune are raised to lofty
situations: It is generally the lot of such people to make few friends; in
their danger there are none to give them warning, in their fall there are few
to afford them pity.

This is not the case with them, who are born to the dignities they enjoy; the
sovereign, whose throne is his inheritance, meets with pity and indulgence;
pity for the cares inseparable from his condition, indulgence for the failings
and excesses incidental to hereditary greatness; but the man, who is the maker
of his own fortune, acts on a stage, where every step he takes will be observed
with jealousy; amongst the many thousands, who are set to watch him, let him
reflect how many hearts there are, rankling with disappointed pride, and
envying him the lot, which in their own conceit at least their merit had a
better title to: When such a man appears, it is the common cry -- I cannot bear
that upstart. -- At the same time therefore that it must be allowed more
natural to excuse the proud looks of the high, than the proud looks of the low,
still it is no bad caution to beware of giving easy faith to reports against
those, whom so many unsuccessful people are interested to decry; for though
fortune can do mighty things amongst us, and make great men in this world, she
cannot make friends.

If caution be necessary for such as are only lookers on upon these sudden
changes in the scene of life, how much more wary should he be, who by fortune's
favor is the actor in it! Time past and present so abounds in examples to put
him on his guard, that if he will not profit by example, what hope is there
that precept will avail? That any man should grow arrogant, who has once been
dependant, is as unaccountable for the folly of the thing, as it is for the
baseness of it; it is as if a pedagogue should turn tyrant, because he
remembers to have smarted under the lash of the master when a schoolboy: And
yet there seems a principle in some natures, that inclines them to this
despicable species of revenge, by which they sacrifice all claim to reason,
reputation, or religion. Dionysius, though the cruellest of all tyrants, had
moderation in a private station and made a good and patient schoolmaster; he
handled the scepter like a rod, and the rod as he should have done a scepter.
Are we to conclude from this and other instances, that humanity may be learnt,
by those who descend from power, but that men become tyrants by ascending to it?

Is there in nature any thing so ridiculous as pride, so self-destructive, so
absurd? The man, who rises out of humble life, must have seen it, felt it, and
remarked its folly; he must have been convinced that pride deprives itself of
its own proper object; for every proud man, who assumes a superiority on the
score of rank, or wealth, or titles, forfeits that better interest with
mankind, which would have credited him for superiorities of a far nobler
quality, than those on which he grounds his silly arrogance: How strange is it
therefore, when the man, who has seen through the weakness of this passion in
others, whilst below them in condition, should fall into the same folly, when
he rises to be their equal! And yet it happens every day. What is so hateful to
a poor man as the purse-proud arrogance of a rich one? Let fortune shift the
scene and make the poor man rich, he runs at once into the vice, that he
declaimed against so feelingly: These are strange contradictions in the human
character. One should have thought that Pope Sixtus V. might have recollected
himself enough to be humble, though Pasquin had never reminded him of it; but
neither he, nor Becket, nor Wolsey, had any moderation in their spirit, though
professing a religion, whose very essence is humility.

In modern times the philosopher's stone seems to have been found by our
adventurers in the East, where beggars have become princes and princes have
become beggars; if Ben Johnson was now living, could he have painted these
upstart voluptuaries more to the life, than by the following animated
description?

I will have all my beds blown up, not stuffed,
Down is too hard; and then my oval room
Filled with such pictures, as Tiberius took
From Elephantis, and dull Aretine
But coldly imitated -- My mists
I Will have of perfume, vapour'd 'bout the room,
To lose ourselves in, and my baths, like pits,
To fall into, from whence we will come forth,
And roll us dry in gossamour and roses --
My meat shall all come in in Indian shells,
Dishes of agate set in gold and studded
With emeralds, saphirs, hyacinths, and rubies.
The tongues of carp, dormise, and camel's heels
Boiled in the spirit of sol and dissolved pearl,
(Apicius diet against the epilepsie)
And I will eat these broths with spoons of amber,
Headed with diamond and carbuncle.
My footboy shall eat pheasants; I myself will have
The beards of barbels served instead of sallads;
Oil'd mushrooms and the swelling unctuous paps
Of a fat pregnant sow, newly cut off,
Dressed with an exquisite and poignant sauce,
For which I Will say unto my cook, there is gold,
Go forth and be a knight! -- My shirts
I Will have of taffata sarsnet, soft and light
As cobwebs, and for all my other raiment,
It shall be such as might provoke the Persian,
Were he to teach the world riot anew.
My gloves of fish's and bird's skins perfumed
With gums of paradise and eastern air --
Q. And do you think to have the the stone with this? --
A. No, I do think to have all this with the stone.
(ALCHYMIST.) These are strong colors; and though he has dipped his pencil
pretty liberally into the pallet of the ancients, he has finely mixed the
composition with tints of his own; to speak in the same figure, we may say of
this sketch, that it is in the very best style of the master.

As I should be loath however to offer none but instances of the abuse of
prosperity, I am happy in recollecting one very singular example of the
contrary sort, though I go back to times far distant from our own to fetch it.

PISISTRATUS to SOLON.
I am neither without example in seizing the tyranny, nor without claim;
forasmuch as I derive from Codrus, and take no more by force, than I should
have inherited by right, if the Athenians had never violated those oaths of
allegiance, which in times past confirmed the prerogative of my ancestors. I
live here without offense toward men or gods; neither transgressing your laws
myself, nor permitting others to transgress them: Judge therefore if the
constitution you have given to Athens is not safer under my administration,
than if entrusted to the discretion of the people: No man suffers wrong under
my government, nor do I exact any new contributions from my people, contenting
myself with the tenths of their produce, as by ancient usage established; and
these I apply not to my own coffers, but to those of the state, for defraying
civil and religious expenses, and as a provision for the future exigencies of
war. Against you, Solon, I harbor no ill will, convinced that in your
opposition to my measures, you acted upon public, not personal motives: You
could not foresee what use I was to make of power, and if you could have
foreseen it, I will persuade myself you would neither have traversed my
interests, nor withdrawn yourself from your country; return therefore I conjure
you, return to Athens, and believe me on the word of a king you have nothing to
fear from Pisistratus, who has not the heart as you well know, to annoy even
his enemies, much less so excellent a citizen as Solon: Come then, if you are
so disposed, and be received into the number of my dearest friends; but if you
are resolved against returning, remember it is your own choice; and, if Solon
is lost to his country, Pisistratus is acquitted of being the cause of it.

Farewell.

SOLON to PISISTRATUS.
I can readily believe that you are incapable of doing me any injury, if I was
to return to Athens: Before you was a tyrant I was your friend, and am now no
otherwise your enemy, than every Athenian must be, who is adverse to your
usurpation. Whether it is better to be governed by the will of one man, or by
the laws of the commonwealth, let every individual judge for himself; if I
could prefer a tyrant, certainly of all tyrants I should prefer Pisistratus. As
to my returning to Athens, I do not think it for my honor, after having
founded the constitution of my country upon principles of freedom, to come home
upon motives of con^enience, and give a scandal to mankind by appearing to
acquiesce under that tyranny, which you have forcibly assumed, but which I,
when voluntarily offered, thought proper to reject.

Farewell.

The above letters are to be found in Diogenes Laertius, but the learned reader
knows they are generally supposed interpolations of the sophists; it must be
owned however they are characteristic of the writers, and, though they ought
not to be received as facts in history, may be read as a speech in Livy or
Guicciardini. The following anecdotes will throw a stronger light upon the
character of Pisistratus, and as there is no reason to question their
authenticity, they will be unanswerable witnesses to the point in question.

"At an entertainment given by Pisistratus to some of his intimates,
Thrasippus, a man of violent passions and enflamed with wine, took some
occasion not recorded to break out into the most virulent abuse and insult:
Pisistratus, who had made no reply to his invectives, fearing that the
festivity of his guests should be interrupted by the misconduct of Thrasippus,
who was now got up and leaving the room, rose from his seat and entreated him
to stay, assuring him that nothing he had said should be remembered to his
disadvantage; instead of being pacified by an act so gracious and
condescending, the brutal drunkard became more furious, and after venting all
the soulest words a heated imagination could suggest, with a violence shocking
to decency and loathsome to relate, suddenly turned upon Pisistratus, as he was
soliciting him to take his seat at the table, and spate in his face. Upon an
insult so intolerable the whole company rose as one man, and in particular
Hippias and Hipparchus, sons of the tyrant, were with difficulty prevented from
killing him on the spot. The interposition of Pisistratus saved Thrasippus, and
he was suffered to go home without any violence to his person. The next morning
brought him to his senses, and he appeared in the presence of Pisistratus with
all proper humility, expecting to receive the punishment he merited. What must
have been his self-conviction and reproach, when he was again received with the
utmost complacency! Penetrated to the heart with the recollection of his
behavior, and the unmerited pardon he had met with, he was proceeding to
execute that vengeance on himself, which he was conscious he deserved, by
rushing on his sword, when Pisistratus again interposed and seizing his hand
stopped the stroke; not content with this, he consoled him with the most soothing
expressions, assured him of his most entire forgiveness, and having put him at
peace with himself, reinstated him in his favor and received him again into
the number of his intimates." Though it is scarce possible to find an instance
of goodnature in any man's character superior to the above, I am tempted to
add the following anecdote not only as a corroborating evidence, but from the
pleasure one naturally takes in hearing or relating facts, that make so much to
the honor of human nature, and which inspire the heart with a love for mankind.

"Thrasimedes, a young Athenian, had the audacity to force a kiss upon the
daughter of Pisistratus, as she was walking in public procession at a religious
solemnity; transported by the violence of his passion, and considering that he
had already committed an unpardonable offense, he seized her person, and
forcibly conveying her on board a ship, put to sea with her on his passage to
Aegina; the sons of Pisistratus pursued and overtook him, bringing him in
person before their father: Thrasimedes, without betraying any marks of fear,
immediately declared himself perfectly prepared to meet any punishment
Pisistratus should think fit to decree; for, having miscarried in his attempt,
and lost the object for which alone he wished to live, all consequences became
indifferent; disappointment, not death, was his punishment; and when the
greater evil had been suffered, he had little apprehension for the lesser. --
Having said this, he waited his sentence; when Pisistratus after long silence,
breaking out into admiration at the resolution of Thrasimedes, instead of
punishing his audacity, rewarded his passion by bestowing his daughter upon him
in marriage." No XXI.
Non jam illud quaero, contra ut me diligat illa,
Aut, quod non potis est, esse pudica velit;
Ipse valere opto, et tetrum hunc deponere morbum.
(CATULLUS.)
IT is become a very gainful trade with our small-ware venders of literature to
expose certain pamphlets in shop windows and upon stalls in alleys and
thorough-fares, which, if any police was kept up in this great capital, would
be put down by the civil magistrate as a public nuisance; I mean Trials for
Adultery, the publishers of which are not content with setting down every thing
verbatim from their shorthand records, which the scrutinizing necessity of law
draws out by pointed interrogatory, but they are also made to allure the
curiosity of the passenger by tawdry engravings, in which the heroine of the
tale is displayed in effigy and the most indecent scene of her amors selected
as an eye-trap to attract the youth of both sexes, and by debauching the morals
of the rising generation, keep up the stock in trade, and feed the market with
fresh cases for the Commons, and fresh supplies for the retailers of indecency.

If the frequency of our divorces is thus to be encouraged because they make
sport for the lawyers, it may be wise to use no preventives against the plague
or smallpox, because they cut out work for the doctors. Upon this principle a
prudent father will breed up his sons civilians, and furnish out a library for
his daughters with these edifying volumes, and if once they take kindly to
their studies, there is no fear of their bringing custom to their brothers and
driving a trade, as it is called, for their families. A convenient nest of
these trials, neatly bound and gilt at the backs, will serve both as elegant
furniture to their closets or bed-chambers, and as repositories of science,
like treatises on the chances to make them skilful in the game. If they are
afraid of their husbands looking into their library, they may find out a
hundred devices for lettering them at the back; they may call them -- Sermons
to Married Women -- or The Lives of the learned Ladies -- The Acts of the
British Matrons -- Commentaries on the Marriage Act -- Treatises on Polygamy --
or by any other title, which their wit needs no prompting to devise.

Another circumstance of the times, which will greatly aid them in their
studies, is, that they have it daily and hourly in their power to resort to the
fountainhead for authority, and consult the very ladies themselves, who are
the heroines of these interesting narratives. These adepts in the art are to be
seen in all places, and spoken to at all hours without hindrance of business,
or knowledge of a bedfellow. As these disfranchised matrons or ex-wives keep
the best company, and make the best figures in all fashionable circles, a
scholar may receive instruction without slander, and prostitute her honor
without risqueing her reputation; a husband must be a brute indeed, who can
object to this society, and a wife must be a fool indeed, who does not profit
by it; when a new-married woman receives these privileged ladies in her house,
she sees at once the folly of being virtuous, for they are the merriest, the
loudest, the best followed, and the most admired of all their sex; they never
disgrace their characters by a pusillanimous repentance, they never baulk their
pleasures by a stupid reformation, but keep it up with spirit, like felons that
die hard at the gallows, to the last moment of their lives. Most of them marry
again, and are so much better than their neighbors, as they are made honest
women of twice over; and that reputation must be more than commonly tender,
which two coats of plaster will not keep together.

As a further temptation to our young wives not to wait the tedious course of
nature, but to make themselves widows of living husbands, as soon as they can,
they will recollect, that they ensure advantages to themselves thereby, which
natural widows do not enjoy; for in the first place they avoid a year's
mourning, which is a consideration not to be despised; in the next place they
have precedents for marrying in the first week of their widowhood; and as it is
the general practice to choose their gallants, they certainly run no risque of
taking a step in the dark, which widows sometimes have been suspected to repent
of; thirdly, they escape all bickerings and jealousies, which disturb the peace
of families, by the common practice of ladies putting their second husband in
mind of what their first husband would have done, or would have said on this or
that occasion, had he been alive. -- Things were not so in my first husband's
time -- Oh that my first husband were living! he would not suffer this or that
thing to pass, this or that man to use me after such a manner -- are familiar
expressions in the family dialogues of second wives in the regular order;
whereas the Irregulars never cast these taunts in the teeth of their spouses,
because they know the answer is ready at hand, if they did.

The Irregulars have also frequent opportunities of showing their affability
and sweetness of temper upon meeting their first husbands in public places and
mixed companies; the graceful acknowledgement of a respectful curtesy, a
down-cast look of modest sensibility, or the pretty flutter of embarrassment
are incidents upon an unexpected rencontre, which a well-bred woman knows how
to make the most of, and are sure to draw the eyes of the company upon her.

If on the other hand a lady on her divorce chooses to revive her maiden title
and take post in her former rank, the law will probably give her back as good a
title to her virgin name, as it found her with. She also has her advantages;
for at the same time that she is free from the encumbrances of matrimony, she
escapes the odious appellation of old maid: Such a lady has the privilege of
public places without being pinned to the skirts of an old dowager, like other
misses; she can also indulge a natural passion for gaming to a greater length
than spinsters dare to go; she can make a repartee or smile at a double
entendre, when a spinster only bites her lips, or is put to the troublesome
resource of her fan, when she ought to blush, but cannot.

Before I turned my mind to reflect upon these and other advantages, so
preponderating in favor of divorces, I used to wonder why our legislature was
so partial to suitors, and gave such notorious encouragement and facility to
Acts of Parliament for their relief and accommodation; I now see the good
policy of the measure, and how much the ease of his majesty's good subjects is
thereby consulted. It is confessed there is a short monition in the decalogue
against this practice, but nobody insists upon it; there are also some texts
scattered up and down in holy writ to the same purport, but no well-bred
preacher ever handles such topics in his pulpit; and if a fine lady should ever
read a chapter in the bible, or hear it read to her, it is very easy to skip
over those passages, and every polite person knows it is better to make a
breach in any thing, than in good manners to a lady.

Our English ladies by the frequency of their incontinence, and the divorces
thence ensuing, have not only furnished out a most amusing library to young
students of both sexes, but they have effectually retrieved the characters of
our wives from sinking into contempt with foreigners on account of their
domestic insipidity and attachment to the dull duties of a family. This was
once the general opinion, which other nations entertained of our matrons, but
upon a late tour through a great part of the continent of Europe I found it was
entirely reversed, and ideas more expressive of their spirit universally
adopted.

It may well be expected, that the influx of foreigners, and the out-flow of
natives, which the present peace will occasion, will not suffer the pretensions
of our ladies to lose ground in this particular: Our French neighbors are
certainly good critics in gallantry, and they need not now stand in dread of a
repulse from the women of England, whatever they may apprehend from the men.

Much more occurs to me on this subject, but these premises will serve to
introduce an idea, which if the several ladies, who have stood trial, would
club their wits to assist me in, might be rendered practicable, and that is, of
reducing Infamy to a system by rules and regulations of manners tending to the
propagation and increase of divorces in Great Britain. A few loose hints occur
to me on this subject, but I offer them with the utmost submission to better
judges, simply as rudiments in the art; the refinements must be left to those
who are professors.

"As early impressions are strongest and most lasting, I would advise all
mothers, who wish to train their daughters after the above system, to put them
in their infancy under the care of those commodious ladies, whom we vulgarly
call Mademoiselles, as the best forcers of early plants; under whose tuition
young ladies have been known to get so forward as to have pretty notions of
flirtation at the tender age of six years; at eight years they can answer
questions in the catechism of gallantry; before they reach their tenth summer,
they can leer, ogle, talk French, write sonnets, play with the footmen and go
through their exercises to admiration: I would then put them to their studies,
of which the annals abovementioned will be a principal part; the circulating
libraries will furnish out a considerable catalogue, and Mademoiselle will
supply them with French memoirs, novels, etc. etc. At the age of twelve it will
be proper to send them to the boarding-school, and there they will have the
opportunity of making female friendships with their seniors in age, by which
they will greatly edify: In the holiday vacations they will correspond with
their boarding-school associates, and these letters should be sacred and
inviolable, by which means they may carry on an intercourse of thoughts without
reserve, and greatly improve their style.

"When two years have been thus employed, they must be brought to London to be
finished under the best masters, most of which should be recommended by
Mademoiselle; and in their intervals from study they will be allowed to relax
their minds in the company of their mother, by looking on at the card-tables,
reposing themselves after their fatigue upon sophas, informing themselves of
the intrigues of the town, qualifying themselves in a proper familiarity of
manners by calling young men by their sirnames, romping occasionally with the
gallants of their mother, when she is out of sight, and above all things
cultivating intimacies with their late school-fellows, who are come out into
the world.

"When their hair is off their foreheads, it will be necessary they should lay
out professedly for admirers amongst the young rakes of fashion, and for this
purpose I particularly recommend to them the tea-room at the Opera-house, where
I would have them stay out all the company, and then commit themselves to their
gallants to find out their coaches, who will be sure to lead them through all
the blind alleys, and never carry them to the right door till the last, by
which time the carriages of these gallants will be drove off, and then common
charity will compel them to bring the obliging creatures home in theirs.

"All this while I would have them put entire considence in Mademoiselle, whose
goodnature will accommodate them in any little notes or messages they may have
to manage, and whose opinion in dress will be so indispensable, that it will be
proper to take her out with them to all milliners shops, artificial-flower
makers, and masquerade warehouses for advice. If the young fellows will come to
these places at the same time, who can help it? Mademoiselle will go down to
call the servants, and ten to one if they are not gone to the alehouse, and
the coach is out of the way, in spite of all her pains to find it.

"When they have made a strong attachment, and consequences are to be
apprehended, it will be time for them to think of marriage, but on no account
with the man of their heart, for that would interrupt friendship; any body, who
can make a settlement, can make a husband, and that husband can make his wife
her own mistress, and every body's else, that she pleases: Mademoiselle becomes
femme de chamber, and when her lady is disposed for divorce, chief witness upon
her trial; a picturesque scene is chosen for the frontispiece, the heroine
figures in the printshops, her fame is sounded in the brothels, and her career
of infamy is completed."

No XXII.
IF any of my learned readers, skilled in the oriental languages, shall choose
to turn over the thirty and three volumes of Abulfagi, the Arabian historian,
they may find the following story: Near one hundred leaves of the Papyrus have
been expended in the relation, but I have been at the pains of compressing it
into one paper.

In the beginning of the eleventh century Abderama, the last descendant of the
Samanian family, who reigned over the territory of Bucharia, was besieged in
his capital of Bochara by Mamood the Great, who afterward reduced all India to
his command. This mighty conqueror, who may be styled the Alexander of the
Arabian historians, made twelve irruptions into India, and in each expedition
swept away as much wealth, and made as great a devastation of the human
species, as Nadir Shah in his. Mamood was the son of the usurper Subuctagi, who
expelled the father of Abderama from Samarcand, and reduced his empire to the
possession of Bochara only and its dependencies.

Such was the formidable general who sat down with his forces before Bochara,
and such the hereditary enmity of these inveterate opponents; Abderama
therefore had no resource but to defend his citadel to the last extremity:
Disabled by his age from active service, he put the garrison under command of a
valiant captain named Abdullah: This young prince was of the house of Katiba,
the general of the Caliph Osman, who conquered Great Bucharia for that
victorious Mahommedan: Abdullah was the most accomplished personage of his
time, of admirable qualities and matchless intrepidity. In vain he challenged
Mamood to decide the fate of Bochara by single combat; he was also beloved by
Zarima, daughter of Abderama and sole heiress of his crown; the beauty of this
princess was celebrated through all the East; more rhapsodies have been
composed and chaunted in the praises of Zarima than even Helen gave a subject
to: Our language cannot reach the descriptions of these florid writers; the
whole creation has been culled for objects to set in some comparison with
Zarima; but as the fire of their imaginations would seem like phrensy to ours,
I shall not risque a fall by following them in their flights.

In a furious sally made upon the army of the besiegers, Abdullah at the head
of the Bocharians had singled out the person of Mamood, and pushed his horse up
to the breast of that on which Mamood was fighting; the shock was furious on
both sides; Abdullah received the point of his opponent's lance in his side,
and Mamood was struck from his saddle to the ground by the battle-axe of
Abdullah; the combatants rushed in to cover their fallen general, and victory
was snatched out of the grasp of the brave Bocharian, who fell back wounded
amongst his companions, and retreated unpursued into the town after a furious
slaughter of the foe.

Whether Mamood was discouraged by the obstinacy of the Bocharians, or, as some
historians insinuate, was daunted by this attack, which he had so narrowly
escaped from, so it was that he let the command of the siege devolve upon his
general Kamhi, and at the head of a scouring party made incursions into the
country to lay it waste with fire and sword, and break up the supplies of
Bochara.

Kamhi had seen the beautiful Zarima; he had been in Abderama's court before
Mamood's invasion, and to see the princess was to be enamoured. No sacrifice
could be too great for Kamhi to obtain a prize so much above all computation in
the heated fancy of a lover: He secretly imparted to Abderama the conditions,
on which he would betray his trust, and expose the army he commanded to
inevitable destruction.

If these conditions staggered the aged monarch on the score of honor, so did
they on the side of interest. To save his crown and city was a tempting offer,
and the divided heart of Abderama was not more agitated as a monarch for the
impending danger of his throne, than it was agonized as a man for the daily
sufferings of his faithful people. He submitted to receive Kamhi into the town,
and to treat with him in person on the subject of his proposal: Abdullah, from
whom this was to be concealed, was now recovering from his wound, but incapable
of service for a time; it was proposed by Kamhi to exchange hostage against
hostage, and Abdullah was instructed to meet him in the depth of night with one
companion on each side; each general was to exchange armor on the spot, and so
to pass their respective sentinels; and mutual secrecy was pledged between the
parties.

There was no difficulty in persuading the generous Abdullah to this
enterprise; Abderama giving him to understand, that the meeting was to adjust
the payment of a sum of money, which Kamhi was to receive for betraying the
army he commanded before Bochara; the transaction was to be kept a profound
secret even from Zarima; the unsuspecting Abdullah repaired to his rendezvous
at the appointed hour without taking leave of the princess, and Kamhi with his
associate passed the city guard unquestioned in the habit of his rival. He
hasted without a moment's loss to the palace of the old king, and expounding to
him the plan he had devised for securing the performance of his part of the
contract, nothing now remained for Abderama, but to engage his daughter to make
a sacrifice, which severe and difficult as it was, he thought he might depend
upon her piety and public spirit for complying with. In this hope he
immediately repaired to her chamber, where lie found her reposing on her couch;
he threw himself at her feet in an agony of tears, and in the most supplicating
posture adjured her to arise and save her father, country, and herself from
impending destruction: Roused from her sleep, the beauteous Zarima immediately
demanded the reason of that solemn adjuration, and what it was that she could
do to gain those glorious ends -- Emulate the magnanimity of Abdullah, replied
the father, resign Abdullah, as that heroic youth, to save this sinking city
from extinction, has now resigned his Zarima. -- Astonishment had now deprived
her of the power of utterance, and Abderama proceeded without interruption to
expose to her the whole purport of his treaty with Kamhi, and the conditions,
on which alone Bochara might be saved, and Mamood's army betrayed into his
hands. He protested to her that Abdullah had been a party to this treaty, that
he had left the city for ever, and to convince her of it, he was ready to
produce Kamhi in the very habit, which her lover had exchanged with him for the
purpose of bringing him to an interview with her, and concluding the agreement.

Not to dwell any longer on Abderama's arguments, (in which was I to follow my
Arabian author I should swell this recital to an unreasonable length) it will
suffice to say that the father prevailed. In the original it appears, as if
some share in the success was owing to female pique, but as the Arabian authors
are very subtle and refined in finding motives and in scrutinizing the human
passions, I should hope this suggestion may be imputed to the historian, rather
than to the heroine.

As I choose to pass over many pages of my original in this place, the reader
will now suppose that the traitorous Kamhi is in possession of his beautiful,
but reluctant, victim; and that Abderama has already made a sacrifice more
painful, than that of Eurystheus, or Agamemnon, when they immolated their
daughters. With the first dawn of the morning Kamhi repaired to the army, and
began to set on foot the project he had concerted with Abderama; when he had
given out his orders for dividing and disposing the troops in such a manner, as
was best adapted to his design, he gave the signal agreed upon with the king
for the sally: The whole garrison was put in motion on this occasion, and
Abderama determined once more to show himself to his army, and command in
person. Every thing had been so prepared on the part of Kamhi, that the
impression, which the Bocharians made upon the besiegers, was immediate, and
the slaughter became universal: Nothing could have saved them from complete
destruction, but the unexpected appearance of Mamood and his army in this
seasonable moment for their relief; as Mamood's troops were entirely composed
of cavalry, he flew into action with amazing rapidity; the fainting spirits of
the soldiers revived at the sight of their victorious chief; his well-known
voice rallied their broken ranks, and they turned upon their pursuers with
redoubled fury: Even the guard, that had been planted upon Abdullah, now ran to
their arms and joined the action; the army of Abderama, no longer supported by
the valor and conduct of their favorite general, began to give way and retreat
in disorder to the city; in this instant Abdullah rushed from his tent, and
presented himself to the eyes of the dispirited Bocharians; the army sent up a
shout of joy, the aged Abderama sunk into his arms, covered with blood and
expiring with his wounds; life just served him to exclaim -- My son! my son!
and then forsook him; his attendants bore him off to his litter in the rear,
whilst Abdullah turned the faces of his soldiers on the foe, and pressed into
the action, where it was hottest.

The conflict became terrible, every inch of ground was obstinately disputed,
and the combatants on either side fell by whole ranks, as if resolved upon
maintaining the contest to the last man: Night at length put an end to the
undecided fight, and Abdullah led off his surviving followers into the city,
without any attempt on the part of Mamood to pursue him: His wound in the side,
which was not yet healed, burst open by the violence of his exertions in the
action, and he had received others, under which he found himself sinking, and
which he had reason to believe were mortal; in this extremity he lost not a
moment's time in betaking himself to his beloved Zarima; his strength just
served him to present himself before her and to fall exhausted with his wounds
at her feet.

Terrible interview! Zarima was expiring; she had taken poison.

The supplications of an aged father, the deliverance of a suffering city, the
salvation of an ancient empire, and, above all, the example, as she believed,
of her betrothed Abdullah, had prevailed with this heroic princess to sacrifice
herself to the detested arms of Kamhi; the contract had been fulfilled upon her
father's part, but to survive it was more than she had engaged for, and an
indignity, which her nature could not submit to: As soon as the battle joined,
she put her resolution into act, and swallowed the mortal draught. Life just
sufficed to relate this dismal tale to the dying Abdullah, and to receive the
account from his lips of the deception, which Abderama had put upon him: The
body of her dead father was now brought into the palace; she cast a look upon
it, but was speechless; fainting, and in the article of death, she dropped into
the arms of Abdullah, her head fell upon his breast, just as it was heaving
with the last long-drawn sigh, that stopped his heart for ever.

No XXIII.
AMONGST the variety of human events, which come under the observation of every
man of common experience in life, many instances must occur to his memory of
the false opinions he has formed of good and evil fortune: Things, which we
lament as the most unhappy occurrences and the severest dispensations of
providence, frequently turn out to have been vouchsafements of a contrary sort;
whilst our prosperity and success, which for a time delight and dazzle us with
gleams of pleasure, and visions of ambition, turn against us in the end of
life, and sow the bed of death with thorns, that goad us in those awful
moments, when the vanities of this world lose their value, and the mind of man,
being on its last departure, takes a melancholy review of time misspent and
blessings misapplied.

Though it is part of every good man's religion to resign himself to God's
will, yet a few reflections upon the worldly wisdom of that duty will be of use
to every one, who falls under the immediate pressure of what is termed
misfortune in life. By calling to mind the false estimates we have frequently
made of worldly good and evil we shall get hope on our side, which, though all
friends else should fail us, will be a cheerful companion by the way: By a
patient acquiescence under painful events for the present, we shall be sure to
contract a tranquillity of temper, that will stand us in future stead; and by
keeping a fair face to the world we shall by degrees make an easy heart, and
find innumerable resources of consolation, which a sretful spirit never can
discover.

I wonder why I was so uneasy under my late less of fortune, said a very worthy
gentleman to me the other day, seeing it was not occasioned by my own
misconduct; for the health and content I now enjoy in the humble station I have
retired to, are the greatest blessings of my life, and I am devoutly thankful
for the event, which I deplored. -- How often do we hear young unmarried people
exclaim -- What an escape have I had from such a man, or such a woman! -- And
yet perhaps they had not wisdom enough to suppose this might turn out to be the
case at the time it hapdened, but complained, lamented and reviled, as if they
were suffering persecution from a cruel and tyrannic Being, who takes pleasure
in tormenting his unoffending creatures.

An extraordinary example occurs to me of this criminal excess of sensibility
in the person of a Frenchman named Chaubert, who happily lived long enough to
repent of the extravagance of his misanthropy. Chaubert was born at Bourdeaux,
and died there not many years ago in the Franciscan convent; I was in that city
soon after this event, and my curiosity led me to collect several particulars
relative to this extraordinary humorist. He inherited a good fortune from his
parents, and in his youth was of a benevolent disposition, subject however to
sudden caprices and extremes of love and hatred. Various causes are assigned
for his misanthropy, but the principal disgust, which turned him furious
against mankind, seems to have arisen from the treachery of a friend, who ran
away with his mistress, just when Chaubert was on the point of marrying her;
the ingratitude of this man was certainly of a very black nature, and the
provocation heinous, for Chaubert, whose passions were always in extremes, had
given a thousand instances of romantic generosity to this unworthy friend, and
reposed an entire confidence in him in the matter of his mistress: He had even
saved him from drowning one day at the imminent risque of his life, by leaping
out of his own boat into the Garonne and swimming to the assistance of his,
when it was sinking in the middle of the stream: His passion for his mistress
was no less vehement; so that his disappointment had every aggravation
possible, and, operating upon a nature more than commonly susceptible, reversed
every principle of humanity in the heart of Chaubert, and made him for the
greatest part of his life the declared enemy of human nature.

After many years passed in foreign parts he was accidentally brought to his
better senses by discovering that through these events, which he had so deeply
resented, he had providentially escaped from miseries of the most fatal nature:
Thereupon he returned to his own country, and, entering into the order of
Franciscans, employed the remainder of his life in atoning for his past errors
after the most exemplary manner. On all occasions of distress Father Chaubert's
zeal presented itself to the relief and comfort of the unfortunate, and
sometimes he would enforce his admonitions of resignation by the lively picture
he would draw of his own extravagancies; in extraordinary cases he has been
known to give his communicants a transcript or diary in his own handwriting of
certain passages of his life, in which he had minuted his thoughts at the time
they occurred, and which he kept by him for such extraordinary purposes. This
paper was put into my hands by a gentleman who had received much benefit from
this good father's conversation and instruction; I had his leave for
transcribing it, or publishing, if I thought fit; this I shall now avail myself
of, as I think it is a very curious journal.

My son, whoever thou art, profit by the words of experience, and let the
example of Chaubert, who was a beast without reason and is become a man by
repentance, teach thee wisdom in adversity and inspire thy heart with
sentiments of resignation to the will of the Almighty!

When the treachery of people, which I ought to have despised, had turned my
heart to marble and my blood to gall, I was determined upon leaving France and
seeking out some of those countries, from whose famished inhabitants nature
witholds her bounty and where men groan in slavery and sorrow: As I passed
through the villages toward the frontiers of Spain, and saw the peasants
dancing in a ring to the pipe or carousing at their vintages, indignation smote
my heart, and I wished that heaven would dash their cups with poison, or blast
the sunshine of their joys with hail and tempest.

I traversed the delightful province of Biscay without rest to the soles of my
feet or sleep to the temples of my head. Nature was before my eyes dressed in
her gayest attire; -- Thou mother of fools, I exclaimed, why do thou trick
thyself out so daintily for knaves and harlots to make a property of thee? The
children of thy womb are vipers in thy bosom, and will sting thee mortally,
when thou have given them their fill at thy improvident breasts. -- The birds
chaunted in the groves, the fruit trees glistened on the mountain sides, the
water-falls made music for the echoes, and man went singing to his labor; --
Give me, said I, the clank of fetters and the yell of galley-slaves under the
lashes of the whip. -- And in the bitterness of my heart I cursed the earth, as
I trod over its prolific surface.

I entered the ancient kingdom of Castile, and the prospect was a recreation to
my sorrowvexed soul: I saw the lands lie waste and fallow; the vines trailed on
the ground and buried their fruitage in the furrows; the hand of man was idle,
and nature slept, as in the cradle of creation; the villages were thinly
scattered, and ruin sat upon the unroofed sheds, where lazy pride laid
stretched upon its straw in beggary and vermin. Ah! this is something, I cried
out, this scene is fit for man, and I Will enjoy it. -- I saw a yellow
half-starved form, cloaked to the heels in rags, his broad-brimed beaver on his
head, through which his staring locks crept out in squalid shreds, that fell
like snakes upon the shoulders of a fiend. -- Such ever be the fate of human
nature! I Will aggravate his misery by the insult of charity. Harkye, Castilian,
I exclaimed, take this pisette; it is coin, it is silver from the mint of
Mexico; a Spaniard dug it from the mine, a Frenchman gives it you; put by your
pride and touch it! -- Cursed be your nation, the Castilian replied, I Will starve
before I Will take it from your hands. -- Starve then, I answered, and passed on.

I climbed a barren mountain; the wolves howled in the desert and the vultures
screamed in flocks for prey; I looked, and beheld a gloomy mansion underneath
my feet, vast as the pride of its founder, gloomy and disconsolate as his soul;
it was the Escurial. -- Here then the tyrant reigns, said I, here let him
reign; hard as these rocks his throne, waste as these deserts be his dominion!
-- A meagre creature passed me; famine stared in his eye, he cast a look about
him, and sprung upon a kid, that was browsing in the desert, he smote it dead
with his staff, and hastily thrust it into his wallet. -- Ah, sacrilegious
villain! -- cried a brawny fellow; and, leaping on him from behind a rock,
seized the hungry wretch in the act; he dropped upon his knees and begged for
mercy. -- Mercy! cried he that seized him, do you purloin the property of the
church and ask for mercy? Take it! -- So saying, he beat him to the earth with
a blow, as he was kneeling at his feet, and then dragged him toward the
convent of Saint Lawrence: I could have hugged the miscreant for the deed.

I held my journey through the desert, and desolation followed me to the very
streets of Madrid; the fathers of the inquisition came forth from the cells of
torture, the cross was elevated before them, and a trembling wretch in a
saffron-coloured vest, painted with flames of fire, was dragged to execution in
an open square; they kindled a fire about him, and sang praises to God, whilst
the flames deliberately consumed their human victim: He was a Jew who suffered,
they were Christians who tormented. -- See what the religion of God is, said I
to myself, in the hands of man!

From the gates of Madrid I bent my course toward the port of Lisbon; as I
traversed the wilderness of Estremadura, a robber took his aim at me from
behind a cork tree, and the ball grazed my hat upon my head. -- You have missed
your aim, I cried, and have lost the merit of destroying a man. -- Give me your
purse, said the robber. -- Take it, I replied, and buy with it a friend; may it
serve you as it has served me!

I found the city of Lisbon in ruins; her foundations smoaked upon the ground;
the dying and the dead laid in heaps; terror fate in every visage, and mankind
was visited with the plagues of the Almighty, famine, fire, and earthquake. --
Have they not the inquisition in this country? I asked; I was answered they
had. -- And do they make all this outcry about an earthquake? said I within
myself, let them give God thanks and be quiet!

Presently there came ships from England, loaded with all manner of goods for
the reief of the inhabitants; the people took the bounty, were preserved, then
turned and cursed their preservers for heretics. -- This is as it should be,
said I, these men act up to their nature, and the English are a nation of
fools; I will not go amongst them. -- After a short time behold a new city was
rising on the ruins of the old one! The people took the builders tools, which
the English had sent them, and made themselves houses: I overheard a fellow at
his work say to his companion. -- Before the earthquake I made my bed in the
streets, now I shall have a house to live in. -- This is too much, said I;
their misfortunes make this people happy, and I will stay no longer in their
country. -- I descended to the banks of the Tagus; there was a ship, whose
canvass was loosed for sailing. -- She is an English ship, says a Galliego
porter; they are brave seamen, but damned tyrants on the quarter deck. -- They
pay well for what they have, says a boatman, and I am going on board her with a
cargo of lemons. -- I threw myself into the wherry, and entered the ship: The
mariners were occupied with their work, and nobody questioned me why I was
amongst them: The tide wasted us into the ocean and the night became
tempestuous, the vessel labored in the sea and the morning brought no respite
to our toil. -- Whither are you bound? said I to the master. -- To hell, said
he, for nothing but the devil ever drove at such a rate! -- The fellow's voice
was thunder; the sailors sung in the storm, and the master's oaths were louder
than the waves; the third day was a dead calm, and he swore louder than ever.
-- If the winds were of this man's making, thought I, he would not be content
with them. -- A favorable breeze sprung up as if it had come at his calling.
-- I thought it was coming, says he, put her before the wind, it blows fair for
our port. -- But where is your port? again I asked him. -- Sir, says he, I can
now answer your question as I should do; with God's leave I am bound to
Bourdeaux; every thing at sea goes as it pleases God. -- My heart sunk at the
name of my native city. I was freighted, added he, from London with a cargo of
goods of all sorts for the poor sufferers by the earthquake; I shall load back
with wine for my owners, and so help out a charitable voyage with some little
profit, if it please God to bless our endeavors. -- Heyday! thought I, how
fair weather changes this fellow's note! -- Lewis, said he to a handsome youth,
who stood at his elbow, we will now seek out this Monsieur Chaubert at
Bourdeaux, and get payment of his bills on your account. -- Show me your bills,
said I, for I am Chaubert. -- He produced them, and I saw my own name forged to
bills in favor of the villain who had so treacherously dealt with me in the
affair of the woman who was to have been my wife. -- Where is the wretch, said
I, who drew these forgeries? -- The youth burst into tears. -- He is my father,
he replied, and turned away. -- Sir, says the master, I am not surprised to
find this fellow a villain to you, for I was once a trader in affluence and
have been ruined by his means and reduced to what you see me; but I forgive
what he has done to me; I can earn a maintenance, and am as happy in my present
hard employ, nay happier than when I was rich and idle; but to defraud his own
son proves him an unnatural rascal, and, if I had him here, I would hang him at
the mizen yard.

No XXIV.
CHAUBERT's narrative proceeds as follows. -- When the English master declared
he was happier in his present hard service than in his former prosperity, and
that he forgave the villain who had ruined him, I started with astonishment,
and stood out of his reach, expecting every moment when his phrensy would break
out; I looked him steadily in the face, and to my surprise saw no symptoms of
madness there; there was no wandering in his eyes, and content of mind was
impressed upon his features. -- Are you in your senses, I demanded, and can you
forgive the villain? -- From my heart, answered he, else how should I expect to
be forgiven? -- His words struck me dumb; my heart tugged at my bosom; the
blood rushed to my face. He saw my situation and turned aside to give some
orders to the sailors; after some minutes he resumed the conversation, and
advancing toward me, in his rough familiar manner, said -- It is my way, Mr.
Chaubert, to forgive and forget, though to be sure the fellow deserves hanging
for his treatment of this poor boy his son, who is as good a lad as ever lived,
but as for father and mother -- Who is his mother? What was her name? I eagerly
demanded. Her name had no sooner passed his lips than I felt a shock through
all my frame beyond that of electricity; I staggered as if with a sudden
stroke, and caught hold of the barricade; an involuntary shriek burst from me,
and I cried out -- That woman -- Oh! that woman -- Was a devil, said the
master, and if you knew but half the misery you have escaped, you would fall
down upon your knees and thank God for the blessing: I have heard your story,
Mr. Chaubert, and when a man is in love, do you see, he does not like to have
his mistress taken from him; but some things are better lost than found, and if
this is all you have to complain of, take my word for it you complain of the
luckiest hour in your whole life. He would have proceeded, but I turned from
him without uttering a word, and shutting myself into my cabin surrendered
myself to my meditations. My mind was now in such a tumult, that I cannot
recall my thoughts, much less put them into any order for relation: The ship
however kept her course, and had now entered the mouth of the Garonne; I landed
on the quay of Bourdeaux; the master accompanied me, and young Lewis kept
charge of the ship: The first object that met my view was a gibbet erected
before the door of a merchant's compting-house: The convict was kneeling on a
scaffold; whilst a friar was receiving his last confession; his face was turned
toward us; the Englishman glanced his eye upon him, and instantly cried out --
Look, look, Mr. Chaubert, the very man, as I am alive; it is the father of
young Lewis. -- The wretch had discovered us in the same moment, and called
aloud -- Oh Chaubert, Chaubert! let me speak to you before I die! -- His yell
was horror to my soul; I lost the power of motion, and the crowd pushing
toward the scaffold, thrust me forward to the very edge of it; the friar
ordered silence, and demanded of the wretch why he had called out so eagerly
and what he had farther to confess. Father, replied the convict, this is the
very man, the very Chaubert of whom I was speaking; he was the best of friends
to me, and I repaid his kindness with the blackest treachery; I seduced the
woman of his affections from him, I married her, and because we dreaded his
resentment, we conspired in an attempt upon his life by poison. -- He now
turned to me and proceeded as follows -- You may remember, Chaubert, as we were
supping together on the very evening of Louisa's elopement, (...) handed to you
a glass of wine to drink to your approaching nuptials; as you were lifting it
to your lips, your favorite spaniel leaped upon your arm and dashed it on the
floor; in a sudden transport of passion, which you were ever addicted to, you
struck the creature with violence and laid it dead at your feet. It was the
saving moment of your life -- the wine was poisoned, inevitable death was in
the draught, and the animal you killed was God's instrument for preserving you;
reflect upon the event, subdue your passions, and practice resignation: Father,
I have no more to confess; I die repentant: Let the executioner do his office.



Here ends the diary of Chaubert.

I do not mean to expose my ideas to ingenious ridicule by maintaining that
every thing happens to every man for the best, but I will contend, that he, who
makes the best of it, fulfils the part of a wise and good man: Another thing
may be safely advanced, namely, that man is not competent to decide upon the
good or evil of many events, which befall him in this life, and we have
authority to say, Woe be to him that calls good evil, and evil good! I could
wish that the story of Chaubert, as I have given it, might make that impression
upon any one of my readers, as it did upon me, when I received it; and I could
also wish, that I felt myself worthy to add to it the experience of many
occurrences in my own life, to which time and patience have given colors very
different from those they wore upon their first appearance.

When men sink into despondency or break out into rage upon adversities and
misfortunes, it is no proof that Providence lays a heavier burden upon them
than they can bear, because it is not clear that they have exerted all the
possible resources of the soul.

The passions may be humoured, till they become our masters, as a horse may be
pampered till he gets the better of his rider; but early discipline will
prevent mutiny and keep the helm in the hands of reason. If we put our children
under restraint and correction, why should we, who are but children of a larger
growth, be refractory and complain, when the Father of all things lays the
wholesome correction of adversity on our heads?

Amongst the fragments of Philemon the comic poet, there is part of a dialogue
preserved between a master and his servant, whose names are not given, which
falls in with the subject I am speaking of; these fragments have been collected
from the works of the scholiasts and grammarians, and many of them have been
quoted by the fathers of the Christian church for the moral and pious maxims
they contain; I think the reader will not be displeased, if I occasionally
present him with some specimens from these remains of the Greek Comedy, and for
the present conclude my paper with the following translation.

Servant. Whilst you live, Sir, drive away sorrow; it is the worst company a
man can keep.


Master. Whilst I live, sirrah? why there is no living without it.


Servant. Never tell me, Sir; the wounds of the mind are not to be healed by
the tears of the eyes: If they were, who would be without the medicine? They
would be the best family-physic in nature; and if nothing but money would buy
them, you could not pay too dearly for the purchase. But alack-a-day, what do
they avail? Weep, or weep not, this stubborn world of ours will have its way;
sighing and groaning, take my word for it, is but labor lost.


Master. Granted! for its use I will not contend, nor can you, as I take it,
dispute its necessity: It is as natural for the eyes to shed tears in
affliction, as for a tree to drop its leaves in autumn.


Servant. That I deny; the necessity of evil I admit, but not the necessity of
bewailing it. Mark how your maxims and mine differ; you meet misfortune in the
way, I let misfortune meet me: There are too many evils in life, that no man's
wisdom can avoid; but he is no wise man who multiplies too many by more: Now my
philosophy teaches me, that amongst all the evils you complain of, there is no
evil so great as your complaint itself: Why it drives a man out of his senses,
out of his health, nay at last out of the world; so shall it not me: If
misfortune will come, I cannot help it, but if lamentation follows it, that is
my fault; and a fool of his own making, my good master, is a fool indeed.


Master. Say you so, sirrah? Now I hold your insensibility to be of the nature
of a brute; my feelings I regard as the prerogative of a man; thus although we
differ widely in our practice, each acts up to his proper character.


Servant. If I am of the nature of a brute, because I fear the gods and submit
to their will, the gods forgive me! If it be the prerogative of a man, to say I
will not bear misfortunes, I will not submit to the decrees of the gods, let
the gods answer that for themselves! I am apt to think it is no great mark of
courage to despair, nor any sure proof of weakness to be content. If a man were
to die of a disappointment, how the vengeance does it come to pass that any
body is left alive? You may, if you think well of it, counteract the designs of
the gods, and turn their intended blessings into actual misfortunes, but I do
not think their work will be mended by your means; you may, if you please,
resent it with a high hand, if your mother, or your son, or your friend should
take the liberty to die, when you wish them to live; but to me it appears a
natural event, which no man can keep off from his own person, or that of any
other; you may, if you think it worth your while, be very miserable, when this
woman miscarries, or that woman is brought to bed; you may torment yourself,
because your mother has a cough, or your mistress drops a tear; in short you
may send yourself out of the world with sorrow, but I think it better to stay
my time in it and be happy.


No XXV.
I MENTIONED in my seventh paper that I had a card from Vanessa inviting me to
a Feast of Reason. I confess I was very curious to know what the nature of this
feast might be; and having been since favored with a second invitation, I
shall take the liberty of relating what I saw and heard at that lady's assembly.

The celebrated Vanessa has been either a beauty, or a wit all her life long;
and of course has a better plea for vanity, than falls to most women's share;
her vanity also is in itself more excuseable for the pleasing colors it
sometimes throws upon her character: It gives the spring to charity,
goodnature, affability; it makes her splendid, hospitable, facetious; carries
her into all the circles of fine people, and crowds all the fine people into
here is; it starts a thousand whimsical caprices, that furnish employment to the
arts, and it has the merit of opening her doors and her purse to the sons of
science; in short it administers protection to all descriptions and degrees of
genius, from the manufacturer of a tooth-pick to the author of an epic poem: It
is a vanity, that is a sure box at an author's first night, and a sure card at
a performer's benefit; it pays well for a dedication, and stands for six copies
upon a subscribers list. Vanessa in the center of her own circle sits like the
statue of the Athenian Minerva, incensed with the breath of philosophers,
poets, painters, orators, and every votarist of art, science, or fine speaking.
It is in her academy young noviciates try their wit and practice panegyric; no
one like Vanessa can break in a young lady to the poetics, and teach her
Pegasus to carry a side-saddle: She can make a mathematician quote Pindar, a
Master in Chancery write novels, or a Birmingham hardware-man stamp rhimes as
fast as buttons.

As I came rather before the modern hour of visiting, I waited some time in her
room before any of the company appeared; several new publications on various
subjects were lying on her table; they were stitched in blue paper and most of
them fresh from the press; in some she had stuck small scraps of paper, as if
to mark where she had left off reading; in others she had doubled down certain
pages seemingly for the same purpose. At last a meagre little man with a most
satirical countenance was ushered in, and took his seat in a corner of the
room; he eyed me attentively for some time through his spectacles, and at last
accosted me in the following words; "You are looking at these books, Sir; I
take for granted they are newly published." "I believe they are," I replied. "I
thought so," says he. "Then you may depend upon it their authors will be here
by and by; you may always know what company you are to expect in this house by
the books upon the table: It is in this way Vanessa has got all her wit and
learning, not by reading, but by making authors believe she reads their works,
and by thus tickling their vanity she sends so many heralds into the world to
cry up her fame to the skies; it is a very pretty finesse, and saves a world of
time for better amusements." He had no sooner said this than Vanessa entered
the room, and whilst I was making a most profound reverence, I beheld something
approaching to me, which looked like columns and arches and porticos in the
perspective of a playhouse scene; as I raised my eyes and examined it a little
closer I recognized the ruins of Palmyra embroidered in colored silks upon
Vanessa's petticoat. It was the first visit I had ever paid, and Vanessa not
being ready with my name, I made a silent obeisance, and receiving a smile in
return, retreated to my chair: My friend said a great many smart things upon
the ruins of Palmyra, which Vanessa on her part contended to be a very proper
emblem for an old woman in decay, who had seen better days; the wit replied,
that instead of Palmyra it ought to have been Athens, and then she would have
been equipped from head to foot in character. Vanessa smiled, but maintained
the propriety of her choice, bidding him observe, "that though she carried a
city upon her back, that city all the world knew was planted on a desert." She
now addressed herself to me, and in the most gracious manner asked me when I
hoped to put my project into execution; I answered in about two months,
thinking she alluded to the publication of these papers, a circumstance I knew
she was informed of. "Well, I protest," says Vanessa, "I envy you the
undertaking, and wish I could find courage enough to accompany you." I assured
her there was nothing in the world would make me so happy as her assistance,
and that I was confident it would ensure success to my undertaking. "There you
flatter me," says she, "for I should do nothing but look after shells and
corals and the palaces of the Tritons and Naiads, if I was to go down with
you." -- Here I began to stare most egregiously. -- "But after all," added she,
"will your diving-bell carry double?" This luckless diving-bell was such an
unexpected plunge to me, that if I had been actually in it, I could scarce have
been more hampered; so I thought it was better to remain under water, and wait
till the real artist came in to set the mistake to rights: This however my
neighbor with the spectacles would not allow of, for suspecting the
mal-entendu, he began to question me how long I could stay under water, and
whether I could see distinctly; he then took a pamphlet from the table, and
spreading out a large engraved plan of a diving-bell, desired me to inform him
how I managed those pipes and conductors of air; all this while he was slyly
enjoying my confusion, till I summoned resolution to apprise Vanessa of her
mistake; this produced a thousand polite apologies on her part -- "But these
wretched eyes of mine," says she, "are for ever betraying me into blunders."
"That is a pity indeed," replied the wit, "for they illuminate every body else;
but if they betray their owner," adds he, "it is God's revenge against murder."
Several literati now entered the room, to whom Vanessa made her compliments,
particularly to a blind old gentleman, whom she conducted to his chair with
great humanity, and immediately began talking to him of his discoveries and
experiments on the microscope. "Ah! madam," replied the minute philosopher,
"those researches are now over; something might have been done, if my eyes had
held out, but I lost my sight just as I had discovered the generation of mites;
but this I can take on myself to pronounce, that they are an oviparous race."
"Be content," replied Vanessa, "there is a blessing upon him who throws even a
mite into the treasury of science." The philosopher then proceeded to inform
her, that he had begun some curious dissections of the eye of a mole, but that
his own would not serve him to complete them: "If I could have proceeded in
them," says he, "I am verily persuaded I could have brought him to his
eyesight by the operation of couching; and now," says he, "I am engaged in a
new discovery, in which I mean to employ none but persons under the like
misfortune with myself. -- So interesting a discovery raised my curiosity, as
well as Vanessa's, to enquire into it, and methought even the wit in the
spectacles had a fellow-feeling in the subject. -- "It is a powder, madam,"
added the philosopher, "which I have prepared for destroying vermin on fruit
trees, and even ants in the West Indies; I confess to you," says he, "it is
fatal to the eyesight, for I am persuaded I owe the loss of mine to it, rather
than to the eggs of mites, or the couching of moles; and accordingly I propose
that this powder shall be blown through bellows of my own inventing by none but
men who are stone blind; it will be very easy for your gardener, or overseer of
your plantations, to lead them up to their work, and then leave them to perform
it; for the dust is so subtle, that it is scarce possible to invent a cover for
the eyes, that can secure them against it. I believe," added he, "I have some
of it in my pocket, and if you have any flies or spiders in the room, I will
soon convince you of its efficacy by an experiment before your eyes." Vanessa
eagerly assured him there was no such thing in her room, and drawing her chair
to a distance, begged him not to trouble himself with any experiment at present.

There sat an ordinary woman in a black cloak by the fire side with her feet
upon the sender and her knees up, who seemed employed upon a cushion or pillow,
which she kept concealed under her apron, without once looking at the work she
was upon. "You have read of the Witch of Endor," says she to me, (observing I
had fixed my eyes upon her) "I am a descendant of that old lady's, and can
raise the dead, as well as she could." -- Immediately she put aside her apron,
and produced a head molded in wax so strikingly like my deceased friend, the
father of Calliope, that the shock it gave me was too apparent to escape her.
-- "You knew this brave fellow I perceive," says she, "England never owned a
better officer; he was my hero, and every line in his face is engraved in my
heart." -- "What must it be in mine?" I answered, and turned away to a circle
of people, who had collected themselves round a plain, but venerable, old man,
and were very attentive to his discourse: He spoke with great energy, and in
most chosen language; nobody yet attempted to interrupt him, and his words
rolled not with the shallow impetuosity of a torrent, but deeply and fluently,
like the copious current of the Nile: He took up the topic of religion in his
course, and, though palsy shook his head, he looked so terrible in Christian
armor, and dealt his strokes with so much force and judgment, that Infidelity,
in the persons of several petty skirmishers, sneaked away from before him: One
little fellow however had wriggled his chair nearer and nearer to him, and kept
baying at him whilst he was speaking, perpetually crying out -- "Give me leave
to observe -- not to interrupt you, Sir -- That is extremely well, but in
answer to what you say." -- All this had been going on without any attention or
stop on the part of the speaker, whose eyes never once lighted on the company,
till the little fellow, growing out of all patience, walked boldly up to him,
and catching hold of a button somewhere above the waistband of his breeches,
with a sudden twitch checked the moving-spring of his discourse, and much to my
regret brought it to a full stop. The philosopher looked about for the insect
that annoyed him, and having at last eyed him, as it were askaunce, demanded
what it was provoked him to impatience. -- "Have I said any thing, good Sir,
that you do not comprehend?" -- "No, no," replied he, "I perfectly well
comprehend every word you have been saying." -- "Do you so, Sir?" said the
philosopher, "then I heartily ask pardon of the company for misemploying their
time so egregiously," -- and stalked away without waiting for an answer.

Vanessa had now recollected or enquired my name, and in a very gracious manner
repeated her excuses for mistaking me for the diver. -- "But if the old saying
holds good," adds she, "that truth lies at the bottom of a well, I dare say you
will not scruple to dive for it, so I hope I have not given you a dishonorable
occupation." I was endeavoring at a reply, when the wit in the spectacles came
up to us and whispered Vanessa in the ear, that the true Diving-bell was in
yonder corner; she immediately turned that way, and as she passed whispered a
young lady loud enough for me to hear her -- "My dear, I am in your third
volume." -- The girl bowed her head, and by the Arcadian grace that accompanied
it, I took it for granted she was a Novelist.

I now joined a cluster of people, who had crowded round an actress, who sat
upon a sopha, leaning on her elbow in a pensive attitude, and seemed to be
counting the sticks of her fan, whilst they were vying with each other in the
most extravagant encomiums. -- "You was adorable last night in Belvidera," says
a pert young parson with a high toupee; "I sat in Lady Blubber's box, and I can
assure you she and her daughters too wept most bitterly -- but then that
charming mad scene, by my soul it was a chef d'oeuvre; pray, Madam, give me
leave to ask you, was you really in your senses?" -- "I strove to do it as well
as I could," answered the actress. "Do you intend to play comedy next season?"
says a lady, stepping up to her with great eagerness. -- "I shall do as the
manager bids me," she replied. "I should be curious to know," says an elderly
lady, "which part, Madam, you yourself esteem the best you play?" -- "I always
endeavor to make that which I am about the best." An elegant young woman of
fashion now took her turn of interrogatory, and with many apologies begged to
be informed by her, if she studied those enchanting looks and attitudes before
a glass? -- "I never study any thing but my author." -- "Then you practice them
in rehearsals?" rejoined the questioner. -- "I seldom rehearse at all," replied
the actress. "She has fine eyes," says a tragic poet to an eminent painter,
"what modest dignity they bear, what awful penetration! mark how they play in
those deep sockets, like diamonds in the mine! whilst that commanding brow
moves over them like a cloud, and carries storm or sunshine, as the deity
within directs: She is the child of nature, or, if you will allow me the
expression, nature herself; for she is in all things original; in pity, or in
terror, penitent, or presumptuous, famished, mad, or dying, she is her author's
thought personified; and if this nation, which fashion now nails by the ears to
the shameful pillory of an Italian opera, shall ever be brought back to a true
relish of its native drama, that woman will have the merit of their
reformation." This rhapsody was received with great tranquillity by the
painter, who coolly replied -- "All that is very well, but where will you see
finer attitudes, than in an opera dance, or more picturesque draperies, than in
a masquerade? Every man for his own art." Vanessa now came up, and desiring
leave to introduce a young muse to Melpomene, presented a girl in a white frock
with a fillet of flowers twined round her hair, which hung down her back in
flowing curls; the young muse made a low obeisance in the style of an Oriental
salam, and with the most unembarrassed voice and countenance, whilst the poor
actress was covered with blushes and suffering torture from the eyes of all the
room, broke forth as follows: -- Oh thou whom Nature's goddess calls her own,
Pride of the stage and favorite of the town --
-- But I can proceed no further, for if the plague had been in the house, I
should not have ran away from it more eagerly than I did from Miss and her
poetry.

No XXVI.
LEONTINE is one of those purse-proud humorists, who profess to speak what they
think -- For why? he is independent and fears no man. If you complain of an
affront from Leontine, you are sure to be told -- That is his way, that is so
like Leontine, you must take him as he is. -- In short, there are certain
savages in society, who seem to have a patent for their brutality, and he is
one.

I often think I can give a good guess at the temper of the master by the
servants looks; in Leontine's family it is strongly marked; I was let in the
other day by a staring half-starved fellow, fresh from the country, who was out
of his wits for fear, not knowing whether he was to say his master was at home
or abroad: Whilst he stood gaping with the door half-opened in his hand, a
voice roared out from the parlour, Who Is there? Upon which he slapped the
street-door in my face and ran to his master; as I was quietly walking away, he
followed me up the street and told me to come back, for his master would see
me. I found Leontine in a fit of the gout; his wife on her knees wrapping
flannel round his foot: It mortified me to see how much the world is governed
by the abject principle of fear, for the assiduity, with which this bashaw was
waited upon by his wife and servants, was surprising. After having cursed the
gout, damned his servants, and scolded his wife for her awkwardness in swathing
his foot, he began to rave about the state of the nation, crying out to me
every now and then -- "A fine pass you have brought things to at last; I always
told you how it would be, but you would not believe me, and now you are ruined,
bankrupt, and undone to the devil; I thought what it would come to with your
damned American war." -- I told him I had nothing to do with politics, and knew
very little of the matter. -- "That Is true," says he, "I understand you are
writing a book, and going to turn author: You know I am your friend, and always
speak my mind, therefore I must tell you, you will repent of what you are
about. Cannot you let the world alone? Is it in your power to make it better?
Can the devil make it worse? Why I could write a book if I pleased, but I scorn
it; nay I was fool enough to do it once from a silly principle of good will to
my country; and what was the consequence? Why, after proving as plain as two
and two make four that we were no longer a nation, that we were broken,
baffled, defeated, and upon the eve of being a province to France -- after
having proved all this, do you see, for the good of my country, what was my
reward, think you, but to be abused, vilified, posted in the rascally
newspapers, who threw the twelfth of April in my teeth and set the people's
heads a madding contrary to all sense and reason, though I had been at the
pains of convincing them how foolish all such hopes were, and that there was
not a chance left, though miracles should be wrought in their favor, of any
possible salvation for this devoted kingdom."

As Leontine is one of those pro and con reasoners, who handle their own
argument in their own way by question and answer, and know what their opponent
has to offer before he has uttered three words, I always leave him a clear
stage to fight out the subject by himself as he can; so that he proceeded
without interruption to put a number of questions, to which he regularly made
responses, and, though these were the very opposites to what I should probably
have given, I let them pass without contradiction, till there was a stop to the
torrent by the introduction of a stranger, who after telling Leontine his name,
proceeded to say he had a little necessary business to settle with him, which
he should take the liberty to explain in very few words. This stranger was a
little, meagre, consumptive man, far advanced in years, of an aspect remarkably
meek and humble, so that it was not without surprise I heard him begin as
follows. -- "I wait upon you, Sir, to demand full satisfaction and atonement
for an injury you have done to my character by the basest lie that ever man
uttered, and which if you do not disavow in as public a manner as you reported
it, I shall expect you will immediately answer my challenge, as there is no
other mode of redressing wrongs of so insidious a nature." When this gentleman
announced his name and description I found he was a general officer, who had
been upon an unsuccessful command in the course of the war; and that Leontine
in one of his political rhapsodies had treated his character according to his
custom with great scurrility; this had unluckily passed in hearing of a friend
of the General's, who had endeavored to stop Leontine in time, but not being
able so to do, had made report to his friend of what had been said of him in
his absence. As he fixed his eyes upon Leontine in expectation of his answer, I
observed his cheeks, which before were of a ruddy scarlet, turn to a deep
purple, which gradually darkened into a livid tawney; fear so transformed his
features, that the flying soldier in Le Brun's battle was not a more perfect
model of horror: His lips, which so lately thundered out vengeance and
anathemas against the whole host of critics, magazine-mongers, news-writers,
and reviewers, with all their devils, runners, and retainers, now quivered
without the power of utterance, till at last a gentle murmuring voice was heard
to say -- "General, if I have given you offense, I am very sorry for it, but I
suspect that what I said must have been unfairly stated, else" -- Here the
little gentleman immediately interrupted him, by saying -- "This excuse affects
the veracity of my friend; I shall therefore take the liberty of calling him
into your room, which I did not choose to do in the first instance, not knowing
you had any body with you; but if this gentleman will have the goodness to
stand in place of your referee on the occasion, I will bring my witness face to
face, who will testify to the very words you spoke." This was no sooner said
than done; for the friend was in the passage, and in the most precise terms
asserted the truth of his information. -- "And now, Sir," resumed the General,
"give me leave to say there is not a man in England more abhors a personal
quarrel than I do, but I make it my study to give no offense, and both my
reputation and my profession indispensibly oblige me not to put up with insult
from any man: There is no alternative therefore left to either of us, but for
you to sign this paper, which I shall use as I see fit in my own vindication,
or turn out; I am very sorry for it; it is an unhappy custom, but if occasions
can justify it, I take the present to be one." -- Having so said, he tendered
the paper to Leontine with as much politeness and address, as if he had been
delivering a petition to the commander in chief.

The intimidated boaster took the paper with a trembling hand, and throwing his
eye over it, begged to know if it might not be mitigated in some particulars:
-- "I should be very glad to oblige you," says the General, "in what you wish,
but they are my words, and as I generally think before I speak or write, I am
not in the habit of unsaying any thing I assert; you must therefore sign to
all, or none." -- "If it must be so, it must," says Leontine with a sigh, and
took the pen. -- "Stop, Sir, if you please," interposed the General, "I would
know of this gentleman, if he has any thing to offer on your behalf, why you
should not sign that paper." I answered, that I had nothing to offer in the
case; upon which Leontine put his name to the paper. "Sir," says the General,
"I am perfectly satisfied, and beg your pardon for the trouble I have given
you; I am persuaded you are not a person, who can injure my character, and this
paper is of no further use." -- So saying, he threw it into the fire, and
having made his bow to Leontine and wishing me a good morning, took his friend
under the arm and coolly walked out of the house. As I was suspicious
Leontine's courage might return after his departure, I thought it best to
follow his example, and, taking up my hat, left the mortified bashaw to his
meditations, well satisfied to find an example in confirmation of my opinion --
That a bully at home is a coward abroad.

As I walked along, meditating on what had passed, a doubt for the first time
arose in my mind as to the practice of duelling, and I began to think there
might be certain advantages accruing to society, which, if the immorality of
the action could be dispensed with, might possibly balance the evils, so
evidently to be set against them. On the one side I saw in all its horrors the
untimely catastrophe of a father, husband, son, or brother, hurried out of
life, and made the sacrifice of a savage fashion, which the world calls honor:
On the other part I reflected within myself what the state of manners might
probably be reduced to, and how much society would suffer, if such overbearing
insolent characters as Leontine were not held in restraint by those personal
considerations, which owe their influence to the practice of duelling. To their
wives, servants, and dependant inferiors, from whom no resentment is to be
apprehended, these tyrants are insupportable; to society in general they are
offensive as far as they dare; it is not shame, nor a respect to good manners
in any degree, nor the fear of the laws, which stop them, for none of these
considerations affect them; neither is it the unarmed hand of man, that can
correct them, for these brutal natures are commonly endowed with brutal
strength, and Leontine would no more have feared his puisny antagonist without
a weapon than I should stand in awe of an infant. If these creatures, thought
I, were let loose upon society, and we had nothing but our fists to keep them
in order, the proverb would be literally made good, and the weakest must go to
the wall; but that same lucky invention of gunpowder levels the strong with the
feeble, and puts all, who bear the character of a gentleman, upon the same line
of defense: If blows were to be exchanged with impunity, and foul language was
to be endured without account, we should be a nation of rabble. It seems
therefore as if nothing more were to be wished, than for certain mitigations of
this terrible resource, which must ultimately depend upon the voluntary
magnanimity of those, who are compelled to resort to it: What I mean is, to
express a wish that gentlemen would think it no derogation from their honor to
acknowledge an error, or ask pardon for an offense; and as it can very rarely
happen, but that one party must to his own conviction be in the fault, it seems
to follow, that all those affairs of honor, that can be done away by an
apology, might by manly and ingenuous characters be prevented from extremities:
As to injuries of that deep nature, which according to the infirmity of human
ideas, we are apt to call inexpiable, I presume not to give an opinion; and in
the aggravating instance of a blow, I have only to lament, that the sufferer
has to expose his person to equal danger with the offender. Though some unhappy
instances of frivolous duels have lately occurred, I cannot think that it is
the vice of the times to be fond of quarrelling; the manners of our young men
of distinction are certainly not of that cast, and if it lies with any of the
present age, it is with those half-made-up gentry, who force their way into
half-price plays in boots and spurs, and are clamorous in the passages of the
front boxes in a crowded theater: I have with much concern observed this to be
an increasing nuisance, and have often wished those turbulent spirits to be
better employed, and that they had dismounted from their horses either a little
sooner or not so soon: But it is not by reasoning these gentlemen will be
taught to correct their behavior.

I would seriously recommend to my readers of all descriptions to keep a
careful watch upon their tempers, when they enter into argumentation and
dispute; let them be assured that by their management of themselves on such
occasions they are to decide their characters; and whether they are to pass as
men of education, temper, and politeness, or as illiterate, hot, and ill-bred
blockheads, will depend upon their conduct in this particular. If the following
short and obvious maxims were attended to, I think animosities would be avoided
and conversation amended.

Every man, who enters into a dispute with another, (whether he starts it or
only takes it up) should hear with patience what his opponent in the argument
has to offer in support of the opinion he advances. Every man, who gives a
controverted opinion, ought to lay it down with as much conciseness, temper,
and precision, as he can. An argument once confuted, should never be repeated,
nor tortured into any other shape by sophistry and quibble. No jest, pun, or
witticism, tending to turn an opponent or his reasoning into ridicule, or raise
a laugh at his expense, ought by any means to be attempted; for this is an
attack upon the temper, not an address to the reason of a disputant. No two
disputants should speak at the same time, nor any man overpower another by
superiority of lungs, or the loudness of a laugh, or the sudden burst of an
exclamation. It is an indispensible preliminary to all disputes, that oaths are
no arguments. If any disputant slaps his hand upon the table, let him be
informed that such an action does not clinch his argument, and is only
pardonable in a blacksmith or a butcher. If any disputant offers a wager, it is
plain he has nothing else to offer, and there the dispute should end. Any
gentleman who speaks above the natural key of his voice casts an imputation on
his own courage, for cowards are loudest, when they are out of danger.
Contradictions are no arguments, nor any expressions to be made use of, such as
-- That I deny -- There you are mistaken -- That is impossible -- or any of the
like blunt assertions, which only irritate, and do not elucidate. The
advantages of rank or fortune are no advantages in argumentation; neither is an
inferior to offer, or a superior to extort the submission of the understanding
on such occasions; for every man's reason has the same pedigree; it begins and
ends with himself. If a man disputes in a provincial dialect, or trips in his
grammar, or, (being Scotch or Irish) uses national expressions, provided they
convey his meaning to the understanding of his opponent, it is a foolish jest
to turn them into ridicule, for a man can only express his ideas in such
language as he is master of. Let the disputant who confutes another, forbear
from triumph; forasmuch as he, who increases his knowledge by conviction, gains
more in the contest, than he who converts another to his opinion; and the
triumph more becomes the conquered, than the conqueror. Let every disputant
make truth the only object of his controversy, and whether it be of his own
finding, or of any other man's bestowing, let him think it worth his acceptance
and entertain it accordingly. No XXVII.
THE following story is so extraordinary, that if I had not had it from good
authority in the country, where it happened, I should have considered it as the
invention of some poet for the fable of a drama.

A Portuguese gentleman, whom I shall beg leave to describe no otherwise than
by the name of Don Juan, was lately brought to trial for poisoning his
half-sister by the same father, after she was with child by him. This gentleman
had for some years before his trial led a very solitary life at his castle in
the neighborhood of Montremos, a town on the road between Lisbon and Badajos,
the frontier garrison of Spain: I was shown his castle, as I passed through
that dismal country, about a mile distant from the road, in a bottom surrounded
with cork-trees, and never saw a more melancholy habitation. The circumstances,
which made against this gentleman, were so strong and the story was in such
general circulation in the neighborhood, where he lived, that although he laid
out the greatest part of a considerable income in acts of charity, no body ever
entered his gates to thank him for his bounty, or solicit relief, except one
poor father of the Jeronymite convent in Montremos, who was his confessor and
acted as his almoner at discretion.

A charge of so black a nature, involving the crime of incest as well as
murder, at length reached the ears of justice, and a commission was sent to
Montremos to make enquiry into the case: The supposed criminal made no attempt
to escape, but readily attended the summons of the commissioners. Upon the
trial it came out from the confession of the prisoner, as well as from the
deposition of witnesses, that Don Juan had lived from his infancy in the family
of a rich merchant at Lisbon, who carried on a considerable trade and
correspondence in the Brazils; Don Juan being allowed to take this merchant's
name, it was generally supposed that he was his natural son, and a clandestine
affair of love having been carried on between him and the merchant's daughter
Josepha, who was an only child, she became pregnant, and a medicine being
administered to her by the hands of Don Juan, she died in a few hours after
with all the symptoms of a person, who had taken poison. The mother of the
young lady survived her but a few days, and the father threw himself into a
convent of Mendicants, making over by deed of gift the whole of his property to
the supposed murderer.

In this account there seemed a strange obscurity of facts, for some made
strongly to the crimination of Don Juan, and the last-mentioned circumstance
was of so contradictory a nature, as to throw the whole into perplexity; and
therefore to compel the prisoner to a further elucidation of the case, it was
thought proper to interrogate him by torture.

Whilst this was preparing, Don Juan without betraying the least alarm upon
what was going forward, told his judges that it would save them and himself
some trouble, if they would receive his confession upon certain points, to
which he should truly speak, but beyond which all the tortures in the world
could not force one syllable: He said that he was not the son as it was
supposed of the merchant, with whom he lived, nor allied to the deceased
Josepha any otherwise than by the tenderest ties of mutual affection and a
promise of marriage, which however he acknowledged had not been solemnized:
That he was the son of a gentleman of considerable fortune in the Brazils, who
left him an infant to the care of the merchant in question; that the merchant
for reasons best known to himself chose to call him by his own name, and this
being done in his infancy, he was taught to believe, that he was an orphan
youth, the son of a distant relation of the person who adopted him; he begged
his judges therefore to observe that he never understood Josepha to be his
sister; that as to her being with child by him, he acknowledged it, and prayed
God forgiveness for an offense, which it had been his intention to repair by
marrying her; that with respect to the medicine, he certainly did give it to
her with his own hands, for that she was sick in consequence of her pregnancy,
and being afraid of creating alarm or suspicion in her parents, had required
him to order certain drugs from an apothecary, as if for himself, which he
accordingly did, and he verily believed they were faithfully mixed, inasmuch as
he stood by the man, whilst he prepared the medicine, and saw every ingredient
separately put in.

The judges thereupon asked him, if he would take it on his conscience to say,
that the lady did not die by poison: Don Juan, bursting into tears for the
first time, answered, to his eternal sorrow he knew that she did die by poison.
-- Was that poison contained in the medicine she took? -- It was. -- Did he
impute the crime of mixing the poison in the medicine to the apothecary, or did
he take it on himself? -- Neither the apothecary, nor himself, was guilty. --
Did the lady from a principle of shame, (he was then asked) commit the act of
suicide, and infuse the poison without his knowledge? -- He started into horror
at the question and took God to witness, that she was innocent of the deed.

The judges seemed now confounded, and for a time abstained from any further
interrogatories, debating the matter amongst themselves by whispers; when one
of them observed to the prisoner, that according to his confession he had said
she did die by poison, and yet by the answers he had now given, it should seem
as if he meant to acquit every person, on whom suspicion could possibly rest;
there was however one interrogatory left, which unnatural as it was, he would
put to him for form's sake only, before they proceeded to greater extremities,
and that question involved the father or mother of the lady. -- Did he mean to
impute the horrid intention of murdering their child to the parents? -- No,
replied the prisoner in a firm tone of voice, I am certain no such intention
ever entered the hearts of the unhappy parents, and I should be the worst of
sinners, if I imputed it to them. -- The judges upon this declared with one
voice that he was trifling with the court, and gave orders for the rack; they
would however for the last time demand of him, if he knew who it was that did
poison Josepha: to which he answered without hesitation, that he did know, but
that no tortures should force him to declare it; as to life, he was weary of
it, and they might dispose of it, as they saw fit; he could not die in greater
tortures than he had lived.

They now took this peremptory recusant, and stripping him of his upper
garments, laid him on the rack; a surgeon was called in, who kept his fingers
on his pulse; and the executioners were directed to begin their tortures; they
had given him one severe stretch by ligatures fixed to his extremities and
passed over an axle, which was turned by a windlass; the strain upon his
muscles and joints by the action of this infernal engine was dreadful, and
nature spoke her sufferings by a horrid crash in every limb; the sweat started
in large drops upon his face and bosom, yet the man was firm amidst the agonies
of the machine, not a groan escaped, and the fiend who was superintendant of
the hellish work, declared they might increase his tortures upon the next tug,
for that his pulse had not varied a stroke nor abated of its strength in the
smallest degree.

The tormentors had now begun a second operation with more violence than the
former, which their devilish ingenuity had contrived to vary so as to extort
acuter pains from the application of the engine to parts, that had not yet had
their full share of the first agony; when suddenly a monk rushed into the
chamber and called out to t^h judges to desist from torturing that innocent
man, and take the confession of the murderer from his own lips. Upon a signal
from the judges, the executioners let go the engine at once, and the joints
snapped audibly into their sockets with the elasticity of a bow. Nature sunk
under the revulsion, and Don Juan fainted on the rack. The monk immediately
with a loud voice exclaimed -- "Inhuman wretches, delegates of hell and agents
of the devil, make ready your engine for the guilty, and take off your bloody
hands from the innocent, for behold!" (and so saying he threw back his cowl)
"behold the father and the murderer of Josepha! -- "

The whole assembly started with astonishment; the judges stood aghast, and
even the demons of torture rolled their eye balls on the monk with horror and
dismay.

"If you are willing," says he to the judges, "to receive my confession, whilst
your tormentors are preparing their rack for the vilest criminal, ever
stretched upon it; hear me! If not, set your engine to work without further
enquiry, and glut your appetites with human agonies, which once in your lives
you may now inflict with justice."

"Proceed," said the senior judge.

"That guiltless sufferer, who now lies insensible before my eyes," said the
monk, "is the son of an excellent father, who was once my dearest friend: He
was confided to my charge, being then an infant, and my friend followed his
fortunes to our settlements in the Brazils: He resided there twenty years
without visiting Portugal once in the time; he remitted to me many sums of
money on his son's account; at this time a hellish thought arose in my mind,
which the distress of my affairs and a passion for extravagance inspired, of
converting the property of my charge to my own account; I imparted these
suggestions to my unhappy wife, who is now at her account; let me do her
justice to confess she withstood them firmly for a time; still fortune frowned
upon me, and I was sinking in my credit every hour; ruin stared me in the face,
and nothing stood between me and immediate disgrace, but this infamous
expedient."

"At last persuasion, menaces, and the impending pressure of necessity
conquered her virtue, and she acceded to the fraud. We agreed to adopt the
infant as the orphan son of a distant relation of our own name; I maintained a
correspondence with his father by letters pretending to be written by the son,
and I supported my family in a splendid extravagance by the assignments I
received from the Brazils. At length the father of Don Juan died, and by will
bequeathed his fortune to me in failure of his son and his heirs. I had already
advanced so far in guilt, that the temptation of this contingency met no
resistance in my mind, and I determined upon removing this bar to my ambition,
and proposed to my wife to secure the prize, that fortune had hung within our
reach, by the assassination of the heir. She revolted from the idea with
horror, and for some time her thoughts remained in so disturbed a state, that I
did not think it prudent to renew the attack: After some time the agent of the
deceased arrived in Lisbon from the Brazils, and as he was privy to my
correspondence, it became necessary for me to discover to Don Juan who he was,
and also what fortune he was entitled to. In this crisis, threatened with shame
and detection on one hand, and tempted by avarice, pride, and the devil on the
other, I won over my reluctant wife to a participation of my crime, and we
mixed that dose with poison, which we believed was intended for Don Juan, but
which in fact was destined for our only child: She took it; heaven discharged
its vengeance on our heads, and we saw our daughter expire in agonies before
our eyes, with the bitter aggravation of a double murder, for the child was
alive within her. Are there words in language to express our lamentations? Are
there tortures in the reach of even your invention to compare with those we
felt? Wonderful were the struggles of nature in the heart of our expiring
child: She bewailed us; she consoled, nay she even forgave us. To Don Juan we
made imm^diate confession of our guilt, and conjured him to inflict that
punishment upon us, which justice demanded and our crimes deserved. It was in
this dreadful moment that our daughter with her last breath by the most solemn
adjurations exacted and obtained a promise from Don Juan not to expose her
parents to a public execution by disclosing what had passed. Alas! alas! we see
too plainly how he kept his word: Behold, he dies a martyr to honour^ your
infernal tortures have destroyed him -- "

No sooner had the monk pronounced these words in a loud and furious tone, than
the wretched Don Juan drew a sigh; a second would have followed, but heaven no
longer could tolerate the agonies of innocence, and stopped his heart for ever.

The monk had fixed his eyes upon him, ghastly with terror, and as he stretched
out his mangled limbs at life's last gasp -- "Accursed monsters," he exclaimed,
"may God requite his murder on your souls at the great day of judgment! His
blood be on your heads, ye ministers of darkness! For me, if heavenly vengeance
is not yet appeased by my contrition, in the midst of flames my aggrieved soul
will find some consolation in the thought, that you partake its torments."

Having uttered this in a voice scarce human, he plunged a knife to his heart,
and whilst his blood spouted on the pavement dropped dead upon the body of Don
Juan, and expired without a groan.

No XXVIII.
Quid dignum tanto feret hic promissor hiatu?
I THINK it much to be lamented that our English newspapers have such an
extensive circulation through Europe, unless proper means could be taken to
restrain their excessive licentiousness. As few foreigners will believe any
government so void of resource in this particular, they can no otherwise
account for our not correcting these abuses of the press, but because we want
the will and not the power. Amongst the causes that have lately operated to
increase their circulation and success, I hope for the honor of human nature,
their licentiousness is not one; and yet it appears as if their encouragement
had kept pace with their malignance. If I had not experienced the bad effects
they have upon the minds of people in other countries, I should not have
thought such publications capable of such mischief. Though the conductors of
them seem careless about consequences, I will not believe it was in their minds
to do a deliberate injury to their country; but as they are not disposed to put
a bridle on themselves, it were to be wished some prudent hand would do the
office for them; though I see the difficulty of finding such a curb as shall
not gall the mouth of Freedom.

I am not at present disposed to be any longer serious on this subject, and
therefore waving all the weighter matters of my charge, I shall take notice
only of one ridiculous circumstance in which they abound, vulgarly called
Puffing.

I have been turning over some papers to find out the chief professors of this
art, which I believe is now carried to its highest state of improvement: Truth
compels me to say, that with regret I have discovered several amongst them, who
ought to have understood themselves better, but whilst there is hope they will
amend, I am contented they should escape; at least I shall pass them over in
silence, regarding them for the present as persons surprised into bad company,
and chargeable with indiscretion rather than depravity.

Our advertising Quacks or Empirics are an ancient and numerous class of
Puffers. A collision of rival interests occasions these gentlemen to run foul
of each other in their general undertakings, and betrays their natural modesty
into a warmer style of coloring their own merits, than the liberal study of
physic and the public-spirited principle on which they pretend to act, would
otherwise warrant: If the candid reader can find an excuse for them in their
zeal and anxiety to recommend the blessings which they offer to mankind, I will
not impede the plea. A foolish partiality some people still have for physicians
regularly bred, and a squeamish unwillingness to repair to back-doors and blind
alleys for relief, oblige them to use strong words to combat strong prejudices.
But though they are at some pains to convince us that our bills of natural
deaths might be all comprised under the single article of old age, there is yet
here and there an obstinate man who will die felo de se before the age of
threescore years and ten.

Whilst the sages are puffing off our distempers in one page, the auctioneers
are puffing off our property in another. If this island of ours is to be
credited for their description of it, it must pass for a terrestrial paradise:
It makes an English ear tingle to hear of the boundless variety of lawns,
groves, and parks; lakes, rivers, and rivulets; decorated farms and fruitful
gardens; superb and matchless collections of pictures, jewels, plate,
furniture, and equipapes; town-houses and country-houses; hot-houses and
ice-houses; observatories and conservatories; offices attached and detached;
with all the numerous etceteras that glitter down the columns of our public
prints. Numerous as these are, it is less a matter of surprise with me where
purchasers are found, than why any one, whose necessities are not his reason,
will be a vender of such enchanting possessions. Though a man's caprice may be
tired of a beautiful object long enjoyed, yet when he sees an old acquaintance
dressed out in new colors, and glowing in the flowery description of these
luxuriant writers, I should expect that his affection would revive, and that he
would recall the cruel sentence of alienation. Pliny never so described his
villa, as these Puffers will set forth the cast-off mansion of a weary owner.
Put a vicious, lame, and stumbling horse into their hands, and he comes out
safe and sound the next morning, and is fit to carry the first lady in the
land: Weed your collections of their copies and counterfeits, by the help of a
persuasive tongue, quick eye, and energetic hammer, they are knocked down for
originals and antiques, and the happy buyer bears them off delighted with his
bargain. What is the harp of an Orpheus compared to the hammer of an Auctioneer!

I must in the next place request the reader's attention to the Polishing
Puffers; a title by which I would be understood to speak of those venerable
teachers and instructors, who are endowed with the happy faculty of instilling
arts and sciences into their disciples, like fixed air into a vapid menstruum:
These are the beatified spirits whom Virgil places in his poetical Elysium:
Foolish men amongst the Greeks, such as Socrates, Plato, and others, trained
their pupils step by step in knowledge and made a bugbear of instruction;
Pythagoras in particular kept his scholars five years in probationary silence,
as if wisdom was not to be learned without labor; our modern polishers puff it
into us in a morning; the polish is laid on at a stroke, just as boys turn a
brass buckle into a silver one with a little quicksilver and brick-dust; the
polisht buckle indeed soon repents of its transmutation, but it is to be hoped
the allusion does not hold through, and that the polisht mind or body does not
relapse as soon to its primitive rusticity. Strange! that any body will be a
clown, when the Graces invite us to their private hops with hand-bills and
advertisements: Why do not the whole court of Aldermen dance at my Lord Mayor's
ball instead of standing with their hands in their pockets, when grown
gentlemen (let them grow to what size they may) are taught to walk a minuet
gracefully in three lectures? Amazing art! only to be equalled by the obstinacy
that resists it. How are the times degenerated! Orpheus fiddles and the brutes
will not dance. Go to the courts of law, listen to the bellowing of the bar; mount
the gallery of the senate, observe how this here and that there orator breaks
poor Priscian's head for the good of his country; enter our theaters -- does
that gentleman speak to a ghost, as a ghost ought to be spoken to? Walk into a
church, if you have any feeling for the sacred sublimity of our service, you
will never walk into another where it is so mangled: Every one of these
parricides might be taught not to murder his mother tongue without mercy, if he
would but believe an advertisement and betake himself to the Polisher.
Education at our public schools and universities is traveling in a wagon for
expedition, when there is a bridle road will take you by a short cut to
Parnassus, and the Polisher has got the key of it; he has elocution for all
customers, lawyers, players, parsons, or senators; readymade talents for all
professions, the bar, the stage, the pulpit, or the parliament.

There is another class of Puffers, who speak strongly to the passions, and use
many curious devices to allure the senses, fitting out their Lottery-offices,
like fowlers who catch birds by night with looking-glasses and candles, to
entice us to their snare. Some of them hang out the goddess of good-fortune in
person with moneybags in her hands, a tempting emblem; others recommmend
themselves under the auspices of some lucky name, confounding our heads with
cabalistical numbers, unintelligible calculations, and mysterious predictions,
whose absurdity is their recommendation, and whose obscurity makes the
temptation irresistible: Omnia enim stolidi magis admirantur amantque,
Inversis quae sub verbis latitantia cernunt.


Essences, cosmetics, and a hundred articles of pretended invention for the
frivolous adorning of our persons engross a considerable share of our public
papers; the Puffs from this quarter are replete with all the gums and odours of
Arabia; the chemists of Laputa were not more subtle extractors of sunbeams than
these artists, who can fetch powder of pearls out of rotten bones and mercury,
odor of roses from a turnip, and the breath of zephyrs out of a cabbagestalk;
they can furnish your dressing room with the toilette of Juno, bring you bloom
from the cheeks of Hebe, and a nosegay from the bosom of Flora. These Puffers
never fail to tell you after a court birthday that their washes, powders, and
odours, were the favorites of the drawing room, and that the reigning beauties
of the assembly bought their charms at their counters.

After these follow a rabble of raree-shewmen with mermaids, man-tygers,
ourang-outangs, and every monster and abortion in creation; columns of giants
and light-infantry companies of dwarfs; conjurers, rope-dancers, and
posturemasters; tooth-drawers, oculists, and chiropodists; every one puffs
himself off to the public in a style as proud as Ancient Pistol's; every
fellow, who can twirl upon his toe, or ride a gallop on his head, pastes
himself up in effigy on our public offices and churches, and takes all the
courts in Europe to witness to the fame of his performances. If a rascal can
show a louse through a microscope, he expects all the heads in England to itch
till they behold it; if a son of the gallows can slide down a rope from the top
of a steeple, he puffs off his flight in Pindarics, that would make a moderate
man's head giddy to read; nay, we have seen a gambling-house and a brothel
thrown open to the town, and public lectures in obscenity audaciously
advertised in a Christian city, which would not have been tolerated in Sodom or
Gomorrah.

I cannot dismiss this subject without hinting to the proprietors of our Royal
Theaters, that this expedient of puffing is pardonable only in a troop of
strollers, or the master of a puppet-shew. Whilst the Muses keep possession of
our theater, and genius treads the stage, every friend to the national drama
will condemn the practice, and hold them inexcusable, who are responsible for
it, if they do not discontinue it. It is hardly possible that any cause can be
profited by puffing; if any can, it must be a contemptible one; the interests
of literature are amongst the last that can expect advantage from it, or that
should condescend to so mean a resource: Instead of attracting curiosity, it
creates disgust; instead of answering the temporary object of profit, it sinks
the permanent fund of reputation. As to the impolicy of the measure many
reasons may be given, but these I shall forbear to mention, lest whilst I am
stating dangers I should appear to suggest them. In conclusion, I have no doubt
but the good sense of the proprietors will determine on a reform; for I am
persuaded they cannot be profited by houses of their own filling, nor any
author flattered by applauses of his own bestowing.

No XXIX.
SOCIETY in despotic governments is narrowed according to the degree of rigor,
which the ruling tyrant exercises over his subjects. In some countries it is in
a manner annihilated. As despotism relaxes toward limited monarchy, society is
dilated in the same proportion. If we consider freedom of condition in no other
light than as it affects society, a monarchy limited by law, like this of ours,
is perhaps the freest constitution upon earth; because was it to diverge from
the center on which it now rests, either toward despotism on one hand, or
democracy on the other, the restraints upon social freedom would operate in the
same degree, though not in the same mode; for whether that restraint is produced
by the awe of a court, or the promiscuous licentiousness of a rabble, the
barrier is in either case broken down; and whether it lets the cobbler or the
king's messenger into our company, the tyranny is insupportable and society is
enslaved.

When an Englishman is admitted into what are called the best circles in Paris,
he generally finds something captivating in them on a first acquaintance; for
without speaking of their internal recommendations, it is apt to flatter a
man's vanity to find himself in an exclusive party, and to surmount those
difficulties, which others cannot. As soon as he has had time to examine the
component parts of this circle, into which he has so happily stepped, he readily
discovers that it is a circle, for he goes round and round without one
excursion; the whole party follows the same stated revolution, their minds and
bodies keep the same orbit, their opinions rise and set with the regularity of
planets, and for what is passing without their sphere they know nothing of it.
In this junto it rarely happens but some predominant spirit takes the lead, and
if he is ambitious of making a master-stroke indeed, he may go the length to
declare, that he has the honor to profess himself an Atheist. The creed of
this leading spirit is the creed of the junto; there is no fear of controversy;
investigation does not reach them, and that liberality of mind, which a
collision of ideas only can produce, does not belong to them; you must fall in
with their sentiments, or keep out of their society: and hence arises that
overruling self-opinion so peculiar to the French, that assumed superiority so
conspicuous in their manners, which destroys the very essence of that
politeness, which they boast to excel in.

Politeness is nothing more than an elegant and concealed species of flattery,
tending to put the person to whom it is addressed in good humor and respect
with himself: But if there is a parade and display affected in the exertion of
it, if a man seems to say -- Look how condescending and gracious I am! --
whilst he has only the common offices of civility to perform, such politeness
seems founded in mistake, and calculated to recommend the wrong person; and
this mistake I have observed frequently to occur in French manners.

The national character of the Spaniards is very different from that of the
French, and the habits of life in Madrid as opposite as may be from those which
obtain at Paris. The Spaniards have been a great and free people, and though
that grandeur and that freedom are no more, their traces are yet to be seen
amongst the Castilians in particular. The common people have not yet contracted
that obsequiousness and submission, which the rigor of their government, if no
revolution occurs to redress it, must in time reduce them to. The condition,
which this gallant nation is now found in, between the despotism of the throne
and the terrors of the Inquisition, cannot be aggravated by description; body
and mind are held in such complete slavery by these two gloomy powers, that men
are not willing to expose their persons for the sake of their opinions, and
society is of course exceedingly circumscribed; to trifle away time seems all
they aspire to; conversation turns upon few topics, and they are such as will
not carry a dispute; neither glowing with the zeal of party, nor the cordial
interchange of mutual confidence; day after day rolls in the same languid round
through life; their seminaries of education, especially since the expulsion of
the Jesuits, are grievously in decline; learning is extinct; their faculties
are whelmed in superstition, and ignorance covers them with a cloud of
darkness, through which the brightest parts cannot find their way.

If this country saw its own interests in their true light, it would conciliate
the affections of the Spanish nation, who are naturally disposed toward
England; the hostile policy of maintaining a haughty fortress on the extremity
of their coast, which is no longer valuable than whilst they continue to attack
it, has driven them into a compact with France, odious to all true Spaniards,
and which this country has the obvious means of dissolving. It is by an
alliance with England that Spain will recover her pristine greatness; France is
plunging her into provincial dependency; there is still virtue in the Spanish
nation; honesty, simplicity, and sobriety are still characteristics of the
Castilian; he is brave, patient, unrepining; no soldier lives harder, sleeps
less, or marches longer; treat him like a gentleman, and you may work him like
a mule; his word is a passport in affairs of honor, and a bond in matters of
property. That dignity of nature, which in the highest orders of the state is
miserably debased, still keeps its vigor in the bulk of the people, and will
assuredly break out into some sudden and general convulsion for their
deliverance. If there are virtue and good sense in the administration of this
country, we shall seize the opportunity yet open to us.

It now remains that I should speak of England, and when I turn my thoughts to
my native island, and consider it with the impartiality of a citizen of the
world, I discern in it all advantages in perfection, which man in a social
state can enjoy. A constitution of government sufficiently monarchical to
preserve order and decorum in society, and popular enough to secure freedom; a
climate so happily tempered, that the human genius is neither exhausted by
heat, nor cramped and made torpid by cold; a land abounding in all manner of
productions, that can encourage industry, invite exercise and promote health; a
lot of earth so singularly located, as marks it out by Providence to be the
emporium of plenty and the asylum of peace; a religion, whose establishment
leaves all men free, neither endangering their persons, nor enslaving their
minds; a system of enlightened education so general, and a vein of genius so
characteristical, that under the banners of a free press must secure to the
nation a standing body of learned men, to spread its language to the ends of
the world and its fame to all posterity.

What is it then, which interrupts the enjoyments of social life, and disturbs
the harmony of its inhabitants? Why do foreigners complain that time hangs
heavy on their hands in England, that private houses are shut against them, and
that, were it not for the resource of public places, they would find themselves
in a solitude, or (more properly speaking) solitary in a crowd? How comes it to
pass that country gentlemen, who occasionally visit town, see themselves
neglected and forgotten by those very people, who have been welcomed to their
houses and regaled with their hospitality; and men of talents and character,
formed to grace and delight our convivial hours, are left to pace the Park and
streets of London by themselves, as if they were the exiles from society?

The fact is, trade occupies one end of the town, and politics engross the
other: As for foreigners of distinction, who ought in good policy to be
considered as the guests of the state, after they have gone through the dull
ceremonial of a drawing room, the court takes no further concern about them.
The crown has no officer charged with their reception, provides no table within
or without the palace for their entertainment; parliamentary or official
avocations are a standing plea for every state minister in his turn to neglect
them. The winter climate and coast of England is so deterring to natives of
more temperate latitudes, that they commonly pay their visits to the capital in
the summer, when it is deserted; so that after billeting themselves in some
empty hotel amidst the fumes of paint and noise of repairs, they wear out a few
tedious days, and then take flight, as if they had escaped from a prison. When
parliament is sitting and the town is full, a man, who does not interest
himself in the politics and party of the day, will find the capital an unsocial
place; that degree of freedom, which in other respects, is the life of society,
now becomes its mortal foe; the zeal, and even fury, with which people abet
their party, and the latitude they give themselves in opinion and discourse,
extinguish every voice, that would speak peace and pleasure to the board, and
turn good fellowship into loud contention and a strife of tongues.

The right assumed by our newspapers of publishing what they are pleased to
call Parliamentary Debates I must regard as one of the greatest evils of the
time, replete with foreign and domestic mischief: Our orators speak pamphlets,
and the senate is turned into a theater. The late hours of parliament, which to
a degree are become fashionable, are in effect destructive to society. I cannot
dispense with observing collaterally on this occasion that professional men in
England consort more exclusively amongst themselves, and communicate less
generally than in other countries, which gives their conversation, however
informing, an air of pedantry, contracted by long habits, great ardour for
their profession and deep learning in it.

As for slander, which amongst other evils owes much of its propagation to the
same vehicle of the daily press, it is the poison of society; depresses
virtuous ambition, damps the early shoots of genius, puts the innocent to pain,
and drives the guilty to desperation; it infuses suspicion into the best
natures, and loosens the cement of the strongest friendships; very many affect
to despise it, few are so highminded as not to feel it; though common
slanderers seldom have it in their power to hurt established reputations, yet
they can always contrive to spoil company, and put honest men to the trouble of
turning them out of it.

It is a common saying that authors are more spiteful to each other, and more
irritable under an attack, than other men; I do not believe the observation is
well founded; every sensible man knows, that his fame, especially of the
literary kind, before it can pass current in the world, pays a duty on
entrance, like some sort of merchandise, ad valorem; he knows that there are
always some who live upon the plunder of condemned reputations, watching the
tides of popular savor in hopes of making seizures to their own account --
Habent venenum pro victu, immo pro deliciis. -- The little injury such men do
to letters chiefly consists in the stupidity of their own productions: They may
to a certain degree check a man's living fame, but if he writes to posterity,
he is out of their reach, because he appeals to a court, where they can never
appear against him.

When we give our praise to any man's character or performances, let us give it
absolutely, and without comparison, for it is justly remarked by foreigners,
that we seldom commend positively: This remark bears both against our
goodnature and our good sense; but let no man by this or any other declamation
against slander be awed into that timid prudence, which affecting the name of
candor, dares not to condemn, and of course is not entitled to applaud. Truth
and justice have their claims upon us, and our testimony against vice, folly
and hypocrisy is due to society; manly resentment against mischievous
characters, cleanly ridicule of vanity and impertinence, and fair criticism of
what is under public review are the prerogatives of a free spirit; they
peculiarly belong to Englishmen, and he betrays a right constitutionally
inherent in him, who from mean and personal motives forbears to exercise it.

When I have said this, I think it right to add, that I cannot state a case, in
which a man can be justified in treating another's name with freedom, and
concealing his own.

No XXX.
Et quando uberior vitiorum copia? quando
Major avaritiae patuit Sinus? ALEA quando
Hos animos? neque enim loculis comitantibus itur
Ad casum tabulae, posita sed luditur arca.
(JUVENAL. Sat. 1.)
THE passage, which I have selected for the motto of this paper, will show that
I intend to devote it to the consideration of the vice of Gaming; and I forbore
to state it in my preceding essay amongst the causes, that affect society in
this country, because I regarded it as an evil too enormous to be brought
within the brief enumeration therein contained, resolving to treat it with that
particular respect and attention, which its high station and dignity in
mischief have a claim to.

Though I have no hesitation at beginning the attack, I beg leave to premise
that I am totally without hope of carrying it. I may say to my antagonists in
the words, though not altogether in the sense, that the angel Gabriel does to
his -- Satan, I know thy strength, and thou know mine. What avails my
hurling a feeble essay at the heads of this hydra, when the immortal drama of
The Gamester lies trodden under his feet?

Conscious that I do not possess the strength, I shall not assume the
importance of a champion, and as I am not of dignity enough to be angry, I
shall keep my temper and my distance too, skirmishing like those insignificant
gentry, who play the part of teazers in the Spanish bull-fights, sticking
arrows in his crest to provoke him to bellow, whilst bolder combatants engage
him at the point of his horns.

It is well for Gamesters, that they are so numerous as to make a society of
themselves, for it would be a strange abuse of terms to rank them amongst
society at large, whose profession it is to prey upon all who compose it.
Strictly speaking it will bear a doubt, if a Gamester has any other title to be
called a man, except under the distinction of Hobbes, and upon claim to the
charter of Homo Homini Lupus -- As a Human Wolf I grant he has a right to his
wolfiso prerogatives: He, who so far surprises my reason or debauches my
principle, as to make me a party in my own destruction, is a worse enemy than
he who robs me of my property by force and violence, because he sinks me in my
own opinion; and if there was virtue in mankind, sufficient for their own
defense, honest men would expel gamesters as outlaws from society, and good
citizens drive them from the state, as the destroyers of human happiness,
wretches, who make the parent childless and the wife a widow.

But what avail a parcel of statutes against gaming, when they, who make them,
conspire together for the infraction of them? Why declare gaming-debts void in
law, when that silly principle, so falsely called honor (at once the idol and
the idiot of the world) takes all those debts upon itself and calls them debts
of honor? It is not amongst things practicable to put gaming down by statute.
If the face of society was set steadily against the vice; if parents were
agreed to spurn at the alliance of a gamester, however ennobled; if our
seminaries of education would enforce their discipline against early habits of
play; if the crown, as the fountain of honor, and the virtuous part of the
fair sex, as the dispensers of happiness, would reprobate all men addicted to
this desperate passion, something might perhaps be done. If tradesmen would
consult their own interest, and give no credit to gamesters; if the infamous
gang of moneylenders could be absolutely extinguished, and the people at large,
instead of rising against a loyal fellow-subject, because he worships God
according to the religion of his ancestors at a Catholic altar, would exercise
their resentment against those illegal places of resort, where desperadoes meet
for nightly pillage, this contagious evil might possibly be checked; but when
it is only to be hoped that a combination of remedies might stem the disease,
how can we expect a recovery, when no one of them all is administered?

Though domestic misery must follow an alliance with a gamester, matches of
this sort are made every day; a parent, who consents so to sacrifice his child,
must either place his hope in her reforming her husband, or else he must have
made up his mind to set consequences at defiance; a very foolish hope, or a
very fatal principle. There can be no domestic comfort in the arms of a
gamester, no conjugal asylum in his heart: Weak and ignorant young women may be
duped into such connections; vain and self-conceited ones may adventure with
their eyes open, and trust to their attractions for security against
misfortune; but let them be assured there is not a page in the world's history,
that will furnish them with an example to palliate their presumption; eager to
snatch the present pleasures of a voluptuous prospect, they care little for the
ruin, which futurity keeps out of sight.

With the clearest conviction in my mind of the general advantages of public
education, I must acknowledge a suspicion that due attention is not paid in our
great seminaries of education to restrain this fatal passion in its first
approaches. I fear there are some evidences of a guilty negligence now in
operation, spreading poison as they flow, and carrying with them in their
course all the charms of eloquence, the flow of wit, and fascinating spell of
science; sanctified by fashion, Gaming-houses, which out-peer the royal palace,
rise around it in defiance; trophies and monuments of the triumphs of
dissipation. The wife, whose husband enters those doors, and the parent, who
owns a son within them, must either eradicate affection and nature from their
hearts, or take leave of happiness for ever. Woe be to the nation, whose police
cannot, or dare not, correct such an evil! It Is foolish to lament the
amputation of a limb, when the mortality is in our vitals.

I shall not take upon myself to lay down rules for kings, or affect to
pronounce what a sovereign can, or cannot, do to discountenance gaming in this
kingdom; but I will venture to say that something more is requisite than mere
example. It was in the decline of Rome, when the provinces were falling off
from her empire, whilst a virtuous but unfortunate prince possessed the throne,
that the greatest part of Africa was in revolt: The General, who commanded the
Roman legions, was a soldier of approved courage in the field, but of mean
talents and dissolute manners. This man in the most imminent crisis for the
interests of Rome, suffered and encouraged such a spirit of gaming to obtain
amongst his officers in their military quarters, that the finest army in the
world entirely lost their discipline, and remained inactive, whilst a few
levies of raw insurgents wrested from the Roman arms the richest provinces of
the empire. History records nothing further of this man's fate or fortune, but
leaves us to conclude that the reproaches of his own conscience and the
execrations of posterity were all the punishment he met with. The empire was
rent by faction, and his party rescued him from the disgrace he merited.

The last resource in all desperate cases, which the law cannot, or will not,
reach, lies with the people at large: It is not without reason I state it as
the last, because their method of curing disorders is like the violent
medicines of empiries, never to be applied to but in absolute extremity. If the
people were, like Shakespeare's Julius Caesar, never to do wrong but with just
cause, I should not so much dread the operation of their remedies; I shall
therefore venture no further, than to express an humble wish, that when it
shall be their high and mighty pleasure to proceed again to the pulling down
and burning of houses, those houses may not be the repositories of science, but
the receptacles of gamesters.

When a man of fortune turns gamester, the act is so devoid of reason, that we
are at a loss to find a motive for it; but when one of desperate circumstances
takes to the trade, it only proves that he determines against an honest course
of life for a maintenance, and having his choice to make between robbery and
gaming, prefers that mode of depredation, which exposes him to least danger,
and has a coward's plea for his vocation. Such an one may say with Ancient
Pistol -- I Will live by Nym, and Nym shall live by me,
And friendship shall combine and brotherhood;
Is not this just? --


In the justice of his league I do not join with Ancient Pistol, but I am ready
to allow there is some degree of common sense in this class of the brotherhood,
of which common sense I cannot trace a shadow amongst the others. A preference
therefore in point of understanding is clearly due to the vagabonds and
desperadoes; as to the man, who, for the silly chance of winning what he does
not want, risques every thing he ought to value, his defense is in his folly,
and if we rob him of that, we probably take from him the only harmless quality
he is possessed of. If however such an instance shall occur, and the demon of
gaming shall enter the same breast, where honor, courage, wit, wisdom reside,
such a mind is like a motley suit of cards, where kings, queens and knaves are
packed together, and make up the game with temporary good-fellowship, but it is
a hundred to one but the knave will beat them all out of doors in the end.

As there are separate gangs of gamesters, so there are different modes of
gaming; some set their property upon games of simple chance, some depend upon
skill, others upon fraud.

The gamesters of the first description run upon luck: a silly crew of
Fortune's fools; this kind of play is only fit for them, whose circumstances
cannot be made worse by losing, otherwise there is no proportion between the
good and the evil of the chance; for the good of doubling a man's property
bears no comparison with the evil of losing the whole; in the one case he only
gains superfluities, in the other he loses necessaries; and he, who stakes what
life wants against that which life wants not, makes a foolish bet, to say no
worse of it. Games of chance are traps to catch schoolboy novices and gaping
country-squires, who begin with a guinea and end with a mortgage; whilst the
old stagers in the game, keeping their passions in check, watch the ebb and
flow of fortune, till the booby they are pillaging sees his acres melt at every
cast.

In games of skill, depending upon practice, rule and calculation, the
accomplished professor has advantages, which may bid defiance to fortune; and
the extreme of art approaches so closely to the beginning of fraud, that they
are apt to run one into the other: in these engagements, self-conceit in one
party and dissimulation in the other are sure to produce ruin, and the sufferer
has something more than chance to arraign, when he reviews the wreck of his
fortune and the distresses of his family.

The drama of a gamester commonly has selfmurder for its catastrophe, and
authors, who write to the passions, are apt to dwell upon this scene with
partial attention, as the striking moral of the piece; I confess it is a moral,
that does not strike me; for as this action, whenever it happens, devolves to
the share of the losing, not of the winning gamester, I cannot discover any
particular edification, nor feel any extraordinary pathos, in a man's falling
by his own hand, when he is no longer in a capacity of doing or suffering
further injury in society. I look upon every man as a suicide from the moment
he takes the dice-box desperately in hand, and all that follows in his career
from that fatal time is only sharpening the dagger before he strikes it to his
heart.

My proper concern in this short essay is to show, that Gaming is the chief
obstructing cause, that affects the state of society in this nation, and I am
sensible I need not have employed so many words to convince my reader that
gamesters are very dull and very dangerous companions. When blockheads rattle
the dice-box, when fellows of vulgar and base minds sit up whole nights
contemplating the turn of a card, their stupid occupation is in character; but
whenever a cultivated understanding stoops to the tyranny of so vile a passion,
the friend of mankind sees the injury to society with that sort of aggravation,
as would attend the taking of his purse on the highway, if upon seizure of the
felon, he was unexpectedly to discover the person of a judge.

END OF THE FIRST VOLUME.

