LONGSWORD, EARL of SALISBURY. AN HISTORICAL ROMANCE.

VOLUME THE SECOND.

DUBLIN: Printed by GEORGE FAULKNER, in Parliament Street. MDCCLXVI.

LONGSWORD, Earl of SALISBURY.
BOOK IV.
SECT. I.
IN the religious house to which Oswald had retired, was a Monk, called
Reginhald, whose mind but ill suited his profession, or his residence in a seat
of piety. He was brother to Gray, and by his interest had been not long since
admitted into the Monastery, and promoted to some degree of dignity and
authority. His manners were equally brutal with those of Gray, but less
disguised by art and hypocrisy. He was like him, abject and servile, but by no
means so well skilled in the arts of flattery: insolent and assuming, but not
careful to distinguish between those who feared and those who defied his power.
Hence was he frequently controuled and mortified by his brethren, whom he
dreaded from a consciousness of his own excesses; and who detested and scorned
him indeed, yet feared the power which supported, or seemed to support him.
They regarded his brother as the favorite of Lord Raymond, and Lord Raymond as
heir to the house of Salisbury, and already possessed of all its greatness. To
purchase his protection, therefore, they turned their eyes from his offenses,
and suffered him to disgrace and disturb their house by scandalous excesses,
utterly subversive of holy discipline and order. Drunkenness, and riot, and
lewdness, had oftentimes profaned their walls with impunity. They lamented
these enormities of their unworthy brother; but, instead of disclosing and
punishing them, lamented to each other in secret, lest they should forfeit the
favor and protection of Lord Raymond; although the miscreant had been scarcely
known, and was utterly unnoticed and disregarded by this Lord.

Gray had conceived a sudden hope of preventing the effects which the flight of
Oswald threatened, by means of this Reginhald; and, if not of gaining young
William into his own power, at least of preventing any emissaries from
spreading the intelligence of his escape to sanctuary, and the distresses of
his mother. This it was that determined him to depart instantly, and to visit
this monastery! but his brother, active and officious in every deed of
baseness, had already prevented his desires, Oswald had happily reached the
monastery, and Reginhald was among the first to demand the reason of his
appearance. Scarcely could he restrain his passion until Oswald had completed
his story; and, then, burst forth with unbounded rage into the vilest and
severest reproaches. He charged him with falsehood and treachery; declared
himself resolved instantly to learn the real nature of his crime, and purpose
of his flight; and, for this reason, to repair in person to the castle. In the
mean time, with an assumed air of authority, he ordered that this fugitive
should be strictly guarded, and kept from all intercourse till his return.
Oswald heard his brutal virulence and passion, not without some terror, which
was noted, and regarded as an indication of guilt. The directions of Reginhald
were obeyed, and he himself now hastened to inform his brother of this event.
He met him when he had but just rode a few paces from the castle; whither Gray
instantly returned with the Monk.

They retired to a private conference with equal eagerness, and with minds
equally prepared for outrage or treachery. The Monk prevented the enquiries of
his brother, by relating what had just now passed at the monastery. Gray
expressed a sullen joy, when informed that Oswald was closely guarded, and, for
the present, effectually prevented from spreading his saucy tale, or pursuing
the design for which he had fled. He commended the zeal of Reginhald; and,
seizing his arm with an aspect, earnest, and mysteriously solemn, he declared,
that both their future fortunes depended on confining Oswald from all
intercourse, and gaining young William into their own power and disposal. The
rude Monk, whose first thoughts were ever to recur to violence, instantly
declared for seizing both, and forcing them from their retreat: but he was
stopped by Gray, who censured such procedure as dangerous and unwarrantable;
and pronounced it necessary to pursue measures the most deliberate and most
cautiously concerted. He proceeded to disclose all the transactions of Lord
Raymond from his first arrival at the castle of Salisbury, all the efforts made
to shake the constancy of Ela, and all the opposition and disdain of that proud
Countess. He began to explain how much their fortunes must be advanced by
finding means of conquering her resolution, and by the final success of Lord
Raymond in obtaining full and indisputable possession of the lands and
dignities of the house of Salisbury. But Reginhald, conscious that his own
security from disgrace and punishment depended on the influence and protection
of this Lord, needed no inducement to concur in the designs and practices of
his brother. He broke in upon his discourse with a passionate heat, and loudly
condemned all his late proceedings. 'Why,' said he, was not I made acquainted
with your difficulties? why were not their hands forcibly joined? I should have
at once pronounced the nuptial benediction over them, and without regard to
female pride or scruples, have united them for ever in those bands, which no
human power can rend asunder. -- Gray again began to condemn his violence, and
to urge the necessity of caution, when their conference was suddenly
interrupted by a domestic, who surprised them by declaring that he sought the
Monk, and had in charge to conduct him to the Countess.

The mind of this unhappy lady had long been violently agitated, the true cause
of that languor and malady which oppressed her gentle frame. The hopes she had
conceived of the safety of her son, and the speedy arrival of friends and
deliverers, had acted on her harassed spirits like a powerful medicine, and
checked the progress of her disorder. She had now leisure to turn her thoughts
to her husband, and to weigh those accounts of his fate which Oswald had rashly
conveyed to her. The idea of his disloyalty was piercing: she revolved it
frequently: she reasoned on the intelligence she had received; she believed;
she doubted; she indulged her suspicions; and strove to banish them, by turns.
Ill were those reflections suited to restore her impaired health; yet she dwelt
upon them. The faithful Elinor, from whom she could not conceal her thoughts,
in vain endeavored to compose her distractions, and to allay her inward grief:
still she tormented herself with reflections on the supposed falsehood of her
Lord, and on his unhappy fate; when the attendant casually discovered from a
window the approach of Reginhald, and observed with some surprise that a
religious man, who by his habit seemed of the neighboring monastery, was now
entering the castle. He comes with news of my son, said the Countess hastily;
Let him be called hither. -- And, alas, this distracted breast has but too
much need of spiritual counsel and comfort.

A domestic was instantly dispatched to seek the Monk; who now appeared before
the Countess. Naturally base and mean, and never before admitted into such a
presence, he stood abashed and confused; and the consciousness of his own vile
purposes served to increase his disorder, His aspect, in which the sensual and
malignant passions had fixed their seat, and his deportment, which was that of
the rude hind or midnight brawler, not of the holy and lettered clerk, were
surveyed by the Countess with sudden disgust. She shuddered, as at the view of
some loathsome animal: yet, assuming a placid air, and endeavoring to conceal
her dislike, she asked of his order and residence. No sooner had he named the
brotherhood of Sarum, than raising herself from the couch on which she leaned,
'You then' said she, bring me news of my son -- dispatched to acquaint me with
his safe arrival within your holy walls -- Is it not so? Reginhald coldly
answered, that her son was safe, and had been deposited in the monastery hy his
conductor. The Countess, with clasped hands and earnest accents, uttered a
prayer for his protection. Elinor was tenderly affected; and uniting her
fervours with those of her beloved mistress, commended young William to every
saint and holy angel. The Monk stood unmoved, and scarcely could assume the
appearance of devotion, just as far as to pronounce a cold assent to their
petitions. The Countess was on the point of imploring his protection for her
son, but the disgust which she had conceived at his aspect, and which was
increased by his demeanor, repressed that thought. She contented herself with
speaking her hopes in general, that his innocence and his wrongs would not fail
to raise him friends in the house of piety and charity. She spoke of the
oppression which she herself had suffered, in terms of bitterness and
indignation: and seemed to demand, as her just right, the vigorous
interposition of every good man for her relief, but more especially the dutiful
and faithful offices of those holy men who had experienced her favor and
munificence. The silence of Reginhald gave her an occasion of repeating and
enforcing her discourse: but her discourse was directed to an unfriendly ear.
The wicked Monk had fixed his eyes upon an object, which totally diverted his
attention from the Countess. Near her couch there stood a table, on which,
among some female ornaments, was deposited a ring, an ancient and precious
jewel, which had long been the distinguishing ornament of her noble house, and
bore its ensigns armorial curiously impressed. The sight of this instantly
suggested a treacherous purpose to the Monk; for which it was necessary to
possess himself of the jewel. His situation was convenient for seizing it,
unnoticed by Ela or her attendant. He watched a favorable moment to convey it
to his bosom; and, having once secured his prize, he was more at leisure to
answer the discourse of the Countess, to assume some appearance of gravity, and
to affect the dignity and spiritual authority of his function. He declared,
that, within their walls, her son could not suffer wrong: but that it was
necessary to send him thither for protection. Nature and the royal pleasure
pointed to his noble kinsman Raymond as his true protector. -- The Countess
prepared to express her indignation, but with an insolence which he mistook for
grave authority; he warned her to beware of froward pride. Their liege Lord, he
said, had graciously considered her widowed state, and provided relief and
comfort. -- Her hand, her affection, and her obedience were now due to Lord
Raymond: such was the King's command. Heaven had approved his kind purpose, and
would not fail to punish that obstinacy and haughty perverseness, which
rejected its blessings. -- And dare thou, abandoned and hateful wretch,' --
thus did the Countess suffer her virtuous anger to break forth: Dare thou
profane the name of heaven? art thou devoted to its service, and do thou
flatter the baseness, and would thou promote the lewd purposes of him who
has renounced its laws, and defies its vengeance? -- 'Thy obstinacy be upon
thine own head!' This was the reply of Reginhald, who was hardened against all
reproof, and impatient to seek his brother. He turned away in sullen disdain,
and left the Countess in wonder and just resentment at his brutal insolence;
nor did this interview tend to allay the fears and suspicions of a fond mother.
If the oppression of Lord Raymond could have its ministers and favorers among
the professed votaries of religion, where might innocence find refuge; or where
seek its just redress? She now dreaded that the sacred privileges of sanctaury
might not find the due regard, as her enemy seemed to have corrupted the
reverend brethren, and to have gained them over to his wicked purposes. She
wished she had contended with her malady, and accompanied her son; again she
wished she had not rashly entrusted him to false and treacherous guardians. Her
presence might have proved a sufficient protection to him: Raymond could not
dare openly to have raised his arm against him: and surely the outrage and
usurpation of this Lord could not long be concealed. -- Thus did she condemn
her conduct, and torment her soul with gloomy and terrible imaginations; though
yet unacquainted with the dangers and distress now prepared for herself and her
son.

SECT. II.
REGINHALD had sought his brother, and recounted all his interview with Ela.
Gray still accused him of violence and turbulence, and urged the necessity of
well-timed dissimulation, of art, caution, and smooth address. The Monk was
provoked at this affectation of superior wisdom; and instead of retorting his
reproof, displayed the stolen jewel, in silent and contemptuous triumph. Gray
was too well versed in the arts of fraud and mischief, not to conceive at once,
that this ring was to be used for deceiving the brethren of the monastery, or
abusing Oswald, as occasions might require, by pretended orders and directions
from the Countess. He viewed it eagerly, and regarded it, (not without reason)
as an instrument of his purposes, too important to be entrusted wholly to the
violent hands of Reginhald. He commended his zeal and address, which he,
confidently promised, should, in due time, meet their full reward: he invited
him to refreshment; reminded him of his satigue: and that the hour of rest
approached: he promised that by the dawn of morning, he himself would be ready
to accompany him to the monastery, where he made no doubt of happily
accomplishing their purposes, and laying a firm foundation of their future
fortunes. Reginhald yielded to his instances, and retired. Gray repaired
without delay to the apartment of Lord Raymond, and appeared before him with a
face of joy and satisfaction. He congratulated him upon the prospect of a
speedy and final accomplishment of his wishes: he briefly related the conduct
of his brother at the monastery, his reception of Oswald, and the means already
taken to prevent that traitor from officiously spreading his tale: he declared
his purpose of seeking him instantly in his retirement; and was fully assured
(he said) that by the assistance of the Monk, (whose zeal and vigilance he
praised) he should be able to bring Oswald to that punishment which his
falsehood merited, and to gain young William into his absolute disposal, the
sure means of prevailing over the pride of Ela, and engaging her to a full
compliance with his wishes. Raymond wondered; but Gray repeated his confident
assurances of success, and departed with requesting his Lord patiently to wait
the events, which the succeeding day must produce.

It was now night; but fraud and interested malice are strangers to rest. The
Monk was wholly engaged by the thoughts of future favor and preferment; and
Gray watched, like the great enemy of mankind, to ensnare the innocent, and to
seduce the weak. He busily revolved in his mind the late transactions, and his
future designs. He thought of an expedient which Reignhald had mentioned, that
of forcibly joining the hands of Raymond and the Countess, and pronouncing the
nuptial blessing without regard to her consent; an expedient which he now
considered not as the suggestion of rashness and unexperienced heat, but such
as the best guided policy might have recourse to, and such as their designs
might necessarily require. In the mean time, he resolved, if possible, to
reserve the disposal of young William to himself, and even to secret him from
Lord Raymond's power. If this Lord should prove successful, he might forget the
services of his creature, or not reward them to the full extent of his wishes.
The possession of this boy might hereafter enable him to revenge such neglect,
by unexpectedly producing a young heir to assert his rights: or if the Countess
should be relieved from her present oppression, and her suitor recalled, or
forced from her castle; the important service of restoring her son might atone
for his former insolence, and shield him from punishment: or should it be
necessary for his purposes to destroy this child; this might be done more
securely in some place of private retirement; and more acceptably to his Lord,
when executed without his knowledge or participation. His own interest was the
sole object of his thoughts, and as to the means of advancing it; to him, all
were equally indifferent.

The dawn of morning stole upon him, while he was anxiously engaged in these
reflections: and Reginhald now stood before him, urging him to pursue his
intended course without further delay. He first summoned some chosen vassals of
Raymond, and, in the name of that Lord, ordered them to follow his steps at
some distance, and to hold themselves ready to obey his orders. The brothers
then took their way, and soon reached the monastery. Here they found, that,
notwithstanding the directions of Reginhald, the Lord Abbot had been made
acquainted with the arrival of Oswald; had examined him in person, had heard,
and was duly affected by his story; promised him protection, and that he would
assist in all honest means of gaining redress for the injured Countess; and
that at this very time he was shut up in the apartment of Oswald, hearing,
examining, and enquiring still more minutely into the circumstances of all
those events which he related with so much confidence, and with such appearance
of integrity. The brothers congratulated each other on arriving so opportunely;
and, at their desire were conducted into the same apartment. Oswald started and
trembled at the sight of Gray; who, with a demeanor grave and solemn, and with
well affected humility, addressed himself to the Abbot in the following manner:

Reverend father! This humane attention to the appearance of distress will be
rewarded; and heaven forefend but that it should meet the just return of praise
from every honest tongue: nor is there less honor due to your pious and
charitable cares, because, in the present case, they are not called forth by
real danger or calamity. You have entertained a fugitive already pardoned by
his Lord; and an infant whom his fond mother is at this moment impatient to
embrace. -- You wonder: but, vouchsafe me a favorable ear, I shall unsold what
seems so strange and perplexing. This venerable brotherhood must have heard how
the royal savor has been extended to Lord Raymond, has invested him with all
the power and dignity of the house of Salibury, has consigned to his
protection the widow of that noble house, and destined his hand for that of the
gentle Countess. When Raymond first arrived at her castle, to execute the
orders of his liege Lord, he found her, alas! sunk deep in sorrowful
reflections on the fate of her unhappy Lord, and but ill disposed to listen to
his honorable passion; nor could his noble nature permit him to break in too
precipitately upon her melancholy, by declaring his suit, and demanding her
consent. -- Here Oswald would have interrupted his discourse, but Gray, with a
mild, yet commanding look, claimed a free and undisturbed audience. The Abbot
seemed to assent; and the crasty minion proceeded thus: A decent interval of
retirement was allowed to her grief; and in the mean time her suitor was
entertained with the respect due to his greatness: nor was she long a stranger
to his purpose; nor did she disdain his suit, although she still deemed it
dishonorable openly to admit a second lover, until she had fully paid her duty
to the memory of Lord William. In this interval, heaven was pleased to afflict
the unhappy Lady with severe sickness: her fever was violent, and long and
obstinate was her delirium. She raved, I know not how, of force and oppression;
she called upon her late Lord, who she declared was yet alive, now in her
castle, and concealed from her by treachery and cruelty. She spoke of blood, of
murder, of her son, his dangers and his enemies. Even when her bodily disorder
began to abate, the disorder of her mind was still unconquered: nor were those
wild visions yet dispelled, which had so long tormented her. Her Discourse
indeed seemed more consistent, though the discourse of madness, and, unhappily,
imposed on the weakness and inexperience of her attendants. They indulged her
madness, and persuaded her to fly, for they believed that Lord Raymond was
really her persecutor: who, on his part, was only anxious for her recovery. For
this, were his prayers incessantly breathed to heaven. For this, did he bind
himself by solemn vow, to reward the devotion of your house, with ample
donations: nor was his piety unnoticed, or his prayers rejected. Scarcely had
the distraction of this Lady prompted her to send away her son, and to retire
from the castle, when heaven was pleased, as it were miraculously, to awaken
her from her frightful dreams, and restore her unsettled reason. The first sign
of recollection which she discovered, was, her orders to those who had been
deceived by her distraction, and rashly conveyed her at midnight from her
castle, to conduct her back again. She was obeyed, and instantly called for
Lord Raymond, acknowledged her infirmity, and entreated his pardon and
indulgence. He, noble and gentle Lord, expressed nothing but the most rapturous
joy at this happy change; earnestly pressing her to reward his love, and crown
his wishes. No longer now reluctant, or insensible to the happiness which
heaven and the royal favor had ordained for her, she only requested that some
little respite might still be granted, some time allowed to pay what farther
duties the memory of her late Lord demanded. This holy father came opportunely
to confirm her in those sentiments, and to direct her pious intentions. By his
persuasions am I ordered to attend him hither, directed by Lord Raymond, to
enquire by what means and in what manner he may most effectually discharge his
vow, and by the gentle Countess to desire, that a solemn requiem shall, without
delay, be performed by this reverend brotherhood to her departed Lord. I am
still farther to declare, that she reflects with confusion on the late disorder
of her mind, which had driven her young son from her arms; that she is
impatient to embrace him; that, at her request to Lord Raymond, he has sreely
and fully pardoned the flight of this his attendant. Nothing now remains, but
that both return, and share in that general joy which reigns in the castle. --
The Abbot wondered, and hesitated; Oswald prepared to speak, but Gray again
prevented him. -- To remove doubts, or scruples, said he, turning to Reginhald,
let us produce the token of our truth and fairly delivered charge. Behold, Lord
Abbot, this ancient ring, the well-known signet of the Countess, entrusted to
us from her fair hand! By this she speaks her pleasure, that young William be
instantly delivered to our care, that, without delay, we may conduct him to her
noble presence.

The Abbot had listened with suspicion and distrust, nor was his perplexity
dissipated by the conclusion of this speech. The accounts which he had received
from Oswald seemed natural and consistent; those of Gray subtle and
improbable: and, yet, this ring was such an attestation of his truth and
integrity, as seemed to warrant a full assent. He wavered for a while, but
endeavored to persuade himself that the orders which Gray delivered were real,
and demanded his compliance; timorous by nature, and possessed with strong
imaginations of the power of Raymond, and the danger of his displeasure. He
therefore labored to suppress all his doubts; affected to be fully convinced
and satisfied; and consented to deliver up young William to be conducted back
to his mother by the Monk and Gray; who dissembled their joy, and studied to
complete their success, by seducing Oswald from his retreat. They exerted all
their artifice to persuade him that the resentment of his Lord had totally
subsided; that he could not but consent to the desires of the gentle Countess,
and forgive an honest though mistaken zeal for the service of a Lady, who in a
few days was to be united with him, in the bands of love and wedlock. Oswald
hesitated; he knew the falsehood of some part of what Gray had declared; yet he
conceived that he must have delivered this jewel from the hand of the Countess,
and by her command; and that, of consequence, she must have been reconciled to
her suitor. He thought it natural, on such a reconciliation, to conceal some
late transactions: thus he endeavored to account for the misrepresentations of
Gray: yet still he feared and doubted. -- Gray, as by the authority of his
Lord, and in his name, not only pronounced his full pardon, but assured him of
favor and reward. The Abbot condemned his irresolution as weak and criminal,
as highly prejudicial to his own interest, and an undutiful suspicion of the
truth and honor of his master. The simplicity and inexperience of the vassal
gave force to these solicitations; he dreaded to renew the displeasure of
Raymond by delay or hesitation: he consented to return, and resigned himself to
Gray, who now led away his victims in triumph.

The party which Gray had appointed to attend him, soon appeared in view,
obeyed his signal, and advanced. At the sight of armed men, the misguided
Oswald felt all his suspicions renewed; he trembled; and his fears were
instantly confirmed. Gray, with an air of sullen authority, ordered him to be
seized and bound; he attempted to expostulate, but was silenced with all the
insolence of a successful malice, committed to a guard, and led away a prisoner
to the castle; and, there, was this friend to the afflicted and oppressed
consigned to the dreary dungeon. The infant heir of Salisbury was entrusted to
others of the party, whose services Gray purchased by rich bribes, and in whom
he chiefly confided. A kinsman he had upon the distant coast of Devon, to whom
they were directed to convey their charge with strictest care. Thus he resolved
to dispose of the young Lord for the present, as he relied on the attachment of
this kinsman, and by his means might hereafter remove him to some safe and
secret residence, as his future purposes might require.

SECT. III.
THUS far the wicked arts of Gray had been completely successful: and, now, he
hastened to the presence of Lord Raymond with his flattering congratulations.
He acquainted him in a few words, that all the mischief which the flight of
Oswald had threatened was now effectually prevented; that he had safely
disposed of young William with such guardians as were devoted to his, and to
his master's service; and that the false slave who had attempted to betray him,
was now his prisoner. Raymond wondered; embraced his minion, and applauded his
address and vigilance. In his first violence of pride and resentment he
pronounced that Oswald should instantly be hanged upon the next tree. But Gray
restrained his passion; and entreated him to suspend the fate of this vassal;
and to reserve the power of granting his forfeited life to the requests of Ela,
if this might hereafter contribute to conciliate her regards. At the name of
Ela, Raymond fighed, and turned upon his creature, with an aspect of perplexity
and sorrow. 'Trust me,' said he, I am weary of this unprofitable pursuit; and
would to heaven I had never seen this proud dame; never felt the power of her
beauty! -- This morning was I unexpectedly summoned to her presence. I saw the
charming mourner: I saw her tortured with fears. She had just discovered the
loss of an ancient ring, the usual ornament of her hand, and although she knows
not by whom, or for what purpose, it may have been secreted, yet this incident
has awakened her suspicions, and she dreads some farther design upon her
peace. But chiefly she fears for her son: she condemns her late conduct as weak
and precipitate, and repents of having trusted the boy from her side. At first,
she made an effort to preserve her dignity, and, in the language of greatness
and affected disdain, demanded how long my usurpation was to be continued. I
interrupted her with humble and ardent expressions of love: she wept, and was
still deaf to my solicitations. Yet, methought, she spoke of her late Lord
with less pride and exultation. If, said she, he has indeed paid the debt of
nature, may heaven look on his offenses with mercy, and protect his helpless
infant, and injured widow! then, with earnest and affecting accents she
entreated me to accept of all her wealth and magnificence, to indulge my wishes
freely with the rich inheritance of her lordly house: but not to pursue the
ruin of an helpless infant: to suffer his mother to follow him in peace; to
hide her grief, and waste her few melancholy days in the holy retirement of the
monastery. -- O my friend, who could stand unmoved at her disorder? But I did
not suffer all my emotion to break out. I contented myself, in general, with
entreating her to banish all gloomy thoughts, to expect happy days, to study
her real happiness, and to command it. I then retired, impatiently expecting
your arrival, and your sage and friendly counsel.

The success which had hitherto attended the practices and designs of Gray,
gave him authority and consequence with his Lord, and encouraged him to urge
his advice boldly and violently. When he had first informed him in general of
the transactions of the monastery, he pressed him to consider seriously that new
incidents might arise, new dangers threaten him, which might not always be
prevented. He spoke with severity of his irresolute and timid conduct: asked,
if it was his purpose to abandon all his glorious hopes, to return disgraced
and rejected; to encounter scorn and reproach, as a person unworthy of the
regards of this Lady, presumptuous and unjust. Nothing could secure his honor
from ruin, or perhaps his life from revenge, but his immediate nuptials with
the Countess. Of this he spoke, as of an event absolutely in the power of
Raymond, and delayed only by his mistaken tenderness. He was heard with earnest
surprise: but when his Lord began to plead the difficulties he had encountered,
and the obstinacy of Ela in denying her consent, he hastily interrupted him. --
'Let a day be appointed,' cried this minion, for the celebration of your
nuptials, let it be known through the land, let your attendants be ordered to
prepare for this event, and your knights directed to hold themselves in such
readiness as the joyful occasion requires. -- Let the rest be my care. Raymond,
who still preserved a tender affection for the Countess, and remembered with
horror how dangerously she had been affected by the insolence of Gray,
hesitated, and insisted on a full explanation of this mysterious language. Gray
again urged the absolute necessity of prevailing in his present undertaking,
both for his honor and his safety: the eternal infamy, nay, the utter
impossibility of receding, after having already proceeded thus far. To this he
added some artful praises of the Countess, and many animated observations on
the happiness of that man who should possess such a treasure of beauty. When
the passions of his Lord had by such discourse been raised to the utmost degree
of fervor, he began to flatter his hopes: 'This Lady,' said he, you at first
found reluctant, and no wonder: for she had not been assured that Lord William
was really no more. Of this she now seems persuaded, but regards his death as
an event too recent, to admit another wooer. What though she has discovered
such impatience of your love? what though she has attempted to escape from
this place? would she not have persevered in her design? would she not have
continued her flight, if this reluctance and aversion had not been artfully
assumed to give her honor and respect in the general eye? She affects to
summon friends to rescue her from your power; but she hopes that they will
interpose, and persuade her to accept your hand: but do we delay 'till some new
suitor shall arrive, and, under the pretense of relieving the oppressed, and
revenging her wrongs, shall successfully court her love, and build his own
fortune on your disgrace and ruin? -- Raymond was moved, and seemed ready to
pay implicit obedience to the dictates of his creature. -- Gray then spoke of
the zeal of Reginhald his brother, and his entire devotion to the service of
his noble patron. This faithful Monk, said he, will be of use. Observe the
Countess for some days; continue your fond wooing with all modest and
respectful duty, but with unabated zeal. She will soon experience that the
flight of Oswald has not proved effectual to collect her creatures round her:
and the disappointment will depress her proud spirit, and convince her that her
own and her son's fate still depend on you. The day on which your attendants
are taught to expect your nuptials, may perhaps find her consenting to your
wishes: but why should we demand or expect her formal consent? Reginhald shall
join your hands by virtue of his sacred authority, and pronounce the solemn
benediction which shall make her yours for ever. Her heart shall secretly
applaud this gentle violence. At least, her son, restored to her arms, shall be
the purchase of your pardon. -- Little of art was required to disguise or
palliate the baseness of this design, so effectually had he prepared the mind
of Raymond for its reception, by raising the storm of passions to darken and
confound his reason. This Lord at once resigned himself to the guidance of his
minion, and consented to pursue such measures as he should dictate. The Monk
was now summoned before him, and appeared in the most abject abasement and
servility. Raymond thanked him for his zeal, promised to repay his services,
and ordered him to observe exactly the directions of his brother. Reginhald
bowed lowly, and attempted to speak his duty and submission, but in disordered
and ungraceful language; then retired with Gray.

These wicked agents, thus invested with full authority, and prompted by their
hopes of interest and savor, vigorously pursued the work of oppression and
deceit. Reginhald repaired to his monastery (so was he directed by his brother)
where he urged the fathers to proceed, without delay, in their obsequies to the
deceased Lord, as his widow now prepared, and had appointed a day for her
secend nuptials, which were only delayed, 'till these religious rites had first
been duly performed. The reverend clerks were arrayed in their sacred
vestments, and chaunted forth the solemn requiem. The neighboring peasants
caught the religious sounds, curiously enquired the cause of these
extraordinary devotions, and spread the tidings of the intended marriage through
the adjacent country. In the mean time, the attendants and domestics of Raymond
were taught to expect the nuptials of their Lord on a day assigned, and ordered
to hold them ready for this joyful event. The found of busy preparation was
loud through all the castle, and was heard even to the apartment of the Countess,
who wondered, enquired, and was not long a stranger to the cause. She conceived
it to be no other than an artifice of her importunate wooer, to deceive the
friends of her house, and to destroy the credit of Oswald, her faithful
emissary (of whose confinement she was yet uninformed.) With scorn and
indignation she reflected on the base attempt to sully her bright fame, and to
persuade her friends, that, in defiance of the strict restraints of decent
widowhood, and the respect which the memory of a noble husband claimed, she
had, within the space of a few months, listened to the solicitations of a new
suitor, and consented to receive the hand of her oppressor. If the honor and
reverence with which she reflected on Lord William had been somewhat impaired
by her suspicions of his disloyalty, a new and more violent aversion to Lord
Raymond now possessed her mind, and there still kept up an inflexible
resolution never to acknowledge his pretensions to her inheritance, or to
accept his love. In such dispositions she received the visits of this Lord with
disdain, nor answered his tenders of affection, but by inveighing with all the
bitterness of contempt and abhorrence against the mean deceit which he was now
practicing. Raymond was abashed: he could not deny the accusation, but, with an
ill-affected openness, declared that he had indeed assured his friends, that
his wishes would be speedily crowned, as he would not suppose that she could
ever continue thus unreasonably obdurate, and obstinately insensible to her own
happiness.

Such were their interviews; and such the fixed aversion and proud disdain of
the Countess, unsubdued by oppression, grief, and fear. Her tedious and
melancholy hours were still wasted in alarms for her son, in anxious
expectation of relief; of the arrival and vigorous interposition of her
friends, and of the defeat and disgrace of her oppressor. In vain did she
incessantly enquire, complain, condemn the slow procedure of those who should
fly to assert her cause. No messenger of deliverance appeared, no voice of
comfort did she receive: but on the morning of that day, which Raymond had
presumptuously proclaimed his marriage-day, she still found herself the
helpless and joyless prisoner of her false guest.

SECT. IV.
RAYMOND, now on the point of executing his bold purpose, trembled with
anxiety, doubt, and solicitude. Gray himself felt an inward agitation,
although he labored to encourage and confirm his Lord. The Monk alone stood
stupidly insensible of the importance or of the baseness of the design. The
attendants were disposed in their appointed stations; and joy and festivity
seemed prepared. The apartments of the Countess alone were sad and solitary,
where Elinor was still suffered to perform all kind offices to her afflicted
Lady. At the appointed hour, Raymond appeared before her, and first in gentle
terms reproached her unkind coldness and severity; but urged his love in a
manner more bold and peremptory. She was silent: he renewed his instances: she
breathed a deep sigh, and looked up to heaven as if complaining of her
unmerited distress, her helpless state, which exposed her to these insolent and
hateful solicitations. He seized her hand; she struggled to disengage herself,
whilst her eyes darted fiery disdain. In that moment the brothers entered. At
sight of Reginhald she shuddered with horror and dismay, though yet
unacquainted with the purpose of his appearance. A solemn pause of silence
ensued; the Countess trembling; Raymond confounded; and the brothers, who could
not behold this disorder without some faint emotion, collecting new force, and
arming themselves against the assaults of pity.

An encouraging glance from Gray, at length, emboldened his Lord to break
silence. He conjured the Countess by all her hopes of peace, all the tenderness
she felt for her darling son, no longer to delay her own happiness; no longer
to continue thus perversely insensible of his just pretensions to her love. He
now stood before her, he declared, to claim those rights which the royal favor
had conferred upon him; that neither his honor nor his love, permitted him,
any longer, to flatter her pride, or to indulge her weak scruples. -- She fell
upon her knees, and began to utter-an earnest and passionate vow, that she
never would consent to accept his hand; but Raymond and his associates quickly
interrupted and raised her from the ground. Nor was her great spirit yet
subdued by this rude violence: she turned upon them with looks of astonishment
and disdain. Raymond entreated; Gray reproved her pride; and Reginhald
denounced the vengeance of heaven against her obstinacy: whilst the tender mind
of Elinor, wounded deeply by the distress of her dear mistress, thus surrounded
with cruelty and oppression, eased itself in unavailing tears. Raymond still
held the hand of Ela; and the impious Monk, who had waited for the signal from
Gray, suddenly began to pronounce the marriage rites; but was instantly
interrupted by loud and piercing shrieks frequently and violently repeated both
by the Countess and her attendant. The unhappy Lady could not long support this
violent emotion; she sunk down upon her couch; and Raymond hung over her with a
mixture of tenderness and vexation. After a long interval of faint and
breathless depression, she seemed to revive, and prepared to speak. Reginhald
seized the moment of her recovery, and again began the holy office. -- But in
that instant a new and unexpected interruption checked his profane purpose, and
confounded the base attempt of usurpation and cruel oppression. The sound of
haste and trepidation seemed to approach the chamber. Raymond started! the
brothers shook at the alarm; a voice was heard calling loudly on Gray. He
issued forth; Raymond and the Monk followed: they saw a domestic pale and
breathless with haste, who just found words to declare that Lord William was on
his way, and would speedily reach the castle.

Not the condemned criminal when he receives his final sentence; not the
sinner, yet unconfirmed in guilt, when the sudden crash of thunder appalls his
spirit, ever shrunk into such abject consternation, as Raymond now experienced
from this shocking intelligence. Gray was scarcely less confounded, although he
feared only for his safety, and had no sense of wounded honor. They hastened
into an adjacent apartment, where Reginhald alone was sufficiently composed to
examine this messenger of terror; who informed them, that his appointed duty
had led him to some distance from the castle, where he had discovered a small
company of travelers, who, on his nearer approach, appeared in disorder and
perplexity: that they had demanded his condition and place of residence, and on
their part informed him, that they were the attendants and messengers of Lord
William, who had landed on the coast of Cornwall, and was soon to resume the
possession of his castle: the information they had receive on their way of the
nuptials of the Countess had filled them with consternation; three of them had
resolved to return and convey this intelligence to their Lord, whilst an equal
number now hastened forward, if possible to prevent so fata a purpose. --
'Behold!' said he, pointing downwards from the window which commanded a sull
view of the castle-gates, their speed has equalled mine, and they are now
entering. -- Gray rushed out, and ordered the domestic to follow. He received
the unwelcome guests with an appearance of respect. They were conducted to an
apartment, and entertained with due courtesy by the man who had brought the
news of their arrival, and who now had strict charge, that for a while they
should be kept from any intercourse or conference with the other attendants.

A small ray of hope seemed to dart through the gloom which had possessed the
mind of Gray, when he found that Lord William himself was not yet arrived. A
little respite seemed of moment, as it allowed him to reflect, and to concert
his suture measures. At first, he thought of abandoning his Lord, and securing
himself by flight; but although Raymond should not be able to revenge such
desertion, the power and resentment of Lord Hubert were terrible, and could not
fail to destroy him. Gay hopes of sharing in the riches of this great house of
Salisbury, had long possessed his imagination; and he now felt the most
implacable hatred of the man who was approaching to defeat these gay hopes. His
malice and his fears conspired to recommend the most desperate course of
action. He resolved to make one daring effort more, and, if possible, still to
establish the pretensions of his master, and to remove his rival by a bold
assassination.

In such dispositions did this wicked minion return to his Lord. He found him
sunk in despair, and tortured with distraction. Scarcely had he begun to speak,
when Raymond, starting up in frantic emotion, seized upon him with dreadful
menaces of vengeance, as the treacherous murderer of his honor and his peace;
and cursed himself and his vile seducer in all the bitterness of remorse.
Reginhald fled, and sought to hide himself from the terror of his resentment.
Gray, without the least expostulation, the least attempt to allay the fury of
his Lord, suffered the violence of passion to take its free course, and to
waste its force in fruitless execrations. And soon was the storm allayed; and
Raymond as if recovering from a sudden phrenzy, softened into grief and
tenderness condemned his own extravagance, and entreated his favorite to
advise, direct, and extricate him from this difficult and dangerous situation.

Gray neither endeavored to palliate the disgrace, nor to lessen the danger,
which his lord dreaded. He observed that Raymond had indeed proceeded so far as
to leave no doubt that he had disregarded the conditions imposed by the King,
and had attempted the most lawless acts of oppression. His own part in these
transactions he represented as the effects of his unbounded zeal for the
service of his master; a zeal which threatened to involve him in the fatal
consequences of an injured husband's vengeance. Such discourse only served to
irritate the pain which Raymond felt. 'Is there no way to retreat with honor?'
cried he, 'no! nor with safety,' returned his minion, Let us not think of
retreat. We are engaged, and must pursue our purpose. You wonder; but the way
is obvious, and there is but one way. Perhaps this husband comes but slightly
attended: you have Knights and men of arms. Nay, start not. Shall we tamely
hold our throats, and receive death from him? No; this arm shall prevent the
blow. -- Raymond had long been accustomed to resign himself to the guidance of
this favorite: by him he had been gradually led on from one excess to the
other; and so thoroughly was his mind prepared to receive the very worst
impressions, (such is the fatal consequence of the first deviation from virtue)
that, instead of trembling at this last proposal, he seemed only sollicitous to
know the surest means of effecting it. -- And, here again, the favorite
assumed that superiority which the pliant temper of his Lord, and an intimate
acquaintance with his weakness and unjust designs had given him. He desired
that all future measures should be entrusted to him; that from him the
attendants should be directed to receive their orders. Raymond acquiesced, yet
not without the utmost anxiety, and most melancholy presages. His retirement
was disturbed and painful: all the inhabitants of the castle plainly perceived
that something extraordinary had occured; something to disorder their Lord, and
to perplex his designs. The Countess alone felt some degree of comfort: she
fondly imputed the sudden retreat of her persecutors to some happy event which
the flight of Oswald had produced, some appearance of her friends, or some
accounts of their motions. Hence was her harassed mind enabled to recover from
the violent shock which it had just now received.

In the mean time, the vigilant and crafty Gray, once more, sought the
messengers of Earl William, who by this time were much alarmed at the manner of
their reception. He met them with courteous looks, and declared, that the
Countess, who was now ill at ease, and could not admit them to her presence,
had sent to inform herself particularly of the intelligence which they brought.
They related briefly the landing of William, the place of his present
residence, and his intention of speedily returning to his own castle. Gray
received the account with coldness and affected diffidence: he observed, that
the most positive assurances had been received that Earl William had perished
in France; that, if he really was approaching he must be received with due
respect: but, if envy or malice sought to disturb the approaching happiness of
Lord Raymond by false intelligence, his power was great, and his resentment
would be violent. By his directions, they were for a short time to be strictly
guarded, lest they should alarm the minds of his friends by rumors which might
possibly prove groundless; if otherwise, a few days would release them. -- They
gazed upon each other with surprise, but it was in vain to expostulate; they
appealed to time to confirm the truth of their declarations: and Gray then
proceeded to summon some of the boldest and most zealous of the attendants on
Raymond, who were conducted to their Lord, and by him commanded to receive
their orders from his favorite, and implicitly to follow his direction.

These commands Gray pretended to explain more fully. He told them, that, from
advices lately received, their Lord had good reason to apprehend a false design
to drive him from those possessions, which he so justly claimed, and from
whence alone he hoped to derive the power of rewarding his faithful followers;
that they were to arm themselves with speed, and carefully to guard all the
approaches to the castle, against force or treachery. Nor were they slow to
express their zeal and chearsul obedience. And now this wicked minion stood
prepared at the head of a resolute and well appointed band, to oppose the
entrance of Lord William, and to plunge a dagger in his heart.

Long they waited in anxious expectation of their invaders, but in vain; no
invaders appeared, no danger threatened them. Gray began indeed to hope that
these strangers had been employed to deceive them, and to raise these false
alarms for some purpose yet undiscovered; perhaps by some friends of the
Countess, who had learned or suspected her present condition. He visited the
messengers frequently, insulted them on the appearance of falsehood which their
intelligence now seemed to wear; menaced, and endeavored to terrify them into
a confession of the real purpose of their coming. They steadily adhered to
their former declarations, and related such circumstances of the fortunes, the
dangers, and the arrival of Lord William on the coast of England, as but too
plainly demonstrated their truth and integrity. Gray was convinced, but
dissembled his conviction. He waited impatiently for the approach of the Earl,
but no intelligence could be received: no unusual appearance, no arrival of
strange and unexpected visitants, had broke in upon the silence and
tranquillity of the adjacent lands. The disappointment served but the more to
perplex and alarm him: his vigilance was not relaxed; he kept his force
collected about him, and still stood resolved to meet his danger, and confirmed
in his bloody purpose.

End of BOOK IV.
BOOK V.
SECT. I.
THE three faithful followers of Earl WILLIAM who had determined to return to
their Lord, found him just issuing forth from the hall of Randolph, at the head
of a small body of attendants. At sight of them his mind was silled with sad
presages. He turned upon his ancient friend with surprise: then both rushed
forward, impatient to learn the cause of this unexpected return; and instantly
received the melancholy tidings, that whilst their companions had brought the
news of the Earl's arrival to the castle of Salisbury, they had returned to
acquaint him, that the Countess had given her hand to Raymond, and that his
nuptials had been solemnized on the very day of their approach.

The bitterness of this intelligence was too great even for the great soul of
WILLIAM. He sunk into a silent dismay, and seemed unwilling or unable to
contend with despair. The Knight, whose suspecting thoughts had been prepared
for this account, strove to rouse and comfort him, but a long time were his
efforts fruitless. The afflicted Lord scarcely forced out, at long and heavy
intervals, some broken sighs, some confused and imperfect expressions, of
anguish, of resentment, at the supposed unkindness of his wife, and the
weakness and unworthiness of her fatal compliance. At length, suddenly starting
from this extreme of depression to that of the most violent fury, he uttered
dreadful denunciations of vengeance against the destroyer of his peace, and
called on his friends to attend him instantly to his castle, and to assist him
in a brave and jost revenge. But here the caution of the old Knight interposed,
and with difficulty prevailed on him to return to his friendly roof, and there
to consult maturely upon the most prudent measures. The Earl obeyed, yet seemed
intent only on the most violent and daring course. In vain did Randolph remind
him of the insufficient numbers of his retinue, and the superior advantages of
the usurper. The storm of passion was still loud and terrible; nor could the
Earl liften to danger or difficulty: the injuries which his honor had
sustained were the sole object of his thoughts, and revenge his sole purpose.

The fair Jacqueline soon perceived a confusion and disorder arising from some
unexpected incident; and, impatient to learn the cause, appeared before her
host and her protector. Randolph accosted and entreated her to unite her gentle
persuasion, and to prevent Lord William from rushing precipitately on ruin.
'No!' cried the Earl, hastily interrupting him, the attempt is not rash, nor
the purpose desperate. What though my wife has so soon forgotten me? What though
the absence of a few months was too great for her impatience? What though she
has accepted a second husband? Have my numerous dependents too been false?
Have they forgotten me? No! let us collect them! let us fire their brave
spirits to revenge their injured Lord; and let his fury fall with its due force
upon this adulterous pair. -- Jacqueline seemed lost in consusion: Randolph
again interposed, and urged the danger of venturing, thus weakly attended, to
seek his vassals, and openly to give defiance to Raymond. But now the noble
maid recovered from her first furprise, and her great soul began to beam forth
through all her virgin reserve. Where is that power and influence, said she, in
the court of England, which Lord William boasted? If his own wrongs cannot
there find redress, if he must have recourse to the precarious chance of arms,
in vain have I sought relief in this strange land; in vain have I indulged the
pleasing hopes of regaining my lost inheritance, and (if he still supports the
miseries of oppression, my injured parent. Will not the king protect. -- He
shall give me justice, cried William. This arm raised him to the throne: this
arm can tear him from it. Then embracing her with a paternal sondness, 'The
spirit of thy brave father,' said he, dwells in thee. Yes, fair partner of my
fortunes, the King shall give me justice. Let my wife, no, the wife of Raymond
now, enjoy for a while her foul disloyalty. My vengeance shall be first
directed a against the great author of my wrongs, the proud Hubert. In the face
of his misguided Sovereign, before the gallant Nobles of England, will I
proclaim his baseness, and demand full redress. Let us hasten to the royal
presence: there shall my friends crowd round me, and my vassals attend my
orders.

Randolph was pleased at this resolution, which William considered as the most
honorable, but he as the safest course. The time, the manner, and all the
circumstances of their departure were now settled with more temper and composed
deliberation. The Knight insisted to accompany his noble friend, together with
his band of followers: Jacqueline consented still to reside in Cornwall, until
the Earl had obtained, first, the sull redress of his own injuries, and, then,
the happy means of rescuing her father, or of revenging his fate. The little
troop was soon prepared to enter on their march, and soon took their way with
no ungallant show. The mind of Lord William was still gloomy and disordered. He
thought on his wife: the tenderness of her former love, the noble nature which
all hen actions had invariably displayed, recurred to his mind, but now served
only to aggiavate his despair. Her strange and precipitate compliance with the
desires of Raymond was perplexing: but to be so soon forgotten was tormenting:
and ever and anon he unbosomed his distracted thoughts to the friendly Knight.

'Foolish and wretched is the man' (thus would he exclaim) who builds his
happiness on the frail and instable affection of woman. O my friend! how
securely did I conceive our loves to have been founded! how firmly did her
heart seem linked to mine: Can I forget the time, when all the noble youth of
England courted the smiles of the rich and beautiful heiress of Earl Patrick,
when her eyes marked me out as their most worthy object, and her love graced my
rising fame? Can I forget the day when I was first, publicly distinguished by
her favor? The solemn jousts were prepared: the Knights glittered in their
pompous array: we were surrounded with all the beauties of the land; but our
thoughts and desires were fixed on Ela. How did I labor to engage her
intention by my gorgeous entry? Well do I remember the device which then
adorned my shield, and which my youthful pride had dictated. It was an eagle
towering in air, with his eyes fixed on the sun; and these words beneath; NOT
AKROGANT BUT CONSCIOUS OF NOBLENESS. We traversed the lists in solemn state;
and each champion, as he passed, made low obeisance toward the place where Ela
sat; but each unnoticed, 'till, William pacing proudly by, and paying the just
homage to her high beauty, suddenly she let fall the knot of ribbons which
adorned her lovely arm. I seized, kissed, and fixed it in my crest: and on that
day did my gallant deeds consess my zeal to merit her high regards. Many a
spear was bravely shivered: but, ere our appointed courses were finished, a
loud and sudden shriek assailed our affrighted ears: we turned and saw the
scaffold, where this fair dame was seated yielding to its load. I burst like
lightning to her rescue; and, amidst all the officious and vigorous
interposition of the crowd, which the dangerous incident had collected, this
arm it was which saved her -- And did our loves decrease? Was my heart ever
estranged? Was it one moment seduced to any other object? -- And, yet, so soon
to be forgotten! the false tidings of my death so eagerly received!

Randolph was studious to divert him from this melancholy subject. Revenge, he
knew, was grateful to the high foul of William; and he labored to inspire him
with hopes of a brave revenge. He spoke of the arts that had been used to
influence the weakness of widowed, unfriended, unassisted woman; of the craft
of Hubert, and his iniquitous abuse of the royal favor. 'But now,' said he,
the King shall know this minion: he shall know with what malicious purpose of
oppression and unjustice his false heart conceived, and his false tongue
uttered the lying tale of Earl William's death; and speedily shall he execute
the full vengeance due to the wounded honor of his brave kinsman. -- With eyes
darting indignation, and sounds of disdain, the Earl replied, that his own
influence and reputation in England, his noble friends and numerous adherents,
had made Kings; and that he relied on these much more than on the justice of
young Harry. 'Alas' said he, little can thy honest heart conceive of that crast
and wily insinuation with which this courtier has wound himself to the heart
of his easy Prince. He alone directs and commands him. The noblest spirits of
England are insolently scorned; and the remotest corner of the realm feels his
pernicious influence. 'Good heaven,' cried Randolph (still laboring to divert
the Earl from the gloomy subject which lay deeply fixed in his mind, and was
ever ready to rife and torment him) When shall our distracted country feel the
blessings of a wife and virtuous rule? shall faction and tumult for ever
disturb the land, and forbid avarice and slavish adulation for ever surround
the throne? Is the insolence of illgotten power to know no control? Sad and
gloomy is the prospect! -- And yet, the spirits of my brave countrymen, though
depressed and overborne, are still unbroken. They have already contended, and
they may again contend for the great prize of freedom. Perhaps (and truly
pleasing it is to indulge that hope) England may yet experience some happy age,
when wisdom, and valor, and virtue shall conspire to bless and to exalt her.
Some glorious Monarch may yet hold her imperial scepter, flourishing in all the
pride of youth, loved and revered by his grateful people, and dreaded by the
enemies of justice and his kingdom. Perhaps the pious care of some illustrious
parent may have formed his mind to all princely virtues; perhaps some noble
friend of exalted merit and unsullied integrity may have aided the glorious
work. Wisdom and justice may guide his councils, and valor lead forth his
victorious armies: the united voice of a happy people may bless him, and the
united force of all his enemies may sink before him. If heaven should be thus
gracious to our country, could its transcendent favor admit of any accession?
-- Yes! let the happiness, dissused from the throne, be reflected back on such
a Monarch. Let him be amply rewarded, in a princely consort, fitted to grace
his royal seat, and relieve his generous cares. -- Then let the ardent prayers
of his people be accepted. Let the princely pair flourish, and very late pay
the debt of nature: from heir to heir let their virtues be transmitted; and
immortal be the glories and blessings of their reign!

The spirit of the good Knight was elevated and inflamed by this idea of public
selicity, the most exalted and complete which his imagination could form: and
William seemed to forget his private grief, and to be wrapped in the same
pleasing dream. And now they approached toward the city of Marlborough where
Henry still held his court. The distant view of this royal seat raised a
violent agitation in the breast of Salisbury. He was now on the point of
breaking from his obscurity, and once more shining forth in his native sphere:
and he selt all the emotion of an high and noble mind, impatient of wrongs,
ready to urge them boldly and resolutely to seek redress. He entered the city,
when suddenly his spirit was still farther agitated by a strange and unexpected
encounter. A small, but gallant, troop approached him, headed by a youth of
noble port. Their leader had already fixed his eyes upon him, with marks of
wonder; and, stoping, as if deprived of all power of motion, pronounced the
name of Salisbury. William came forward with courtous demeanor, attentively
surveying the stranger, who at once ended his suspense, yet increased his
wonder, by declaring himself the young Lord of Poictiers, that Chauvigny whom
his generosity had restored to an injurious father. A sudden exclamation of
surprise burst from the Earl, and an interval of silence ensued: at length he
was enabled to exclaim -- Good heavens! the son of the oppressor and murderer
of my friend: -- And in England! -- The father too, perhaps, is ready to insuit
our wrongs, and boast of his perfidious cruelty.' -- With his ashes' replied
the youth, 'let his errors also lie buried, Do thou love the good Les Roches?
He is my friend and father: extend thy love to me, and say, bless me with the
happy tidings, that the fair Jacqueline has escaped the storm of contention
and misfortune, and lives in sasety.' -- Would to heaven!' cried the Earl,
'that her father were now in England, to embrace and bless her; to be witness
of her noble nature, and to thank the faints for her preservation. -- The young
Lord could no longer restrain his impatient ardour; they had both alighted, and
he now rushed on Earl William, and clung round his neck, with all the
extravagance of joy. 'What tho,' said he, the brave Les Roches be still pursued
by the severity of fortune; he may be rescued; he may be yet restored to honor
and happiness. Lord William will not deny his assistance; he will aid me with
his power, whilst I labor to restore him! -- Now, cried the Earl, I am indeed
thy friend. -- But we are at the English court. Here must I make a trial of my
power. If the name of Salisbury be not forgotten; if a few months of obscurity
have not totally effaced the remembrance of my birth, my actions, and my
services, I shall yet obtain redress of my private wrongs; and, if he still
survives, I shall relieve my friend.

Thus saying, he rushed forward, with an aspect of Fiery resentment and
indignation. Chauvigny turned back with his followers, and attended him,
expecting some important discovery, some explanation of what the Earl had
hastily and obscurely hinted. They soon reached the very center of greatness
and magnificence; and, now, the long lost Earl of Salisbury once more appeared
in becoming state amidst the nobles of England, shining like the great light of
heaven when just emerged from a dark and baleful eclipse. His ancient friends
embraced him; his peers crowded round him, impatient to learn the story of his
wonderful deliverance. Not so the crasty Hubert; he heard of his arrival with
terror, and beheld him with confusion and dismay. The young king hastened to
congratulate his noble kinsman, who sunk upon his knee, loudly calling for
justice and redress. Henry raised him, and demanded the cause and purpose of
his petition. The Earl collected his great spirit, and, with locks of terror
and disdain, pointed to Hubert, whilst silence and suspense possessed the crowd
of nobles. 'Come forth,' said he, thou wicked author of my wrongs! come forth,
and meet the vengeance due to thy treachery. -- Here stands the wretched
caitiff, (such this arm shall prove him) who basely seized the fatal moment of
my absence to destroy my peace and happiness for ever. Bear witness for me, ye
warlike Barons and Nobles of this land, with what zealous loyalty I labored to
support the cause of Henry, and to establish our rightful King on that royal
feat: for him and for our country have I encountered the toils and desperate
calamities of war, the fury of proud foes and formidable hosts, the rage of
storms and waves, and the dangers of the tempestuous ocean. Scarcely have these
shattered limbs supported the painful task of honor, and wonderful has my
deliverance been. And what is my recompense? Whilst I fought in Gascoigne, this
pernicious courtier, who never experienced the hazards and distresses of the
field, never knew aught but the luxurious ease of a palace, contrived the ruin
of the brave harrassed soldier. He chose out his minion, his nephew, the
unworthily ennobled Raymond: he filled the royal ears with false and malicious
tales of my death; he sent his creature to seize my castle, my power, and my
extended domain; and to insult my unhappy Countess with his adulterous love: he
has abused her weakness; he has deceived her credulity, or perhaps by force
possessed himself of her bed. I seek not for reparation: my wrongs wist not
admit of this; but I call for just punishment, for vengeance due to that deadly
wound my honor has thus sustained. To the justice of my liege Lord I fly, --
to your royal justice, rather than to the influence which Salisbury still
maintains, and the power which he still commands in England.

Henry was embarrassed and disordered by the boldness of this address. The
precipitation with which he had yielded to the desires of Hubert now appeared
in the true light, and covered him with confusion. He prepared to accost the
Earl in such soothing terms, as he could command in this disorder of his
thoughts, when the favorite, versed in all the refined arts of dissimulation,
hastily prevented him, and thus assumed the semblance of a generous impatience
of all censure or suspicion:

That I rejoice at the happy arrival of Earl William, the saints are witnesses:
that I believed him dead surely cannot be deemed a crime, when such repeated
assurances were received, that he had shared the fate of his unhappy
countrymen. What though I too indulgently consented to the wishes of my nephew,
and obtained him permission to woo the gentle Countess, whom all the land
regarded as a widow? What force, what fraud, what injury was meditated? What
injustice has been committed? What vile dishonest purposes have been pursued,
that vengeance is so loudly denounced? The soul of Raymond is noble, and his
procedure has been honorable. True, he sought the Countess; he found her deep
in sorrow; he indulged her sorrow; nor urged his passion with the importunity
of violent love. He waited, if, happily, time and his tender cares might move
the Countess to listen to his suit; but, thanks to the interposing providence
of heaven, his suit could not prevail. -- Go, Lord William, repair to thy
princely castle: there thy wise waits to receive thee; there shall thou find
her unassailed and unpolluted. Go, and be happy; and, when thou reflectest on
thine own credulity, learn to forgive those who too easily received the false
story of thy death.

The Earl gazed in silence, doubting, yet willing to believe these happy
tidings. Hubert repeated his assurances with an aspect steady and composed. By
'my Holidame!' exclaimed the King, it rejoiceth us that Lord William has now
found his suspicions false: not the unexpected deliverance and happy arrival of
our noble consin give us greater joy. But let us forget all jealousies, and
depise all false rumors. -- Embrace, and forgive Lord Hubert, command our
power, and enjoy the reward of thy gallant toils. -- The courtiers echoed the
sentiments of their prince, and William with a constrained submission gave his
hand to Hubert: his noble friends were collected round him, and renewed their
congratulations: the King by his caresses seemed willing to efface the
remembrance of that easiness with which he had yielded to the desires of his
savourite, and this favorite, by an assumed affection and humbleness of
deportment, sought to quench all remains of animosity in the mind of the
injured Earl; but conscious, of his own artifice and hypocrisy, he naturally
suspected that readiness of belief, with which Salisbury seemed to yield his
declarations, as well as that sudden calm of peace and reconciliation, in which
his fury seemed to subside. He had injured, and therefore hated him: he had
affirmed boldly to divert the present storm; but, whether the Countess had
already yielded to Raymond, or whether he had forcibly possessed himself of her
bed, as yet he knew not: and possibly Lord William might detect his falsehood,
and return with double fury, to urge his wrongs, and seek his just vengeance.
Such thoughts he revolved for a while in his busy mind; and then confirmed
himself in the dreadful purpose of concealing his baseness, and providing
effectually for his safety and power by the immediate destruction of this Lord.

Far other thoughts now employed the Earl. He had by slow degrees, and by the
repeated arts of refined and steady hypocrisy, been wrought into a firm
persuasion, that Hubert had declared the truth; that his messengers had been
deceived; and that his wife still preserved her loyalty: and he freely indulged
these delightful thoughts, which naturally inspirited an enlivened joy and
complacency. The gracious condescensions of the King he received with just
returns of duty; he shared in the delight which his noble friends expressed at
their return; and, although he wondered, yet was he affected with due pleasure,
at the zeal and love which the young Lord of France discovered, at that
earnestness of friendship which seemed so kindly interested in his sortunes.
But not the splendor and pleasures of a court, not the affection of friends,
nor the smiles of royal favor, could detain him in the city of Marlborough. He
was impatient to seek his own noble mansion, and his attendants held themselves
in readiness to accompany him. Without any delay, but what refreshment
necessarily demanded, he took a dutiful leave of the King; he received the
repeated assurances of Hubert, that his nephew had already retired from the
castle, and that the Countess waited to embrace him with unabated love; and he
departed at the head of his little troop, now reinforced by the followers of
Lord Chauvigny, who declared his resolution to attend the Earl of Salisbury.

They took their way; and William, who had hitherto been totally engaged by his
own great affairs, was now more at ease, and more at leisure to recall the
tender sentiments of friendship, and to think on the good Les Roches. 'Gentle
Lord,' said he, addressing himself to young Chauvigny, how have I deserved this
zealous attachment, these extraordinary instances of your affection? Say, what
surprising events have brought thee hither? Say, how has Les Roches merited
those tender names, I think thou gavedst him, of friend and father? What of his
fortunes can thou inform me? If he indeed survives, where shall I seek him?
How shall I restore his daughter? -- The mention of Jacqueline brightened the
countenance of her lover with a momentary joy, which was instantly clouded, and
with a sigh which awakened all the sears of William, he exclaimed at the
severity with which fortune had pursued his generous friend. 'I still hope,'
said he, and on that hope rests all my comfort, that he is now in England, but
whither driven, or where he may now lay his melancholy head, alas, I know not.
It is my purpose to seek him; and in this good purpose Earl William surely must
assist me. -- Let me unfold the story of our fortunes, and no longer wonder to
see Chauvigny in this land. -- They rode slowly on apart from their associates,
all but the good old knight; and the Frenchman thus began.

SECT. II.
HOW can I reflect on that credulity, with which my father yielded to the false
and malicious Renresentations of Mal-leon, and that unmerited severity with
which he pursued our generous friend? Peace and forgiveness to his departed
spirit! -- If thou have already heard how the hunted fugitive ranged through
the wild and desert mountains, spare me the odious recital: yes, thou must have
heard. Thy brave Countrymen, who long defended him, must have at length found
their Lord. Their valor only could have rescued thee from the snares of envy
and cruelty. And, may due honor and reward attend that Fidelity, which guarded
the unhappy devoted head of Les Roches! Long time they watched over him in his
melancholy retreat: nor was it their want of vigilance, but his own absence of
thought and careless inattention to danger, which at last separated him from
their protection.

It was on the morning of a night of broken and disordered slumbers, that the
unhappy Lord started from his hard couch, full of inward grief, and agitation.
The woody covert where he had sought repose, at first concealed his motions
from the Englishmen, who watched at some distance. Insensibly was he led on,
wrapped up in sad and painful reflection; and wandered solitary down the winding
path, which led from the mountain, was divided, and gradually lost in a vale
incumbered with shrubs and rocks, and watered by a resounding current. At
length, he awakened as from a dream, stared round on the awful prospect, and
sought to gain his companions. But, alas! he had wandered too far, and too
incautiously. Perplexed and confounded, encompassed with steep hills, which the
luxuriant hand of nature had clothed with a wild magnificence of forest; and,
ever and anon, diverted from his course by the rocky fragments which the
torrent seemed to have washed down into the valley; his eyes searched in vain
for the path which he had taken: he hasted on, and paused by turns, without
direction, nor totally free from terror; when suddenly he descried a venerable
personage, clad in the habit of austere piety, on which the silver beard
descended from a grave and emaciated visage. The hermit advanced, raising his
shrivelled hands in holy benediction over our astonished friend; and, as Les
Roches bowed before him, he enquired with surprise what fate or chance had led
him into this rude and solitary retreat.

The afflicted Lord, awed by his reverend aspect, yet comforted by that
benevolence which beamed forth from his looks, and softened all his accents,
freely acknowledged that he was the wretched child of calamity, driven to the
desert by persecution and oppression; and that he sought the neighboring
hills, where a few friends, the two sharers in his misfortune, waited his
return. The reverend father, who saw his anguish, comforted, exhorted, and by
degrees so far gained on his confidence, that he freely acknowledged his name
and quality, and briefly related the events which had driven him from the
society of men. The hermit was moved, and, pointing to his cell, which lay at
no great distance, There, said he, shall thou find refuge, 'till these storms
of calamity have wasted their violence. Come, on, my son, enter and partake of
my homely refreshment: your friends too shall be my care. Tarry there: I know
all the windings and secret paths of these unfrequented hills; I shall soon
find them: and here shall they enjoy a more secure, and, perhaps, less
uncomfortable retreat. The Baron made obeisance, and accepted the generous
invitation. The hermit labored up the precipice with slow and painful steps,
toward the place which Les Roches had described; but here he found no unhappy
strangers: all was silence and solitude. He returned full of fears and sad
forebodings, which his tenderness of nature had dictated. He entered his cave,
but this too was silent and solitary: no guest appeared; no afflicted Lord
waited his arrival.

However cautiously Les Roches had directed his course, however secret and
retired he had chosen his residence, still had his motions been long watched by
some base and ignoble men, allured by the rewards promised to those who should
discover and seize him. Four sordid hinds, disguised in the garb of wood men,
had diligently traced him through all his various progress, but still were
terrified and kept at wary distance by the vigilance and well known valor of
his attendants. The moment of his separation had not escaped them: they
exulted, and resolved to seize this critical occasion. They pursued his steps,
and hastened down to the valley by different routs to them well known. -- They
lay unnoticed, impatient to snatch their prey: they marked the late conference,
and saw the hermit depart; and no sooner was he lost in the distant wood, than
rushing furiously into the cave, and drawing their concealed weapons, they
seized the unhappy Lord unprepared for resistance. In vain did he enquire the
cause, and endeavor to expostulate: they sternly commanded him to attend their
pleasure, and hurrying him precipitately away, directed their course toward
the castle of Poictiers, filled with the delightful idea of those rewards they
were to receive for a service so important. Their victim attended them, patient
and resigned to their insolence, disdaining all entreaties and complaints; and
was at length conducted into our hall, as a man indifferent to his fate, and
prepared boldly to meet the worst that oppression could inflict.

But here he found a strange and unlooked for reception; and all the sanguine
hopes of his sordid hunters were lost in confusion and disgrace. Fortunately
some followers of Les Roches, who had been made prisoners, and were examined by
my father, distinctly recounted the events in the Isle of The, and fired his
brave spirit with indignation and contempt for the Count Mal-leon. He began to
lament the precipitate and misguided severity with which he had pursued our
friend, and to revere the character of Lord Salisbury. In that moment he
received the account of my flight, with true paternal grief and anxiety. His
joy at my speedy return was equally extravagant; and soon was he informed of
the generosity that restored me to his arms. Alas! these violent and repeated
impressions were too great for his weak and disordered frame. He had long been
oppressed by a dangerous malady, which, as it had inflamed and irritated his
spirit to an unusual degree of impatience and fretful violence, so was it, in
return, inflamed and irritated by the events which this violence had produced.
Too late did he lament his fatal rashness, and utter his ineffectual wishes to
make a full atonement. On the very morning when Les Roches arrived at
Poictiers, we were alarmed with the symptoms of his dissolution, and in these
arms did he expire.

Too intent on paying the mournful offices of my deceased parent, I could
scarcely give a thought to Les Roches; I had just the power to issue my command
that he should be treated nobly. Thus did he continue for some time a prisoner,
unnoticed, and uncertain of his fate: an interval which we afterward lamented
bitterly. To that we imputed the loss of Jacqueline; to that, the distresses of
Lord William; which our imaginations represented in the most frightful form,
all derived from my unhappy delay in seeking and offering him protection. At
length the remains of Lord Chauvigny were interred with all solemn rites
befitting his exalted condition. I now became Lord of his power and domain, and
soon found leisure to think on the father of my beloved Jacqueline. The hinds
who had made him my prisoner, and now applied for their reward, faw me fall at
his feet and embrace him, with all the rapture of affection and reverence. They
would gladly have a merit of preserving and conveying him to my castle: nor
should I have denied their reward, but that their rude insolence had aggravated
the distresses of my friend. I instantly pronounced him free; I vowed to devote
all my influence and power, to make atonement for his unmerited sufferings; to
exert the most zealous efforts of love and friendship to regain his daughter
and to relieve Lord Salisbury. But Les Roches was indeed re-instated in full
possession of his lands and castle: but, not all our most diligent enquiries,
not all our vigilance and labor, in traversing the wildest and most
unfrequented parts of our province, could obtain the least information of his
daughter, or his friend; so secretly had Salisbury chosen his retreat: or
perhaps he was then contending with storms and waves: perhaps securely landed
on his own native shore. This last thought was pleasing, and we were inclined
to indulge it. -- Thus while my breast was filled with all the impatience of
love, and paternal fondness equally predominant in Les Roches, we soon
concurred in the adventurous resolution of seeking the dear treasure in
England, which fortune had so unkindly torn from us. Thither, said we, has
Jacqueline been conducted by her noble protector, and there shall we find both
utterly despairing to regain Les Roches. Inflamed with such hopes, we instantly
prepared our retinue, a gay and gallant train: we soon reached the coast, and
soon were we embarked: alas, too soon! little suspecting the severe reverse of
fortune, that now threatened to confound all our flattering expectations. -- The
sea was rough and stormy, our bark stout and amply furnished, but our mariners
were unskilful; and long time did we contend with all the violence of the
winds, and long time were we driven from our destined course. And, when at
last, after various dangers and difficulties, we were cheared with the hopes of
speedily gaining the English coast, suddenly we found ourselves assailed by a
bold piratical vessel, and threatened with a severe captivity. The hostile
intentions of our adversary were but too plainly discovered, as he bore down
upon us. Our force was instantly collected, and we resolved to defend our
liberty with due spirit. Tortured at the thought of being prevented from
pursuing my design, I raved in all the wildness of frenzy and desperation,
which the good Les Roches endeavored to restrain, himself equally resolute,
but inspired with a more deliberate and rational courage. No sooner had the
enemy closed with us, than this gallant Lord, earnest to prevent me in the
pursuit of danger, leaped on board his vessel, was followed by a few
attendants, and there maintained a bloody and unequal conflict. We pressed
forward, earnest to second this bold attack; the pirate was alarmed at our
numbers and our resolution, when, suddenly, the violence of the surge separated
our vessels; and as we endeavored to regain our former station, anxious for
the rescue of our companions, we were shocked with the view of the pirate
flying before us. His vessel was of quicker sail, and his mariners more expert.
He left us in rage and anguish, uttering fruitless execrations, and straining
our limbs in fruitless efforts to regain our captive friends. In the bitterness
of grief and disappointment, I resolved to continue the pursuit, if happily
some favorable incident might bring the enemy once more into our reach; and
for a while the pursuit was continued. But the storm was loud, and my followers
too sensible of their danger. They forced me to make toward land; and, after
much hazard and difficulty, we were at length disembarked on the southern coast
of England. -- We recounted our late adventure to the inhabitants of the coast,
who well knew the pirate we described, and had oftentimes suffered by his
depredations. They informed us that his name was William de Morisco, a bold
adventurer, who had of late frequently infested their dwellings, and probably,
ere long, might alarm them by another descent: that his exactions had ever been
severe, but that his nature, rude as it was, discovered no wanton cruelty, no
malicious thirst for blood; that an honorable ransom might prevail upon him to
set our friends at liberty. I was comforted by this intelligence, and waited
for a time, in hopes of some favorable opportunity of recovering Les Roches:
but no vessel appeared; no intelligence was received.

Unable to support this delay, I resolved once more to seek the enemy at sea.
My followers I knew would prove averse to such an attempt; and the occasion
demanded more skilful mariners, and a vessel more completely appointed than
our's, which by this time had felt the severity of winds and seas. I therefore
formed the bold design of applying for assistance directly at the English
court. A young King, jealous of his honor, could not be unmoved at the insults
offered to his territory by this obscure adventurer: he must readily favor the
generous purpose of pursuing and engageing him: and, if Lord Salisbury has now
regained his native country, he cannot be less zealous to rescue his friend; he
must effectually aid my endeavors. -- Thus I reasoned; and, leaving a part of
my retinue on the coast to treat for the ransom of our friends,' if the pirate
should appear, I proceeded to the court of England, where jousts and
tournaments were prepared for the entertainment of the King, now recovering
from a tedious sickness. In these I engaged; nor was I disgraced, or my
attendants unnoticed. Henry vouchsafed his attention to the stranger, and
received me with a princely welcome. I called myself a young Lord of one of
those provinces of France that acknowledged the English jurisdiction; and
declared the whole story of my adventure on the voyage toward England. The
King was duly affected with indignation, commended the gallant resolution I
expressed of seeking the pirate, and readily promised to entrust the
chastisement of this insolent plunderer to my command.

Lord Hubert, whom I soon found to be principal in the confidence of his
master, echoed the sentiments of Henry: he frequently held converse with me,
and enquired much about the affairs of my province. Discourse of the late wars
naturally introduced the name of Salisbury: I sighed, and Hubert hastily
demanded if I could say aught of the fortunes of this Lord. The melancholy air
which I assumed, redoubled his attention: I told him that Lord William had
landed in France, had been pursued by the fury of his unjust enemies, fled with
a noble maid whose father had deeply snared in his calamities; and, since he
was not by this time returned to his native country, I seared for both. --
Hubert, with an impatience and violence to me unaccountable, hastily
interrupted me, by declaring that William must have perished; and this was
delivered in a tone and manner which indicated too plainly, that he felt a
peculiar pleafure in this persuasion. I was alarmed; I cautiously avoided all
farther explanation, and coldly assented to his opinion: but Hubert, naturally
jealous, and practiced in the arts and policy of courts, suspected my silence.
He was sensible that I had suppressed some part of my story: he treated me with
distance and reserve, and my suit sped but coldly. Frequently did I remind him
of the royal promise I had received, and urged him to issue the orders
necessary for enabling me to seek the pirate. I was long tortured with delays,
'till, quite wearied out by the insincerity of a minister, who interposed like
a baleful cloud between me and the favor of his prince, I sought a convenient
hour, and once more kneeled to young Henry. He graciously directed me to repair
to the coast without farther delay, and at the same time commanded that a
vessel should be there prepared, ready to receive and to acknowledge me
commander. I bowed, and kissed the royal hand: I collected my attendants: -- I
met Lord William.

In a happy hour!' replied the Earl: -- 'but, gentle Lord, be not diverted from
thy purpose: haste thou to the coast, I shall but visit my castle, and straight
follow thee, if happily we may yet recover our noble friend. Jacqueline shall
receive us at our joyful return, and thank thee for her father.

SECT. III.
CHAUVIGNY prepared to answer, when their conference was suddenly interrupted
by the approach of a stranger, who, with gentle aspect and deportment,
addressed himself to Salisbury, and kindly congratulated his sase return to
England. The Earl beheld him with surprise tempered with due courtesy, and, ere
he could demand his name, the stranger observed with earnestness that the dampy
shades of night were approaching fast; and pointing to a fair dwelling, which
lay at some small distance, invited the Lords to accept of residence and
refreshment under his roof, 'till morning. 'There,' said he, shall your retinue
be also entertained; and there shall Lord William receive some pleasing
intelligence from the castle of Salisbury. Without farther hesitation or
enquiry, the Earl joyfully aceepted this invitation, and, pressing forward as
his host directed, entered a goodly hall, which seemed decked and prepared for
his hospitable reception.

Little did this Lord conceive of the danger which now awaited him; of the
desperate purposes of Raymond and his associates, and the secret malignity of
Hubert who for some time had entertained a design against his life, and
hesitated only about the mears of execution. Conscious of the vengeance due to
his own baseness and salsehood, and firmly determined to prevent it, he
revolved many different schemes of destroying Earl William either by force or
fraud. In the midst of such bloody thoughts he was surprised by the arrival of
a messenger from Lord Raymond, who desired a private conference: Raymond and
his wicked minion had for some time been perplexed and confounded. The
intelligence of the three English men (whom they still kept under restraint)
was clear and explicit: they adhered invariably to their first account, and
frequently repeated their declarations with an ingenuous appearance of truth,
wondering that their Lord was not yet arrived. On the other hand, Salisbury did
not appear; no farther intelligence was received, no discoveries made by those
sent out to watch his approach. In this suspense and uncertainty, Raymond,
whose mind was too violently agitated to suggest any calm and deliberate
counsels, and Gray, whose wiles seemed to be at length exhausted, concurred in
the expediency of dispatching an emisfary to Lord Hubert, to inform him of
their situation, and to desire his direction. Reginhald was appointed for this
purpose, and recommended as a person in whom Hubert might confide. The Monk now
appeared before him and delivered his letters; (having already received the
dreadful intelligence that William was now safe in the town of Marlborough.)
The piercing eye of Hubert, long used to scan the countenances of men, and
there to read their thoughts, narrowly surveyed the aspect of Reginhald, and
sormed too just conceptions of his temper and disposition. He enquired
particularly into the measures his nephew had pursued; and the Monk answered to
his questions in such a manner, as admitted Hubert to a thorough knowledge of
his wicked heart. Fully persuaded that he now had a proper instrument of his
deadly purpose, he dismissed the Monk for a while, and appointed an hour for a
second conference.

The dark design he now meditated required still some farther assistance. A man
there was at this time attendant on the court, whom the crasty minister had
frequently made the agent of his oppression and unjustice. He had often times
sent him out to harrass the land by severe and fraudulent exactions, and had
suffered him to be enriched by a share of the spoil. Tyrrel (so was he named)
lived but by the favor of Hubert, who reserved him for his wicked purposes;
yet might at once take away his life with a fair semblance of public justice,
should he at any time rebel against his sovereign pleasure. This man was now
summoned before him; and, with a brow of care and anxiety, as if some design of
moment possessed his mind, Hubert commanded him instantly to repair to his
house, which lay near the road Lord William was to take; to invite this Lord;
to entertain him with all nospitable rites; and, in some other matters which
should hereafter be explained more fully, to submit entirely to the guidance of
a Monk whom he should speecily send to him, and whom he was also to entertain.
Tyrrel was alarmed at this mysterious language: he knew the desperate
unrelenting spirit of his master, and suspected that some bloody design was now
to be executed; and that his house was to be the fatal scene of violence or
treachery. He trembled and hesitated, for he was not yet consummate in
villainy: but Hubert thundered in his ears the most terrible denunciations of
vengeance and utter destruction, should he betray the least reluctance, the
smallest defect of zeal and alacrity in executing his orders. Tyrrel bowed
before him with a slavish submission, and promised full obedience.

Still he had to practice with Reginhald; but here he expected, and indeed
found an easy task. The Monk was again summoned to his presence. The
distinction and apparent confidence with which he was treated, served to
intoxicate his base mind, and to prepare him for some deed of violence or
mischief: Hubert artfully commended his fidelity, and promised to reward it,
but lamented the danger in which Raymond and all his adherents were now to be
involved. Lord William, he observed, must soon reach his castle; the shame of
disappointment and the violence of hatred and revenge must soon fall on
Raymond; and the zeal of his faithful friends must appear odious and criminal.
Then, with well-affected perplexity and terror addressing himself earnestly to
the Monk, he desired his sage counsel in this dangerous emergency. Reginhald,
with an awkward and abject abasement, declared that he was totally unable to
advise, but ready to follow the directions of Lord Hubert with implicit
submission. The subtle courtier seized him by the hand, applauded his zeal, and
lavished the amplest promises upon him. 'Be bold,' said he, and be happy. --
There is but one way -- Let us prevent the attempts of our common enemy -- by
destroying him. -- Reginhald took fire at this propofal: he at once freely
offered himself to be the agent, and seemed impatient to learn the means of
executing a design so suited to a heart that never felt humanity or remorse.

Hubert hastily produced a phial filled with a deadly poison. 'Behold,' said
he, the sure means of destroying our enemy. Let it be thy care to present Lord
William with this fatal draught, and name the reward of so great a service. --
And now he proceeded to explain his fell purpose to the Monk more particularly.
He dismissed him fully instructed, and impatient for the execution. Reginhald
was received by the abject creature of Hubert, and invested with absolute
authority over his domestics; Tyrrel watched the approach of Lord William; this
Lord accepted his insidious invitation; and the Monk was brought before him, as
a person from whom he was to receive some particular intelligence of his
Countess. The Earl was earnest in his enquiries, and Reginhald prompt in his
false assurances. He declared (as he had been instructed by Hubert) that he had
for some time resided in the castle of Salisbury, employed in administering
spiritual consolation to a domestic of the Countess; that he had frequently
seen this Lady, been witness of the melancholy of her widowed state, and of the
affection with which she cherished the memory of her Lord. A suitor indeed had
visited her; but she had obstinately shut her ears against all his
solicitations; and Lord Raymond was long since retired in despair.

These studied falsehoods had all the effect for which they were intended. The
heart of William was dilated with joy: he embraced his friends with that warmth
of affection which sudden good fortune naturally excites: then, turning again
to Reginhald, repeated his eager enquiries about his wife, his son, his house;
and received such answers as confirmed his joy. He now secretly condemned his
own rash suspicions of the Countess; his love was redoubled; he was impatient
to receive her in his arms; and all the lively impressions of delight and
satisfaction which he felt were communicated to his friends. Chauvigny embraced
him in joyful congratulation; Randolph forgot his suspicions, and wore a face
of serenity and pleasure. A generous repast was prepared, and the board was
graced with the most enlivened social festivity.

The false host knew full well the dreadful purpose now to be executed, and
dared not oppose, though he shuddered at the thought of it. To Reginhald he
resigned the absolute command of his domestics. The wicked Monk was officiously
attentive to oblige Lord Salisbury; eager to promote the joy of the table, but
less intent on sharing in this joy, than in providing for the guests. He had
now mixed the fatal draught, and saw the poisoned bowl in the hand of an
attendant, ready to be delivered to Lord William. He stood unnoticed in a
distant part of the hall; his heart panting, his limbs trembling, and his
haggard eyes fixed upon the Earl. He saw him receive the bowl; he retired
toward the entrance of the hall; he heard him salute his host and his
associates; he turned, and saw him raise the poison toward his head. -- In
that instant he rushed impetuously out, regardless of those who were entering
with equal haste; mounted his horse, which stood prepared by his appointment,
and in an extravagance of horrid and malignant joy, fled to Lord Raymond with
the important news that the Earl of Salisbury was no more.

The joy of Raymond was extravagant. With eyes all on fire, and accents
faltering with impatience and emotion, he demanded the particulars of this
surprising intelligence; and the shameless and abandoned wickedness of
Reginhald scrupled not to declare the whole of his adventures since his late
departure from the castle. He was heard with eagerness and anxiety. At the
mention of poison Raymond trembled; the blood forsook his cheeks, and his brow
bespoke horror and consternation: but Gray labored to quiet his disordered
spirit, by observing, that he had taken no part in the deed; that it was past
and irrevocable; that now, he had but to consider how to approve this event to
his own advantage, to the interests of his love and fortune. The wretch who
has once deviated from the paths of goodness, is easily reconciled to the
horrors of his progress in iniquity. The thoughts of this Lord were soon turned
to the flattering prospects of happiness which were presented to his
imagination: his first emotions of joy and triumph returned; he commended the
zeal and daring spirit of Reginhald; and Gray joined in the applause, although
his wicked heart secretly repined at the share which his brother might now
boast, in advancing the designs of Lord Raymond; and envied the vast rewards
which his services might justly claim.

Raymond was now sully persuaded that all his wishes were speedily to be
crowned with success; that future difficulties would gradually vanish. In his
present state of exultation he forgot the obstinacy with which the Countess had
hitherto opposed his desires, and flattered himself with the hopes that a
little time, together with a full and clear assurance of the death of
Salisbury, would prevail on her to listen more favorably to his suit. For a
while he resolved to suspend his solicitations; but, as the prospect of
success served to inflame his passion, he obstinately adhered to his resolution
of possessing the proud Lady, and even of recurring once more to violence, if
violence should be necessary. With an affected lenity and generosity he ordered
the three followers of William to be dismissed, when he had first severely
reproved them, for presuming to disturb the minds of his friends by false
intelligence. They returned toward the house of Randolph, still wondering at
the delay of their Lord, and impatient to acquaint him with those important
tidings, which the unhappy Oswald had found means of giving them in their
confinement, notwithstanding the vigilance of their guards.

Nor did these late extraordinary events, which had engaged all the attention
of Raymond and his creatures, fail to excite the wonder and expectation of the
Countess. They had suspended her persecution, and now gave her leisure to
indulge her hopes of relief and deliverance. Such hopes she had not yet
resigned, though tormented by delay and painful disappointment. Some fears
indeed sometimes arose, to cloud the pleasing thoughts she was studious to
entertain: yet when she reflected how abruptly Raymond had retreated from his
wicked purpose of forcibly possessing himself of her bed, under the pretense of
a nuptial ceremony; when she considered the appearances of commotion and
disorder which were evidently discoverable in the castle; she seemed to have
good reasons to persuade herself, that some intelligence must have been
received, equally favorable to her, and confounding to her oppressor. She
expected every moment to hear of the vigorous and effectual interposition of
some friends to affert the rights, and to redeem her from her present
captivity; yet did she frequently lament to her faithful attendant, that her
rescue was so long delayed. Whatever consolation Elinor could give, was now
dissembled and constrained; for Oswald had been enabled to convey to his sister
an account of the seizing of young William, and his own return and confinement.
She was but too well acquainted with the violence of Ela, too much alarmed with
the dread of her relapsing into her former malady, to entrust this fatal
intelligence to her ear. With a heart oppressed with grief and terror, she
assumed the aspect of ease and serenity. When the Countess expressed her fears,
a sigh sometimes escaped from the attendant; but it seemed the sigh of friendly
sympathy; and in her moments of pleasing thoughts, and expectations, Elinor had
ever at command some general expressions of comfort, some effussions of pious
confidence in the great protector of innocence, to brighten the dawn of hope
which arose within her gentle mistress. But she was soon to be undeceived; too
soon was her heart to be pierced with the most dreadful didings.

End of BOOK V.
BOOK VI.
SECT. I.
THE two brothers who had proved such zealous agents in oppression and cruelty,
were once again to aggravate the distresses of the Countess. The discontent and
envy which Gray had conceived toward Reginhald since his last arrival, which
he was not studious to conceal, together with the insolence and presumption of
this Monk, founded on the opinion of his great services, produced mutual
coldness and contempt in their wicked hearts, and threatened to dissolve their
iniquitous union. A new and unexpected incident now served to light up their
animosity.

Some enormities of Reginhald had lately been discovered in the monastery, too
great to be concealed or palliated. A country maiden had been seduced to a
compliance with his sensual desires. He had for some time consorted with her,
until by degrees his brutal passion grew sated, and required some new object.
He fixed his lascivious eyes upon the concubine of one of his associates in
revelling, and made some attempts to possess her; which had provoked her
paramour to utter the most violent menaces against the Monk. To appease his
resentment, Reginhald basely proposed to give him up the unhappy victim of his
own lewdness. The man was not yet so abandoned to all sense of virtue, as not
to feel the utmost abhorrence at this instance of transcendent villainy. Less
scrupulous to acknowledge his own shame, as he was not of the clerical order,
and too violently provoked against the Monk to admit any thought of
reconciliation, he only waited to procure such proofs as might confirm his
information; then seized the moment of Reginhald's absence, produced the
wretched woman he had corrupted, as well as her he had attempted, and wounded
the ears of the reverend fraternity with a full detection of their wicked
brother: the whole cloister was instantly filled with sorrow and indignation.
Every instance of outrage and irreverence which he had committed was now
recalled to mind, and repeated by every tongue. How often he had disturbed or
disgraced their religious house, was now freely told; how often his inoffensive
brethren had been exposed to his insolence or malice; how often his beastly
revels had been prolonged, until, roused by the matin-bell, he had mixed his
debauchery with their early devotions. It was at length resolved to send a
deputation to the castle of Salisbury to demand that Reginhald should be sent
back to the monastery, there to here his accusers, and to suffer the punishment
due to his accumulated baseness.

The persons entrusted with this commission were now arrived. The Monk was made
acquainted with the purpose of their coming, and affected to treat them with
defiance and contempt, although he was too conscious of his guilt not to feel
the most violent secret emotions of terror. He sought his brother, and demanded
his advice and assistance in this emergency. They chose for their private
conference a garden belonging to the castle, in which the Countess had chiefly
delighted in her happier days, and which she now sometimes visited, to refresh
her harassed mind. Gray listened to the story of his brother's danger, with a
provoking coldness and insensibility. Reginhald rudely vaunted his important
services to Hubert and Raymond, and seemed to expect, as his just right, their
full protection in this his present difficulty. Gray at length broke silence by
lamenting this fatal discovery, which he industriously represented as in the
highest degree dangerous and terrible. The Monk could scarcely restrain his
impatience, at the affected air of superiority which his brother assumed, and
the insolence of reproof and censure which his words conveyed. Gray, as if
still desirous to mortify him to the utmost, continued his discourse by
observing with what zeal he had labored to recommend a man to the notice of
Lord Raymond, who, he feared, must now appear, in the general eye, as unworthy
of the favor of this Lord, and that he himself must share in his disgrace. --
'Dog!' exclaimed the Monk, flying furiously upon his brother, who was alarmed,
and retired from his violence, which he endeavored to allay, by hastily
promising his friendly interposition with Lord Raymond. -- 'Thy interposition!'
cried Reginhald; Am I to depend on thee, thou caitiff? Is this my reward? Am I
to sue thee for the protection of thy great friends? Who was it that saved them
and their pernicious minion from disgrace and ruin? Thou, indeed, could
steal away from sanctuary the infant heir of Salisbury: but this was the daring
hand which presented the fatal draught to the father. -- Here a loud and
piercing shriek broke off their discourse. Ela and her kind attendant had taken
their seat unnoticed, in an adjoining bower, and heard the last passionate
exclamations of the Monk. The emotions of the Countess was too great to be
suppressed. The brother started, were confounded, and hastily separated; whilst
Elinor fled with frantic speed to summon assistance to her mistress.

She was soon conveyed to her chamber, and laid upon her couch, languid and
silent. Elinor hung over her with streaming eyes, and ever and anon entreated
her to give vent to her sorrows; but they were too great for utterance. Her
eyes indeed were sometimes raised to heaven with all the expression of silent
misery, and then, again, gently closed, as if inviting the kind and healing
hand of death to cover them in eternal darkness. But no complaints did she
breathe, no exclamations of anguish did she utter. At length her frame seemed
convulsed, and violently agitated: a torrent of tears poured down her lovely
cheeks, and Elinor conceived some hopes that her great soul was now struggling
to shake off the intolerable weight of sorrow. But the calm which succeeded was
the calm of insensibility: she gazed round her with a vacant eye, and all her
nobleness of nature seemed irrecoverably lost in senseless melancholy.

The disorder of her apartment had reached the cars of Raymond, and, in the
violence of surprise and anxiety, he once again rushed into her presence. --
With all the bitterness of remorse, he viewed the majestic ruins of exalted
beauty and greatness, the fatal effect of his lawless passions. His haughty
soul melted into pity: he demanded the cause of her disorder, and received from
Elinor a distinct account of the horrid discourse to which her unhappy Lady had
been witness. All the train of dreadful passions that attend on detected guilt,
tore the heart of Raymond with their united tortures. He started, and wildly
traversed the chamber: he paused; bent his eyes again upon the Countess: then,
turning suddenly from the afflicting object, uttered terrible execrations upon
himself and his vile seducers. He fell upon his knees, and addressing himself
to Ela, as if she were sensible of his discourse, he passionately vowed to
restore her son to her arms, and instantly to abandon her castle. -- Again,
rising suddenly, and issuing forth with wild precipitation, he called loudly
for Gray; who appeared before him trembling, and, to prevent his rage, began
with cursing the brutal violence of Reginhald. -- 'Bid my Knights prepare,'
said Raymond; 'let my retinue stand ready before the gates: -- we must depart.'
-- The countenance of his creature expressed surprise and dissatisfaction. --
No expostulation! none of thy damned arts! -- Where have thou bestowed the son
of this unhappy woman? See that he be instantly conveyed back to her castle. Do
it, slave, or woe upon thy head! Haste! -- answer me not. -- Give out my orders
for departure. -- Then, once more entering the chamber of the Countess, with
all the remorse and anguish of a man at length awakened to a sense of his
unjust misguided conduct, when it was now too late to be corrected or repaired;
he gazed distractedly upon her, and with a deep and dismal groan pronounced a
solemn farewell. Then, turning quickly upon Elinor, who wept by his side:
'Speak to her,' said he; she disdains, and justly, to hold converse with a
villain. Say, that her persecution is now erded. Tell her I know not, I
contrived not the murder of her husband. Let her pronounce his doom, and the
officious slave that acted the foul deed shall die. Her son lives, and shall
yet be happy in her embraces. -- Hear me woman! Tell her I am gone: gone, never
more to torment the weak unfriended, solitary widow. -- Yes! these cheeks are
yet lovely; that form still noble. But what of that? For me! for me could
Heaven have reserved so rich a treasure? Horrid presumption! -- Elinor kneeled
before him, petitioned with all humility for the enlargment of her brother, and
that, to assist her in the necessary attendance of the unhappy Countess, he
might be ordered to reside for some time in the castle. -- 'Cursed castle!'
cried Raymond; cursed be the hour in which I first entered these fatal walls!
And for ever cursed be the slaves who forced me, against my better reason, to
persevere in cruelty!

In the midst of this frenzy, he was surprised into some degree of composure by
the appearance of a stranger, who forcing his way violently into the apartment,
approached toward the Countess, with an air and aspect of affection and
reverence. He accosted her, without deigning to cast a look upon Lord Raymond;
and soon perceived the wretched state to which she was reduced. 'What!' cried
he, no ear for joy and comfort! no voice to greet the arrival of an old
faithful servant! -- Raymond, advancing with a stern and haughty frown,
demanded to know who he was, and what the cause of this bold unmannered
intrusion. Question thy own base hinds, said he, who dared to forbid my
approach. -- Nay, let thy weapon rest; I have a sword as keen, and an arm as
brave as thine. -- Raymond here attempted to summon his attendants. -- 'Beware,
proud Lord,' continued the stranger; poor as I am, single as I stand in the
midst of thy creatures, I fear not the power of Lord Raymond. The least
violence done to this person would be instantly repaid with ten-fold vengeance.
If this noble dame has been reduced to her present state of misery by thee --
hear, and tremble. Yes! thou have cause to tremble: my Lord, my gracious
master, the princely Salisbury, approaches, and, before the close of day, shall
resume his rightful power and authority within these walls. -- Here, Elinor,
who had listened in amazement, fell suddenly on her knees, returned thanks to
heaven with the most rapturous devotion, and called passionately upon her
mistress to hear the joyful tidings; but was answered only by a deep and
heartfelt sigh.

The soul of Raymond was harrowed with consternation. He stood speechless and
motionless, and suffered the stranger to depart without further question. He
found himself on the brow of a precipice, whither he had been fatally misled by
the wickedness of his flatterers, and now was prevented from retreating.
Justice followed close upon him, and vengeance was ready to push him head long
down. After an hideous pause of dismay, he rushed out, and once more called
suriously for Gray: but Gray had heard the fatal intelligence, and hid himself
from the fury of his Lord, which echoed loudly through the halls. The
attendants were collected round him, whom he ordered instantly to prepare for
their departure, and to retire from this accursed place. He loudly and
frequently cried out, To horse! still ranging madly through the castle in
search of Gray. In this state of distraction he chanced to espy the Monk, who
trembled and shrunk from him, in abject terror. 'Traitor! cried Raymond,'
seizing him by the throat, thy falsehood has done this. Thou have listened to
my enemies, and been their agent to abuse me by thy falsehoods, to deceive and
destroy me: but thou at least shall feel my vengeance. Reginhald fell at his
feet, and would have expostulated; but the storm in the breast of Raymond was
too violent to be allayed by his submissions. The unhappy Lord, fully persuaded
that the Monk had purposedly framed a tale to luil him into false security,
called to his followers, and commanded them to hang up the traitor. -- 'There,'
said he, sternly, repeating his command, and pointing to a large oak which
stood in view, near the castle walls; there let me see my sentence executed
without delay. And without delay did they proceed to execute this dreadful
sentence. The wicked Reginhald, condemned by the man for whom he had proceeded
to such enormous guilt, was led away, in vain imploring mercy, urging the
unmerited severity of his fate, and gnashing his teeth in rage and despair.
Gray, from his place of concealment, was terrified with the view of his brother
in the agonies of death, and tortured with the fear of becoming the next victim
to the distracted violence of Raymond.

SECT. II.
THE dreadful intelligence, now received, was speedily and fatally confirmed to
these wicked intruders. Heaven had graciously watched over the Earl of
Salisbury, and, with a wonderful hand, rescued him from the brink of
destruction. Just in that moment when the cup, poisoned by the Monk, had
reached and wet his lips, a sudden exclamation from Chauvigny surprised and
discomposed him. He started and withdrew the fatal draught. The noise was loud
in the hall, and the crowd increased: his eyes quickly encountered Les Roches
rushing eagerly forward: the cup fell from his hand, and he pressed on with equal
ardor to meet the embraces of his long-lost friend. They clung together in that
tumult of joy which knows no words: and, when at length Les Roches found
leisure to turn to Chauvigny, the gentle youth, pressing him earnestly in his
arms, completed his happiness, by exclaiming, that Jacqueline too was safe.
Nature was exhausted by these violent emotions, and Les Roches sunk down upon a
seat, breathless and silent. Again recovering, he cast his eyes round, and
surveyed the well-known countenances of his followers and associates, the
attendants of Chauvigny, and some of the brave soldiers of Lord William. He
started up, and pressed the hands of each: then again, turning to his two noble
friends, again he gazed upon them with eager joy, and again they renewed their
embraces. 'Now,' said the Earl, I shall indeed return home in triumph: now are
all my toils, my terrors and dangers, amply recompensed Then, resuming his seat
at the table, he invited Les Roches to share in their repast, and to allow some
indulgence and refreshment to his fatigue. -- And have thou, indeed, preserved
my daughter? cried the Frenchman. Let me see her! let her father take the dear
treasure to his arms! Is she well? Is she at hand? -- Safely bestowed under the
hospitable roof of this good Knight, replied William, and pointed to Randolph.
The noble maid shall straight be summoned to meet thee, and soon shall she
share thy joy. -- Thanks to the eternal goodness! replied Les Roches, that
goodness which has been pleased to unite us to each other by mutual and
repeated offices of friendship. Lo! for my daughter, I present thee with a gist
as precious. Then beckoning to one of his followers, who had entered with him,
the man retired, and soon returned, leading young William in his hand, who flew
to his father with tears of infant joy. The astonishment of the Earl could
scarcely allow him leisure to return the fond endearments of his son. He looked
wildly on his friend, and seemed to demand an explanation of this wonder.
'Yes,' said Les Roches, thou do embrace thy son, rescued from danger, perhaps
from destruction. -- But be calm. Thou shall be satisfied. Hear then the story
of my fortunes, since I was last separated from thee, my dearest Chauvigny. A
few words will relate it all.

Thou have already heard (Lord William) how much I am indebted to this noble
youth. He has informed thee, no doubt, of our preparations for seeking thee in
England, and of our adventure with the pirate who attempted to seize our
vessel; little suspecting that strength and desperate resolution which soon
taught him to consult his safety by a precipitate flight. Just in that instant
when the swelling waters had separated our ships, and our enemies were crouding
their sails, to escape from that force which they had rashly provoked, their
captain had been borne down by the press, and lay at the feet of one of our
brave followers, whose sword was now ready to descend with fury upon his head.
But I stopped his arm; and, perceiving our situation, that we were unseconded,
and now surrounded by our enemies, I deemed it madness to provoke them by any
farther resistance. I yielded myself a prisoner; and the few who had leaped on
board with me, soon followed my example. At first, the attention of our enemies
was wholly engaged on securing their escape. When they had left our vessel at
sufficient distance, their captain accosted me, and, with a gloomy courtesy,
thanked me for rescuing him from his danger. I answered, that, as he had
experienced our valor, and, when we still might have sold our liberties at a
dearer rate, we had declined the effusion of blood, I hoped he would treat us
nobly. He demanded to know who we were, and what our purpose. He had taken us,
he said, for merchants; that, as he approached, our numbers and appearance had
alarmed his people; but, as we had made every attempt in our power to avoid
him, he was encouraged to persevere in his design of attacking us: that he
himself lived by plunder, and he suspected, that we were engaged in the same
pursuit. -- If so we might unite our force with his, and share his fortunes.

To convince him of his mistake, I informed him freely of my country, my
condition, and my destination, earnestly conjuring him to restore me to my
companions, and promising the most ample rewards for a service so important.
Let me once regain my countrymen, said I, and they shall enrich thee with such
a ransom, as shall exceed thy wishes. But not all my promises could prevail
upon the pirate again to seek our ship. He had experienced our force, and
dreaded a severe revenge for his attempt. Yet my repeated solicitations at
length so far prevailed, that, after some time ineffectually roving in search
of prey, he proposed to keep three of my companions and myself on board, to
land the rest, with a small number of his own men, on the coast of England, (as
it was probable our friends had sought this coast) and that, if they could
regain them and send back the stipulated ransom, I should then be free. I
gladly embraced this proposal. The pirate steered toward the land: the coast
was alarmed at the sight of his vessel: but to prevent all opposition, we chose
the dead hour of night, and sent off our men in a boat, which brought them
unnoticed to shore. They traveled for some time, ere they had the good fortune
to find those of our attendants whom Lord Chauvigny had left to treat for my
liberty. At length, however, they were found; and the men returned, unmolested,
with my ransom. To this I added a rich jewel taken from my finger, which I
presented to the pirate, in acknowledgement of my gratitude.

I now hastened to join my friends, and from them I learned that Lord Chauvigny
had proceeded to the city of Marlborough. I was earnest to follow him, but my
fatigues demanded some refreshment. I was conducted to the house of an
inhabitant of the coast, who received me with all hospitable kindness. -- Let
us unite in adoring the invisible power that directed my steps thither! -- The
friendly repast was prepared for me; nor were my followers neglected. I was
pleased at the honest undesigning affection of my host, and taught to revere
the generous people amongst whom fortune had now placed me. At the hour of
rest, I was courteously conducted to my chamber, but my mind had been too long
and too violently agitated to admit repose. I revolved the dangers and
distresses I had experienced: I thought of the great purpose for which I had
visited this country: I thought of my daughter and my friend: I sometimes
indulged my hopes of finding them, and, again, checked and condemned these
flattering imaginations. Thus did I pass the weary night, 'till roused by a
voice in the adjacent chamber. I listened attentively, and heard my host in
earnest conference with his wife. "I like not," said he, this message from the
castle of Salisbury. -- I started at the name, and redoubled my attention. --
This boy is to be carefully guarded and concealed. But wherefore? Lord Raymond
is to wed the widow of the Earl. Why then this concealment, unless he purposes
to destroy the young heir? I know the soul of Gray; and though he be my
brother, our souls are not allied. I dread his temper. Nature formed him stern
and cruel; nor do I doubt but that he may easily be wrought upon to act a deed
of blood. But shall my humble dwelling be made the scene of murder, of an
infant's murder. -- His wife here began to chide his jealous fears; but they
seemed to have taken too deep root in his mind to be easily removed. What, though
my house should not be made the place of execution? said this good man; What,
though they should not proceed to the utmost pitch of cruelty? Their purpose
cannot be honest, and I am made their accomplice by concealing him. -- I had
heard enough; and now "I busily revolved this alarming discourse.

It was evident that the son of my preserver was exposed to danger -- perhaps
abandoned by his widow -- (pardon me, Lord William, if my suspicion was rash
and ungentle) -- certainly concealed for some mysterious purpose. A stranger
seemed to pity and to fear for him; What then became a friend? What was the
part of Les Roches? Were his father still alive, Heaven has now enabled me to
restore him to his arms: but, if he really has perished, surely it must be my
care to protect and cherish this boy, to form the unhappy orphan to honor and
virtue, to make him worthy of his illustrious descent, and enable him, in due
time, to assert his native rights. -- Thus I reasoned; and, rising with the
early dawn, summoned my followers, communicated this important discovery, and
desired their counsel and assistance. They readily concurred in the design of
rescuing the young Lord from his present danger. By their advice I waited the
appearance of our host. I accosted him gently, and led him on to discourse of
his situation, his condition, his friends and his country. He answered me
without reserve, 'till I at length mentioned the name of Earl William, and
asked if he could inform me of the fortunes of this Lord, and his noble house.
He started, and answered, hesitating and confused. I at once sternly told him,
I was no stranger to the designs formed against the young heir of that house:
that, as I had been a friend to the father, I resolved to be a protector to the
son, who, I knew, was concealed under this roof. If he would consent to give
him up peaceably into my hands, the service should be duly rewarded; if not --
I had force sufficient to rescue him from danger. The man trembled, and,
without delay, resigned his charge into my hands. -- And now was my mind
possessed with new fears and scruples. Methought I had been too rash. A
mother's tenderness, perhaps, has concealed this Boy, and for a weighty cause,
no doubt. How then shall the news of this violent removal afflict her soul?
What terrors must she feel? Yet, still, upon mature reflection, I deemed it the
safest course to convey this youth to Marlborough, where I hoped to gain such
intelligence as might direct my future conduct. Thither we bent our course;
and, near this place, did I receive those joyful tidings, which brought me to
deliver up my dear charge into his father's care.

"From my soul I thank thee," replied the Earl. -- Yet has thy tale renewed
some doubts and suspicions -- but let suspicions sleep till tomorrow. Then,
starting up earnestly, he asked with a loud voice, Who of my brave followers
will undertake the charge of repairing instantly to Cornwall, bearing to the
fair Jacqueline the chearing news of her father's arrival, and conveying her to
my castle? Fitzalan stood forth, and with five more who defied toil and
fatigue, insisted that this pleasing charge should be entrusted to them. They
departed, each fresh and vigorous, as the sturdy hind that rises to his morning
labors. And now Lord William, turning kindly toward Les Roches, attempted
once more to speak his joy and gratitude. But suddenly his voice failed, his
cheeks grew pale, a cold dew issued from his pores, his whole frame was
disordered, and he sunk faintly down. The guests arose in confusion and
amazement. Tyrrel trembled in an agony of terror, nor was his consternation
unobserved. -- 'Treason!' cried Chauvigny, seizing the false host, and this
sword shall revenge it. -- But what revenge on thee, thou wretched slave? --
Say, Have thou indeed murdered this noble Lord? Has thy vile hand dealt him
poison? Confess thy villainy, or this moment is thy last. The abject Tyrrel had
fallen on his knees, and now loudly and vehemently asserted his innocence; but,
when terrified by the view of instant death, he scrupled not to confess, that
by the direction of Lord Hubert, he had invited the Earl to his house, but that
he was not privy to any deadly purpose; if such had heen concerted, the Monk
alone was privy, the Monk alone had executed it. Reginhald was sought for, but
he had fled, which confirmed their suspicions, and filled the hall with grief
and dismay. William alone seemed unmoved. He gently pressed the hand of Les
Roches: 'my enemies have prevailed,' said he, the snares of Hubert have caught
me. -- Alas! thou know him not. -- Visit my castle, comfort my wife, and Oh!
continue thy kind protection to my son.

The grief of Lord Chauvigny was outrageous: that of Les Roches had choked his
voice. He hung over the languid Earl, in silence and consternation; whilst, on
the other hand, the boy clung passionately round the knees of his father. The
scene was affecting; and even the rough soldier, to whom death had been long
familiar, melted into tears. -- 'Poisoned! and by Lord Hubert!' was repeated
with sorrow and indignation. The dismal tidings were soon caught by busy
tongues, spread abroad, and propagated through the land, to aggravate the
disgrace the wicked favorite was soon to experience.

His afflicted friends conveyed the Earl to his couch. And now, the good old
Randolph, whose venerable face had worn the deepest marks of sorrow, seemed to
be suddenly enlivened by a gleam of hope. He paused, appeared earnest to
collect his dissipated thoughts, and now looked as a man unexpectedly visited
by comfort. The eyes of his friends were fixed upon him, as if demanding an
explanation; when, addressing himself hastily to Lord William, he asked of his
present state, whether his pain was increased or his languor more oppressing?
He thanked the gentle Knight, and declared, that now he seemed more at ease. --
'Yes,' cried Randolph, and soon shall this malady cease, and still shall
William live. -- The Frenchmen were astonished, but the Knight confidently
repeated his joyful assurances, Experienced and sagacious, and accustomed to
survey all objects with more calmness and composure than young Chauvigny, he
revolved all the incidents, since their arrival at the house of Tyrrel. He had
marked the aspect of the Monk, and from thence had formed the blackest
suspicions of his temper and designs. He had marked his officious cares, and
obsequious zeal in attending on the Earl. He had marked how, at the first
entrance of Les Roches, the cup had dropped from the hands of Salisbury. He
recollected, that after this the Monk had not been seen; and justly concluded,
that this was the fatal cup which had been prepared for his friend; that the
fell purpose of Hubert had been happily deseated by his sudden surprise; and
that the poisonous mixture, which, if drunk must have instantly proved fatal;
had now, when but just scarcely tasted, raised a temporary disorder in the
frame of William, which nature, still free from deep infection, would soon be
able to overcome. These thoughts, which he communicated to his noble
companions, were received with joy; and soon were they confirmed by that ease
and vigor which the Earl gradually recovered. Tyrrel had been secured, and was
now examined at more leisure. His discoveries served to convince them of what
was really the truth, that he indeed connived at the base design, but had not
been directly an assistant. But he was not an object worthy of noble revenge.
Against Lord Hubert was vengeance loudly denounced, and the soul of Salisbury
was on fire to inflict the full severity of justice on his treachery and
unrelenting malice.

His resentment and indignation were still to be more inflamed. The unhappy
Oswald, who had for some time groaned under a severe captivity, at length had
found means to make some impression on the heart of his keeper, who kindly
consented to relax his hardships. When the messengers of Lord William were
confined, he had desired, and was secretly admitted to hold some conference
with them. The keeper was witness, with what clearness and ingenuous honesty
they entered into the detail of all their fortunes, and declared that their
Lord must, ere long, appear to confront his enemies. The man was alarmed: he
had heard the story of Oswald, and he heard it now repeated with honest pity
and indignation. He was persuaded that the power of Lord Raymond was soon to
expire; and that he should do an acceptable service to the Earl, by favoring
the escape of that man who had been punished for his affection to the Countess.
He revolved these thoughts for some time; at length listened to the
solicitations of his prisoners, and suffered Oswald to escape. He lay
concealed for a while, resolving to take his way cautiously toward Cornwall;
but soon learned the important tidings, which, by this time, began to spread
through the adjacent country, that the Earl of Salisbury had arrived at
Marlborough, and was preparing to return to his castle. He therefore changed
his course, and directed his wary steps toward the royal seat. Fortunately, he
encountered Fitz-Alan and his companions, who informed him where he might find
their noble master. He entered the hall of Tyrrel at midnight, and demanded to
be instantly conducted to the Earl. Alarmed at that general sorrow and dismay
which dwelt upon every face, he ventured to enquire, and was soon informed of
the cause. Alas!' said he if the malice of his enemies has reached the Earl,
how shall Oswald hope to escape? Then, sitting down in mournful silence, he
passed the heavy hours in all the bitterness of anguish and despair, 'till the
dawn of morning.

The friends and vassals of the Earl, who by this time began to collect round
their Lord, had scarcely felt the alarm of his danger, when they received the
joyful tidings of his recovery. Oswald too was cheared, and again demanded
immediate admittance to the Earl. And he was soon admitted, for his appearance
and demeanor promised something extraordinary. He kneeled before Lord William,
and wept. -- 'I come,' said he, from thy castle. I come to tell thee of thy
unhappy Countess. -- The agitation of the Earl grew violent: but he commanded
him to proceed, and he heard him with breathless attention; 'till Oswald, who
began to relate all the events of the castle of Salisbury, which he had known,
proceeded without reserve to describe the oppression of Lord Raymond, with an
artless and ingenuous freedom. The rage of William was kindled: he started
wildly from his seat, and thundered out the most terrible denunciations of
vengeance and destruction. -- So may this arm prosper. So may this good sword
do me service in the hour of danger, as I will revenge thee, noble dame! And
may I be cursed, and scorned, and vile as thou, thou recreant Lord, if I forget
thy treachery and oppression. -- But come, my friends! let us away! -- O
murderous thief! Is it thus thy wolfish nature has stolen in upon my helpless
fold! -- His friends labored to recall him to calmness and attention. Oswald
proceeded in his tale, and filled the breasts of all his hearers with the most
enlivened indignation. He concluded with relating the reception of the
messengers, and his own escape, humbly imploring the protection of the Earl
against his incensed Lord. 'May heaven forget me,' replied William, if I forget
thy honesty. But come, my friends! if ever pity softened your breasts, if ever
manhood dwelt in your noble hearts, assist me in punishing the injuries of my
gentle Countess. -- Here young William entered, and ran fondly to embrace his
father. At sight of him Oswald fell upon his knees, and with an extravagance of
pious joy, thanked the gracious powers who had preserved him. The boy turned
and acknowledged his former protector. Thus was the truth of all that Oswald
had delivered wonderfully confirmed; and William renewed his thanks and
promises of favor. The attendants were summoned: every moment brought in more
and more of the Earl's vassals: Les Roches, Chauvigny, and Randolph vied with
each other in their expressions of zeal and impatience to redress the injured.
All were ready to take their way, and William enjoyed the pleasing thoughts of
surprising the base usurpers in the midst of their presumption. But Fitz-Alan
had prevented this surprise. He could not suppress his impatient affection for
his noble mistress. To delight her with the first joyful tidings of her Lord's
approach, he had turned aside and visited the castle; and there did he raise
that confusion which had overwhelmed Lord Raymond, and his wicked creature.

SECT. III.
BUT whilst the anguish and consternation of Raymond, which arose from shame
and remorse, grew every moment more violent; Gray, who was concerned solely for
his personal safety, gradually regained some share of recollection, and began
to consider of the means to ward off the impending danger from his own head.
His chief reliance was on the important service which he conceived to be in his
own power, that of discovering the residence of young William, and restoring
him to his father. But still farther to increase his merit, and to atone for
past offenses, he determined to betray his master, and to give him up, naked
and defenseless, into the hands of his enemies. This base resolution once
formed, no time was to be lost in executing it: Raymond was preparing to
depart; this must be instantly prevented. He flew among his followers and
attendants: he represented the danger which now threatened them, in the most
alarming colors: he told them, that their Lord had long proceeded in a course
of injustice and oppression, which must be revenged with indiscriminate fury on
all who had accompanied him: that he now prepared to retire, hoping, that,
whilst the injured Earl was taking a bloody vengeance on his innocent
followers, he might escape in the confusion: that the only means of providing
for their safety, of approving their innocence, and of disarming the resentment
of Lord William, was to continue in their present situation, without any
appearance of hostile intentions, any purpose of opposing the entrance of the
rightful Lord of this castle, and to oblige their leader also to stay and
answer for his own actions. To the nobler few he hinted these things with
caution, and they received his insinuations with disdain, loudly declaring that
they were resolved to live or die with Raymond. To the baser and the greater
number he spoke more plainly. To them he scrupled not to declare, that the
violent passions of their Lord had disordered his understanding, and asked,
with well-affected terror, who could be safe, after the outrageous dealing with
his unhappy brother, whose only fault was, that he had served Lord Raymond
(alas!) with too blind and too violent a zeal. -- They heard him with
approbation, and readily consented to submit to his direction, in this
dangerous emergency.

The unhappy Raymond was now reduced to the lowest state of human wretchedness;
tormented with the consciousness of his own guilt and weakness; unable to
repair, or to atone for the mischief he had occasioned; pierced with all the
stings of remorse; unable to conceal his disgrace, yet still too great of soul
to bear it: helpless and solitary, whilst the arm of vengeance was lifted
against him; deserted by his followers, and betrayed by the man whose wicked
arts had sunk him into this depth of misery. Gray, on the other hand, seemed to
have composed his fears, and to enjoy a short lived triumph. He had collected a
party round him, which gave him the command of the castle. His Lord had retired
to give his distractions some moments of rest; and his creatures now issued out
orders to his associates, to watch his motions, and even to oppose his
departure by force.

In the midst of his presumption, he sought Lord Raymond, whom he had but now
avoided, with the most abject terror: with an insolent composure he desired him
to explain his intentions. -- Oh! are you come?' cried Raymond: -- I have
commanded my people to prepare for departure. Let us this instant be gone!' --
'Whither?' said Gray. How shall we escape? Whither shall we fly? The powers of
Earl William are at hand. -- But what of that? His resentment is not directed
against us. We have not sought to pollute his bed. We have not destroyed the
repose and happiness of his wife. -- His Lord started up in sudden fury, as if
preparing to punish this insolence: But Gray, nothing dismayed, bad him compose
his passions: they had already proved too violent. -- 'Alas!' said he, What was
the crime of my unhappy brother? -- Guilty indeed he was, but not to thee,
cruel Lord. But I will not upbraid thee now. -- Those followers, whom Raymond
cannot protect, he must no longer hope to command. -- Nay, my Lord, seek not to
pass: here thou have no longer power; this chamber must content thee: here must
Earl William find thee. Answer him as thou may. -- There only wanted this
treacherous insolence, to fill up the mighty sum of miseries, under which
Raymond groaned. He found himself indeed a prisoner, guarded by his own people,
and in the absolute power of his perfidious creature. He stood in mute
surprise; and Gray was just preparing to repeat his insolence, when the noise
of horsemen called him suddenly forth.

A small troop had been descried at a considerable distance, pressing toward
the castle, with the most violent and precipitate speed. Those of Raymond's
attendants, who had refused to unite in the treachery of Gray, first espied
their approach, and, mounting their horses, called for their Lord to stand on
his defense, or bravely to lead them against the enemy (for such they deemed
them.) But Gray now appeared, and with a sudden recollection of thought, told
them, in the name of Raymond, that no resistance was to be attempted: that
their Lord feared not nor would oppose these visiters: but that he directed his
friends to march a mile eastward of the castle, and there to expect him. They
obeyed; and Gray now observed the little troop more distinctly, wondering at
the small number, and struck with a sudden and instinctive terror, when he
discovered Lord William (whose person he well knew) at the head of this
company. He gazed earnestly round him, yet still but a few persons only were in
view. -- 'By heaven!' cried Gray, he comes not with a force to drive us hence,
but to make himself our prisoner: then hastily ordered his associates to suffer
these men to enter unopposed and unmolested, and, instantly afterward, to shut
fast the castle-gates. He cursed his own folly and rashness, which had led him
to betray himself to Lord Raymond. He now saw a noble occasion of repairing his
fault, and, instead of persevering in his resolution of giving up Raymond into
the hands of the Earl, he now deemed it in his power, and judged it the wisest
course, to give up the Earl into the hands of his Lord.

SECT. IV.
WILLIAM had indeed exposed himself to the utmost danger, by his ungoverned
violence. He had taken his way at the head of a princely retinue, well
appointed, and zealous to vindicate his cause; so that now his port was that of
a warlike Baron, marching to assist his King, against some sudden invasion.
Part of his powers was directed to advance toward the castle by different
approaches, so as to surround it, and prevent the escape of Raymond or his
people. He himself, at the head of a chosen band, attended by the two French
Nobles, rushed directly forward. But the impetuosity of the Earl soon left his
attendants at a distance, all but young Chauvigny and a few others, who with
difficulty kept pace with him. They arrived at the castle-gates, without
perceiving that they were come unsupported; and William, far from recollecting
his danger, rushed on with furious and impatient ardour, 'till he had reached
the apartment of the Countess.

He flew to take her in his arms, and started back in an agony of terror and
surprise, at the discovery of her unhappy condition. He called upon her with
earnest, yet tender accents; and now nature seemed to make some efforts to
shake off its lethargic weight. The Countess trembled, as at some extraordinary
appearance; gazed with a look less vacant, as if the dawn of reason were
returning; sighed and wept. -- 'Art thou,' said the Earl, turning to Elinor,
who busily assisted him to support her mistress, Art thou that good matron,
whose cares have administered comfort to my wife? -- Heaven shall reward thee:
and William shall not be unmindful of thy honest affection. But say -- conceal
not the truth: Whence this sad disorder in her noble mind? Has not her
oppressor completed his vile design? Has he not forcibly taken possession of
her bed? -- Elinor assured him, that heaven had been pleased to preserve her
from such pollution; but that, surprised by the shocking tidings of his death,
she had lately fallen into this her present state of melancholy. -- William
again pressed the hand of Ela. 'Speak to me,' cried he; say that thou rejoicest
at my return. -- No word of congratulation! No look of joy? Is this the
happiness which my busy fancy formed? Is this my reception? -- The Countess
gazed upon him, and seemed in violent agitation: but still she was unable to
return his affection. Reason had not yet regained its seat. -- At length, the
Earl, whose heart was torn with anguish, bounded furiously from the ground
where he had fixed his knee, and loudly demanding the vile murderer of his
peace, issued forth in search of Raymond.

By this time the castle was in confusion. Chauvigny and his few attendants had
been prevented, by superior numbers, from following Earl William. They
expressed their surprise, and now began too late to perceive their danger. One
of them, suddenly taking a horn from his side, prepared to give so shrill a
blast, as would have reached the ears of their companions, and quickened their
speed: but Gray, who now had the sole command, as suddenly prevented him, by
declaring with a stern insolence, that the least alarm should prove immediate
death to Lord William. His design, which he now sought to execute, was to raise
a violent broil and tumult in the castle, and to assassinate the Earl, in the
confusion. -- The presence and interposition of Raymond he deemed necessary;
and he hastened to summon this Lord, to embrace the fair occasion of destroying
his rival, which fortune presented to him. At first entering the apartment, his
eyes were wounded by an object of terror, which at once confounded all his
designs. Raymond had fallen upon his sword, Gray started back in amazement;
and, in that moment, William entered and saw the unhappy Lord, pale and
bleeding on the ground, who shut his languid eyes, as if ashamed to meet the
countenance of him he had wronged. The art, the hypocrisy, the boldness and
recollection of Gray, all deserted him. He stood trembling and confounded, awed
by the presence of the Earl, as by that of a superior being. At length he
attempted to retire; but William, drawing his sword, forbad him with a terrible
authority, and demanded the meaning of what he now beheld. Raymond, lifting his
eyes faintly, just found breath, at broken and painful intervals, to declare,
that his own hand had done it. -- I have indeed wronged thee, Lord; nor could I
endure thy triumph, and my own shame, yes, I have destroyed the noblest Lady.
-- But there stands the accursed wretch, the false and traitorous -- Here his
emotion grew too violent for his languid condition. He was seized with a sudden
pang; he groaned and expired.

The Earl then, turning to Gray, exclaimed Yes! Thou art the wretch who
labored to aggravate the distresses of Ela, with such infernal diligence. Thou
art he who basely stole away my son. -- Gray fell upon his knees, supplicating
for mercy with the most abject and servile fear, and promising to restore young
William. The Earl raised his arm, and prepared to strike the miscreant.' 'Kill
me not!' cried Gray, or thy son is for ever lost. I alone know the secret of
his present residence. Here a sudden and violent shout arrested the sword of
William. His followers had arrived, had quickly forced the gates open, and
rushed in a rapid torrent, through the halls. Les Roches and Chauvigny,
Randolph and Oswald, directed by the outcries of Gray, and the loud rage of
Salisbury, forced in, just as the wicked agent of oppression was entreating for
mercy. At sight of Oswald, despair pierced his soul heart; and when he espied
young William led on and protected from the violence of the rout, he closed his
eyes, and crouched to receive the deadly blow. 'O shame to manhood!' cried
Randolph, shall such a slave die by the arm of William? -- Look there! noble
Lord: (pointing from the window to the body of Reginhald, which still hung from
the oak) behold! thy just vengeance is prevented. Behold the punishment which
befits such vileness! "Be it so," cried William, well do thou instruct me!
And, without farther respite, was Gray led forth to share the fate of his
wicked brother.

The view of blood and death allayed the joy of William and his noble friends.
The good old Knight was moved, and now seemed to regret that the just
punishment of Gray, had not been inflicted but by abfolute and violent power.
All the late dismal effects of lawless oppression crowded into his mind; and he
felt the want of that inestimable blessing, a wise, righteous, and well
attempered rule.

The thoughts of Ela, and her unhappy condition, still diffused a gloom over
the countenance of the Earl. His thanks and congratulations were grave and
solemn. The body of Raymond was removed; his attendants were suffered to depart
unmolested; order and tramquillity were restored in the castle; and Lord
William was at leisure to inform his noble friends of that terrible impression,
which her misfortunes had made upon his wife. They had scarcely begun to offer
condolence and comfort, when Elinor appeared with earnest looks, beseeching the
Earl instantly to visit her afflicted Lady. The sight of him had awakened her
to some degree of reason, and his removal had excited in her mind a violent and
dangerous emotion of fear and anxiety. He hastened to her presence, leading his
young son, who ran to the arms of his mother. She hung upon the dear objects
with tenderness and pleasure, and uttered some words of joy. That melancholy
which had clouded her noble mind, began gradually to dissipate. At length she
looked, as if roused from a dream of misery; returned the ardent caresses of
her husband, and breathed out her pious thanks to that goodness which had
preserved him. A little time so far contributed to compose her mind, that she
required the story of her husband's fortunes and dangers. But this he
suspended, until her health should be confirmed, and her mind less subject to
violent emotions.

Jacqueline was now arrived; had embraced her father and her lover, and was
presented to the Countess. At sight of her, Ela felt some agitation, and
recollected the tidings which Oswald had conveyed to her. But when William
informed her, that he had saved and protected this maid from danger; that she
was daughter to a dear friend, to whom he owed his life; and betrothed to a
noble youth, both of whom were now in the castle; she embraced her with a
tender affection, and secretly felt some shame at her former suspicions. And
now the two Barons of France, and the old Knight, were admitted to offer their
congratulations to the Countess. The friends of Earl William crowded from
different parts to share his joy, and the castle was for some days a scene of
gladness and festivity. But Chauvigny, impatient to complete his happiness
gently urged to Les Roches the necessity of returning to France. William was
soon acquainted with their purpose. 'Not so!' said he, Shall I not be witness
of the happiess now to crown the virtues of that dear maid, the lovely
companion of my dangers, and comforter of my distress? Here, even here, shall
her plighted hand be given to Lord Chauvigny! -- Les Roches consented; the
nuptial rites were prepared, and celebrated with all due solemnity.

The two sons of Randolph had attended Jacqueline to the castle; and now she
earnestly entreated their father to permit them to accompany her to France.
'They shall be my Knights,' said she, and shall be treated with all honorable
care. The Countess requested, with equal earnestness, that Randolph would
permit them to live with her son. But the fond father could not yield to these
solicitations: he declared that his sons must first endeavor to render
themselves more worthy of such favor.

The faithful Elinor still attended on her beloved mistress, and was
entertained with an affection which made the remembrance of her former
misfortunes less bitter. Her brother too found that respect and reward which
his honest zeal had so justly merited.

The resentment of the Earl against Lord Hubert was in some degree disarmed,
when he received the tidings, that this wicked favorite had forfeited the
royal grace, and was ignominiously banished. He now reflected on his wrongs
without emotion. Ela too seemed to forget her sufferings; and each was the more
endeared to the other, by the late dangers and distress of their separation.

THE END.
BOOKS, printed and sold by Dillon Chamberlain, in Dame street, facing
Fownes's-street.
-- 1. --
EMILIUS and SOPHIA, or an Essay on Education. By John James Rousseau, citizen
of Geneva. Translated from the French by Mr. Nugent.

Sanabilibus aegrotamus malis: ipsaque nos in rectum genitos natura, si
emandari velimus, juvat.

Sen. de Ira, lib. 2. c. 13. In two Volumes. Price sewed 5 s. 5 d. bound 6 s. 6
d.

"The education of youth, is a subject of such general importance, that every
attempt to facilitate or improve it, must be acceptable to the public. The
fulfilling so ardous and important a task was reserved for the ingenious M.
Rousseau, an author who has already merited the public applause, and from whom
nothing less than a masterpiece could be expected.

The plan of this performance, which has made so great a noise in most parts of
Europe, is altogether different from any treatise of education hitherto
published. The author supposes an imaginary pupil, named Emilius; and himself
to be the person entrusted with the care of his education, from the time of his
nativity, till he settles in the world. He attends the young gentleman with the
utmost assiduity and care from his cradle to his nuptials; and assists him with
the necessary directions for his general improvement. Upon his arriving at
years of maturity, he introduces him to the acquaintance of an agreeable young
lady, named Sophia, whose affection he gains by his amiable behavior. After a
variety of affecting circumstances, Emilius has the happiness at length of
being united in wedlock to the engaging object of his wishes. The whole is
conducted in an historical narrative, and affords not only the utility of a
didactic piece, but likewise the entertainment of an ingenious novel.

The author has spared no pains to embellish his work with all the elegance of
language, and luxuriancy of imagination. His nervous style displays those
touches and animated strokes which characterise the new Eloisa. There is
something nobly wild and extravagant in his remarks, yet, extremely acute and
sagacious, such as plainly evince him to be a man of genius."

-- 2. --
The BEAUTIES of the Adventurer, the Rambler, World, and Connoisseur, etc. etc.
In two Volumes. Price 3 s. 3 d. neatly bound.

These volumes contain 44 entertaining and instructive histories, every one of
which is equal to any, superior to most, of the Novels published, and will be a
very agreeable and valuable Present to the Youth of both sexes.

"Among all the various methods of conveying instruction, none has been so
universally and successfully practiced, as that wherein the mind is impressed
with the characters of virtue, by a lively and natural detail of interesting
incidents. The excellency of this method consists in rendering pleasure and
entertainment subservient to the purposes of document and admonition. We read a
lesson of morality, without considering it as such, for the sake of the story;
we regard examples as the incidents of that story; and consider its precepts
rather as conclusions than instructions. The passions spontaneously become the
instruments by which we are insensibly engaged and irresistibly retained in the
interest of virtue; and the social affections are awakened, united and directed
to exert themselves in the cause of truth.

"Among the other advantages that will arise from a perusal of this collection,
we beg leave to mention one, and that by no means inconsiderable, which is,
that while the reader is otherwise instructed and entertained, he is
familiarized with the beauty, strength, and elegance of his own language in the
greatest perfection."

-- 3. --
CHRYSAL: or, the Adventures of a GUINEA. Wherein are exhibited views of
several striking scenes; with curious and interesting anecdotes of the most
noted persons in every rank of life, whose hands it passed through, in America,
England, Holland, Germany, and Portugal. -- Hold the mirror up to nature,
To show vice its own image, virtue its own likeness,
And the very age and body of the times
His form and pressure.
SHAKESPEARE. Qui capit, ille facit. By an Adept. In four volumes. Price sewed
7 s. 7 d. bound 9 s. 9 d. The third and fourth volumes may be had separate to
complete setts.

-- 4 --
The REVERIE: or, a FLIGHT to the PARADISE of FOOLS.

All things vain, or all who in vain Things
Build their fond hopes of glory, or lasting fame,
Or happiness in this or the other life.
Milton. By the EDITOR of the adventures of a GUINEA. In two volumes. Price
sewed 4 s. 4 d. bound 5 s. 5 d.

"Little sagacity is required to enable the reader to discover this piece to be
the work of the ingenious author of CHRYSAL, which has been honored with
universal approbation; equal spirit as well as knowledge of the human heart are
observable in every page: there is besides a circumstance, not to be found in
Chrysal, which cannot fail of rendering the present work more entertaining
here, namely, that the scenes of many transactions are laid on this side the
water, and the actors sufficiently known to every person who has the least
intercourse with the world."

-- 5. --
The Life and Opinions of TRISTRAM SHANDY, Gentleman. In eight volumes. Price
bound in three 8 s. 1 d.

-- 6. --
The ESSAY8 of Michael Seigneur de MONTAIGNE. Translated into English. With
explanatory notes and a copious index to each volume. The eighth edition, with
very considerable amendments and improvements, from the most accurate and
elegant French edition of Peter Cost. In four Volumes. Price sewed 9 s. 9 d.
bound 12 s.

"Instead of venturing to say any thing in behalf of this excellent author, we
think it more advisable to take his character from the annexed eminent
perfonages, who cannot be charged with or even suspected of selfishness. --
Justus Lipsius, calls him the French Thales. -- Mezeray, the Christian Seneca.
-- Thuanus, Prince of the French historians, says he was extraordinarily free
and sincere, as posterity will see by his essays, for so he has entitled that
immortal monument of his genius. -- Rollin, that the reading him still pleases
infinitely, and, no doubt will for ever please. -- Balzac, that he was an
eloquent soul, that he delivered his thoughts in nervous and masculine
expressions, and, in another place, that he is comparable to those ancients
whom we call, maximos ingenio, art rudes, etc. -- Cardinal Perron, that his
essays ought to be the manual of all gentlemen. -- The Marquis of Hallifax,
that it was the book in the world he was the best entertained with. -- The Duke
of Buckingham remarks, that we must never expect as much sincerity in any
writer as the incomparable Montaigne, who is like to stand to all posterity. He
is likewise quoted by Swift, Pope, Addison, and many other eminent English
authors.

-- 7. --
The Life of RICHARD NASH, of Bath, Esquire Extracted principally from his original
papers. -- Non ego paucis
Offendar Maculis.
HOR. With his Effigies, from an original painted by Mr. Hoare, and presented
to the corporation of the city of Bath. Price sewed 2 s. 2 d. bound 2 s. 8 d.

"The history of a man, who for more than fifty years presided over the
pleasures of a polite kingdom, and whose life, though without any thing to
surprise, was ever marked with singularity, deserves the attention of the
present. -- In the work an exact account is given of the rise, regulation, and
nature of the Amusements of the city of Bath, how far Mr. Nash contributed to
establish and refine them, and what pleasures a stranger may expect there upon
his arrival."

-- 8. --
The POLITE LADY, or a COURSR of FEMALE EDUCATION. In a series of LETTERS from
a Mother to her Daughter. Price sewed 2 s. 2 d. bound 2 s. 8 d.

It Is education forms the tender mind,
Just as the twig is bent the tree's inclined.
POPE. "These letters (wherein are recommended the study and practice of all
those virtues and good qualities which in the opinion of the author constitute
the character of a polite and accomplished lady) were originally written for
the private instruction of a daughter, and as they contributed, in a great
measure, to form the character of a young lady, who, in the impartial judgment
of the world, is allowed to be one of the most accomplished women of the age,
the author, desirous of putting them into the hands of her younger daughters,
which could not be so conveniently done in manuscript as in print, and being
likewise made to believe that they might be useful to the fair sex in general,
has therefore been induced to offer them to the public."

-- 9. --
VENUS UNMASKED: or, an INQUIRY into the nature and origin of the passion of
LOVE. Interspersed with curious and entertaining accounts of several modern
Amors. O happy state! where souls each other draw,
Where love is liberty, and nature, law!
All then is full, possessing and possessed,
No craving void left aching in the breast
Even thought meets thought ere from the lips it part,
And each warm wish springs mutual from the heart.
Pope's Epist. from Eloisa to Abelard. In two volumes. Price sewed 2 s. 2 d.
bound 2 s. 8 d.

"We are of opinion that some vestiges of an admired annual writer may be
discovered in this work. It is not, as might be surmised from the title, a
chain of dry reasoning, but a tract replete with novel and extraordinary
anecdotes, The subject one of the most interesting in nature, is handled in a
masterly manner, yet with the utmost simplicity and conciseness. In short, we
may venture to pronounce it an extraordinary epitome of what has been wrote on
that elegant and refined passion by the most brilliant pens, and that the
author has discovered the true arcana, the knowledge of which must be of
utility to many and give general satisfaction to all." Impartial Review.

"It is so far from being dangerous, that it is in some sort necessary for
young persons to be acquainted with the passion of love, that they may be able
to shut their ears against it, when it is criminal, and know how to conduct
themselves in it, when innocent and honorable.

M. Huet, Bishop of Avranches.

-- 10. --
The LIFE and entertaining ADVENTURES of Mr. CLEVELAND, natural Son of Oliver
Cromwell. Written by himself. Interspersed with reflections describing the
heart of man in all its variety of passions and disguises. Also some curious
particulars of Oliver's history and amors, never before made public. In two
volumes. Price sewed 4 s. 4 d. bound 5 s. 5 d.

-- 11. --
The illustrious French LOVERS: being the true histories of the amors of
several persons of quality of the French nation. Written originally in French,
and translated into English by a lady. Price sewed 2 s. 8 d. bound 3 s. 3 d.

-- 12. --
MEMOIRS of Madam de GRANSON. An historical Novel. In two Volumes. Translated
from the French of the celebrated Crebilion, the elder. Price sewed 1 s. 7 d.
bound 2 s. 2 d.

"This piece is distinguished by elegance and purity of style, and a pleasing
variety of characters, which are all along finely supported; the sentiments are
at once delicate and noble. The basis of the work is the celebrated Siege of
Calais by Edward of England, yet Love almost entirely makes up the business of
this well wrought tale. The incidents are so many, so interesting and
important, that the readers attention is strongly excited and kept up through
the whole narrative. The episode of Lord Arundel and Mademoiselle de Roye is
indeed both interesting and affecting; but the noble sacrifice made by the
Count de Canaple and his companions cannot be read by a person of the least
sensibility without feeling alternately all the emotions that are excited by
amazement, pity, and terror, from which the reader is unexpectedly relieved by
the happy, yet natural catastrophe. No wonder then that this novel should have
been received with such uncommon approbation at the French court as well as by
all the beau monde at Paris and elsewhere throughout that kingdom.

-- 13 --
The Adventures of a TURK. To which is annexed, Letters to and from a Turkish
Bashaw, a beautiful French slave, and several other personages. Translated from
the French.

Parce tuum vatem sceleris damnare, Cupido.

Ov. R. Am. In every climate love despotic reigns,
But chief amidst Arabia's happy plains:
It mingles with the fragrance of the grove,
And every gale's impregnated with love.
In two volumes. Price sewed 1 s. 7 d. bound 2 s. 2 d.

"These Adventures have the force of novelty to recommend them; they contain a
great variety of new and uncommon incidents (some of which are truly comic)
that happened during his travels through Persia and France; a particular
account of the extraordinary manners and customs of the Jatabists, and the
intrigues and amors of some of the principal Ladies of quality in France. The
Letters abound with the pathetic and are very entertaining as well as
instructive. -- The Monthly Review says, That it is, like the rest of the
French novels, pregnant with amor, has a good deal of sentiment, is really
interesting, and that it must be confessed, the writers of this kind in France,
excel those of any other nation."

-- 14. --
The Chinese SPY: or, Emissary from the court of Pekin, commissioned to examine
into the present state of Europe. Translated from the Chinese. In six volumes.
Price bound in three 8 s. 1 d. sewed 6 s. 6 d. The London edition sells for 19
s. 6 d.

"The fund of humor and vast variety of truly antique characters interspersed
throughout this entertaining performance, has gained it the attention of the
public, and more particularly the estimation of the curious.

FINIS.

