THE Habitable World DESCRIBED.

Inscribed by Permission to His Royal Highness Frederick DUKE OF YORK, etc. etc.

HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE

blazon or coat of arms

LONDON* Published as the Act directs, by the Author. No. 62. Wardour-Street,
Soho.

1788.

THE HABITABLE WORLD DESCRIBED, OR THE PRESENT STATE OF THE PEOPLE IN ALL PARTS
OF THE GLOBE, FROM NORTH TO SOUTH; SHOWING The Situation, Extent, Climate,
Productions, Animals, etc. of the different Kingdoms and States; Including all
the new Discoveries: TOGETHER WITH The Genius, Manners, Customs, Trade,
Religion, Forms of Government, etc. of the Inhabitants, and every thing
respecting them, that can be either entertaining or informing to the Reader,
collected from the earliest and latest Accounts of Historians and Travelers of
all Nations; With some that have never been published in this Kingdom; And,
nothing advanced but on the best Authorities.

WITH A great Variety of MAPS and COPPER PLATES, engraved in a capital Style,
the Subjects of which are mostly new, and such as have never yet been given in
any English work.

BY THE REV. DR. JOHN TRUSLER.

VOL. IV.

LONDON. Printed for the AUTHOR, at the Literary-Press, No. 62, WARDOUR-STREET,
SOHO; and sold by all Booksellers.

M DCC LXXXIX.

TRAVELS THROUGH Siberia and Tartary, PROVINCES OF THE RUSSIAN EMPIRE;
BY S. PALLAS, M. D. PROFESSOR OF NATURAL HISTORY, etc.
PART III. CONTINUED.
I SHALL now speak of the Jugrian and Obdirian Samojedes; Mr. Surjef having had
an opportunity, in the above northern tour, of seeing a good deal of them: yet
the accounts he brought are, in some measure, imperfect; as but few Samojedes
live in the districts of Obdorskaja; and the rest, having partly mixed
themselves with the Eastjaiks, by marriage.

The Samojedes, who call themselves Chasowa, or Ghosovo, that is, men, were
made tributary to the Russian empire so early as 1525; whereas, the other
nations of Siberia, were not conquered till the 17th century. They inhabit the
coasts of the frozen sea, from the 65th degree of north-latitude, to the
seashore; that is, all the northern districts of Russia and Siberia, as far as
to the Jenisei, but are within this district, divided into many tribes,
different even in their dialects. Probably all those, to whom the Russians give
the name of Samojedes, are not of the same origin. What is said here, is meant
of those Samojedes who live between the river Ob, and the Jugrian mountains.

Nothing more probable can be concluded, but that the whole of this people must
originally have been one nation, expelled by war from their abodes, and who
settled on the extreme boundaries of the northern hemisphere. This nation must
long have inhabited a cold and mountainous country, and have there lived a
wandering life; otherwise, they would have been unable to have continued in so
rude a climate, where others can hardly bear the winter, sheltered in
commodious dwellings; neither could they have preserved the use of moveable
huts, if they had not originally been wanderers. Add to this, there are, in the
eastern parts of Siberia, about the Jenisei, where the country, according to
every appearance and token, has been once more populous, a posterity of that
nation in the neighboring Sajanian mountains, in the Koibals, Kamatschinzes,
Matores, Sojetes, and Karagassians, who all speak the Samojede language. This
nation, indeed, does not recollect that it came from the east; but it is
natural to suppose, that their troublesome and dangerous mode of living, may
have effaced, in a few ages, such a remembrance from their memory.

The most northern part of the district of Beresowa, inhabited by the
Samojedes, is divided by the gulf of the river Ob, into two districts; of
which the western, or Kamennaja, is bounded by the district of Pusdoserskaja,
lying from Archangel to the source of the river Sob, along the Jugrian
mountains, Karskoi. The other, called Nisowaja, runs eastward from the gulf of
the Ob; and is bounded by the district of the Juriakian Samojedes, dependent on
Mangasei.

"The European Samojedes," says Took, extend from the White Sea, or rather
from the river Mesen, to Mount Ural. The Asiatic Samojedes occupy the countries
between Mount Ural, and the environs of the Lena, to beyond the Jenisei; those
of European Russia, live separately; those of Siberia, are settled partly in
the vicinage of the Eastjaiks, or mixed with them. The countries they occupy
are marshy, and full of rocks; so that, from the 67th degree of latitude, there
are no trees of any kind; and that cold which prevails in these climates,
prevents vegetation to such a point, that even the little brushwood here and
there to be seen, dwindles away to nothing, as we advance toward the north.
Although they do not inhabit Nova Zembla, situated over against the mouth of
the Ob, nevertheless, to the eastward of the Jenesei, the shores, along which
their little settlements extend, reach to the 75th degree of north latitude;
for which reason, their vast territories are the thinnest of inhabitants, the
rudest, and the most barren and wild, of any of the known regions of the
terrestrial globe.

The Samojedes are, in appearance and language, entirely different from the
Eastjaiks; the latter being, in physiognomy, more like the Russians, and most
like the Finlanders; but the Samojedes have almost the look of a Tunguse,
round, broad, and flat faces (very fine in the women); pouching, broad lips, a
flat and open nose, little or no beard, and black, coarse hair. Their stature
is rather short than middling; but well-proportioned, and more nervous and
fleshy than the Eastjaiks. In their manners, they are much more savage, more
uncivilized and ungovernable, in their open and distant wilds, than the
Eastjaiks, who are much improved, by their frequent intercourse with the
Russians.

SAMOJEDES.


The man's dress differs but little from that of the Eastjaiks. Some shave
their heads partially, some wholly, and some not at all. Some wear but one
whisker on one side, and others on both sides, the chin. The women's dress is
singular. They go always bare-headed, and barefaced; and are, in other
respects, very impudent. Their hair is braided into two tresses, which hang
down behind, and are never opened. In their ears they wear short, bead
pendants. The breast and back-pieces of their garments, are made of the furs of
young reindeer; and the rest, pieces of cloth sewed together; the whole
bordered with fur, and made to lap over before, and there tied with a girdle.
Instead of a breast-pin, they have a large, iron ring, on which both ends of
the girdle are tied. They also wear breeches, of died, reindeer skins; but
they do not follow the ridiculous custom of the Eastjaik women, which I have
mentioned, and wear the willow-tent, and worop. In this dress, the Samojede
women remain day and night; but the men sleep, without any clothes; and, but
for these breeches, would be quite naked.

As the Samojedes live an unsettled life, both in summer and winter, and are
always roving about with their tents, covered with reindeer skins, in woodless
plains, their uncleanliness is not so observable in winter, as among the
stinking Eastjaiks; yet they are in no wise less filthy in their persons, and
manner of eating. Each Samojede keeps his own reindeer, and he and his family,
watch them themselves; the more wealthy ones hire poor people, as shepherds.
These domestic animals are chiefly employed to transport their tents and
effects, on sledges. They do not know how to milk them, and their numbers are
too small to kill them; indeed, their possessors are too covetous to do it.
Their chief living is hunting, like many nations of North America; especially
that of wild reindeer, which they catch in many different ways, as shall be
mentioned below. The wild reindeer furnishes the Samojede with every necessary
he wants, viz. food, roofs, spades which they make of the horn, clothes, and
sinews for thread, etc. etc. When they live near the sea, they have sufficient
subsistence from the sea-bears that come on shore, dead whales thrown up by the
waves, and other animals, which they eat indiscriminately. Dogs, cats, ermines,
squirrels, and snakes; in short, whatever they can kill, or find dead: nothing
comes amiss to them. They sometimes fish in the gulf and lakes, with small
nets made of willow-bast, and ropes of willow-rods. In autumn, they hunt
ice-foxes, which are not only caught by the men in traps, and sometimes
pursued, but even dug out of their holes by their wives, and killed. There are
wealthy Samojedes, who, for the sake of fishing, will take up their
summer-abode on the river Ob, and leave the care of their flocks to their
children, and shepherds; yet, when the time of hunting approaches, will return
to their old way of living. When a Samojede has killed a reindeer, nothing is
lost. They first cut off the animal's ears, (this is done on the spot where he
is killed) and throw them away, as an offering to their gods, to obtain,
future, good luck in hunting; the leg bones are taken out, split with a knife,
and the marrow is eaten raw: so do they eat raw the warm and bloody brains, and
consider them as a great dainty. The eyes are buried in a certain spot; and no
woman or girl is suffered to pass over this spot, lest it should destroy their
success in hunting. In the spring, when the reindeer has new horns, which are
knotty and rough, they will eat these horns, only singeing off the hair, and
even the old horns they will bruise and boil, and make strong glue of, by
mixing it with the blood of the same animal. When more families are boiling,
for they have but one kettle among four or five families, the rest of the meat
is boiled, and every one eats his portion of in his own tent. The wife,
however, cannot eat with her husband, but is contented with what he leaves.

The female sex is in general used worse by the Samojedes than the Eastjaiks.
They have every domestic business to perform, to put the luggage on the
sledges, etc. and notwithstanding they are quite slaves to their husbands, the
latter are continually scolding and cursing them except a few evenings in the
year, when love, for a moment, softens their savage breasts. Nothwithstanding
this, the women are considerd by their husbands as impure creatures. When a
woman has erected a tent she dares not enter it, till she has smoked herself
and every thing she sits on, and even the sledge she carries into the hut, with
reindeer hair. When she unloads the sledge by untying the cloths upon it, she
cannot do it from above, but must creep under the shafts and do it. So on a
journey, no woman can cross a train or row of reindeer sledges following each
other, but must either run round the whole, or creep underneath the shafts.
Even in the hut a staff is erected behind the fire, the limits of which she
dares not pass, for they deem the fire sacred, and think a woman going round it
would profane it. To do her domestic work, if she wants to go from one side of
the hut to the other, she must go round about. For the Samojedes absolutely
believe, that if a woman is at liberty to go about the whole tent, a wolf will
certainly devour a reindeer the same night, and the Eastjaiks who keep
reindeer have adopted the same superstitious notions. For no woman or
marriageable girl is suffered to eat of the head of a reindeer. In the time of
their menses, they are plagued beyond measure. They must often undergo
purification by smoking themselves with reindeer hair, or castor, nor are they
suffered at such times, to dress any food for their husbands, or hand them the
least thing. It is the same after lying-in; the husband does not cohabit with
his wife for two months. At this period, she is not to eat any provisions
fresh-killed, but must put up with old provisions; but the worst of all customs
is this: the least pain in childbirth causes an immediate suspicion that she
has had some illicit connection with other men, and she is therefore left to
suffer, in order to extort a confession from her. A European dame would despise
this, but the poor Samojede, in order to have assistance, will confess an
intrigue, she was, perhaps, never concerned in. This confession however, has no
bad consequence. If the delinquent be a near relation, the woman does not name
him, but the husband immediately guesses the person, and makes him accountable
whether innocent or guilty. If it be any one else, she names him, and he is
called upon to defray the consequent expenses of that assistance, he put his
friend to, without being applied to for it.

When a Samojede wants a wife, he looks for one in some other family than his
own: he never cares for beauty, but chooses one equal to himself in rank and
property. Having appointed a negociator of the business from among his own
friends, whom it is customary to reward with a reindeer for his trouble; with
this man and his relations he goes to the habitation of the girl's father, and
being arrived, no one presumes to enter the hut, but ranging all their sledges
in a row, each man sitting on his own, while the negociator waits upon the
father of the young woman, and enquires whether the young man can have her. If
the father refuses, which is but seldom the case, he gives the negociator a
basket, which is the token of refusal and nothing more is said, the whole suite
return as they came; but if the father accepts the proposal, the negociator
settles the kalym or price to be paid, which is attended with more difficulty
than among the Eastjaiks, for such shall be the covetousness of the father,
that he will keep the whole train a long time on their sledges, that he may get
as much for his daughter as he can. The kalym generally consists in a variety
of clothes, household necessaries, reindeer, and little matters purchased from
the Russians. The father indeed can keep but part of this kalym to himself, it
being usual to give some of it to his relations.

As soon as the youth has paid the kalym, the father-in-law loads him and his
company with reindeer meat, and during the feast, the young man and the
bride's father sing to each other, the father advising in his song the son to
love his wife, and the son recommending himself as well as he can to his new
father. It is then settled, when the bride's portion is to be paid, and when
the bride shall be ready to give her hand. For a father always gives with his
daughter in marriage, a certain quantity of clothes. On the day appointed, the
bridegroom waits on his bride with a number of strange women to fetch her. On
this occasion, small presents are demanded from those relations that share the
kalym. The bride is then forcibly placed on a sledge by these women, tied on,
and all the sledges with the presents and gifts (the first three or four of
which, the father must cover with good cloth, and the rest with reindeer
skins) then set off; the bride's sledge first, and all the rest following, and
return to the young man's hut, where it is the business of the bride to make
his bed, in which she sleeps by her husband, but undisturbed for the first
month. Both Eastjaiks and Samojedes make the bride's mother a present, if it
turns out that her daughter when married, was a virgin.

Some time after marriage, the young wife pays a visit to her father, and stays
with him a few weeks, during which time, she has the liberty to receive her
husband. At their taking leave, the father must make her a number of presents,
and do the same at every visit; so that the young woman for a length of time
shall have no occasion to apply to her husband for any thing. In cases of
divorce, the kalym is returned. Should the woman die soon after her marriage,
the widower claims a return of the kalym, if respect to the deceased does not
prevent it.

The Samojedes have very easy labors. The afterbirth is either buried, or
placed in some remote place, where no cattle, or wild animal, can approach it.
At the time of a woman's delivery, her husband keeps a good knife ready, with
which the attendant on the mother cuts the navel-string of the child, and keeps
the knife as a reward. All present take the child as soon as born, and caress
it. Like the Eastjaiks, they lay it upon rotten wood or soft moss, and so tie
it, that the mother may readily carry it at her back.

When a boy is two years old, his father gives him a name, which he keeps till
he is fifteen, then gives him another of his own choosing, or borrows one from
some friend, after the death of their relations; for the names are sacredly
kept in the family, and should a Samojede give his son the name of another
person, without the consent of that person's relations, it would expose him to
bloodshed. A girl never has any money. When married, her husband calls her Ne,
that is, wife; and she calls her husband, Chosowa; that is, man.

The names generally given to boys, have some significant meaning, as for
example: Chanchara, sledges and larchwood; Nerme, opening in the ice; Laatscha,
hillock; Lakeer, hilly-land; Naemale, broken bones; Warpts, lightheaded;
Eptukai, goose foot; and the like.

The Samojedes inter their dead very soon, have no certain burial-ground, but
carry the corpse to a height or hill. They dress the body in as many of its new
clothes as they can put on, laying what is left about the corpse, and put the
head into a boiler, from an opinion that, after the head is decayed, the soul
will there remain: all this done, they wrap up the body in the cover of a tent,
of reindeer skins, bind it round with ropes, and drag it out of the tent,
head-foremost; not out at the door, but from under the covering of the tent the
man inhabited, which they raise for the purpose; for they idly think, if it is
taken through the door, the deceased will return, and soon fetch away some
other of the family. When brought to the place of interment, if in summertime,
they dig a very shallow pit, not above eighteen inches deep, cover the corpse
with wild bushes, and then throw the ground upon it. In wintertime, they erect
a hut with timber and bushes, place the deceased in it, give him an axe, knife,
bow and arrows, tobacco, a pipe, spoon and cups, and then leave him. The
reindeer that drew the corpse are killed, and put, with all their furniture,
into the grave. Rich people kill also those reindeer with which the deceased
used to hunt, and the whole, in winter, is covered with straw; in summer, with
moss and straw. Of course, Samojede graves are a banquet prepared for
ice-foxes, hyenas, and other wild beasts.

During the interment, they send for a magician, who is often fetched from a
great distance, in honor of the deceased. On such occasions, these magicians
have recourse to the drum, and put on a particular kind of robe, ornamented
with figures, in iron-plates. Their business is, to persuade the spirit of the
dead not to molest those he has left behind him, nor fetch them away; but to
leave his lucky hunting-days to his relations. At these times, they sacrifice a
reindeer, and dress it on the spot; but neither the wife nor husband of the
deceased is at liberty to eat out of the common boiler, without being first
purified by washing and smoking themselves with castor. Should a Samojede pass
the grave of an ear relation, even ten years afterward, he must sacrifice a
reindeer, in memory of the deceased, and eat it with his attendants, leaving
the head and horns upon the grave. The name of the deceased is no more to be
mentioned, but by allusion or circumlocution; he that would pronounce the name,
would become a declared enemy of the relations: but, after a length of time,
the same name may be revived in the second or third generation, and given to
children, to keep up its remembrance.

Mourning for the dead, consists in not tying up their fur-boots, nor girding
their bodies with willows; undoing the tresses of the hair, letting it go
dishevelled for some time, and afterward braiding it, for life, into three
tresses, letting the third hang on one side over the ear.

I must not omit to mention, that many Samojedes, especially magicians, are
occasionally panic-struck, partly owing to lax fibers, the effects of a
northern climate, and their manner of living, and partly to fancy, weakened by
superstition. We see this also among the Laplanders, Tunguse, and the
inhabitants of Kamschatka. Major Islenief assured me, he had heard this among
the Jakutes; and, in a less degree, I met with it among the Tartars, about the
Jenisei, and the Buscats. -- We have read of the same among the Laplanders. An
unexpected touch, a sudden call, whistling, or a fearful and sudden appearance
will throw these people into a state of fury. The Samojedes, and Jakutes, who
seem more to be affected in this way, carry the matter so far, that, forgetting
what they are about, they will take the first axe, knife, or other offensive
weapon that lies in their way, and would wound or kill the object of their
terror, if not prevented by force, and the weapon taken from them; and if so
interrupted, will beat themselves about the hands and feet, scream out, roll
upon the ground and rave. The Samojedes and Eastjaiks have an infallible remedy
to bring such persons to themselves; which is, to set fire to a reindeer skin,
or a sack of reindeer hair, and let it smoke under the patient's nose: this
occasions a faintness, and a quiet slumber, often for the space of twenty-four
hours.

In the district of the river Ob, Mr. Surjef saw a female magician, who had
quitted her way of life, on account of her advanced age. This woman was not
only terrified by whistling, but even by the noise of the wind. There was also,
among the Samojedes who accompanied him on his journey to the frozen sea, a
woman, who was terribly frightened at every trifle. In 1772, in their travels
through Mangasei, they met with a young Samojede sorcerer, whom Mr. Surjef no
sooner approached, than he imagined he was going to be killed; and, on holding
a finger out to him, he seized it with both hands, and took that opportunity to
run off: however, after many persuasions of the interpreter, that no harm was
designed him, he recovered himself. They then put on him a black glove, and
immediately his eyes rolled; he stared steadfastly at the glove, and fell into
such a fit of madness, that he would have committed some murder, with an axe
that lay in his way, had it not been secured. Disappointed of his weapon, he
ran about raving, screaming, and shaking his hand, in order to get off the
glove, which he took to be the claw of a bear, and which he was afraid to touch
with the other hand, till the bye-standers laid hold of him forcibly, and
pulled it off, on which he recovered.

The Samojede magicians are skillful in their art: besides the drum, which they
use as do the Laplanders, they wear a particular dress. According to Mr.
Gmelin's account, they are tolerable jugglers. Some have the art of plunging a
knife into the body, without making a wound; and apparently wringing off their
heads, by fastening a cord round their necks, and suffering two persons to draw
it tight, and afterward setting it on again. But these tricks are seen only
among those magicians who require but little art to deceive their countrymen;
and, indeed, to speak seriously, such a Siberian juggler, would cut but a very
indifferent figure at a European fair.

I could learn nothing authentic about their idols; yet I know that each man
has, in his house, a pagod, which is often some particular stone, or some other
inanimate body, which the Samojede ties upon his sledge, and considers as
sacred.

I will say a few words about their amusements, and then leave them. When many
assemble, upon any joyous occasion, they divert themselves with fighting, and
running over certain limits. They also dance with their wives, by couples, in
circles; throw themselves into a variety of attitudes, and make a number of
grimaces, all to musical measure; and often, for want of music, will keep time
by snorting, and other nasal sounds; in which the women, in the same way, bear
a chorus, and reply.

I will proceed to their fisheries, and manner of hunting, about the river Ob;
equally practiced by Eastjaiks and Samojedes.

Took, who speaks from Gmelin, is a little more particular respecting the
persons of the Samojedes. He says, The men are about five feet high; some few
are seen, only four feet. They seem all of a heap; have short legs, small neck,
a large head, flat nose and face, with the lower part of the face projecting
outward, large mouth and ears, small black eyes, but wide eyelids, small
lips, and little feet; their skin is of a deepish yellow hue, and they have
seldom any beard at all; their hair grows in very small quantity, but, small as
it is, both sexes take great pains to eradicate it every where, except on their
heads, where it is black, and has the appearance of silk. The women are shorter
than the men; have a more slender shape, and are softer in their features. At
the same time, they are far from handsome; and a pretty female is as
extraordinary as a fine man; their breasts are small and flat, and their
maturity very early; many of them being mothers at twelve years of age, and
sometimes at eleven: they are not, however, very prolific; and, after thirty
years of age, seldom bear children.

The constitution of this country has always been, and still is, that of the
infancy of the world. They never had an idea of any prince, or superior, except
the elders of their branches. Their historic songs perpetuate only the
remembrance of some ancestor, who gloried in his courage and skill in hunting,
or who was the founder of their families, or, of their magic priests. Since
their conquest by the Russians, little forts, or places of confinement, have
been built in their territories, to keep them in order, and receive their
tribute; and, at first, they were bold enough to oppose these establishments;
but they now pay their tribute, or taxes, with great cheerfulness, and at the
places destined for that purpose. This moderate tribute is left to themselves
to proportion, and consists of the skins of wild beasts.

Having now described the persons of the Samojedes, let us speak of their
fisheries, and manner of hunting, in and about the river Ob; in which the
Eastjaiks and Samojedes agree.

There is no large river in all Russia and Siberia, where such a quantity of
all kind of fish of passage comes up from the sea, as in the Ob Of whitings
(Coregoni), it contains several unknown species; but trout, salmon, and several
other sorts of fish, caught in other large rivers of Russia and Siberia, are
wanting here; which may be ascribed to the nature of the water, its slow
course, and the sliminess of the ground. The Siberian omul (Salmo autumnalis),
found in the Jenisei, Angara, Baikal, Tubal; and the lake Madshour, is not seen
here, though it is common in the frozen sea; nor is the little trout (Salmo
eriox), abundantly caught on the Jugrian coast, and on the river Petschora, to
be found in the river Ob; but the sturgeon, and huso, who like a soft ground,
are larger, and more abundant, yet of a worse taste in the Ob, than in such
rivers as are stony.

The fishes of passage peculiar to the Ob, and seen no where else, are, the
muksun (Salmo lavareto affinis), the soroch (Salmo wimba), the nelma, large
quabs, pike, perch, shad, and barbel. The muksun, nelma, and some others, crowd
up the Ob in spring, as soon as the ice is dissolved, reach Beresowa about
June, and then proceed further into the Jenisei and Tom; but, in September,
chiefly return into the ocean, before the river-water, under the ice, begins to
stink. This disagreeable change of water, only happens in little, slow-flowing
rivers; not in the larger ones, in the district of Beresowa, nor even in the
Ob, after the month of December. Some rivers, which flow from the mountains
into the Ob, and have strong and rapid streams, as the Sob, and others, are
free from this defect; and, of course, are fuller of fish in wintertime. But,
in the Ob, fish commonly live in such places, where the sweet water rivers
empty themselves, and where fresh and strong rivulets run into it. In such
places, the finny tribes assemble so plenteously, that they are caught, in
quantities, during the whole winter. Where there is foul or dead water, it does
not freshen and become sweet till spring, when the melted snows adds to it.

The spring-fishery in the Ob does not begin before June; when the river opens
again, and shoals of fish push their way up, and fill all its branches. Just at
this period, the Ob is too deep and broad to be fished; and, it has been known
that at such flood-times as happened in 1770 and 1771, the Eastjaiks, who have
made no provision, have been almost starved. Those who are prudent, make a
greater provision than merely for the winter; and find themselves very well
rewarded for their care.

Besides drag-nets, made use of from June to October, the Eastjaiks have
Various, other ways of fishing. One is, with a net, called Kylidan. It is like
a bag, ten feet broad, and seven long: its lower edge is stretched upon a pole,
at the middle of which a stone is fixed, in order to sink it, flat on the
ground. Near the stone is fastened a rope, which goes through a ring fastened
on the upper edge of the net, which the fisherman rowing takes hold of, and
drags the net after him. A few inches below the upper edge of the net, are some
strings fastened to it, which the man holds between his fingers, and hereby
feels when any large fish strikes against the net; when he immediately lets go
the string, and pulls the rope tight, which draws the bottom and top of the net
together, and imprisons all that is within the bag. With these nets they catch,
from June to September, sturgeon, white salmon, quab, muksun, and schagur.

Through the summer, they also catch a quantity of fish, with garths and
baskets; and also, in winter, when the ice is solid; and they use ropes, with
hooks on them, called snasts, as in the Wolga. They fish, at night, with
fish-prongs, in the side-rivers, by the light of kindled birch-bark, erected
upon poles; and, when the rivers are shut up, will make openings, with huts
over them, and let down baits, cut out in wood, and made to resemble small
fishes; in doing which they are clever, and, when these baits draw fishes
toward them, catch them with their prongs. Such a quantity of sturgeon is
caught at Beresowa, that a pud weight will not sell for more than 40 copecs,
and the fat at 50, per pud; and never for more than a ruble.

There is a kind of dolphin met with in the gulf of the river Ob, and is
occasionally seen at certain distances up the river, in pursuit of fishes of
passage. These are the fish, which the Russians call Bjelugas; which Mr. Gmelin
has given some account of; and which are mentioned by Muller; and also, by
Professor Kraschenini, in his natural history of Kamschatka. Anderson and
Crantz, in their accounts of Greenland, give a particular description of this
dolphin, which they call the White Dolphin; and what they say of its teeth,
corresponds with what I have myself observed in the head of this fish. Nothing
is more true, than the suppositions in Muller's Collection; that the sea
bjeluga, is no other than the white dolphin of the Greenlanders. Mr. Surjef,
four miles beyond Obdorskaja, found several heads of this fish, in a pagan
place of sacrifice. From a variety of accounts, which I have collected from
those who are well acquainted with the sea-bjeluga, and from a head which I
received quite entire, I am capable of resolving every doubt respecting this
animal; and I take upon me to aver, that this marine bjeluga belongs to the
genus of dolphins; having, like the whale, two heart-pits, lungs, warm blood,
external genital parts, and teats; and that it cannot have any communication
with the bjeluga of the Caspian, and Black seas; nor have any similarity to it,
but in the name, form, and white color. The white dolphin resembles a
quadruped so much, particularly the sea-dog, that the Samojedes take it rather
for a water-animal, than a fish. It is never above 21 feet in length; its head
is oblong; and, in respect to the body, very small, conically flat above, and
about the snout obtuse, soft, and round. It Is eyes are small, round, and
project from the head. It has no nostrils in the snout, but has a vent-hole in
the forehead, through which, when it swims on the top of the water, it throws
up a great deal of water, as a spout. Its ear-holes are very distinguishable;
its mouth, with the lips, not much wider than a reindeer, which, if it wants
to bite, it can open wide, and both jaws have, on each side, a row of short,
and very blunt, teeth. The distinguishable mark of this fish, from all other of
its genus, is, that it has no gills. When it swims, it bends its tail like a
crab, beats the water impetuously back, and thus darts forward, as rapid as an
arrow. Its skin is white, moist, without hair, as soft as human skin.
Underneath its belly, the female genitals are very visible, and close by are
two teats, like those of a cow, full of white milk. The penis of the male is
about ten inches long, without cartilage or bone, thick as one's arm, and
pointed at the end like that of a bullock. The Samojedes say, its flesh is as
black as soot; and the whole body is covered with a white sward: the young ones
are more black, or gray, than the mother, and follow her swimming. In general,
white dolphins gather, in little flocks, together; and when they are observed
in the gulf of the Ob, the Samojedes assemble, in large numbers, drive them on
the shallows, and kill them. Dr. Baden, resident-physician of the regency of
Tobolskoi, dissected one, and compares its intestines to those of a calf.

Hunting is very general in all the districts situated north of Beresowa. The
animals that abound most in the woodless wilds, the farthest north, are blue
and white ice-foxes, common foxes, white and gray wolves, hyenas, and
reindeer. In the adjacent, woody parts, elks, lynxes, sables, ermines, otters,
beavers, and a few black bears; and, on the seacoast, white bears, but not so
abundant as on the ice-fields of the ocean. About Obdorskaja, they are very
rare; but not so rare about the Jenisei, as far as Mangasei. It having been
observed, that ice-foxes follow the mice, in certain years, to eastward; they
are at such times found, in great quantities, in Mangasei; and the hunting then
has not been so good upon the Ob.

Their methods of catching these animals, are the same as those practiced in
Russia and Siberia. Besides shooting-instruments, and catch-clefts, they have
self-shooting bows, for bears, lynxes, wolves, hyenas, and the common game.
Wolves and foxes are caught with poisonous baits of crow's-eyes and sublimate;
and, by fall-traps. Of the latter, the Eastjaiks make a kind, which they call
Kuromsess, set up with a block, on which the bait is tied; and the animal
endeavoring to move the block, to take off the bait, is killed by its fall.
Such traps as are used in Russia, for ermines and pole-cats, are made use of by
the Samojedes, but of a larger size for ice-foxes; and sometimes they fix
self-shooting bows, on forks, in the deep snow, against snow-hills, in which
such foxes hide pieces of fish.

Sables are of little value here; and are either shot by the peasants with
arrows, or driven into nets. If found sleeping in their holes, a bag-net is
placed before them, into which the sable is driven, and entangled.

Beavers are sometimes seen in crowds, about the uninhabited districts of the
rivers; but, in general, are sound single, in woody borders. Hunters go in
search of their holes in winter; and, having found them, encompass them with
pales on the waterside; then open the vent-hole, large enough to let a dog in,
who takes the beaver by the teeth, and he is then drawn out by the hunter, by
the hind-legs. Others are pursued and killed, sometimes by dogs, and sometimes
by springbows, placed by the waterside, that go off and shoot the animal, when
the bait fixed on it is touched. They encompass woody places with pales,
leaving here and there a way out, and fix snares, and spring-bows, at such
openings. They catch elks, and reindeer, by the same method; but in the marshy
plains, near the sea, where this cannot be done successfully, the Samojedes
have found out another method of getting at the wild reindeer, who rove there
in winter, in herds of ten, a hundred, and two hundred at a time. When there
are many Samojedes together, and they see such a herd of wild reindeer, they
place some tame ones, and sledges, at a distance, upon a piece of flat, high
land, to windward, and stick from thence in the snow, toward the herd, long
sticks, with goose-wings tied on them; and which the reindeer easily move, at
the distance of ten fathoms from each other: and, on the other side, to
leeward, or under the wind, about 50 fathoms from the sledges, they stick poles
as before, and continue them on till they have passed the herd, which are all
this time searching for food underneath the snow, too attentive to look about,
and prevented from that by their great beams. When all is ready, the Samojedes
divide; part hide themselves behind the sledges, and part, called Wardar, lie
concealed, with bows and arrows, in the opening on the lee-side, near the
sledges; others, at the same time, run, and drive the herd toward the winged
poles, which, shaking in the wind, alarms them, and, impelled by fear, they run
among the tame reindeer standing by the sledges. They are soon, however,
driven from this place; and, seeing no winged poles where the Wardar lie,
attempt to force their way through, and there many of them meet their death.
But as such a mode of hunting requires a great number of people, they have
other inventions, to deceive the reindeer. Having trained up four or five of
their tame, female reindeer, so as to walk in order with the huntsman, he
fastens a long cord about each of their horns, and ties the other end to his
girdle, that he may have the command of them, in case of confusion, or
disappointment. These female reindeer have the fawns running about them; the
hunter is thus surrounded by the whole, and, with this cavalcade, can approach
the wild deer, near enough to shoot the one he likes.

In autumn, at rutting-time, the Samojedes will take a strong buck, and go with
it in search of wild herds; and, meeting one, will wind a cord about the buck's
beams, or horns, extending it from one horn to the other, and there fasten it:
so armed, he is turned loose. The hot animal rushes among the herd, and is
there attacked by the wild buck, who, during the contest, is entangled by the
horns, in the ropes fastened about those of the tame one; when the huntsman
runs in, and kills him. They catch their deer also with great ease, when they
come down, in summer, to the cool brooks; and, in wintertime, in deep snows,
by pursuing them in their snow-scates.

When on the seacoast, the Samojedes employ themselves in catching seals, or
sea-calves, that prowl about the cliffs, or ice; and sea-dogs, that come up
from the water, through small holes which they make in the ice, by constantly
lying on one spot. The Samojedes lay a board near such holes, to which they
fasten a rope, and hiding themselves behind the large pieces of ice, till the
seal comes up out of the water through the hole, they draw the board over the
hole, which prevents its return, and of course it is soon killed. (See plate
Samojedes.)

Having described their fishing and hunting, I must not omit their fowling,
which begins in spring, in the district of the river Ob. As the snow melts,
they look out for such spots, where the snow-water forms little lakes. As the
fowls arrive, with the first thaw, and settle in such lakes, they erect small
huts near them, where they can lie concealed, and within reach of a shot; and,
in order to decoy geese and ducks, they stuff out the skins of geese and ducks
with hay, and fix them near this hut; and it is curious to see how wild swans
and geese will soar over these stuffed baits, and unfeather them with their
bills.

Later in spring, they catch them in flying-nets, hung up in an avenue made
through a wood, as I have already described elsewhere: nay, they catch them
here in broad day, as the fowlers conceal themselves in huts, erected for the
purpose. They catch wild geese, also, on the flat sand-banks, with such a net
as fowlers use in England, to catch small birds; for in these northern
countries, the people take no notice of small waterfowl, they catch only the
larger kind; and the quantity here is so great, that the Russian inhabitants
might provide themselves well with it for the whole year, and have plenty to
throw away in the ensuing spring, which brings fresh supplies.

I came back to Krasnojarskaja to winter, on the 28th of February, 1772; Mr.
Georgi, assistant to Professor Falk, arrived from Tomskoi, with three other
gentlemen, sent by him to accompany me; his infirm state of health, not
suffering him to travel on. In return, I was to send one of the gentlemen I had
with me, who was to go on from him to Petersburgh. He set off for Tomskoi, on
the 4th of March; and, by him, I sent to Petersburgh best part of the natural
curiosities I had collected in the course of the last year. There being nothing
now to prevent my prosecuting my intended journey, into the eastern parts of
Siberia, and my health being restored, I set out, on the 7th of March, from
Krasnojarsk, on my road to Irkuzkaja, a distance of 544 miles; where I removed
on the 14th of March. This road is tolerably passable; sometimes we traveled
on sledges, and sometimes on wagons. Post-stations are here erected, at proper
distances, with horses, and good warm and white, painted rooms, for the
reception of travelers; and the country is all along inhabited by Siberians,
or Russian colonists. That I might miss nothing worthy notice, or observation,
I left Mr. Kaschkaref at Krasnojarsk, to explore the vegetable kingdom, in the
neighboring mountains, as the spring opened; and sent Mr. Surjef, as he was
more accustomed to traveling in the north, to Jeniseikaja, and from thence, by
water, to Mangasei, and further northwards, to get all the knowledge he could
of the Siberian productions in the frigid zone.

We reached the town Irkuzkaja on the 14th at eleven at night; our horses being
very much fatigued. The many curiosities I had here to see, the many useful
accounts I had to collect, respecting the unknown district on the opposite side
of the Baikal; and the kind attention of his excellency Lieutenant General De
Brill, governor of this town, so engrossed my time for the whole week I staid,
that I could not think of giving a description of this fine place; of course,
left it to the pen of Mr. Georgi, who was to stay here till the ice left the
Baikal, which would at least be two months longer; first giving him my
instructions, to guide him in the journey he was to take, along the coasts of
that sea.

Through the favor of General Brill, I shared an uncommon curiosity, which
richly deserves mentioning. During the winter, the inhabitants of this town,
being out a hunting, found, on the river Wilui, the body of an unknown, large
animal, and brought the head of it, with a fore and hind foot, well preserved,
to this place. The person who sent it and the annexed account, dates his
letter, Jan. 17, 1772; and mentions, that the carcass of the animal had been
found in December, about 30 miles up the river, on the sandy borders, about 7
feet from the water, and 28 feet from a higher and steeper border, half-covered
with sand; that it was measured on the spot, and found to be 7 feet long, and
its height 5 feet. The whole body had still its natural, thick, leather skin,
but had been so decayed, that nothing could be taken off whole, but the head
and feet, which he had sent to Irkuzkaja, as a curiosity. On the first
appearance, these parts showed, that they belonged to a rhinoceros. The head
was still covered with its natural skin; and, therefore, the more
distinguishable. On the skin was, on one side, short hairs; and, almost every
where, the external organization of the skin was well preserved; even the
eyelids did not appear to be decayed. Underneath the skin lay, here and there,
a loamy substance, the remnant of some decayed, soft parts. About the feet
were, besides the skin, strong remains of joints and sinews. The horn of the
mouth, and the hoofs of the feet, were wanting; but the situation of the
former, and the border of the skin round it, were like the cloven hind and
fore-foot -- unquestionable marks of this animal.

Having written a special treatise on this wonderful discovery, which may be
found in the writings of the Imperial Academy of Sciences, I shall not repeat
the cause, that may have brought such an animal to the most northern districts
of the Lena; and so many other remains of strange animals, all over Siberia. I
shall only mention some circumstances which occurred to me, and acquaint the
reader with the district where these remains were found, and preserved for such
a length of time. The country about the Wilui is mountainous, and contains
either strata of sand, or limy slates, with some soft layers of loam. Upon the
banks are also broken stone-coal; of which there must be some bed, higher up
the Wilui. The brook Kemtendoi, on which is a whole mountain of selenites, and
rocksalt, in the neighborhood of an alabaster mountain, lies 225 miles higher
up the Wilui, from the spot where the rhinoceros was discovered. Right toward
that spot lies, upon the Wilui, a sandy mountain, whose height is near 15
fathoms; near which the body of the animal was found, tolerably deep in gravel,
and was preserved by the frost, as the ground never thaws about the Wilui, to a
considerable depth. The warmest, sandy, and elevated tracts, are indeed
softened by the rays of the sun, to the distance of some feet underground; but
in the valleys, where the earth is mixed with loam and sand, we find, even at
the end of the summer, every thing freezes, at a foot deep. But for this, it
would have been impossible that the animal should have been so far preserved,
whose transposition from a southern, native soil, into the frigid zone, cannot
be of later date than the general deluge; as the oldest annals of men speak of
no later change of the earth; and to this change, may probably be ascribed this
variety of contents in the earth; the remains of the rhinoceros, and the bones
of elephants, dispersed throughout Siberia.

On account of the warm weather, we saw now, about Irkuzkaja, the last passage
of the snow-larks (Alauda alpestris), and black sparrows (Fringilla
flavi-rostris); and there was also arriving, a kind of parti-colored jackdaw,
which spends the winter in China, or the warmer part of the states of the Mogul
(Corvus Dauricus).

The winter-road we were to travel, was over the frozen lakes, and shore of the
Baikal; and, in our way, on the 23d of March, a most violent, frigid storm blew
behind us, so that the sledge-leaders could not keep their ground, but were
blown many fathoms about the sledge, on the slippery ice; and nothing could fix
them, or save them from the danger of being blown into the deep chinks between
the ice, and being frozen to death, but sticking their knives into the ice, and
holding fast by them. These chinks are, in many places, so large, and so deep,
that no one durst venture to cross the ice in such weather. As the storm
increased, we were obliged to halt, and take up our abode in this cold spot,
till the next day, not daring to cross the lake before us. Several persons were
here, preparing to catch sea-dogs, which prowl up from the Baikal, to these
warmer places, to sleep, bask in the sunshine, and enjoy themselves. They come
up to these animals, readily, in little sledges; before which they extend a
white sail, which the sea-dogs take for a piece of ice, and are thus
surrounded, and shot with balls. There is generally a beaten road over these
lakes, and the seacoast, in winter; and men will travel it, in preference to
one that is less dangerous, but farther round: nay, will even pass chinks, by
putting boards across; over which the horses and sledges will pass.

Approaching nearer the shore of the Baikal, I saw a particular kind of
fishing-basket, consisting of a little enclosure of bushes, extending from the
shore some feet into the water; at the end of which was another enclosure, that
formed two rooms; whose entrance is the angle which each room forms with the
enclosure. When any fish approaches the enclosure, they go into these rooms, or
places, from which they cannot return. Here I stopped, to put one of my wagons
upon wheels, for they were so contrived as occasionally to be converted into
sledges, for the purpose of traveling over the ice and snow. We traveled on,
at the rate of about 25 miles a day, but with difficulty; sometimes on sledges,
sometimes on wheels, but without any material accident; passing many villages
in our way, till we reached the town of Selenginskaja, on the 31st of March,
where I met Mr. Sokalof, whom I had sent forward in the beginning of the year.

The district about this place is encompassed by sandy mountains; and so warm,
that spring begins here sooner than in the mountains about the Baikal. On the
20th of February, the air was very temperate; and, toward the end of this
month, the snow melted entirely upon the hills; and all sorts of birds of
passage were arriving. On the 20th of March I shot the first water-wagtail; and
a great many little birds now entered the woods.

On the 3d of April, the snow being entirely melted, I made a little tour, to
the distance of 60 miles, up the brook Tschikoi, to see the Mongalian pagoda
that was erected here about 12 years ago. I chose this time, being informed,
that the three days of prayer, appointed monthly by the Mongols and Burats, are
on the 13th, 14th, and 15th days of the new moon; so that I might see here the
idolatry of the Lamas, and compare it with that of the Kalmucks. I reached it
on the 5th of April. This pagoda is situated in a sandy plain, and is the
largest belonging to the Russian Mongols. Besides the chief pagoda, and six
smaller ones, there is here erected a good mansion, belonging to the chief of
the clergy of Lama in this district, whom they call Bandidi-Chambo-Lama; and
two houses, one inhabited by a military clerk, and the other by a christened
Mongol, in the service of the Cossack regiments. There are also, about the
north, west, and east sides of the pagoda, several enclosures, in which the
principal clergy, if they come here to the service of the temple, erect their
felt tents; some on the ground, and others, on a platform, raised with planks
above the ground. All the buildings are of wood, and built by Russian
carpenters, according to the direction of the highpriest, Chambo-lama; who
endeavored to imitate the form and ornaments of the pagodas of Thibet, which
he had seen in his youth. It would be a superfluous repetition, to enter here
into a circumstantial description of these temples; as I preserve these, and
other accounts, for a particular treatise on the manners, customs, and religion
of the Mongols and Kalmucks, which I mean to publish hereafter.

Kjachta. Twenty-seven miles from this place stands Kjachta, which is the
frontier fortress, and center of all commerce between Russia and China; where
there is a guard of custom-house officers, to prevent smuggling. This place is
situated in an even, elevated plain, in a wide valley, intersected by the brook
Kjachta, and encompassed with high, rocky, and woody mountains; the most
considerable of which is called, by the Mongols, Burgultei (eagle-mountain); it
lies so close to the fortress, on the southern side, as to command the same;
and yields a fine prospect in every street, and part of the fortress; and also
of the Chinese fortress, adjoining it. Since the last marking out of the
boundaries, the Chinese, probably conscious of the advantage the mountain may
afford, have claimed it as their own; under the frivolous pretense, of its
containing some holy sepulchers of their ancestors; for the Russian
frontier-line formerly ran across it. The whole mountain, however, is now left
with them; and the boundaries are drawn more to the north, over the bottom. On
a western and adjacent mountain, stand the Russian and Chinese marks of
boundary. The former is a heap of stones and earth, with a cross; the latter,
of stones only, set up, one on another, so as to leave a hollow place within,
something like a Kalmuck tent, or Tartarian jourt.

The fortress consists of a quadrangle of pallisadoes, fortified on the
curtains with four wooden, corner bastions, and batteries. It has three gates;
one on the northern side, one on the south, toward the Chinese frontier-town,
which I am going to describe; and a third on the west, on the brook Kjachta.
Within the fortress, is a fine wood-built church with bells, a spacious
bartering-house, with 60 shops, which is to be made still more extensive, on a
new plan, and built of stone; in the center of which is laid the foundation of
a little chapel, which is to be built also of stone. Here is also a house for
the commander, a custom-house, an old guard-house, and a great number of
offices and houses belonging to merchants; besides dwellings for the soldiers.
The suburbs which are encompassed with a wooden wall, have not more than about
120 houses, very irregularly built; the gates, however* to this place, are
guarded, as are the gates of the fortress.

Kjachta is supplied with nothing so ill as with water; for the brook is, in
summertime, so shallow, as scarce to be above the shoes; and the water so
thick, as to be unfit to drink. Many wells have been sunk, but they are so
impregnated with lime, and a bitter salt, that all the inhabitants, who are
people of property, and fond of tea, send for water, with leave of the Chinese,
to a spring in their territory.

Their soil is equally bad; and consists mostly of sand and rocks, quite unfit
for gardening. Had the line of boundary been placed a little further, toward
China, by a neighboring brook, as appears to have been marked out by nature,
the situation of this fortress would have been better; there would have been
abundance of good water, plenty of fish, and a fertile plain behind it, --
advantages which the Chinese, at present, enjoy.

The garrison consists of a company of soldiers, and a number of Cossacks,
settled here. The commander is an officer of rank, who decides all little
quarrels and disputes, that arise among the principal Russian and Chinese
merchants; and who, in cases of more importance, appeals to a neighboring
court of limits, and the governor of Irkazkaja.

The most opulent inhabitants of Kjachta, are Russian merchants, and
commissioners of considerable houses at Petersburgh, and other Russian places
of note; and are as civilized and hospitable as in any town in Siberia, except
Irkazkaja. Their company would still be more pleasing, if they did not trouble
strangers with so much drinking of tea; for every merchant prides himself in
producing as many samples of boiled tea, as he has in possession.

The boundaries, between these two countries, are carried on a considerable
way, from east to west, with chevaux-de-frize, which prevents cattle being
smuggled into either country. Every guard-station westward, as far as the
regency of Tobolskoi, and five other ports eastwards, are subordinate to the
commander of Kjachta; but those beyond the mountain, are under the commander of
Aschinskaja. It will not be unuseful, nor unpleasant, to those who are fond of
geography, to know where the line of partition runs: I will, therefore, point
it out. Westwards, from Kjachta, toward the regency of Tobolskoi, follow the
frontier ports, in the following order:

Utschinskoi-Karaul, 23 miles from Kjachta, upon the Selenga, in an open
mountainous district.

Zagan-Ussunskoi, five miles from the latter, also on the river Selenga.

Bossinskoi, 19 miles further on the river Dshida, which the line follows
upwards.

Silturinskoi, 23 miles; where, on the right, the brook Silturna falls into the
Dshida, and the country grows more mountainous.

Chuldazkoi, 19 miles further.

Charazanskoi, 23 miles; to which are several roads, and where there are many
fields in the valleys, which the villagers on the Dshida do not use. Now the
mountains become, on the right of the Dshida, especially toward Mongalia, so
very wild and high, that no one can go to the following ports, but on
horseback, and this in summer only, especially in wet weather, without danger
of their lives.

Zeskinskoi, 23 miles from Charazan; where, on the right, the brook Sodski
falls into the Dshida.

Modenkolskoi, 57 miles; Natschitunskoi, 50 miles, and thence to Dotoshinskoi,
nine miles, a wild district; after which follows an unhabitable, impervious
snowmountain, between the sources of the Dshida and Dshonmurin, that to a
distance of 150 miles, to Tunkinskoi-Ostrog, between Dshonmurin and the bay of
Baikal, or Kultak, not a place could be found for a frontier-post; and, from
Tunkinskoi-Ostrog, the mountain continues so high and steep, as far as to the
Jenisei, that they could place but two guard-stations, in the distance of 50
miles; and from thence it is 120 miles, to the first frontier-post in the
regency of Tobolskoi.

Eastwards of Kjachta, the stations are situated along the Tschikoi; the first
Kiranskoi, 12 miles; the second Kudarinskoi, 21 miles; the third, at the
distance of 34 miles from the latter; the next, at 18 miles distance; and the
last, at 10 miles; where the Tschikoi leaves the frontiers. The line thence
runs on the river Mansa; and the next station is Monshinskoi, at a distance of
112 miles: then follow the high mountains that divide the rivers of Baikal from
those of the Amur; from whence it is 120 miles to the next post on the
Balskikan, dependant on Akschinskaja.

I will now give as complete a description as I can of the Chinese frontier and
commercial town, which is called by the Russians Kitaiskaja Sloboda (the
Chinese borough); the place having, properly speaking, no name of its own. The
Chinese name is Maimutschin, composed of Nikanian and Manshurian words, Maima,
and Tschin, or Tschen; the former of which implies commerce, and the latter, a
place surrounded with walls. The town lies not more than 60 fathoms from the
southern wall of the fortress Kjachta, on a fine and even spot, quite
sequestered from the brook Kjachta, and consists of 200 dwellings. In the
middle, between the two towns, stand two boundary-posts, 10 feet high; one with
a Russian inscription, and the other with a Manshurian. The Chinese borough has
no other fortifications, than a square, wooden wall, which, in 1756, during the
last Kalmuck war with the Choitian prince Amursaran, when this frontier-place
was threatened with fire and sword, by a Mongol, who revolted against their
prince Schadir Wang, was erected in haste, with a ditch scarce three feet
broad. This fortification, if it can be so called, is flanked by a long space,
from east to west, whose longest side is 350 fathoms, and the shortest 200
fathoms. Each wall has, in the middle, a principal gate, opening into the chief
streets. Over each gate is a wooden centinel-box, where part of the Chinese
garrison, which consists of ragged Mongols, with clubs, stands on guard at
night. Before the gates, on the Russian side, are wooden walls, erected in the
Chinese way, 28 feet from the gates, to prevent any persons looking into the
town. The houses are built in regular, direct lines, and compose two principal
streets, from 21 to 28 feet wide, crossing each other in the center of the
place; and two other side-streets, running from north to south. They are not
paved, but gravelled; have drains in the middle, and are kept very clean.

The houses are spacious, and each occupies a long oblong place, covered with
gravel, and kept very clean; having, to the street, a large long portico, or
passage, leading to the yard, with side-doors and store-rooms: the rest of the
house consists of dwelling-rooms, store-rooms, and a kitchen. All the buildings
are uniform, not more than 14 feet high, without stories, built of wood,
plastered with loam, and painted white. The roofs are flat and boarded, and
supported by pillars; but the roofs of the common houses, are made with cross
poles, and covered with turf. In all buildings, the windows are large, and made
in the European way; but, as glass and isinglass are too dear, are covered with
paper, except a few of the dwelling-rooms, of which the windows are glazed.
Paper-windows are commonly ornamented with little pictures. One of the rooms
serves as a shop, and contains samples of every merchandise the proprietor
deals in. The floors are bricked, and the walls papered, as in England; and
within are proper screens, to keep off the dust. Round half the room is a
broad, painted bench, two feet high, on which the family eats and sleeps. On
this bench is also a square, brick oven, two or three feet high, with a
perpendicular, cylindrical opening, like a fireplace, in which they burn wood.
The smoke from this fireplace, is carried from above, downwards, by a pipe,
underneath the bench, and conveyed out of the room into the street, and there
carried up in a perpendicular chimney, not raised higher than the roof. This
fireplace makes the bench and walls so warm in winter, that if the head is
laid next the wall, the person cannot sleep. Within the room is no other
furniture than two little, low tables, standing on a bench, on which is always
placed a pan of burning coals, which emits no vapor, and serves to light their
tobacco-pipes. In a particular niche, screened by silk curtains, are some
elegant pagods, drawn on paper, before which, on festivals, they place burning
lamps and candles, and a curious cinder-box, made of metal or stone, in which
the ashes and droppings of the incense-candles are preserved, with many little
ornaments, and bouquets of artificial flowers.

Their kitchens surpass the best European ones, in cleanliness and order; and
have, besides the broad bench on which the servants sleep, and the fireplace,
upon it, two other fire-places, in which iron, or stone-boilers, are fixed.
They have nothing particular in their kitchen-furniture, but broad knives, with
which they mince and press their meat into moulds, before it is served up. The
blades are near six inches square, made of polished steel, with a wooden
handle, whose cutting edge is as sharp as a razor: the cook takes one of these
knives in each hand, minces the meat without touching it, and then presses it
into moulds.

This is all I can say of the Chinese houses. The public buildings of their
towns on the frontiers, are no other than the mansion of the Surgutschei, or
chief of the merchants, and a little Mahomedan metsched, in those places where
the Bucharians live.

One of the pagodas of this frontier-town, is built in the middle of the place,
where both the principal streets cross each other; it is in the form of a
Chinese tower, through which passengers can pass into both streets; the opening
being-in the form of a cross. Above this portico, the building is square, with
a covered gallery round it, the roof supported with pillars. In another story,
above this, the building is octangular, and has eight bells, which are easily
moved with the wind, and give a pleasing sound, and round this part is another
gallery, like the one below. In the lower story of this building, stands the
image of the god Tjen, which, according to the accounts given me by the most
enlightened of the Chinese I met with, reigns over 32 heavens. The Manshours
call him Abcho, and the Mongols, Tingeru; that is, heaven, or a god of heaven.
It sits, with nothing on its head but hair, encompassed with a glory, like the
images of Christ, a straight sword in his right hand, and his left lifted, as
if giving his blessing. This figure of the pagod, with the Roman-Catholic
images of the Redeemer, is perhaps the cause of the Chinese Surgutschei
(through whose favor I got a sight of this temple), assuring me, that the
Jesuits, and their sectaries, who lived in so great respect and authority at
the court of Peking, worshipped it equally with the Chinese. Probably these
holy fathers may have given the resemblance of the Chinese Tjen to their
representations of Christ, to excite more the devotion of their new converts.
Near this idol Tjen stands, on one side, two youths; and, on the other, a girl,
and an old man. In the upper story of the building, is another idol, in a black
and white chequered cap, also accompanied by a venerable, old man, and three
young people. Neither in this, or the other part of the building, are any
altars or ornaments, but these round the pagodas. Their temples are only opened
on feast-days, and strangers cannot enter without permission; yet the Chinese
show these idols no more reverence than those in the greater pagoda.

The great pagoda is far more splendid and spacious, and stands near the
southern principal-gate, before the mansion of the Surgutschei. Strangers may
see it almost every hour of the day, by applying to an under-priest, who
resides for this purpose in the fore-court, the entrance to which, is fortified
with Cheveux-de-frize. We are conducted through two, little, elegant gates,
divided by a small building. Opposite these gates stands a little, painted
theater, near which are erected on each side two, high poles, on which they
spread, on festivals, large flags with Chinese characters; and, on some
peculiar festivals, on this theater are exhibited little burlettas in honor of
the idols, where the merchants' clerks are the principal actors, the spectators
standing in the street.

In the little building between the gates of the first court of the temple,
within grates, are two saddle-horses molded in clay, as large as life, and
turned toward the South. One is a sorrel bay, represented as leaping, and the
other of a dun color with a black mane and tail, walking: each as led by two
men, dressed like grooms, and sculptured with great skill. Near each horse
stands a yellow, silk-flag, painted with silver dragons, but no further
ornaments. Just within the gates of the first court, are two covered scaffolds
encompassed with a gallery; on one hangs a large bell of cast iron, pulled by a
wooden club, and on the other, two enormous tymbals, like those in Kalmuck
pagodas. There are also, here two other front buildings, that serve as
dwellings for the servants of the priests.

From this outward court, we enter through one large and two little painted and
carved gates, into the innermost temple, which has small buildings on both
sides, divided into pagodas, like alcoves with grated doors, whose walls within
are ornamented with pictures representing the actions of the Gods; thence we go
to the hall of the temple, which, like the temple itself, is surrounded with
pillars, varnished, gilt and carved with an elegant, Chinese roof, a gallery,
and little bells hanging round it. This hall represents an armory. In it, along
the walls, on ledges or scaffolds, are all sorts of gigantic and ancient arms,
and warlike emblems, as spears, scythes, broad blades fastened on many
spear-poles, morning-stars, shields, banners with hinds and dragon's heads,
elegantly gilt. Opposite the fore-door is an enormous, yellow flag embroidered
with silver dragons and leaf-work, underneath which, stand all kinds of altars
skreened, and several oblong tables standing on pedestals, with Chinese
inscriptions. From the gate behind this place, passing a court about ten
fathoms long and five broad, we come to the temple itself, through a short,
uncovered gallery, decorated with flower-pots. In the gallery before the
temple, supported by a row of pillars, stand, right and left of the entrance,
at some distance from the gates, two bordered tables, of black slate, seven
feet high, on which, is engraved a long detail of the foundation of the temple.
Before the pedestal of the western table, there is, in a small case, a little,
frightful image, about six inches high. The temple within is beautifully
ornamented, and exhibits, on the walls, many warlike adventures and marches of
the chief idol. All the idols are modelled in clay, skilfully executed in
gigantic shape, and placed on pedestals four feet high, on three niches, which
occupy the whole northern wall. The niches are decorated with a great deal of
carving and gilt ornaments. The chief idol that occupies the niche in the
center between two pillars, wreathed with gilt dragons, is Gedsur or Gessur
Khan, called by the Chinese Coujil, or the first and eldest, by the Manshours
Guanloe (the chief god), and to his history the abovementioned horses allude,
This figure, represented splendidly sitting and dressed, has a gilt beard, a
crown on his head, and is in size four times as large as a man. His clothes are
not modelled in clay, like the rest of the idols, but are made of silk, and
elegantly formed. He holds, in his hands, before him a board, as if reading
with earnestness. On his right and left are two little, female figures,
representing children of thirteen years of age, one of whom, holds a paper
roll. Before this figure, which represents nothing more than some peaceable
prince or judge, lie, on the right, seven golden arrows, and on the the left a
bow. The Mongols and Kalmucks, do not worship it as an idol, but acknowledge it
to be some great hero, who lived near the source of the river Choango, and who,
like the Bacchus and Hercules of eastern Tartary, vanquished many monsters: and
they have in their language a long history of his heroic deeds. Before this
idol, is a spacious place encompassed with shrines and in the midst stands an
altar with strips of narrow silk, hanging over it, as in Mongalian temples.
About the altar, are four, standing figures in couples, turning their faces to
each other, representing ancient counselors and generals of the deified Gessur
Khan. All the figures are of Colossal size, but not so large as the idol
itself. Those that stood next these Pagodas, were dressed like judges, and held
boards in their hands, like the Gessur Khan; one had a white beard, and seemed
as if singing, and of the two others, one on the left was dressed in armor,
wore a kind of turban, and carried a large sheathed sword on the left shoulder,
the handle upwards; the other was clothed also in warlike dress, very
corpulent, with a horrid, red-brown face, having in his right hand, a
spear-pole with a broad blade at the end.

In each side-division are two idols seated, one in a military dress, and one
in that of a Mandarin. All four shorter than Gessur Khan, but still of gigantic
size.

The warlike figure on the right, represents the god Masuang or the Otschirboni
of the Mongols, whose very look is frightful; it is habited in armor, and has
a looking-glass on its breast, one eye in its navel, and on the head three
faces of such a dark-brown color, as to be almost black. It has six arms, two
of which, hold bent swords across the head. The next figure on the right, has
also a looking-glass; the next on the left, something square, resembling a
piece of ivory, but in its hands, a bent bow, as if going to shoot.

The god that sits near him, is called by the Chinese Zausching, or the gold
and silver god, and by the Mongols Zagan-Dsambola. It has a black cap on the
head with two obtuse corners, in its hand a box filled with jewels, and is
dressed in rich, Chinese robes of state. On one side stand two small figures,
one of which held a branch of a tree. Two similar figures accompany also, the
former, one having an arrow in his hand, and the other an animal. In a division
on the left, is the god Chusko, or in the Manshour dialect Chua-aschan, whom
the Mongols call Galdi or Fire-god, with a frightful, fiery face, in complete
armor, holding in his hand a drawn sword, and, though sitting, appears as if
suddenly rising. One of his satellites is represented as if crying out, the
other, bearing in his hand a bird like a duck. Another idol on this side, is
the god of bullocks, Niu-o. He is represented as quietly sitting in Mandarine
robes, a crown on his head, and, like all the preceding ones, with a round
looking-glass on his breast. The Chinese take him to be the same with the
Jamandaga of the Mongols. His Manshour name is said to be Chain-Killowa, but
the Mongols call him Bars-Batir, (Tyger-hero). The Chinese are so suspicious,
that the most affable will refuse to give you the names of their idols, and if,
they see any one attempt to write them down, will give them a fictitious name;
of course, I cannot take upon me to warrant all the names I here give,
particularly those of the Chinese.

The idol Niu-o has his table also, on which they serve him on festivals, with
all sorts of baked meats, dried fruits, and other dainties, besides other
victuals, even meat, and whole carcasses of sheep. Before him are placed urns,
frankincense, wax-candles, and lamps, some of which, before the principal
pagod, are kept burning night and day. Among other things we see a vessel
resembling a quiver filled with a great many long, flat sticks made of split
canes, upon which are written little, Chinese mottos, which foretell the fate
of any one the ensuing year, that shall draw out an arrow from the quiver, on
new-year's-day. At the east end of the table lies a hollow, wooden, black,
varnished helmet, on which those who assemble for the sake of devotion in the
temple, knock with a beater. No stranger dare knock this helmet, though he is
allowed to touch every other thing on the pagoda, and examine the idols as near
as he pleases.

There is very little to be said of the rest of their public buildings. The
house of the Surgutschei or director of the merchants, stands on a great deal
of ground, and is very neatly furnished, but has nothing peculiar, except two
flag-poles erected at the gate, which are its distinctive marks, and the solemn
tribunal which stands in the hall. The quarter where the Bucharians live, is in
the south-east corner of the town, where they have a little, plain metsched or
chapel, built of wood. The Bucharians, who imitate the Chinese in their dress,
are badly and shabbily lodged, notwithstanding their considerable commerce with
the court of Peking, which is supplied by Bucharian merchants, who come here
annually for that purpose. Whatever goods such a Bucharian merchant or
commissioner from Peking wants to buy, cannot be sold to any other Chinese
merchant, on pain of severe punishment, till the former has accomplished his
purchase; though the other should offer a much higher price.

We will now speak of the Chinese themselves, and of the trade of that nation.
The merchants who reside here, are chiefly Nikanians, or natives from the
northern provinces of China, especially from Peking, Santchuen, and some other
cities. They dwell here like travelers, without their families, for in the
whole Chinese market towns, no woman is to be seen. Those however, who feel
their Oriental blood, are very galant customers to the women in Kjachta, who to
the prejudice of their national honor, are frail to an excess. The Chinese are
also charged with unnatural crimes, at least they are remarked for keeping
young, fine-made shop-men, with whom they are very familiar. Some, also, spend
large sums in the Mongalian quarters, with females of that nation, of whom I
shall say more hereafter.

All the Chinese merchants here residing, trade in partnership, two or more
together, relieving each other by turns, one conducting the business a whole
year in Kjachta, whilst the other goes home for fresh merchandise; on the
arrival of the latter, the former sets off with the goods bartered for, and
returns the next year with a new cargo. The Surgutschei presides, with the
power of a magistrate, over the merchants here residing; and not only keeps up
a rigid police, but directs the trade, and gives orders respecting it, that no
advantage in commerce may be lost. He is generally a man of rank and abilities,
but it sometimes happens that Mandarins who have committed, in other places,
certain misdemeanors, are sent here to undertake this office, for their
punishment and reformation. His characteristic mark of distinction is a crystal
button on his cap, and a peacock's feather behind. The Chinese give him the
title of Amban, (commander in chief). No one dares approach him, but bending
his left knee, in which posture he remains the whole time he is speaking, and
until he receives the Amban's answer. This magistrate has a salary, but far
inferior to the presents made him by the merchants. In China, it is the
privilege only of high rank, to ride in a four-wheeled carriage. The
Surgutschei rides in a covered cart, with two wheels only.

The persons of the Chinese are sufficiently known; they are well formed, and
many young persons have sweet, fair faces, to which their small black eyes and
jetty hair give an agreeable turn: yet we frequently meet with broad
Manshourian-like masks, high cheek-bones, broad noses between the eyes, and
extraordinary large ears, which seems to be national to this people. Elderly
men suffer their black beards to grow, but all shave their heads in the
Manshourian way, leaving only one thick, lock on the crown, which is
universally black, and which they braid into a tress. Hence they are good
customers to the barbers, whose houses are distinguished by little flags hung
out at the door.

Their dress is very uniform, and suited to the season; they have particular
clothes for the summer and winter, and others for the intervals of these
seasons. This difference is most remarkable in their caps. In spring and
autumn, they wear little, round covers, which barely hide the crown of the
head, whose standing border is covered with the skin of a sea-dog, or sea-bear,
or with velvet; having at the top, a little button, and a tassil of twisted,
red silk, which overspreads the whole hat. In summer, they go about with wide
straw-hats, resembling a bowl, which shade the face; these are neatly made,
cost often from four, to six rubles, each, and have an elegant fringe of long,
red shining hair, taken from wild, Tangutian cows, the bos grunniens of
Linnaeus, which the Chinese call Sinija, the Mongols, Sarlikukyr. In winter
they wear flat caps edged with fox-skins, and fringed at the top: these do not
cover the ears. All European nations take off their hat, in the presence of
persons of rank; but it would be a sin against Chinese politeness and respect,
to do the same. Their garments vary, in every season, in the thickness of the
linen and stuff of which they are made. Merchants of all ranks, wear the same
dress, which is chiefly shining, cotton stuffs (Kitaika) generally black, but
sometimes dyed of a deep blue. This is their dress from spring to autumn, and
consists of a garment which reaches to the ancles, with narrow sleeves. Behind,
it is slit open to the waist, and ornamented before with buttons the whole
length. Over this they wear something resembling a woman's jacket, without
sleeves, passing the arm through a hole, and above all, a short waistcoat,
whose sleeves reach to the elbow, made of silk, and lined with the fur of the
paws of sable, fox, or sea-bear, with the hair outward. Persons of distinction
wear their waistcoats made of curled, black sheepskins, sables, or the
sea-bears of Kamschatka. The latter articles are of importance, are part of the
Russian trade, and worn by the whole court of Peking. They wear also wide boots
covered with black silk, the soles of which are heavy, half an inch thick, and
made of coarse, cotton stuff (Daba) glued together, and are said to last
several years. On their girdle, which fastens their under-garment, they carry,
constantly, long, silk tobacco pouches and pipes, and a case containing knives
and the little chop-sticks, which they use as forks. They are always so
dressed, both at home and abroad. Their persons and houses are kept with great
cleanliness, which seems the more surprising, as all the domestic business is
performed by men. They are inured to cold, of course, their rooms are so little
heated in winter, that an European would be chilled in them. Many, especially
opulent merchants, who do not meddle with packing and unpacking of their goods,
let the nails grow on their fingers to the length of half an inch. I saw some
whose nails were rolled up and grown into the flesh. A European would not be
able to imitate this odd custom without difficulty, and would often lose his
nails, before they attained their proper shape and strength.

Their food is clean, very nutritive, and suited to the seasons. They are
remarkably fond of garden-fruits, vegetables and sweetmeats, and eat a great
deal of garlic. In summer they supply Kjachta with coleworts, girkins,
radishes and French-beans, and cultivate for their own use spinach, celery,
parsley, yellow-parsnips, and a kind of colewort, split like endive. As other
productions of European gardens do not ripen here, they bring with them rice,
several sorts of peace, also dried, and, in winter, frozen fruits. Among their
peace I remarked an oblong, little, green species, called Lodou, which appears
to be the Phaseolus radiatus of Linnaeus, and which they suffer to attain their
full growth, during winter, in water which they often change, and then eat them
raw instead of sallad. The most common, fresh fruits which may be had of the
Chinese, are water-melons, apples, (Pinsa) like green Pommes de Rennette,
pears, a species of oblong quinces, (Mugha), citrons, sweet and sour oranges,
wild chestnuts (Kidsa), large walnuts, a little, red pentagonal medlars, which
grow wild in the northern parts of China, and of which, with sugar, they make a
cheap jelly, called by the Russian merchants postila. They have also a fruit
called alema, which seems to be nothing more than a Tkaschu apple, and brought
from the southern provinces. They have also a very peculiar species of citron,
(fuischu,) divided like a lily-root into 12 parts, without kernel, and
uncommonly fragrant; but these are only distributed as gifts, by the
Surgutschei. Of dried fruits the Chinese have long raisins, with a large
kernel; small, black, sourish raisins; little fruits of a species of elaeagnus,
with a peculiar kernel, called by the Bucharians dshigda, by the Mongols zagda,
and by the Chinese sazusa; a species of reddish, smoked prunes, (schuptuga,)
with a kernel like a roller; little, black plums, dried apples, oranges
squeezed and boiled in sugar, preserved ginger, black, sweetish fruits with
many flat kernels, (choder,) some of which are brought from Persia, and are
called gorokum; a shell-fruit, with a large, round kernel, encompassed with a
sweet substance, exquisitely mellow: This substance is pressed together into
flat cakes, wrapped up in bamboo leaves, and used as a cordial sweetmeat; it is
brought from the southernmost provinces, and sold by the name of gaklo. They
have also other fruits, with one or two nut-like kernels; whole flat nuts, in
form of an apricot-stone, with a bitterish, purgative kernel, (lansu, or
boigo); common almonds, pimenti and other cheap spices. Among their other
eatables the Chinese have crabs, brought from the seacoast, and salted, which
they eat with rice; sea-snails, dried on strings, (holothuria tremula Linnaei,
in Chinese chairsan,) and a gristly, sea production, called dshileng. With the
latter they also brought me some particular dried flowers, (tschentscheng,)
which they boil in soups, and are brought from the southernmost parts. They
have sometimes also spongy roots of a water-plant, consisting of members an
inch long. The Chinese bring also, in winter, frozen pheasants to Kjachta,
which they find on this side the Chinese wall, on the southern parts of the
mountains which separate the rivers Amur and Choango; but are mostly met with
about the latter river. They are said to be fond of dog's flesh, and that it is
publicly sold in the markets at Peking; but the Chinese here will not admit it.
They also carefully conceal their eating, as a dainty, the legs of frogs, and a
species of large wingless grasshopper, common about the river Selenga, probably
because they have been laughed at for it by the Russians.

The usual drink of the Chinese is tea, which they keep almost the whole day on
the fire, and drink it whenever they are dry; they boil it a second time, make
it very weak, and use little or no sugar. Their strong liquors are, the
tarasur, which may be compared to English beer mixed with brandy, and a kind of
brandy, called in Mongol Chantschina. Many of the Chinese are so much addicted
to the free use of this and other Russian, strong liquors, that we commonly see
the lower class going about the town with chains on their legs, the usual
punishment for fighting and other excesses committed by people in liquor: it is
probably owing to this policy that a drunken Chinese is seldom seen abroad.

They cannot exist without smoking tobacco. If at leisure, they will never let
a quarter of an hour pass without taking a pipe; so that they are constantly
smoking in the streets. As the bowls of their pipes are not much larger than a
thimble, they have the pleasure of filling and lighting them often.

The Chinese of this place are affable and hospitable; and though they never
like to treat a stranger with any thing but tobacco and tea, they are in this
liberal to every visitor. To acquaintances they will present sweetmeats, and
various sorts of fruits. When they visit the Russians, let them be ever so
strange, they are impetuous, and without paying any regard to rank, very bold,
and often unpolite: they will enter houses uninvited, with their pipes in their
hands, sit down unasked, and continue sitting as long as they please, let the
people of the house take it as they will. It seems the Russians have led them
into this unmannerly conduct by their too great indulgence; for in presence of
their own superiors they always keep a respectful distance. They are fond of
games; and when they have no business to employ them, are generally seen
playing at draughts at home, in their own way, or with little Chinese cards in
their hands. -- To gratify this passion, they frequently buy many Russian
copper and silver coins to game with, and purchase, from the Russians, eatables
and other little necessaries the cheaper.

Persons of distinction play, in their hours of leisure, with a rosary in their
hands; and some of the middle class carry such rosaries made of larch resin,
continually along with them, which the sweat of their hands renders as hard and
transparent as yellow amber, and will fetch a good price among the Mongols.

In their trade and conduct with the Russians, they are exceedingly crafty,
secret and interested, and hereby have a great advantage over the persons they
deal with, who are not a match for them. The Russians are strictly punctual and
exact in trade, and are kept to this by the Surgutschei, who strives all he can
to advance its success; but the Chinese too often render the best regulations
fruitless, by their selfish, giddy and chattering mode of dealing, if not kept
within bounds by the severe inspection of some commercial chief. This has made
the Chinese well-acquainted with the value of Russian productions, and enables
them to keep their own in a proper balance; for the Surgutschei punishes those
who attempt to spoil another's bargain by underselling him; he also takes care
that the markets are not overstocked; for as the general rendezvous of the
caravans from all the towns and cities of the Chinese empire assemble in the
Mongalian court-quarters on the river Tola, 375 miles from Kjachta, they are
only suffered to come from that place in moderate numbers to this frontier
town, in January, May, and autumn. For this leave they pay a duty of five per
cent. for all Russian goods on return. This small duty is what gives the
Chinese the principal advantage over Russian merchants.

The goods are mostly brought here on camels; yet the Chinese make use of a bad
kind of cart with two awkward wheels, having two cross beams, and a third
passing the center, through which the axle-tree is fixed, and which turns with
the wheels. When the merchant caravans travel in winter through the step, they
carry with them felt tents, which they erect at night. In summer they have fine
hut-frames made of cane, which they sold up together like a fan, and put into
wooden cases, occupying no more room than seven inches in length, and four
inches in height and breadth, and yet, when spread out and covered with a
sail-cloth or mat, two persons may sit and sleep therein, and be entirely
sheltered from the sun and rain. They are usually 46 days on their journey to
the next town, situate on the great wall, called Zisongku or Schanschiacho, by
the Mongols Kalgan or Kalcha, (new gate,) and from thence to Peking four or
five days, and from Kalgan to Santschuen about a fortnight.

The Nikanian tradesmen on the frontiers all understand the Mongalian language,
in which the Russian merchants talk to them, either themselves, or by
appointed, sworn interpreters. Many speak broken Russ; but their pronunciation
is so soft and defective, that a Russian can scarcely understand them. They
cannot pronounce the letter r at all; but sound it as an l. They also divide by
vowels such syllables, which, if joined together, have more than one mute
letter, wherein the Russ language is very rich. These two defects are never
observed in Tartars, Mongols, Kalmucks, and other Asiatics, who learn the
Russian language.

The trade with the Chinese is chiefly carried on by barter or exchange of
goods. The Chinese come to the Russian mart, where samples are laid out, and
they choose what they like. Contracts for goods are sometimes made in the
market; but the Chinese generally go home with the Russian merchant to his
house, and there make the agreement. At first it is settled what goods the
Russian merchant can and will take; then the quantity and respective value of
the goods to be mutually exchanged are agreed on; and after having drank tea,
and both parties having finished their bargain, they go to the warehouse, where
the Chinese dealer marks all the bales of goods and other articles he has
agreed for, which is sometimes the contents of the whole shop; this done, the
Russian merchant goes to the house of the Chinese dealer, and inspects his
goods, enquires into the value, and particularly if they are all perfect, and
having fixed on what he likes, separates them from the rest, and leaves a
person in charge of them, and to take care they are not altered or diminished,
till an opportunity suits to exchange the goods mutually, according to
agreement. In this exchange the Russian merchant rates the value of most
Chinese goods at a half, a third, and often at a quarter of the price at which
he values his own, which he can the readier do, as Siberian furs may always be
bartered at double the price they are frequently bought for, and are in
goodness and value a very arbitrary merchandise. Without this advantage it
would be impossible for the Russian merchants, who are at so great an expense
for transporting them, to pay a custom-house duty of 20 to 25 per cent. for
most of the goods they sell to and buy of the Chinese; hence it seems evident
that a wholesale trade of current Russian money would be injurious to the
state; and for this reason the court of Petersburg has prohibited it. The
greatest disadvantage the Russian trade labors under is, that some merchants
who arrive from the distant parts of the Russian empire, sell to the Chinese at
a lower valuation, in order to be able to make their bargains, and return the
sooner; yet there is a commercial establishment formed by a company of Russ
merchants in Kjachta who, by authority, fix the prices of merchandise among
themselves, instruct the traveling merchants of this, as soon as they arrive,
and endeavor to persuade them into what is right; yet, in spite of all this,
there being no severity of punishment inflicted on transgressors, they cannot
always prevent it. Besides, there are many young, Russ merchants who, by
babbling, when half-drunk, will let the Chinese perfectly into all those
circumstances which the rest would wish to have concealed.

Here follows a list of the prices and sorts of some kinds of goods exchanged
by the Russians and Chinese, according to a late regulation of the chief
commissioner of the frontiers. This list contains the highest and lowest prices
from 1770 to 1772.

The chief article of Russian goods are furs. The chief, Canadian furs imported
by sea, and brought to Kjachta, are as follow: Canadian beavers from seven to
10 rubles each; each ruble 4s. 6d. English. Otters, of the best sort, from six
to 25 rubles. Black foxes from one to 100 rubles each. Common foxes three
rubles and a half.


Most of the rich furs which the Chinese buy, are productions of Siberia, in
the newly-discovered, eastern islands, and a small part in the uninhabited
districts of Russia. Those which come into trade at Kjachta are valued as
follow: Sea-otters from Kamtschatka, or what they call sea-beavers, are much
sought after by the Chinese, and are valued at between 90 and 140 rubles each.
Sea-beavers tails from two to seven rubles each. Common beavers from the
Sysran, Ob, and Tschulym, without bellies, four rubles to six and a half each.
Bags of beavers bellies sewed together, 25 to 44 rubles. River-otters 30 copecs
apiece, each copec a halfpenny English. Bear-skins from two to four roubles
each. Wolf-skins, the worst under two, and the best to eight rubles. Young
wolves cut out from the belly of the dam, 30 copecs each. Wolf-paws, according
to the goodness, 30 to 70 copecs each. Lynx-skins, four to six rubles each;
lynx paws one and two eighteenths to three and a half rubles a couple.
Hyena-skins eight to four rubles each; hyena paws, 25 to 50 copecs a couple.
Foxes quite black, or with hoary hair in a dark bottom, from four to 180
rubles. Hoary foxes, 10 rubles. Fine red foxes from 80 copecs to nine rubles.
White foxes, two rubles. Fox-bellies, 75 copecs to one ruble the couple.
Fox-tails of the common species, 4 copecs. Bags of red fox-backs, sewed, 26 to
60 rubles. Fox-bellies in bags, 20 to 28 rubles. Whole sables of the meaner
species, two and a half to 10 rubles each. Bags of such mean sable-backs, sewed
together, 120 rubles. Sable-tails 25 to 50 copecs each; sable-bellies 58 copecs
the couple; bags of sable-paws sewed together, 20 to 50 rubles. Marten-furs, 90
copecs to three rubles each; marten-paws nine copecs to three rubles; and bags
sewed together of marten-necks, seven rubles; marten-tails 20 copecs each. Furs
of the islanders, consisting of martens and chesnut-brown sables, brought
through Anadyrskja, 25 to 40 rubles each. Ermines of various value and shape,
which was formerly a very dear article, and sold by weight, (till the Chinese
found out that the sellers imposed on them by sewing lead in the paws) are sold
now from 20 to 60 copecs each. Bags of ermine sewed, 15 to 25 rubles. White
weasels two to 10 copecs. Fire-yellow weasels, 25 to 27 copecs. Common ferret
furs, 11 to 15 copecs. The tails of both former animals, two to three copecs
each. Bags of ferrets sewed, six to 15 rubles. Bags of gray fur backs, three to
20 roubles. Bags of squirrel-heads sewed, caught on the river Lena, three
rubles. Flying squirrels, two to six copecs each. Striped squirrels, two to
three copecs each. White hare furs, 11 to 12 copecs each. Bags of hare-bellies
or backs, from one ruble to 70 copecs, and four rubles to 35 copecs. Bags of
hoary hare furs, about seven rubles. Bags of sewed hare-paws, two rubles and a
half. Bags of dyed white hare-ears with black points, three rubles. Rabbit
furs, from three to 10 rubles. Wild stone cat, one ruble to 74 copecs. Muscus
rats from the district of the Wolga, 28 to 34 copecs each. Bags of brown and
black water-rats, sewed, collected in the Lena, four to 10 rubles each. Common
or blacked marmot furs, 15 to 25 copecs each. Bags of the silver white bellies
of plovers, sewed, on the Baraba, 12 to 13 rubles. Sea-dogs, partly from
Archangel, partly from Baikal, one ruble, 40 copecs, to two rubles. Young
sea-bears, black and gray, from one and a half to six rubles. Large
portmanteaus of gray sea-bear skin, four to 20 rubles. Mattresses of sea-bear
skins, 89 rubles. Jakutina young reindeer skins, four to five rubles and a
half. Saigak horns, of which the Chinese make some very transparent lanthorn
panes, 60 to 80 copecs the couple; single, 27 to 35 copecs.


To these wild animals the following domestic ones may be added, as productive
of gain in the Russian trade with the Chinese.

Common cats furs of various colors, 14 copecs each. Fine black lamb skins,
from 30 to 110 copecs each. Vari-coloured and white common lambs skins, from 20
to 58 copecs. Large black and white common sheep skins, 25 to 80 copecs.
Goat Skins, which are common Mongalian furs, 12 to 40 copecs. Dog-skins, 50
copecs to one ruble. Black and red Russia hides, or Jufts, two and a half to
four rubles. Cordovan and Turkey Cordovans, 90 copecs to two rubles. Living
sheep, one to two rubles. Bullocks, 17 to 28 rubles. Beef, 130 copecs per pud,
or 36 pounds. Mutton, one ruble per pud. Geldings, 20 rubles and more. Horse
flesh of old slaughtered, or otherwise perished animals, 16 to 18 copecs per
pud. Beef and mutton tallow, two rubles per pud. Sea-dogs fat, two and a half
to two rubles per pud. Fish fat, one ruble, 20 copecs per pud, to three rubles.
Common glue, 15 to 30 copecs the pound. Fish glue, 18 rubles per pud, 40 to 80
copecs the pound.
The following, inland manufactures are brought by the Russians to Kjachta, and
rated at the under-mentioned prices.

Common soldiers cloth, one ruble per ell; or 2 feet. Common Russian ditto, 40
copecs per ell. Dyed and undyed peasant's cloth from the Lena, and other
places, 12 to 35 copecs per ell. Felts made of sheeps wool, two to three rubles
each. Demi Camblet from Moscow, 30 copecs per ell. Russian callimanco, 25 to 50
copecs per ell. Russian draget, 50 copecs per ell. Common Russian Drell, 39 to
60 copecs per ell. Coarse linen, 15 copecs ditto. Printed linen, 35 copecs
ditto. Common linen, six to seven and a half copecs per ell. Napkin stuff, 15
copecs ditto. Striped coarse stuff (Tik) 30 to 50 copecs per ell. Common linen
handkerchiefs, 2 copecs each. Paper to hang rooms, 16 rubles per quire. Brass
tea-kettles, one to two rubles. Green glass bottles and gass vessels from the
glass-houses of Irkuzkaja, 50 copecs. Mock gold, 25 to 40 copecs the piece.
Looking-glasses of all shapes and kinds, in various frames, from the smallest
chamber-glasses to the meanest pocket-glasses, from 10 copecs to four rubles,
and sometimes 40 rubles. Axes, 50 to 115 copecs. Scythes and sickles, 33 to 8
copecs. Common pocket-knives, two rubles and 40 copecs. Common knives in cases,
25 copecs, to three rubles a dozen. Common scissars, five to 20 copecs. Locks
by Pawloff, 10 to 42 copecs.
Among other articles which the Chinese are eager to purchase, I must mention
the isinglass, which sells at present at 27 rubles the pud; but formerly, when
the trade between Russia and China was in an infant state, a pud of large
isinglass was sold at Peking for from eight to 10 rubles only.

Of foreign manufactures the Russians import the following articles: English,
Dutch, French, and German oiled linens, from two to seven rubles an ell.
Camblets, 70 copecs to one ruble an ell. Callimanco, 30 rubles each piece.
Draget, a half ruble to two rubles an ell. White flannel, 60 to 100 copecs an
ell. Gold stuff, 20 to 30 rubles an ell. Gold gauze with silk flowers, 15
rubles an ell. Tin, 15 to 31 copecs per leaf, and all sorts of foreign
looking-glasses of the lesser sorts.


Next follow the Chinese goods bartered for the above articles, and transported
throughout Russia. The silk stuffs, which the Chinese bring to Kjachta, are now
much inferior in goodness and value to those they used to bring formerly: their
satins and damasks are also so thin and slimsy, that they will scarcely do for
Russian cities. Rich and thick satins, and other good stuffs, are now seldom
seen. Their thin taffeties, if made of good silk, and not oiled, and their
Kitaika, or Nankeen, may be considered as the best of all the woven goods in
China. Even tea is not so fine, and yet dearer than it was formerly; the
Russian merchants however always choose the best sorts. The article next in
importance is their porcelain, or Chinaware, in which they have evidently
imitated the European porcelain in its strength, fine forms and painting,
probably from patterns they must have received from Canton. I have taken notice
of figures painted on their porcelain and on paper, habited in European
dresses, and ornamented with representations of Roman idols, and regular copies
of known copper plates. At the house of a Chinese I saw painted in colors
Pygmalion, et l'oiseau en cage, two original French prints. Merchants, who
sometimes bring German and very indifferent copper plates to Kjachta, find
numberless purchasers among the Chinese.

I. The chief articles brought from China are as follow: Fine silver in pieces,
cast and stamped, which the Chinese use instead of large pieces of money. Their
form, which resembles the hoof of a horse, was in days of yore introduced into
China, because a horse, by scraping up with his foot some pieces of massive
silver, discovered the first mine of this metal. A pound weight of this silver,
in barter, is valued at 16 rubles. Raw silk, a capital article; not brought in
such quantities as the Russians wish for: a pud of the best sort is valued at
150 rubles, or three rubles and a half the pound; the inferior sort is sold at
75 rubles per pud. Raw and very pure cotton, used by the merchants to pack
their porcelain in, from four rubles 80 copecs the pud to 12 rubles. Spun silk
of various colors, from two to four rubles the gin. A stronger sort of spun
silk (polutarnaja) from four and a half to six rubles ditto. Mongalian spun
silk, an inferior sort, in all sorts of high colors, from two to three rubles
the gin.


The Chinese wove silks and cottons are at present valued at the following high
prices: Plain velvet, of very loose texture, in pieces of nine else, from nine
to 12 rubles apiece. Flowered velvet of a better texture, nine else in a piece,
from 18 to 25 rubles each piece. Stuffs from 25 to 30 rubles a piece. Satins,
or Kanfa, flowered and plain, the largest and broadest pieces, containing 20
else, between 25 and 40 rubles; middle sort of bad silk, in pieces of 16 else,
from 15 to 25 rubles; the smallest from 10 to 20 rubles; what they call
Smaslanki from 10 to 18 rubles. Damasks, or Gooli, brought by the Bucharians,
large pieces from 12 to 20 rubles; smaller ones from 11 to 13 rubles. Damasks
brought by the Chinese; large pieces, of 15 or 16 else, from 12 to 16 rubles;
smaller ones from 10 to 11 rubles. Gros de tours, with or without flowers, from
10 to 30 rubles each piece; what they call Rezet, of different lengths, about
one ruble the ell, from 10 to 20 rubles. Baiberek, 10 rubles the piece. Ussi, a
kind of ordinary, silk stuff, that shines like satin, from sive to 10 rubles
the piece. Thin taffety, or sansa, the best sort in large pieces, of 20 to 22
else, from 10 to 12 rubles; middling sort, of 16 else, from six to eight
rubles; smaller ones from three to four rubles; and the worst sort from two to
four rubles. Silk gauze from two to 10 rubles the piece, and 25 to 30 copecs
per ell. Silk lansa, from one and a half to two and a half rubles; demi-silk,
from one to two and a half rubles the piece. Bucharian Kudna, a cotton stuff,
with silk and satin stripes, three rubles. Oiled, silk gauze for dress in rainy
weather, two and a half to five rubles the piece. Oiled taffety, for the same
purpose, small pieces from three to six rubles; ready made, rain clothes, three
to five rubles. Second-hand Chinese clothes, similar to a man's morning gown
(asami) of satin, damask, lansa, and gauze; the first from three to 15 rubles,
and the latter from 45 copecs to one ruble. Silk curtains, from 10 to 20
rubles. Silk counterpanes from five to 10 rubles; of lansa and cotton, half a
ruble to two rubles. Silk fringes for caps, 44 copecs. Cotton flannel, whose
rough side is curled like the fleece of slunk lamb-skins, from 10 to 25 copecs
per ell, and 50 copecs to three rubles per piece. Bucharian cotton, at two to
four rubles the piece. Daba, or white, narrow cotton, coarse woven; large
pieces from 50 to 20 else, at one and a half ruble; middling ones, from 14 to
15 else, at one ruble; smaller ones, from 10 to 18 else, at half a ruble to one
ruble. Dalemba, a small; cotton stuff, at one and a half ruble the piece.


II. The second chief division of Chinese goods are ornaments and vessels of
porcelain, enamels, etc. with numberless trifles. I will mention some of the
principal; for it would be as tedious to give a list of the whole, as it would
of the French fashions; for the Chinese are full as trifling as the French
nation, or the people of Nuremberg in Germany; and they find plenty of insipid
purchasers.

Common porcelain dishes, with cups and covers, at four rubles the dozen;
coarser ones, with or without covers, at three to 50 copecs the pair. Plates
and dishes from five copecs to one ruble; sweetmeat dishes at two and a half
rubles; sweetmeat plates, two to 15 copecs. The whole materials of a tea-table,
with cups and saucers, from five to 12 rubles; tea-pots from 10 copecs to one
ruble; punch-bowls, with a dish to set them on, one ruble; milk-cans 50 copecs.
Wash-hand basins from six to 50 copecs; with undersets, 25 copecs to one and a
half ruble. Earthen basins, teapots, washing basins, pots, etc. from four to 30
copecs; stone plates, bowls; teapots, etc. etc. 10 to 25 copecs; large; stone
waiters three rubles. Enamelled waiters or boards, with six bowls, from 25
copecs to one and a quarter ruble; teapots from 15 copecs to one ruble;
sugar-boxes and tea-caddies, from 25 copecs to one and a half ruble;
fruit-plates two and a half to four rubles; small sweetmeat-plates from 44
copecs to three rubles; not to mention salt-boxes, vinegar vessels, goblets,
etc. whole sweetmeat sets at three rubles. Lacquered tea-boards, etc. from 25
copecs to one and a half ruble. Wooden cups varnished, made in this place, from
five to 40 copecs. Little, brass bowls of various sizes, from five to 15
copecs. Large, copper bowls, at 50 copecs; ladles at 20 to 50 copecs, etc. Iron
ladles and spoons, from four to 30 copecs; basins of cast iron, of different
sizes, 50 copecs to 2 rubles; iron strakes for wheels, and cast-iron axletrees;
two of the latter, with boxes, 50 copecs, and 25 copecs per cwt. for the
strakes.
The Chinese would not be able to get rid of these wretched goods, and other
kinds of iron work, if iron, after the abolition of the manufactory of
Irkuzkaja, was not become so dear, that it was sold in Selenginskaja at three
copecs per pound, and dearer still at Irkuzkaja. The Chinese have begun, at the
distance of 37 miles from Kjachta, to smelt raw iron in hand-blasts. They do
not forge any; on this account buy their steel very dear from the Russians, but
sell their cast-iron more advantageously.

Lacquered shrines, with the best varnish, from 90 to 150 rubles, and more;
common ones, lacquered on wood, 30 rubles, and upwards. Little, ivory boxes,
five rubles. Boxes inlaid with mother-of-pearl, or snail-shell, 25 to 66
copecs. What they call Chinese bibles, exceedingly well painted upon soft
stones, ivory, or with figures on silk, five to 30 rubles. All sorts of
porcelain figures, of various prices, according to the workmanship. Lacquered
watch and dial cases, 75 to 120 copecs. Tea papers, 100 sheets from 25 copecs
to one ruble. Colors, at half a ruble to 11 rubles per hundred weight; sold by
the pound for 40 to 100 copecs. White lead, in boxes, from one to five copecs.
Red lead, a little box at one ruble. Red color, box at 25 copecs. Varnish, a
small bladder, at two to five copecs. Paper to paint on, from half a ruble to
two rubles the cwt. Frankincense candles, the bundle, from, one to 10 copecs;
the box, at 3 rubles. Densui, an earthy medicine, in little cylinders, of a
red, yellow, or black color, similar to the stone of Goa, at 1 ruble to eight
copecs the piece. Cane walking-sticks, 19 to 50 copecs; wooden ones lacquered,
30 copecs. Gansa, or little Chinese tobacco-pipes, of iron, at two to six
copecs each; more elegant ones of the same kind, of tutaneg, or brass, four to
50 copecs. Tobacco-purses, 15 copecs; fire-steels, and files, at 10 to 15
copecs. Burning-glasses, at 10 copecs; spectacles, in cases, at 40 copecs; bad,
Chinese compass-watches, in a hollow, brass globe, with a little looking-glass,
eight copecs. Glass lamps, with chains, two copecs. Needles in parcels, one
thousand, from 20 copecs to one ruble. Glass beads, 25 copecs to one ruble the
thousand. Red beads, made of glue soaked in oil, and always elastic, from 25
copecs to two and a half rubles the thousand. Polished stones, 10 copecs each.
Round, blown-glass pearls, one ruble the thousand. Flat, false pearls, one
ruble the thousand. Serpent-heads (cyproea nodosa), 15 to 50 copecs. Flowers
made of marrow, of very lively colors, the bouquet from half a copec to two
copecs. Tyger-skins, seven rubles; leopard-skins, two rubles.
III. The third division of Chinese merchandise comprehends all sorts of tea,
eatables, and a variety of dainties.

Good green tea, or shulan, one ruble per pound; large boxes, 59 to 80 rubles:
the best bohea, or ladsumei, two rubles per pound: the tea tair-za, 40 to 50
copecs per pound: lonchowoi tea, 16 rubles per pud: bohea, called baichowoi,
five to eight copecs per pound; and a variety of other teas at proportionate
prices.
They have a kind of tea called kirpitschnoi tschai, or brick tea, because this
tea is pressed into tables, or cakes, eight or nine inches long, four or five
broad, and one inch thick. It is prepared in the most northern provinces of
China for the Mongols, who, like the Burats and Russians beyond the Baikal,
cannot do without it. Being an astringent, and mixed with bloody water to form
it into cakes, it is very cloying, if taken with milk and butter; or, as the
Russians do fasting, with oil and flour. On these cakes the Chinese print, or
impress the name of the place where it is prepared, and an encomium on it. The
translation of one that sell into my hands is as follows: -- From the
manufactory Jun-zen Zedsi, in the government of Randshin, in the second month
of spring, collected when the dew falls; fresh, delicate, and salubrious tea,
surpassing the best species of tea suulu, pejean, contan, fynsu, jiupan,
ljuidsan. An inhabitant of Selenginskaja endeavored in vain to counterfeit
this tea with the leaves of the dwarf elm, the sasifragae crassifolia, et
pyrola rotundisolia; for his tea was directly known not to be genuine, because
he had not given his cakes a proper solidity.

Chinese, yellow tobacco, or scharr, at 15 copecs per pound. Sugar Candy, from
10 to 15 copecs per pound. Millet, from 60 copecs to two rubles per pud.
Wheat-flour, from 50 copecs to two rubles 40 copecs the pud. Preserved ginger,
from two rubles eight copecs to eight rubles the pud. Oranges preserved in
sugar, to three copecs each, or four to six rubles the pound. Star anis, or
badjan, six and a half to 12 rubles the pud. Water-melons, 15 copecs each;
apples, or alema, 10 copecs the pound; pears, one and a half copec each;
apples, at 20 copecs to three rubles the cwt.; dried ones, five to 10 copecs
the pound; chestnuts, 5 to 15 copecs the pound; walnuts, 10 to 30 copecs per
hundred; confectionary and fruit jellies, in sugar and honey, from five to 30
copecs per pound, etc. etc. etc.
Hence we may see, that furs, hides, some coarse manufactured goods, lacquered
wares, glass, and great cattle, are transported into China; and that raw and
manufactured silk and cotton, tea, tobacco, porcelain, small-house furniture,
and toys, are the objects of commerce with that nation. Eatables and flour were
much dearer formerly than at present, and much more sought after by the Chinese.

Some of the poorer Mongols have begun to grow wheat about the river Orchon.
They buy still a great many horses, and large cattle; for the Mongols are but
yet poor in cattle, and their horses are far inferior to the Russian horses.
They buy up terriers, mastiffs, and all kinds of large dogs, with avidity, and
pay very dear for them. The watch-trade will no longer do with them, as they
seem to have been plentifully supplied with this article through the European
sea-trade at Canton; they even sell those watches that are out of order at a
very moderate price, to the Russians at Kjachta.

The greatest advantage which Russia reaps from the Chinese trade, is its being
able to make a good use of those natural productions of the remotest parts of
Siberia, which would not be worth bringing to Russia, especially those
sea-beaver skins, which will not sell in Europe, and are now the very life of
Kamschatka commerce; by selling them at high prices to the Chinese, and getting
from them those necessaries which the Russians would be otherwise obliged to
purchase at an expensive rate, and to the disadvantage of their balance in
trade. The revenue of Russia is very much increased by the Kjachta trade, by
the duties on goods sold into China, and brought from thence. In the year 1770,
the custom duties at Kjachta amounted to no less than 550,000 rubles, 128,750l.
sterling; and in both ensuing years, not much less. The principal goods are
settled by a tariff; those not so settled, are some, few furs, cattle, and
victuals, which pay 23 per cent.; Russian manufactured goods, 18 per cent.; all
forts of sables, 19 per cent.; looking-glasses, 16 rubles per cwt.: and besides
this, all goods pay one ruble per cwt. to support the customhouse and its
officers, and some articles 7 per cwt. for the said purpose. The following
goods are free of customs in going out of the kingdom, writing-paper, Russian
lacquers, colors, fruit, brandy, and all its preparations; and the following
are admitted into the kingdom duty free, raw and colored cotton, glass beads,
false pearls, white lead, fans, needles, preserved ginger, and other
confectionary, rice, dogs, musical and other instruments, china, earthen wares,
enamelled things, and a variety of furniture and ornaments.

Formerly there was a private trade carried on by the crown in caravans, which
carried into China all fine furs, sables, black and gray foxes, blue and black
ice-foxes, otters, beavers; and, among other articles, brought back tobacco;
but these caravans that formerly went to Peking, are discontinued, and the
Russian merchants may deal in all the above articles, carrying them out,
without interruption, from any private trade, except ammunition, gold and
silver, stallions, mares, reindeer, elk-hides, tanned leather, horse-skins,
beaver-hair, pot-ash, resin, and linen yarn; and may bring in every thing,
except salt, brandies, poisons, copper-coins, and rhubarb, which are
prohibited. Of the last article, whose purchase the crown has reserved as its
prerogative, nothing has been brought in from China these two last years; but a
commission has been lately signed for its introduction in future. The
contractor is a Bucharian, called Abdusalam, and his son Abdaula. Abdusalam's
father was the first importer of it at Kjatchta, and monopolized the whole.
This Bucharian family are from the town Selin, situated south of Kokonoor
(Blue-sea), toward Thibet, and is with all the towns of little Bucharia,
subject to China. The district consists of high, barren mountains, on which the
rhubarb grows, northwards from Selin, as far as Kokonoor, out of the clefts of
the rocks. The old, good roots are known by their thick stalks; are mostly dry
in April and May. Having dug them out, they scrape off the earth, and hang them
about on trees in the neighborhood, till the gathering season is over, when
the Tangutians (who are the chief rhubarb-gatherers) take them down, and carry
them home. The leaves are said to be round, and to have no very deep incisions;
of course, by this description, the rheum palmatum, is not the genuine rhubarb,
but the rheum compactum; for I enquired of the Bucharians respecting the
former, and they were unacquainted with the leaves. Perhaps the rheum
undulatum, which grows with rotten roots on some of the cold and moist
mountains of Siberia, may grow also on the southern, free and drier mountains
of Thibet, and make the noblest rhubarb-roots; and perhaps this, with care,
might be properly cultivated in some parts of Dauria, or on the Jenisei, by
frequent transplanting.

Exportation of the best rhubarb is prohibited in China (the Mongols call
schara modo, yellow wood, the Chinese doncko), of course the trade is a kind of
smuggling one, effected by bribing the superior officers, and mixing the good
roots with the bad. It is brought on camels, in woollen bags, containing rather
more than five puds. Its brokage, reception, and payment, is under the
regulation of a pensioned apothecary, in commission at Kjachta. All the rhubarb
is there brought, and bored through by sworn workmen, in presence of the
Bucharian merchants, scraped, and the refuse thrown aside: the spongy, hollow
roots are of no value, these are not taken; but the good, sound roots are
received, weighed, and paid for, as by contract. The refuse is burnt; though it
might serve to make extracts and preparations of rhubarb, for the hospitals.

The Bucharians, at no small expense of the Empress, have already twice
preserved rhubarb-seed, but it is unknown to me what species of Rheum was
produced from the first seeds. The last time when a Greek officer of the
rhubarb-commission at Kjachta, one Simon Manuelofsyn Skerletof attained seeds
from one of his friends a Bucharian, they produced the known Rheum palmatum;
but some persons, who have seen the rhubarb in its native soil, describe its
leaves quite different, as I have mentioned above. Perhaps this medical plant
comes from more than one species of this genus, which may be readily found out
by experiments. In the last parcel sent, were some pieces of milk-white
rhubarb, whose efficacy was equal to the best, but its taste sweetish. A
selection is designed to be made of this, and its true nature and properties
enquired into.

On the 6th of April, 1772, I had an opportunity to be an eyewitness of the
conduct of the Chinese, during a lunar eclipse, when they idly suppose the moon
is attacked by a dragon. At night the guards of the police at Kjachta made a
rattling in the streets every quarter of an hour, and every one might, if he
pleased, have done the same. This alarm began at dusk, soon after the shutting
of the town-gates, and continued incessantly, all the time the eclipse lasted.
Besides this noise made with boards and kettles, the bell and tymbals at the
pagoda were sounded, and the barking of dogs, stirred up by this noise,
increased the tumult. The next day, scarce a Chinese was to be seen in the
streets, though at other times in the day, they walk the streets in great
numbers; for the 7th of April, was set down in their almanac as an unlucky
day, in which no kind of business was to be done, except bathing. It is indeed
remarkable that so keen a nation should attend so much to almanac prophecies,
which, besides a deal of superstition, point out the business to be done every
day. The conceit of delivering the moon from the attack of the bad, aerial
spirit Arach Ulla, by noise, clamor and firing of guns, might be pardonable in
the superstitious and uncivilized Mongols, but it is not agreeable to the usual
prudence and discretion CHINESE DELIVERING THE MOON.
of the Chinese. Less pardonable is their foolish conduct in case of fire, of
which there have been late examples in Kjackta: a house accidently took fire,
and the flames were so rapid as to consume several habitations. No Chinese
would attempt to quench them. They stood in crowds about the fire, and only
sprinkled it occasionally with a few drops of water, to appease the god of the
fire, whom they believe selected these houses as a sacrifice. Had not the
Russians, on this occasion, exerted themselves to the utmost, the whole place
probably would have been burnt to ashes.

But notwithstanding this, I do not see that the Chinese pay any great
reverence to their idols, except that on the days of supplication, which are
appointed on the days of the new and full moon of every month, every Chinese
goes once into the temple, and without taking off his cap, lays his hands
together before his face, bowing five times to every pagod, and touching with
his forehead the pedestal on which the pagod or Burchan stands, and then goes
away. On high festivals, such as their new-year's-day, which, like the Mongols,
they call the white day, and which is that which falls on the new moon in
February, and continues the whole month, they hoist flags before their temples,
serve up on the pagod-tables, a great deal of provision, which the priests
consume at night, in the side-rooms of the fore-court, and in honor of the
idols, exhibit daily, on the theater I have mentioned a comedy, satyrising
generally unjust judges and magistrates. They have also, at this time, many
other entertainments, but nevertheless do not neglect their business; indeed,
this month is allowed by the Russian merchants to be the best of the whole year
for trade, because the Chinese are then very eager to buy and sell, on account
of the happy prophecies with which their almanacks are filled during this month.

On the 8th of April a Mongalian Taischa, or prince, arrived at Kjachta, as an
ambassador (boschka), or commissioner. His arrival was made known the night
before by the Chinese Surgutschei; for Kjachta has also such a chief director
of the Russian merchants, and called by the same name. The Surgutschei of
Kjachta received him early in the morning at his house, where he equipped him,
after breakfast, with a proper escort of soldiers and horses to conduct him
safe to Selenginskaja. He came from the Mongalian headquarters, Urga, on the
river Tola, and was sent merely to surrender some poor Tangutians, who were
under the protection of the Russian empire, and had transgressed the limits in
winter, to a distance of 15 miles, for the sake of hunting, and had the
misfortune to fall into a crowd of Mongalian hunters, who took them prisoners.
Trifling as this offense may appear, the Chinese think so much of it, that they
will on such occasions send a legate, or deputy, as far as Irkuzkaja, to make
heavy complaints for such an usurpation, of right, in encroaching on their
boundaries. This legate, his secretary, and two other Mongols who accompanied
him, wore, as badges of distinction, and being on public business, a peacock's
feather hanging down from the hind part of their caps. The button of the
legate's cap was white crystal, those of his companions red glass.

On the 9th of April I lest Kjachta at night, and returned to Tschikoi, where
the Mongalian high priest promised to meet me, and show me the temples. I
reached that place the next morning, and saw here a species of duck, not yet
described by naturalists, with beautiful, vari-coloured, scythe feathers in
their wings (anas falcata), which spend the winter in China, and the summer on
the Daurian rivers, building their nests on the Lena, and Jenisei, and soaring
in little flocks, with a whistling and shrilling noise.

On the 10th, in the afternoon, I was enabled to continue my return to
Selenginskaja. On the road we were benighted; the unexperienced drivers having
driven us out of our way. On my arrival at Selenginskaja, the river Selenga was
almost free from ice; but it shut up the Tschikoi and Chilok, which last river
was not open till the 20th of April. The sun, however, was so warm, as to cover
with green and bloom the heights situated in the south. On the 13th of April we
saw the first wind-flowers (anemone pulsatilla), which sprung abundantly from
the sand, and increased amazingly. On the 20th appeared the first flowers of
Potentilla subacaulis, which is the most abundant plant in the sandy plains,
whose leaves under the snow, continue green, and become the first food of the
hungry flocks of the Burats. Their sheep devour in equal quantities the dry
leaves of Veronica incana, and both species of the sharp wind-slower, which
have a purgative property among the cattle, and often cures them of the winter
itch; but their effect on the skin of the human body is the reverse, and seems
to be so corrosive as to raise blisters.

Leaving a student in Selenginskaja to collect the vernal plants, I pursued my
way to Udinskaja, accompanied by Mr. Sokolof, my draughtsman and huntsman; but
did not go the usual road to this place along the Selenga, and the mountains
that run along the side of that river, but chose a bye-way, in order to take a
view of the iron ore discovered on the Kuitun, with which the smiths of this
place supply the whole district of Selenginskaja, with iron and steel. I met in
my way there with a number of sine, sky-blue magpies (corvus cyanus) with black
heads, and very long tails, who come with the approach of spring from Mongalia
and China, and build their nests on the Selenga, Onon, and Argun. Common as
this bird is we were not able to shoot one, out of the numerous crowds we saw,
owing to their wonderful and frequent change of flight. Stretching away from
the Selenga, we crossed a stony sand-mountain, and reached, on the 23d of
April, in a deep valley, the river Chilok, which had been only two days free
from ice, and was very much swolen. Whilst they prepared the ferry, we passed
the night upon the shore, near a good fire; a dark night, and a little rain and
wind, rendering our passage over the river impracticable till the next day,
when my wagons were brought on barges, one after the other, to Chilokskaja,
which consists of 30 habitations, of which two thirds are colonists of
Polanders, settled here about six years ago. They cultivate buck-wheat; have
their land given them, and grow plenty of water-melons; the situation to the
south being warm, and the ground sandy. The river Chilok, which is here very
broad, is so shallow in summer, as in many places to be fordable. There are a
number of villages erected along this river, and colonized with Poles, who have
mixed with some few of the natives.

We left the Chilok, crossed a mountain, and came to Tarbaganteiskaja, on the
river Tarbagantei, passing several villages in our road. The population of this
district amounts to 309 peasants and 466 new Polish colonists, all governed by
Wybornei or elders chosen by the villages, and resident in Targabanteiskaja.
From this place we traveled up the Kuittun, which springs from wild, barren
mountains, truly deserving this appellation; for there is not a green leaf to
be seen in the whole district. The hollow places or depressions had almost
every where flowers. Probably the saltness of the soil may be the real cause of
its cold nature, increased by an adjacent woody and high mountain. Though there
are colonists here also, they cannot bring either slax, hemp, buckwheat, peace,
or wheat to ripen; but the industrious Polanders try every means, and are not
dispirited.

Dunging the land on these mountains is of no use; some Polanders have tried it
on turnep-fields, but it was found to wither the corn. Some of the inhabitants
keep a great many sheep of the Mongalian breed, with black heads; the ewes
without horns. They also keep a great number of goats, whose furs are here an
important article. The flocks of these people seed in summer with those of the
Burats, who will not admit a horned he-goat among the females, that the
offspring may not have horns to wound each other. Some of the Burats assured
me, incredible as it is, that one he-goat was able to serve 60 females in one
day, and render them fertile. The Kalmucks here told me the same. Among their
lambs, many have fine, curled skins; and many of this breed are fold at a great
price to the Chinese. The Polish colonists, according to a custom in their own
country, in order to curl their sleece, lace the lambs, as soon as dropped,
tight up in linen, and wet them the next day with warm water; in which
condition they leave them three or four weeks under the ewe, till they think
their tender sleece is sufficiently curled; letting the strings looser at
different periods, as they find them grow; and when the lamb becomes too big to
keep it thus swathed up, they kill it for the sake of the skin.

The woods about the Kuitun consist of fir, and on the highest parts, of
larches, quite covering the adjacent mountain, which abounds with elks, and
other game, and is full of iron ore. In the neighborhood of this place, near
the brook Katscherga, are the remains of a gold-mine, consisting of some,
tolerably deep shafts; but as the lode soon discontinued, it has been deserted
these 10 years. About five miles from this mine runs another mountain eastward
along the Katscherga, where the ground is richly colored with ochre, the
vicinity of iron ores. The iron-mine has been worked, but, not finding the ore
in any great quantities, has been left to private smiths, who have never been
molested, nor the duty of 10 rubles for each hand-blast, demanded of them.
These smiths here dig iron, supply the whole district of Selenginskaja with it,
and get near a ruble per pud at the first hand. Quantities of ore lie above
ground, and is gathered by the peasants in autumn, before the snow falls, when
the ground is frozen, and carried to their houses. One man will often collect
more than 50 puds in a day.

We crossed the Uda on the 26th of April in the same ferry-boat in which we
passed the Selenga, and arrived early at Udinskoi, where, on account of some
business, I stopped till next day. This place is situated on a point of land,
formed by the union of the Uda with the Selenga, and has now a new-built stone
church and two wooden ones. It is fortified with a timber wall, has four towers
and one gate. Behind the town is a fine, new-built granary, which supplies the
Daurian silver-huts with corn. Here live some substantial merchants, trading
chiefly in cattle, Buratian lamb-skins, and Daurian gray furs, of which they
send annually 3 or 400,000 pieces to Kjachta. Udinskoi, and other, little
adjacent places, are well situated for the transport of salt and corn to the
Daurian huts, and the lead brought here from thence.

Near Udinskoi begins the great, high road to Nertschinskaja, that has a
verst-stone (every verst is three quarters of a mile) like our mile-stones; but
has no where any hedges, and is entirely left to nature, because this road is
chiefly used in winter for transporting goods, and other public business, when
the brooks are frozen over. From Udinskoi we rode through a sandy fir-wood to
the brook Beresofka, and then came to a dry, narrow slope, above 150 miles in
length, with little variation, except that of being sometimes intercepted with
brooks, which flow into the Uda, has the Uda on the left, and a chain of
mountains on the right. The stations from Udinskoi to Tschitinskaja are well
supplied by the Chorinzian Burats. Each is obliged to keep 50 horses and some
camels in readiness, for the use of those who travel on the business of the
state, and for the transporting of goods. Here and there is a Cossack officer,
to command and regulate these post-stations; and the intendant-general of the
whole resides at Udinskoi. Here I saw, for the first time, the manner in which
the Burats broke in young horses for draught. They have but few, tame horses,
one of which they put into the shafts of each wagon; but should they have more
wagons than they have horses used to harness, they will force wild horses to
draw. The tame one being put into the shafts, a wild horse is placed on each
side, and girt over the saddle with a double rope, in which there is a short
club; then lashing another double rope on the wagon, they mount the horse, and
place him so near the wagon, that they can wind the rope fixed to the wagon
round the club on the saddle; thus will the young, wild, horse run along-side
the tame one till he is tired, when they have others, following the wagon,
ready to relieve him.

Near the second Buratian post is a lake, on whose sandy borders lies a great
deal of white, nitrous, bitter salt, which the Burats fetch under the name of
chudshir, and boil it in their tea, to make it thicker. Not every bitter salt
will please them for this purpose, but that only whose taste is urinous and
alkaline; and those who inhabit the mountains, and cannot get this salt, use
sharp birch-ashes (schulta) as a substitute.

In a Buratian tent, of which there were some here, was a young, Chorinzian
sorceress (Udugun), whom I ordered to attend me in her magic dress; but I found
her so unskilled in her art, that the tricks she played are not worth
repeating: her dress shall be described below. Her magic drum was carried after
her by her husband, whose office was to beat it. When she returned, the
proprietor of the habitation took her crutches from her, and placed them over
the door by raising the felt roof.

After traveling about 76 miles further, where the river Onon branches into
three arms, and where I stopped on the 29th at Lossiowo Simowic, and sent for
foam sorcerers; I visited the Damba, who resides in the neighborhood, and is
the head of the most numerous, Chorinzian tribe. No sorcerer would appear,
under a pretense that they were gone to some distant parts to practice their
magic art. The Chorinzian Burats, who inhabit the country between the Chilok
and Baikal, and beyond the mountains, on both sides the Ingoda to the Onon,
consist of eleven tribes belonging to the regency of Nertschinskaja, and pay
their Jassak, or tribute, in furs. Most of them are rank heathens, devoted to
their magicians; yet the priests of Lama, whose zeal for conversion is
uncommonly great, endeavor to spread among them their better superstition,
which contains, however, some moral doctrine. They have already among them a
Geshul, with 26 common Lamas, or priests, some nobles or Saissangs, and a
Taischa or prince, followers of Lamaism.

In my way to a mine, at the distance of 11 miles, on the 30th of April, I
stopped at the tents of the Buratian saissang, Schantan, to ask him for a
guide; but in hopes, at the same time, of meeting with a famous, Chorinzian
sorcerer. Disappointed of my latter object, I went directly to the metallic
mine about seven miles further on, called the Mungut mine. The ores here
consist of compact, massive lead-blinde, containing per pud about seven pounds
of lead, and one dram of silver, and also an alloy of copper, of which more
than 12,000 puds have been dug.

It is designed to erect, by degrees, in this whole road to Nertschinskaja,
Russian station-villages, in order to release the Burats from the obligation
they at present lie under of furnishing horses to travelers. About a mile
north-west of the village Pogromna is a mineral spring, which, if largely drank
of, causes a kind of deafness and vomiting, and is used by the Burats against
various, inward complaints with great success: but it has proved mortal to some
Russians who have immoderately used it in severe distempers. I rode to the
place, with an intent to examine into it, but the spring being frozen over, I
was obliged to defer it till my return. About the spring were many dry bushes
stuck in the ground, and left by the Burats, after having drank the water.

Six miles from the Pogromna, the Burats of the tribe of Scharazkaja have a
post-station. Here I ordered a Chorinzian sorceress, who lived in the
neighborhood, to be sent for, in order to see some of her magic arts. Her name
was Labantsika; she came, accompanied by her husband and two other Burats, each
of whom carried a magic drum. She told me she had not the full number of her
drums, for that on feast-days she used nine. She herself carried two crutches,
(sorbi); each of which was ornamented at top with a horse's head, and had many
little bells (holbuga) about her. With the same kind of bells in bunches was
her leather-garment full. From her shoulder to the ground hung down about 30
black and white serpents (nutchal) made of vari-coloured pieces of fur, and
furs of weasels and ferrets fastened one to another, like ribbands. Among the
serpents, one at the end was divided into three parts, which she called Mogoi,
and which above all things must not be omitted in their magic dress. Her cap
was covered with an iron casque, with three branching horns on each side, like
those of a deer. She was at no loss to play off some pieces of witchcraft,
though it was broad day, and seemed skilled in her profession. She began with
divinations, slow in the beginning, but violent afterward; and began to leap
and roar in her incantations, at the sound of the magic drums, in which she was
accompanied by the Burats, who formed a circle round her. During the invocation
the sorceress seemed to be convulsed, half-swooning, and putting often her hand
over her face, and thus concluded. During her first songs she feigned to run
out of doors, but was prevented by two Burats, who stood at the door. After
many other suchlike fantastic ravings, she ran always singing toward three
Burats, who were sitting with their drums on the left side of the hut. Once she
took her crutches in both hands, and jumped, leaping as it were out of the
smoke-hole, as if she wanted to draw the aerial spirits with her crutches into
the hut. Afterward she seemed gay, and begged to have questions put to her,
which she answered singing, and swinging herself backwards and forwards. At
last she asked for some brandy, and prophesied, from behind the liquor, that I
should be happy, and travel much farther by sea, and with this she ended.

I have given this woman as an instance of the present art and dresses of
Buratian sorceresses, in order that my readers may compare them with those of
other nations, whose sorceries have been, or may be related. (See the Lapland
magician, etc. and judge between them.)

On May the 5th, at daybreak, a great deal of wet snow sell, which, with the
stony and miry roads, made our way almost impassable, and extremely toilsome.
We could scarce travel half a mile without stopping to give the Buratian
horses, which seemed to consist only of hair and bones, time to recover breath
and strength. With the greatest pain, however, and loss of time, we passed the
Uda, and crept over another mountain, covered with larches; and late in the
afternoon found ourselves at the distance only of 12 miles from the place we
left at break of day. We were fortunate, however, to meet here with a deserted
winter-hut, with a slove, but without roof, door, or window, where we slept,
and were sheltered from the snow; but our greatest pains were to find wood
under the snow, which lay an ell deep. We collected all the superfluous wood of
the hut, and thus made a fire; but it occasioned so insupportable a smoke, that
we were obliged to stay without in the snow, till the wood was nearly burnt
out. Two of my wagons were not so happy as to reach this wretched smoke-hole,
but were obliged to pass the night in different places of the wood, though we
sent back all the horses we had which were able to move.

Next morning, after a chilling night, our desart-habitation looked like a
field of battle. Near it stood our horses and wagons, of which we had 20, but
11 of them having died in the night, with the frost and hunger, lay stretched
out on the snow, and had attracted all the crows and ravens of the forest,
whose cawings rendered the place still more dreadful. A spent horse was set at
liberty from a wagon, and it fell without looking out for a birch-bush, which
is the winter-food of the Buratian horses in this district. In our
wretchedness, however, the birds of the forest, which, stimulated by hunger,
gathered about our hut, gave me no little pleasure. We threw rubbish out of the
hut, which still further decoyed them, so that we could shoot a great number of
rare birds through the window-holes. Here I got seven, new species of unknown
birds, some of which I never could meet with afterward, as they inhabit the
innermost and thickest part of the forest, and are very shy. These were, Turdus
ruficollis, and Alpinus, Motacilla Cyanura, Emheriza minuta, ruslica,
Chrysocilla et Spodocephala. Toward night we found several, little birds in
the snow, killed by hunger and the frost, and a little species of blue-tailed
hedge-sparrow (Motac. Cyanurus) which, though extremely shy, flew into our hut
for shelter, and hopped boldly about.

It was a joyful circumstance that the change of the moon on the 6th of May
brought a serene day, which gave us hopes of deliverance from our wretched
hermitage, where we were blocked up by the snow, and whose cold and dripping
waters became more and more insupportable. I dispatched early in the morning an
interpreter on horseback to get fresh horses from the next post-station,
situated on the great road, at the distance of 11 miles. They were brought in
the evening, but almost as poor and miserable as those which lay dead before
us. We were able, however, this day to fetch the wagons left behind us; and,
lying another night in this hovel, very scarce in provisions, the next morning
we proceeded on, up to our knees in snow, dirt, and water, in order to lessen
the load of the horses through the mountainous wood. Notwithstanding this help,
we could not get further with the empty wagons than four miles and a half, and
were obliged to put them out at the next birch-ground, to give them time to
refresh themselves with birch-twigs. But with all this, we should not have been
able to have got much further, had not the Burats sent us from Schascha-noor
fresh horses and camels. The latter, in case of necessity, are put before the
wagons, and a felt, rolled up, and tied between the poles or shafts, is to lie
as a yoke betwixt the camel's neck and the hunch on his back. Thus did the
camels draw us, though slowly, yet without stopping, through the valleys
overflown with mud and snow-water. Some camels, however, are so obstinate as
not to draw in different spots; nor can they be made with the greatest blows,
nor with the rope drawn through their noses. This day we crossed the Schibirtu,
and two brooks which flow into the Konda. From the Schibirtu to the Konda, the
wood is intercepted by a steep track of rocks, from which the snow-water rolled
in such torrents, as to resemble so many rivers, and swelled the Konda so much,
that we could not pass it without a bridge; and as we could not construct one
that day, and our posthorses and camels longed for rest, we stopped at some
Buratian tents that were there erected.

As soon as the bridge was finished next day over the deepest arm of the river,
I ordered the wagons to cross, and we did the same on the camels; but scarcely
had we reached the opposite bank, but the rising water dragged away the bridge.
With much difficulty we traveled on; every thing seemed overflown with a
general flood; the smallest brooks were so deep, that we durst not pass them,
had we not contrived a peculiar kind of bridge of distress, which was many
times afterward very useful to us. We sought, for example, for a spot where
the brook was the narrowest, and its banks steep; then felled down two smooth
fir-trunks, and some Burats, who were to ford the brook on horseback, dragged
them across with ropes; and as these rested on the two opposite banks, our
wagons could pass expeditiously on them; the axle trees, which in this country
go round with the wheels, turning on these trunks, with the wheels and horses
in the water. After having crossed several, frozen rivulets in this manner, we
came at last to more even ground, and got on pretty well: but I must not omit
mentioning a new species of ducks which I met with in this road (Anas
histrionica) which inhabit the east of Siberia only, on the mountain-lakes and
torrents; and as they seek for the wildest rock-waters, the Russians call them
Kamenuschki, that is, Cliff-ducks. They swim quite plunged in the water, so
that nothing but their necks and breasts appear. They dislike flying, but dive
when apprehensive of danger, and do this wonderfully.

On the 9th of May we reached the bottom of the partition mountain, which
divides Dauria from Siberia. This mountain rises gradually with a gentle
ascent, till we come to that steep, rocky part, which, by the name of
Jableni-Daba, separates the brooks of the Baikal and Lena from those of the
Amur. This mountain, which is 15 miles broad, consists of granite rock, and
extends itself from the Mongalian boundaries, beyond which it runs between the
Tschikoi and Onon, with many windings, uninterrupted to the Eastern ocean. Its
height appears moderate, for there are here and there side-mountains, which
surpass it in loftiness; Come whose summits during the whole summer are covered
with snow, though it melts very soon on the partition-mountain; but the rapid
streams of the waters which run from it to seas so remote, are an evident proof
of its loftiness. It is peculiar that no regular rock-stratum is to be met with
in the white mountain. The pieces of rock lay, without regularity, large and
small together, mostly overgrown with moss, in which, between the cliffs, some
few trees grew, and the wheels of our wagons received great damage. It would
be in vain to mend this road, as the snow-waters, which have deprived these
ancient mountains long ago of their earthy covering, would soon spoil the
whole. The whole mountain is burnt up, and the trees, which are larches and
birch-bushes, grow only on the east side, with a few pines and furs along the
brooks. We passed this mountain fortunately; but, it being eight miles from the
top to the next post-station, could not reach it before night; and as at the
bottom the road was bad, and our horses fatigued, we took up our lodging in the
wood, and reached the station the next morning, where I waited till the 10th of
May for some of my people, who had stopped in Schakscha-noor, for the sake of
hunting.

On the 11th I continued my journey for Titschinskoi. The country here became
more open and agreeable; and only the highest mountains are covered with wood.
The valleys are gravelly, and among the small stones is a great deal of quartz
and milk-white Chalcedon-like pebbles. I stopped at a village on the river
Ingoda, five miles short of Titschinskoi, and ordered a raft to be constructed,
in order to ride down the river, as the road along-side of it was quite
overflown. On the warmer mountains about the Ingoda, the larch-trees began to
put out their leaves; the birches were dropping their juice, and the
Rhododendrum Dauricum showed its purple bloom.

On the 13th we got upon the rafts, passed Titschinskoi, and on the 14th landed
37 miles below it, near the village Charamangut The Russians are vulgarly
called by the Burats Manguts, which means a Goblin, and is a lasting mark of
the old opinion the Burats entertained of them. The founder of the village was
black-haired, and was therefore called Charamangut (i. e. black Russian) which
name the village retains to this day.
, having slept on shore the preceding night. The number of field-mice on all
the plains and even grounds between the Ingoda and the Argun is incredible.
They are of a particular, black species, found in the step of the Jenisei (mus
oeconomicus) make, just underneath the turf, spacious nests, with side caves
and paths within, where they store up winter-provisions, filling them with
various cleaned roots. It is scarce comprehensible how a couple of little
animals (for there are seldom more than two mice in one winter-habitation)
should be able to dig out such a quantity of roots from the dry turf, carry
them to their cells; it being often found that one provision-cave has contained
eight or ten pounds of cleaned roots; and each nest has three or four or more
such caves. These mice often dig their nests at a great distance from the cave;
and where they are in great numbers, we see little holes in the turf, from
whence they took out the root. They clean them on the spot, and then drag them
to their home. In order to convey them the easier, they make flat, little paths
in the turf, on all sides, from the opening of their subterranean magazine. The
roots they collect are the Sanguisorba (in Tunguse Schuddu); the Polygonum
viviparum, (in Tunguse Mykir); and a kind of a meadow-plant, with flowers
similar to the wind-flower, Chaerophyllum temulum; which, from its stupefying
poison, and dangerous effects, cannot be eaten by any human being. The Tunguse
say the mice gather these roots, in order to intoxicate themselves on their
feast-days; and indeed this pernicious, little root, resembling a turnep, is
devoured by the mice with the other roots. In the higher steps of Dauria is a
light-grey species of mouse, smaller than these, the mus socialis; which I have
described about the Jaik. It leads an almost similar life, and makes cells
about its nest, which it fills with the onions or roots of a cinnabar-red lily
(lilium pomponium) and a small tasteless leek, (allium tenuissimum) which grows
on the sand. Those about the Jaik store up the tulip-root.

No where does the industry of these little animals become more useful to men
than in Dauria, and some other districts in the east of Siberia, where the
pagan nations, without agriculture, act with these poor, little creatures, as
do unjust lords with their tenants. They are the peculiar object of the
Tunguse, who, by plundering the cells of these field-mice, often live during a
whole winter. When these animals have filled their caves in autumn, the Tunguse
go in search of their holes, which they call Urgan, and feel with their foot,
or the handle of their spade, where the turf is soft, and seldom fail to hit
upon the nest, or some provision-cell. They immediately know all forsaken
holes; and when they see the little paths not recently made hollow, the
earth-holes not cleaned, and no traces of dug roots in their neighborhood,
they pass them by, looking for the well-stored caves of the fugitive mouse,
and, pulling out the poisonous roots, carry away the remainder. The Sanguisorba
root is in form like the former, but not so tough, nor so white, and, may
easily be distinguished from the black Sanguisorba, which the Tunguse are fond
of drinking, as tea. The mice save their lives at least from these robbers; but
the wild boars, who live on roots, as do the Tunguse, and are their rivals in
this respect, search diligently for these Urgans or nests, and often devour
their benefactors and provisions together.

Mr. Gmelin relates something similar of the marmots, which abound in Dauria;
but these neither make their holes flat beneath the turf; nor do they fill them
with roots, spending the winter in a state of lethargy.

Along the whole course of the Tura, as also, in general, in the mountainous
country between the Ingoda and the Onon, are no Russian habitations, except a
few villages on the former; nor is any agriculture going forward, though the
place is fit for it. The Chorinzian Burats wander about here in summer with
their slocks, and some poor, Tunguse tribes; not only poor individually, but
poor in people, wishing to get a livelihood about the Russian villages, are
constant inhabitants of this district.

None can conceive a more magnificent sight than the woodless and steep
mountain along the Onon, whose southern side was enamelled with the
peach-coloured bloom of the wild, Siberian apricot; and its north side with the
deep-purple blossoms of the Rhododendrum Dauricum. Through my whole travels I
never saw so romantic a region. On the 19th of May I rode along such mountains
to Akschinskaja, where I found a ferry-boat ready to carry me across the Onon.
This is a fortress, erected in 1756, containing one church, the regency, some
storehouses, officers houses, and eight caserns. The house of the
commanding-officer was burnt down last year, and is not yet rebuilt. As the
number of the working garrison is but small, the fortifications are not yet
completed. The common dwellings, of which 10 new houses for colonists make the
greatest number, will, according to the plan laid down, when they are
increased, form a regular suburb without the fort, which was erected to quarter
a number of light troops, to keep the country free from several gangs of
fugitive Mongols, famous in this country for robberies committed by them as far
as the Russian boundary. At that time 400 Tunguse entered the Cossack service,
who, with as many Cossacks from Nertschinskaja, occupy the frontier guard on
the Onon and Argun, and on the western side of the partition-mountains. The
posts are guarded with Cossacks from Selenginskaja and Irkuzkaja, and a party
of Mongols, subject to Russia; of which, in case of necessity, 1700 men must
perform regular, military duty. On the Daurian line half of these troops are
divided on the frontier guards, each commanded by a corporal of militia; the
other half is together in troops; and have their quarters, at proper distances,
in order to be ready, and in motion when required. By degrees, these frontiers,
like those of the Irtish and the Ob, will be guarded by a line of fortresses
and posts, wherever the situation of the country will admit of it, the plan
being at present regularly laid out.

I stopped at Akschinskaja till the 25th, in order to acquire some knowledge of
the country, and of the rattle-chace against the step-goats or antelopes. These
chaces are the chief delights of the Mongols and the Daurian-step Tunguse. The
Mongols call it Ablachu, and the Russians Oblawa. They are chiefly performed in
an open district, toward a mountain-river or wood; especially in autumn, when
the horses are strong. Parties of 100 or 200 men, who ride well, and have
several horses, are all armed with bows and arrows, and each has a skilful
hound, thus making a pack. They elect a chief, who regulates the chase as long
as it continues; dispatching in the morning, where they mean to throw off,
three or four sharp-sighted men, who are to look out for game; then follow
them, and if these see it in flocks, they stop till the whole body of hunters
join them, giving signs, by turning their horses to the side where the game is
feeding, and showing them in the same manner how they are to divide. After this
signal, the body divides into little parties, disposing themselves into the
form of a large bow, one man not more than 60 or 80 fathoms from another. The
end of this moving-bow approaches the place where the game is said to be, and
the hunters hide themselves as much behind the heights as they can, till they
have enclosed it. Then the whole circle draws nearer together, and as soon as
the game is aware of their danger, and takes flight, the whole body rushes
after it, full-gallop, drive it together, and shouting, kill it with
whizzing-arrows This kind of arrow is called by the Russians Switstung, by the
Mongols Dsi. It is a heavy arrow, with a rhomboidical, sharp, iron point, five
fingers broad, at the lower end of which is a hollow, bone button, which
receives the air through holes. When such an arrow is shot with, it makes a
hissing noise through the air, and where it falls, makes a broad and mortal
wound.
. With this weapon the Daurian step-nations perform regular, equestrian
exercises. If, in the course of the chase, there is any river, or woody
mountain, the sport is the greater; for the antelope of this district will
never cross any water, let the hunters with their hounds be ever so near: they
will rather try to save themselves by jumping. They are almost as shy before a
wood. As soon as they are driven among the trees, they become so bewildered and
frightened, that they will not run 100 fathoms further, but knock their heads
and bodies against the trees, and sink down breathless. The hunters are no
losers in either case; sometimes wolves, and other animals of prey, are by
chance within the circle, and their skins add to the gratification of eager
pursuers. If the district be all open, the whole party must strive to conceal
themselves, until some have brought the game within the circle with their
whizzing-arrows.

The Bird-Cherry was now, May 20th, just entering into bloom, which will lead
my readers to judge of the influence of the Daurian climate upon plants.

All the rivers which flow through Dauria, and empty into the Amur, are
plentifully stocked with fish, and particularly those fish that are rare in
some Siberian rivers. There are two sorts of scale-fish, one uncommonly
delicious, called by the Russians Kon, because it saves itself, by its
incredible swiftness, from the nets. Small barbels, met with throughout
Siberia, are also here; the Russians call them Ssan; and their little shape and
bitter taste only distinguish them from the Wolga carp. Here is also a small
species of shad (Some,) and a species of bjeluga, which comes singly through the
Amur into the Onon and Ingoda, and is called here Kaluga. Common pikes are here
gold-coloured, and variously spotted, like Indian fish. Besides these, the Onon
has common sturgeons, Lenki, Taimeni, and a species of large salmo oxrynchus,
known in the Baikal by the name of Morskoi Sig; crabs, and a variety of small
fish. The common slime-muscle is found here, on the lakes, of an enormous size.
I received some shells above half an ell A Russian ell is three-fourths of an
English yard.
long, and between three and four inches thick. The Onon, which flows here over
a more stony ground, throws out, on the banks, cornelian and onyx pebbles,
which would be of great value, if large, or cleft-less pieces could be found.
Pieces of green, yellow, and striped jasper are quite common, of which there
must be some in the mountains, which the Onon breaks through. The above
cornelian and onyx stones are said to be more abundant and finer about the
Argun. The wilds of Gobei, in Mongalia, are most famous for such stones, and
are considered as their native place.

On the 23d of May they brought me, from the Tunguse chase, antelopes (Decren)
of various breed and age; and I busied myself the whole day in dissecting and
describing them. What is most particular in these animals, and which no other
species of antelope has, is, that with the bucks horns the larynx also grows to
so enormous a size in all its parts, that the old ones look as if they had a
large wen. They have also underneath the foreskin of their bellies a wide,
oval bag, with a peculiar opening, exactly similar to the purse or bag of the
Moschus, except that the antelope's is quite empty. Perhaps it may be filled
with some matter in the brimming season; but the above season is late in
autumn, and they get their young only in June, when the Sanana, or purple-lily
is in bloom. Their young, if brought up in houses, become exceedingly tame, so
as to run about the house, or abroad, as they please, and will never go away;
but, if pursued by a dog, will fly to the house. On the open steps, however,
they are very wild, and swifter than the Saiga, and will not suffer the
huntsman's approach.

The Daurian sheep are incontestibly the largest in the world, and far surpass
the Kirguisian; they grow and fatten by feeding solely on the rods of the bush
Robinia Caragana, which the Tunguse call Altagana.

I meant to sleep, on the 27th of May, in Kubuchaiku; but, having received
intelligence, by an interpreter I sent on before, that the Tunguse had killed a
step-horse, I determined to ride the whole night, to save this rare animal from
the corruption of the present, hot weather. My guides took this night a wrong
way on the step, on which there is no road, but where travelers direct their
way by the sun. We were already seven miles from the fortress, toward the
Mongalian frontiers, and, seeing the error of my guides, I took out my compass,
and showed them the direction we were to steer. Before daybreak we arrived at
Sassutschinskoi Karaul, where I stopped to breakfast; then hastened to the
guard-station, Kulussutai, a distance of 60 miles, since I last slept. Here Mr.
Sokolof and I parted, for I dispatched him on a tour along the Argun to make
his observations on the vegetable kingdom of that district.

In the wild steps about the Tarei are continually seen, at a distance, that
species of wild step-horse, called by the Mongols Dshiggetei (long-ear). In the
Mongul country, particularly in the wide, waterless step of the Gobei they are
said to be met with in large herds; but that within the Russian frontiers,
since so many guard-posts have been erected, seldom any such herd, headed by an
old stallion, and consisting of from 10 to 30 mares is to be met with; but only
a fugitive, young stallion or mare, which has run singly from the Mongalian
side, pursued by the old ones; and these are only found on the steps about the
Tarei, and the utmost corner of the district of the Argun, near Abagaitu.

These Dshiggetei can neither be called horses nor asses; they are, like mules,
between both. Hence it was, that Messerschmed, who first observed this animal,
came to call them fertile mules (Mulus Dauricus faecundus). Mules they are not,
but a genus of their own, and have a much siner shape than a mule. That kind of
step-ass, called by the western Kirguese Kulan, is not to be taken as such; for
the latter, according to the truest accounts, are but wild asses of Onagorsof,
which inhabit the mountainous steps of Western Tartary, as the Dshiggetei do
the Mongalian deserts. The latter has certain beauties, which render him far
preserable to the ass. An uncommon, light body, slender limbs, a wild, fugitive
appearance, and fine-coloured hair, are his advantages over the ass. The ears
also are better proportioned than those of a mule, and, being livelily erected,
suit him well; and, with these beauties, it may be over-looked that his head is
rather heavy, and his hoofs like those of an ass. The straight, angular back,
and the ugly cow-tail, are it is only deformities. It Is head is clumsy, it is
breast large, cornered below, and somewhat pressed together. The backbone is
not like that of a horse, hollow and round, nor as straight and angular as an
ass, but calf-like, bent outward, or rising in the middle, and obtusely
angular. The ears are longer than those of a horse, and shorter than a mule's.
The mane is short, wild, and perfectly like that of an ass; and so are the tail
and hoofs. The breast and shoulders are narrow, and not so fleshy as those of a
horse, and the flanks and hind-quarters are rather lean and thin; the limbs
slight, and tolerably high. The color is a light-yellow brown; the nose, and
the inside of the legs of a sallow-yellow; the mane and tail blackish; and
along the backbone runs an elegant brown and black stripe, broad along the
croup, and slender toward the tail. When the animal stands, it carries its
head high; and if running, stretches its nose in the air. That which I had an
opportunity to dissect and describe at Kulussutai, was a mare, three years old,
which was catched singly, and killed upon the step. Two young stallions were
killed a little before by the Tunguse, and their flesh, which they esteem as
the greatest dainty of all game, was eaten. This animal had now its long and
woolly, winter-hair, which looked somewhat more sallow, and was very smooth and
shining. The swiftness of the Dshiggetei surpasses all imagination, and is
therefore become a proverb among the Mongols -- No horse, ever so swift, can
overtake it; it can therefore be only killed from a hidden retreat, where the
wind is against the huntsman, and when the animal comes within reach of his
arms. The most numerous rattle-chace would be incompetent to catch them. No
sooner does a herd of these animals see any thing suspicious, for instance, a
huntsman lying, or creeping, on the ground, at a distance, than the stallion
and guide of the herd runs in a large circle twice or thrice round the object
of his fear, and then, with the whole herd, takes his flight. Hence it happens
that mares are more seldom killed. If the mares lose a stallion, the whole herd
scatters and divides, and thus often fall a prey to the hunters.

Were there a possibility of taming these animals, there would not be better
coursers in the world; but their wildness is not to be overcome. If there had
been any means of taming them, the Mongols, and other Asiatic nomades, into
whose hands so many colts fall, would have effected it. It is remembered that
on these frontiers, many years ago, a Cossack of Nertschinskaja fed a captive
Dshiggettei colt, and endeavored, for several months to tame him; but it
remained wild, and at last killed itself by forcibly jumping. Yet, with proper
prudence and care, other attempts might be made with very young foals, caught a
few days after they are dropped, which, perhaps, might not be in vain. It would
be worth giving a premium to those that should succeed, as it would be
obtaining a new, domestic animal, that, by its speed, might be very useful.

Mr. Sokolof left me at Kulussutai, but I remained here till the 31st of May,
and was so busy in describing the various, natural curiosities, especially of
the animal kind, that were brought me, that I had scarce time to eat or to
sleep. The richer the little district toward the Argun is, in little lakes and
marshes, the more it abounds in water-sowl. There are a great many, not only
common, but also Indian crows (Ardea Antigone) and what they call the Numidian
Virgin (Ardea virgo, Demoiselle de Numidie); also bustards of an enormous size,
and cocks, which are called by the Mongols Sachaltu, on account of their
fine-feathered beards, and having, under the tongue, the opening of a wen-like
water-bag, the size of a large goose-egg; the bird often weighing above 30
pounds.

In these steps resides also a very remarkable, little animal, which is even
more abundantly to be found on the Selenga, known in Dauria by the Mongalian
name of Ogolona. It has the greatest similitude to the smallest earth-hare
(Lepus pusillus); and with the cliffhare (Lepus alpinus) which I have
described. The difference between these three little animals is much more than
between the common hare and the rabbit. The Daurian earth-hare is about the
size of the cliffhare, but of a pale-yellowish, gray color. Its ears resemble
both the other species; are large and round, the head obtuse; short feet, with
the usual divisions, and no tail. It burrows in the sand, like a rabbit, and
leaves its holes only about noon or night to feed, which it does on the bark of
the Daurian (Pyrus baccata) on which account it inhabits the islands and banks
of rivers. In the morning and at night we may hear their shrilling and
whistling voice, where they dwell. Toward autumn, they gather, about their
holes, little round heaps, of about one foot in diameter, made of all sorts of
plants; and, with the gray, mountain-speedwell, stuff up all the passages to
their holes, but fill them again if consumed, and the weather be severe. This
animal is the usual prey for the step-cat, so common in Dauria.

On the 30th of May I entertained myself before my departure with a clever,
Tunguse witch, who was at a relation's in this neighborhood. She came, as soon
as it was dark, near a fire, lighted before a tent, and some young lads carried
her dress, magic drums, and crutches; she had also along with her a great
number of young women and girls, to assist them in TUNGTSE SORCERY
singing. Her dress, which she put over her bare skin before the fire, was
similar to that of the Chorinzian sorceress, viz. a leather-robe, ornamented
with a great many iron, rattling toys, and brass ornaments; and from it hung
down behind, from the shoulders, a quantity of varied-coloured serpents, or
tails, each of which had a little bell. On her cap were leather-horns only,
instead of iron ones, and on her shoulders she had also some figures of frogs.
Her drum was more than an ell in diameter, and was first warmed over the fire
to give it a deeper sound. She took it first in hand herself, put it down on
the north side of the fire, ordered the choir of women to sit before her in one
row, and the men round about in a circle; then began, turning her face to the
north, and made her incantations with a terrible voice. At last she gave her
drum to her husband to beat, and began to leap with the crutches in one hand,
then raved, made various contortions, during which she pretended to be out of
her mind, by hiccoughing, imitating the voice of the cuckoo, and other odd
sounds; and in the end, whilst she was singing, a question was read to her,
which she pretty well guessed. After this she asked for brandy, and being
desired to answer some more questions, replied, that she could command but
three spirits, one every evening; one of which, she said, lived toward
midnight, one toward morning, and the third toward evening; she could
therefore answer no more than two questions. She then began her conjurations
toward evening, and called upon her aerial spirit, Daroldshe, often looking up
to the shining moon, with her hands over her eyes, as if she saw something
coming from far. When she was to answer the third question, she repeated her
magic hymns toward morning, and all the questions we had made false, on
purpose to deceive her, she guessed so well, that it astonished me, and made me
almost suspect my interpreter had told her how to act beforehand. The Tunguse
said she had not been instructed by any other magician, but formed herself,
and, whilst a girl, had lived a long time in a foolish, melancholy state; but
the Cossacks assured me that her master was an old sorcerer upon the Onon, to
whom it happened that his clothes were stolen away by some professors of the
art traveling, at that time, in this district; and that since this, he had
left off his business.

I had now, on the 13th of June, an opportunity of enquiring into the nature of
the mineral spring mentioned before on the brook Pogromna. This well has not
been dug more than four or five years, and is similar, in quality, to the
Seltzer water. I shall not determine, from any experiments I made myself, as
the well was not now in perfection; but from the experiments of Mr. Georgi,
made the autumn following, at my recommendation.

From a variety of experiments then made, by this gentleman, it may be
collected, that the mineral spring of Pogromna contains a great deal of ether,
a strong mineral alkali, a small degree of iron, and a still smaller quantity
of chalk, such as may be met with in all pure waters, and a very little
selenites, which the sulphurous smell of the residuum on coals demonstrates.
To the first three ingredients the known efficacy of the water ought to be
ascribed; and it may arise from the superabundance of ether, that the Russian
peasants who drink this water, as do the Burats, (but immoderately) as a cure
for disorders, or whenever they pass this way, feel a certain heat, and
giddiness of head, which has given to this spring the name of Pjanaja woda,
i.e. intoxicating water. This effect neither I, nor my people perceived, who
drank of it; but afterward we felt an irritation of the nose, like that
excited by wine, or beer, rich with ether.

The Burats use it against all disorders, and even to cure lameness; and come
here, annually, to bless the well with prayers, for seven days, three or four
times a day. Drinking it renders them very weak, and somewhat severish; but
many find a cure in all kinds of disorders. They know nothing of any
pernicious, or mortal effect it has; and we may readily see in two cases
related by the Russians, that it is only by an immoderate use of it, preceded
by some disorders, that makes it fatal. Round about the wells have been hung,
on bushes, all sorts of rags, and shoulders of sheep and oxen-skins, on which
were written the names of those who had received benefit from the waters, their
cure, and the blessed day of their recovery. Near one well (for there are three
or four) stood a long staff, with two cross sticks, on which hung little
boards, with Tangutian prayers, which turned with the wind.

On the 20th of June, at night, I reached Selenginskaja, which lies on the
right border of the Selenga, quite encompassed with sand mountains. In all the
Islands of the Selenga, of which there are many, the little, sand-bare
(ogelona) was seen in great abundance. The Mongol boys, who are fond of
roasting these little animals, are peculiarly skilled in catching them, and
call them alakdaga (speckled colt). Both Mongols and Burats told me, that these
rare hares do, as they say the common hedgehog does in England, and the large
house-toad in Russia, respecting cows, and the night-swallow respecting goats;
that is, suck their udders at night. This, however, is certain, that they are
seen, at night, among the sheep-flocks whom they frighten by their jumps.

I now determined to return to Kjachta, partly to give them an account of what
I had met with on the frontiers between Russia and China, where I had been, and
partly to examine into the beautiful, southern districts about the Selenga and
Tschikoi in this season, and to collect the plants that had attained their
perfection. I took, therefore, the usual road to Petropaulofskaja-Krepost,
where is established on the upper frontier, a custom-house, that collects a
duty on all goods carried to Kjachta, and examines all goods and bales brought
from thence, that nothing may be carried away without being stamped. For this
reason the side-roads are stopped against merchants; and the corner between the
Tschikoi and the Selenga has a barrier. To reach the fortress, the Tschikoi is
to be crossed, which, a little farther downwards, falls into the Selenga, from
whence the fort took its old name, Strjelka, which implies a cape between two
united rivers, and agrees well with the former situation; for it was formerly
situated in the very corner, where both rivers meet. The goods which are
brought from Kjachta by land, pass before this place in barges, and are carried
down the Selenga, over the Baikal, and then farther on, on the Angara and
Tunguska, into the Jenisei; and those barges arriving from the Angara, over the
Baikal, are drawn up the Selenga to this place.

On the 24th of June I left Poworotnoi, the first station on the road to
Kjachta, at 15 miles from Selenginskaja, on the left, and went straight toward
the Selenga, to see a Mongalian house of prayer, erected at the common expense
of the three Tabungutian tribes; and then went on to Kjachta, the road to which
is fenced in on both sides with hedges, and where I arrived on the 26th. I left
it again on the 28th, in order to go to Selenginskaja, which I reached on the
30th of June Two days before, I was a spectator of an extraordinary, pagan
worship, ordered by the superior Chambo-Lama, out of compliment to me. It
consisted in a formal, solemn blessing, which he performed himself, and
assembled on the occasion a great number of his clergy.

I was employed some days in Selenginskaja in collecting several things
relative to natural history, and arranging what I had hitherto collected. In
the mean time I ordered every thing to be ready for my return to
Krasnojarskaja, and was thus able to set out for the Baikal on the third of
July.

Mr. Bykof, whom I had left in spring about Selenginskaja, to collect plants, I
ordered to remain, and, if possible, to go up the Dshida, along the frontier
guard-posts, as far as to the high mountains of Tunkinskaja, to gather every
remarkable plant he could find, make other observations, and wait in
Selenginskaja the arrival of Mr. Sokolof from Dauria, and return with him, in
autumn, to Krasnojarskaja.

Before I take my leave, however, of this district, I will add some general
observations on it.

I must own, that upon the whole Siberian line, from the Uralian mountains,
which may be considered as the line of boundary between Europe and Asia, quite
to the Baikal, I have not been able to collect so many new and curious animals
and plants, as in that track of land bounded by Mongalia, and on the north by
the Baikal. It is certain, that on the Jenisei, especially its upper and
southern districts, which are by nature similar to those of Dauria, many
natural curiosities are to be found, especially in the botanical line, which
are not to be met with in the western parts of Siberia, or on the loftier parts
of the Altai mountains; but these productions are no where so copious, so
perfect, and genuine as in Dauria, and all the mountains situated beyond the
Baikal. I say mountains, because the whole country is mountainous; for even the
plains may be considered as broad valleys, and are situated on heights, toward
the west of Siberia, as the generality of Siberian mountain-plants, which grow
even in the lowest valleys, incontestibly prove, without making any
observations with the barometer. Besides, the very high, woody mountains, which
have their greatest breadth from the Baikal to the source of the Selenga,
forming, with the Sajanian mountains about the Jendred, a mighty chain, which
spreads more toward the east, and joins in one part with the western bay of
the Baikal, but turns, with its principal track, toward Mongalia, and goes on
over the sources of the Jenisei, Selenga, and Tola, and then divides into those
branches, which separate partly the brooks of the Amur from those of Siberia;
partly its principal rivers, Naun and Scharamurin among themselves; and partly
the brooks of the Amur from the Choango: besides these towering, chief
mountains, full of numerous cupolas, covered with snow, and cold, woodless
summits; all the space between the Baikal and the frontiers is mostly full of
dry, open, torn, and very steep mountains, intersected with sandy valleys and
plains; on which it is clearly evident that the sand originated in the
withered, small particles of the matrix, and was carried away and spread by
winds, rain, snow-water, and other streams. For most mountains in these parts
consist of decayed granite-rocks, and other very ancient matrices; and, in some
few places, strata are to be seen; the stratum of all the mountains first
appearing northwards from the Baikal, and in the upper district of the Lena.

As the mountains, both in the district of Selenginskaja and Dauria, are very
sleep and rocky, and are often nothing more than projecting cliffs and towering
pieces of rock, they exhibit an awful sight, and fine, magnificent prospects.
Such a country must afford abundance of curious bushes and shrubs, peculiar to
such soils; and a variety of mountain-plants, as well growing on the mountains
themselves, as in the valleys beneath; some of which are shady, cold, and
narrow, and others open, warm, and sandy; and in many places, depressions and
low grounds, often enriched with salt-spots. Hence also must be ascribed the
great difference of the warmer and colder situations, in districts adjacent to
each other, and in the same latitude. For example, about Selenginskaja and
Kjachta, all sorts of garden-stuff, even water-melons, will prosper in the free
and open ground; and many rare plants are common, which are generally the
product only of warm rocks; whereas in the country, and more to the north,
situated on the Uda, not even corn will-ripen; so again upon the Baikal, under
the shadow and cold of the southern, adjacent mountain, plants grow even to the
borders, which otherwise are only common to the frigid mountains. Also trees
bud later, snow falls sooner, and the winter is longer, than 100 miles further
up the Selenga "We have read, in a description of Norway, that it shall,
apparently, be winter on the northern side of the lofty mountain of Filefield,
when at the same time it shall be summer on the southern side, where it
receives the benefit of the sun."
. This influence of the high situation, unsheltered against the cold, in the
climate of the mountainous districts I have mentioned, must be considered as
the principal cause of the cast of Siberia, especially the district south of
the Baikal, being colder than the western countries, situated under the same
latitude. All Dauria enjoys a mountain-air; it lies also exposed to the
northern winds, which send their chilling blasts from the glacial sea, even in
summertime, through Siberia, where they cause uncommon cold. Is it then any
wonder that the weather is much sharper here than in the more western parts of
Europe, encompassed by seas, which alone renders the air much softer?

Firs are the most common wood in Dauria, on the Selenga, on account of the
sandy soil. The higher and colder mountains have larches, white firs, red and
white pines, birches, and asps, promiscuously; and the underwood consists of
birch-bushes, the Bagulnik, (Rhododendrum Dauricum) and various species of
willows. The higher cliffs, snow-clad throughout the year, had on their summits
some few, creeping trees, or none at all; perhaps some little shrubs of pines,
cedars, larches, dwarf-birches, and some species of the plane and savin-trees,
and some particular small willows.

The consequence of this general description is, that Dauria, and the district
of Selenginskaja will never become so populous, or so general a corn-country as
the rest of Siberia, situated not so much to the north; there being every
where, even in the valleys and plains, many tracks, nothing but rock and sand,
which no other people but the Mongols and Burats can turn to advantage. But as
these nations will soon scarce find space enough to support themselves, owing
to their increase, as is evident about Selenginskaja, it would be policy, in
order to bring agriculture to its highest pitch, to remove some part of this
people into other districts; for example, to the sandy-salt-desarts about the
Irtish or the Baruba, these places being now left to the treacherous Kirguese,
who never will become husbandmen.

Selenginskaja. -- I will now say a few words of the town of Selenginskaja, and
its dependencies. It lies chiefly on a shallow, sandy arm of the Selenga,
fordable in many places. Behind the town are some high, sand mountains, from
whence the streets now begin to be overflown with sand. These mountains are at
the same time richly clothed with timber and underwood, quite down to the
river. From the river's-side the place makes a good appearance, with its three
churches, and the house of a commissioner of state, now uninhabited. The place
is fortified with four, timber ramparts, and towers within the angles. Within
the walls is a court of Waywodes, and a court of boundaries; a house for the
commanding-officer, another for the president, and a guard-house, all within a
square. At the upper end are gardens, and a corn-mill, worked by horses.

Though this town is advantageously situated for the Chinese trade, here are
but few, substantial merchants. Most of the inhabitants are of the middling
class; the cause of which probably is, their carelessness, and inclination to
extravagance. Many of the citizens scatter themselves, and live in other
places, in order to be duty-free, and lead a more indolent life, in agriculture
and breeding of cattle. Farms, nay villages, founded by people of this
description, may be seen just opposite the town, on the left bank of the river.
Many of the towns-people, and those of the country round the town, show a great
mixture of Mongalian blood; the most substantial of them having long been in
the habit of marrying Mongalian and Buratian women; and, to make an
advantageous alliance with these people, some Mongols will have their daughters
christened. There have been instances about this place, of the Burats
themselves embracing the christian faith, in order to espouse the daughter of
some wealthy Russian. From such mixed-marriages spring many mulatto children;
these retain something of the Mongalian face, and have black, shining hair, but
have, at the same time, the most regular features, and the sweetest
countenance, called, in Russ, Karymki; of course the Buratian manner of living
is almost as much in use in this district, as the Mongol, or Mongalian language.

Under the jurisdiction of the court of Waiwodes in this place are the
following towns: Baicharozkaja, Urluzkaja, Muchorschibir, and Tarbagantei; also
the following places, with their districts: Itanzinskai Ostrog, with 20 little
villages, mostly situated on the little river Itanza, and containing 371
peasants; Archangelskai, to which belong six villages, Jlinskoi Ostrog, and
Pokrosskaja, all together situate in the neighborhood of the Selenga, and its
little brook, and containing 141 peasants; Kudarinskaja, at the mouth of the
Selenga, with seven villages on the adjoining step, containing 293 peasants;
Kubanskoi Ostrog, with its five villages, and 296 peasants; and, lastly, the
district of Dshidenskaja, containing seven villages, besides Bainchussun,
situate on the river Dshida. Also six other towns on the Dshida; one on the
Selenga; one on the Ira, of 95 peasants, colonists, comprehending all together
279 peasants. To these villages may be added 2520 old inhabitants of the towns,
and 1534 colonists, 102 peasants dependant on the convent of Terizkaja, on the
Selenga; and 138 depending on that of Polsolskaja; also near 100 citizens, and
somewhat above 900 Burats and Mongols, which is the whole population of this
district encompassed by the Baikal, the Chinese frontiers, and the great
partition-mountains. Bargusinskoi Ostrog is also reckoned in this district,
which contains 1600 Tunguse, paying tribute. If to this is added the district
of Nertschinskaja, properly Dauria, subject to the Russian scepter; which,
except 16,000 Burats and Tunguse, 10,000 of whom live in huts round the Argun,
scarce contains 11,800 men; near 3000 of whom are colonists, sent here within
these 15 years, the whole population of the country beyond the Baikal, which is
525 miles in length, and from 150 to 375 in breadth, amounts only to about
43,000 full-grown men.

The district of Selenginskaja, like all others situated about the Baikal, is
sometimes subject to little earthquakes. In 1768 two were observed in
Irkuzkaja; one on the 18th of March, at four in the morning; another on the 5th
of August, at four in the afternoon. On the 13th of October, 1769, at eight in
the morning, they felt a double shock, the last pretty strong; in 1771, July
28, about nine in the morning, they had a strong earthquake at Irkuzkaja; and
at 11 o'clock the same morning, in Selenginskaja, which was felt also in many
places. The sphere of these earthquakes are generally not very extensive. They
are never felt in Dauria, and the northern parts of the Lena; so that the cause
of them must be hidden in the mountains situated close about the Baikal, and
their warm springs; peculiar pebbles, and the bitumen which the lakes throw
out, are evident proofs that there is no want of materials to occasion such
subterranean heat and motions. Probably the earthquakes observed in the Altai
mountain originate from that spot where the Noor Saissane is encompassed by
mountains.

It was noon, on the 3d day of July, before all the horses required for our
departure could be brought together, and my wagons could cross the Selenga. I
did not take the usual post-road, but went straight toward the lake Gusinoi
osero (goose-lake) to which the deep and sandy valley Tojon leads, and which
commences at the hut-mountain behind the Selenga. We reached the lake just
before dark, during a violent tempest and deal of rain, and took our lodgings
at the north end of the lake. A number of rare plants decorated the sands,
which I gathered the next morning; and, among the rest, a peculiar species of
Robinia, hitherto unknown to botanists (Rob. ferox) which shot into high bushes
and thick branches, often seven feet high. This species of the false
acaciathorn deserves cultivation in Europe, on account of its usefulness; it
being very short, with long thorns, and spreading on the ground, would make
exceeding good fences, through which neither man nor cattle would be able to
penetrate. The soft points and leaves are also an agreeable food for sheep; and
its pods, which are without number, would at least answer the purpose of
vetches. It is remarkable that this fine bush, which displays in spring its
numberless sulphur-yellow flowers, should no where be met with in all the
districts beyond the Baikal, except in the great valley, which, from the Temnik
and Gusinoi Osero extends itself with the Selenga as far as the brook Ubukun,
and some valleys, as far as the Orengoi. The Mongols and Burats give it no
other name than what they give to the smallest acacia-thorn (Robinia pygmea)
viz. Charagana. It grows as well on the moist and salt-depressions, or low
places, as on drier and sand-spots, though it prefers the former. It is said to
be very common about Peking, where all the level country is somewhat moist and
salt. It was well known to the Russians, who went there with caravans, because
the Chinese planted this hedge against the walls which surrounded the
caravan-house, it being as good as so many sentinels, to hinder any one from
climbing them.

This lake is deep, and if the wind blows ever so little, carries large
billows. They say it was much smaller formerly; but that, about 15 years ago,
in the month of May, the river Temnik, which is at a considerable distance,
swelled by a sudden slow, blocked up its own bed with sand and floating wood,
and made itself a fresh channel, changing a neighboring valley into a great
lake, part of whose waters have added to this lake. The new channel which the
Temnik made is called by the Mongols Zagan, i. e. white or holy, from an awful
reverence, at having destroyed some of their fine pastures in the low grounds.
Few great Mongalian Lamas (for priests seldom make a bad choice) have fixed
their residence in this delightful vale, and built two fine temples, one at the
north end, and the other at the south. A description of these temples, and the
holy offices performed therein, and what I saw when they were going to erect a
sacred monument on the mountain, on the 4th of July, will accompany my other
accounts collected respecting the Mongalian idolatry. The whole valley is so
flat, that when the Temnik sought a new channel, they feared a general
inundation as far as the salt-lake Solunoi Osero.

Round about this lake, which is not above a mile and a half from the one where
we took up our night's lodging, the ground is white, with a bitter salt, and
full of salt-plants; its length is about half a mile, its form oblong, and its
greatest diameter lies from east to west. Many fresh water rivulets flow from
the north side into it, which lessens its saltness, and renders the salt unfit
for boiling in summertime. The salt-veins seem to be within the lake itself;
for, when the water freezes in autumn, we see spots where no ice will settle,
and there the salt water is stronger. They tried an experiment on such a spot
in 1762, and put down a pipe into such a salt water spring; and, at the depth
of more than seven else, found nothing but slime; but, having felt something
hard under this slime, they applied a bore, and brought up a piece of pure ice;
and, observing afterward that fresh water issued from the place, they left it
to itself, to seek for the real salt veins on the borders of the lake. They
have made many unsuccessful attempts, and wherever they bored, fresh water has
issued out.

The bottom of the lake consists of a blue slime, on which, when the frost
comes, a scum, several inches thick, will settle, consisting of pure
Glauber-salts, which, when dried in the air, crumbles into a white, farinaceous
substance. Continual, dry weather, and summer-heats, will divide this scum from
the salt water, and it will then swim in tender scum on the surface of the
lake, which, at a distance, in the sunshine, has a red appearance, and, by the
motion of the water, will sink to the bottom. The water is otherwise clear; has
no red appearance, but in summertime will smell like foul mire. It is not
sufficiently impregnated with salt, so as to be fit for boiling till autumn,
when it has an ice-crust upon the surface. They begin to boil in November, and
continue till the middle of March, when the snow-water from the mountains
diminishes its strength. In these four months they procure but 20,000 puds of
salt. There are at present two salt-houses, with proper pans, where they boil
salt; and they are preparing to erect a third. Within 24 hours a pan is
completed, and yields 600 pails full, equal to 1200 common pails, or about 100
puds of salt. The boiled salt is fine, white, granulous, and very pure, but is
not to be compared in saltness with that of Angarskoi. Even what they scrape
from the pans is pure salt; this they throw away as rubbish, but why, I know
not. The Imperial treasury pays, on the spot, 10 copecs to the boiler for every
pud of salt, deducting a duty of 11 per cent. When proper agreements are made,
the salt is transported to the storehouses, or wherever it is wanted. The wood
they use, in boiling, is felled at the distance of three or four miles from the
lake, and 16 miles from the Selenga, paying 15 copecs per stack for felling,
and 20 copecs for carriage. This would not make the boiling dear, but the iron
for the pans is brought from the smithery at Kutunskaja, at 70 copecs per pud,
and a pan will not last a whole winter, without mending.

In 1728 there was a boiling-house, with one pan, at the expense of the crown,
which was soon after sold to a private person. From this first proprietor the
salt-works became the property of the family of the present possessor, Michael
Pacholsof, who has, besides the boiling-houses, two neat houses for his own
residence; a storehouse, in which at present are 15,000 puds of salt, ready to
convey away; and also some houses for his workmen.

When I had viewed these works, I made the best of my way to the post-road,
behind which flows the brook Ubukun, on which there is a post-station, about 30
miles from Selenginskaja, and seven from the salt-lake. I did not sleep here,
but three miles and a half lower down the Ubukun, in a village of six houses
erected on it. The road to it is over a moderate mountain, where a
stone-searcher had dug some trying-pits on account of a demi-transparent,
greenish and amethyst-coloured, flaming spar, which breaks above ground. In the
spar lay kidneys of yellowish and greyish agate. This spot, and the whole
mountain, deserves a stricter examination.

At the distance of nine miles from this, the river Orongoi is passed by a
flying bridge. At Udinskoi, 30 miles further, where I slept on the 7th of July,
I received a number of letters, sent to me to the Onon, but which there missed
me; and from this place I sent back my Mongalian interpreters, having no
further occasion for them.

Beyond Udinskoi are several little villages, and the step, about the lowermost
part of the Selenga, is very fertile and populous; indeed, one of the most
populous districts beyond the Baikal, containing from 8 to 900 peasant
families, and two convents. On the 8th of July I reached the Baikal sea, where
I met with a number of plants peculiar only to cold mountains; for instance,
C^mbra Empetrum rignum, Campanula rotundifolia, Fumaria impatiens, Polygonum
divaricatum, angustisolium, et sericeum, Scrophularia scorodonia, Dracocephelum
nulans, Lycepsis v^sicaria, and many others. The Pyrola rotundifolia, which
grows so very large in Siberia, is often here gathered, in case of need, by the
peasants, and used as tea. These mountain-plants, which are so generally to be
met with on the low shores of the Baikal, arise from the cold and foggy air in
summer, from the adjacent, high mountains, and the effect of the snow-clad
cliffs, which the lofty mountains standing round the Kuluk, or western bay of
the Baikal, raise above the clouds.

Baikal. -- When I arrived at the convent of Posolskoi, the Baikal was covered
with such a thick and cold fog, as is only to be seen in high mountains, which
attract the clouds, or in seacoast countries, during autumn and winter. It
resembled clouds enclosed within mountains, had already continued eight days,
and lasted till the 20th of July, during calm weather, amid the breeze of
western winds. In the mean time, there fell such a rain in all the high
mountains of Dauria, also north of the Baikal, and about the Jenisei, which
never had been remembered in these districts, and which continued, with very
little serene intermission, till late in autumn, and destroyed the hay and
harvest. The spring, and the first half of summer, had been, in these parts,
uncommonly dry, and without rain.

The western winds, which usually continue some time in the Baikal, gave me but
little hopes of crossing over to the mouth of the Angara; and though the Imperial
galliot, which served here as a packet-boat, arrived here from the other side,
almost in the same hour that I did, yet the passage seemed almost impracticable
for a long while. This galliot, called the Boris-O-Gleb, is navigated by a
pilot from Ochozkaja, and is, at present, the only vessel that sails in the
Baikal, the merchants using their dangerous dostschenicks, which go with sails,
before tack winds only, or else with rudders. A galliot was here stranded, in
autumn 1770, not far from the mouth of the Selenga, and was lost. Indeed,
galliots are not fit for this sea, which is so narrow; vessels with rudders, or
demi-gallies, would be of more utility.

I occupied myself therefore with collecting of plants, and viewing the
fisheries usual in summer, in the straights of Posolskaja, till the weather was
finer. There is a duty on this fishery, as on other considerable ones, and the
convent here receives a certain number of tons, as a privilege. The fishery is
carried on, through the whole summer, with drag-nets, 200 fathoms long, which,
as the sea is not very deep on this coast, they let out from a barge, with a
tackling 300 fathoms in length, which is afterward taken in, by means of a
reel fixed on the shore. In spring, as soon as the ice breaks, they catch
abundantly the Sigi morskye (Salmo oxyrhinchus) and Lenki, which come upon the
sands to spawn. In summer, this fish seeks the deep, and is not caught here,
but on the northern steep and rocky coast, which is very deep. At present they
caught nothing but what is called the Omul, which strays, at this time, in
great quantities, on the southern banks, and toward autumn seeks the mouth of
the rivers on this side. This fish, about the mouth of the Selenga, is not more
than eight or nine inches thick; it is these only that are caught annually in
the bay of Tschiwirkui, are remarkable for their size, and are caught no where
else on the coast of the Baikal. This is a new proof, that fishes, like birds
of passage, return annually to the place of their birth, and do not readily
spawn, or enter any other river, than where they first received life. The
passage of the omuls is known in all districts situated on the opposite side of
the Baikal; or the inhabitants of those places, whose slimy rivers do not
abound in fish, would otherwise want food for fast-days. They generally come at
the Ascension of the Virgin, and as they advance but slow, arrive, about the
latter end of September, near Udinskoi Prigorud.

They never enter the Uda, or Chilok, though plentifully caught at the mouth of
these rivers, but abundantly visit the Dshida, the Tschikoi, past Irluzkaja,
and the Selenga, up to the Orgon; and when the ice breaks, return quite spent,
and exhausted, to the Baikal, and many lose their life without reaching it. The
milder the autumn, the later they enter the rivers; and if the ice breaks soon,
return early, and do not go up into the upper districts. The omul comes
originally from the glacial sea, and not only enters the Jenisei, but all the
rivers of Kamschatka. Through the Jenisei it comes into the Baikal, not only by
means of the Tunguska and Angara, but also by the Tuba, and the large lake,
Madshar, on the Sajanian mountains. Having found a wide and deep water in this
sea, at its return from the upper river, it would not go back into the ocean,
but breeds in this enormous space of water, sheltered from all fish of prey.

The presence of the sea-dog in the Baikal is much more wonderful, as these
animals never leave the ocean so far as to enter the rivers; and, at this time,
is not observed in the Jenisei, nor the lower Angara; therefore must have come
here by some great change in the surface of the earth, or by some extraordinary
and rare accident. More rare still is a species of fish, quite natural to the
Baikal, called by the Russians Golomjanka, which is said to have been
discovered but a few years since, though here before, and, perhaps,
undiscovered by negligence. This fish (Callyonymus Baikalensis) has no more
solidity than a piece of fat, and are absolutely full of an oily substance,
which, if the whole fish is put on a gridiron, will melt away to the bones.
They are never caught in nets, nor alive. It is supposed, and with some
probability, that they reside only in the deepest recesses of the Baikal, which
in the middle, and not far from the northern, steep, mountain-coast, cannot be
fathomed with lines of three to four hundred fathoms. What cause or change in
the sea brings them so high is hard to tell. They arc commonly thrown out by
violent, northern storms, on the coast of Posolskoi, and about the mouth of the
Selenga, in summertime only, when a calm succeeds a storm. They are seen in
many hundreds swimming and ploughing the surface of the sea. For many years
they were thrown out so abundantly, as to lie in heaps on the strand, like a
rampart, and the inhabitants turned them to profit, by boiling train-oil from
them, which the Chinese bought up at a great price. In June, this year, but few
of them were driven ashore. I received some of them twice, by means of
messengers dispatched occasionally to Posolskoi; some dried, and some preserved
in brandy. They appeared for the last time on the 24th of June, and were
neither touched by insects, nor crows, probably on account of the rankness of
their fat, which melts in a few hours, and sometimes in the hand.

On the 10th, the master of the galliot gave notice, that whoever wished to
make his passage must go on board. Every thing to be shipped was put that night
on board; but during the whole night the wind blew so hard, west, that the
thoughts of crossing was almost despaired of. Those who navigate the Baikal
have a particular compass, which marks only three winds; those that blow
between the north, east, and south, called Barguim, with which the passage from
the mouth of the Selenga over the lake is easy and ready, as they blow all from
the same place. All the winds between the north-west and south-west, which
apparently come out from the large Baikal-Bay, are called Kultuk; and those
that blow straight north, from the mountainous, northern coast, have the
general name of Gornoja Pagoda (mountain-winds), last but a short time, but are
the more dangerous, and commonly, sudden-raging hurricanes, which strand the
vessels, or drive them to pieces on the southern, shallow coast; and sometimes,
if the sails are not expeditiously taken in, will overset the vessel, or
dismast it. Other winds are not so dangerous, as the Baikal has no sand-bank,
or shoals, between the mouths of the Selenga and Angara, except a single one
(discovered by trading-boats), around which the sea is deep. The depth of the
Baikal in the middle, and in the northern borders, is unfathomable. This lake,
or sea, is like a huge cleft opened by the torn mountains, in which the
adjacent rivers took their mouths. The mountainous coast itself shows
everywhere marks of the most violent changes, and, at the same time, of the
highest antiquity.

About 11 o'clock at night rose a good, south-west wind, by which a skilful
seaman could have easily reached the mouth of the Angara, or pretty near it.
Our master thinking he could do the same, the anchor was weighed by his order,
whilst he lay in bed, and a sailor, who steered the vessel, carried us over,
but further from the mouth of the Selenga than we were when at Posolskoi. When
the master awaked, and saluted the morning, we found ourselves in the
Pestschanaja-Guba (sand-bay), above 75 miles above Listwenischoe Simowje, to
which it is but 71 miles from Posolskoi, measured upon the ice, and paid for in
the packetboat. The wind grew more violent, and would not suffer us to quit the
coast; so that our master, without further attempts, ordered his men to cast
anchor, and wait for a better wind.

This beginning of our unsuccessful navigation was not so disagreeable to me,
as I had enough to employ me in collecting plants on the rocky coast, which
were now in full perfection, and some of them very rare. They also fished the
whole day on the sands of the bay. On the barest parts of the barren rocks
grew, plentifully, the delicate stone-leek (allium Altaicum) which was greedily
eaten by the sailors. Of all the plants, the polypodium fragrans deserves to be
mentioned. This rare, fine, and most fragrant fern, is collected from the
highest rocks, where it grows out from the clefts, and is called by the Burats
serlik, and is drank by them as a remedy in most scorbutic and paralytic
complaints. It may as well be drank for its fine taste, as if two or three
leaf-stalks are added to it, it flavours the common, green tea to the highest
degree of perfection. Its smell is so powerful, that it will communicate its
fragrance to whole bundles of herbs, and boxes full of paper.

As a small, east wind rose toward night, we weighed anchor, and spread sail;
but this was scarce done, before a west-wind blew again, and we were obliged to
seek a new anchoring-place, at the lower end of the bay.

On the 13th our captain got out his drag-tackling, and thus hauled the vessel
on about 10 miles, where we anchored again. It was a fine sight about the rocks
of the Baklanye, to see the innumerable crowds of ravens that were building
their nests, and the whole rock covered with their white dung. Some of the crew
went toward the rock in a boat, when the old ravens sluttered above the rock,
and the young ones, that could not fly, threw themselves from the rock into the
sea. On the 14th we advanced a little on, and a gentle gale springing up about
noon, we got about 14 miles further, where horses were employed to drag the
vessel all the next day, when we anchored afresh. This miserable vovage now
became irksome to me, and I would certainly have gone to Irkuzkaja by land, if
there had been any passable road: but there being no such thing, I got from the
master of the packet his small, flat-bottomed boat, which he had in the
galliot, and ordering a little post-waggon I had with me to be placed across
it, so that its wheels almost touched the water, I manned it partly with my own
people, and partly with passengers, whom I encouraged with a promised reward,
left the vessel, with our baggage on board, and rowed for the mouth of the
Angara. This expedition almost proved my last. The wind blew west this morning
violently, and the billows raged still more. The sailor who steered our boat,
and who had crossed a bay and reached the next cape, wished to shorten the
labor of the rowers; instead, therefore, of keeping round by the shore, he
attempted to cross a bay more than seven miles over; but we had no sooner left
the cape, than the wind blew so violent, and we were carried so far off the
coast, that it was with the utmost danger and difficulty we could reach the
next cape; for my part, I expected every instant to have been a prey to the
waves. In order not to be exposed to a similar danger, we took a tackle,
fastened it to the boat, and had it dragged along the coast. We had still great
trouble to get past the projecting rocks of some high mountains, which, from
top to bottom, had been apparently soft, and seemed kneaded together, cemented
by large and small pebbles, carried all round, in the water, by a sandy and
limy species of stone, and convinces me, that there must have been some mighty
change in the mountains of the Baikal. These rocks could not otherwise have
been formed, than by pebbles rolling underneath the water horizontally, and
afterward, by violent convulsions of the earth, changed into mountains of more
than 100 fathoms perpendicular height.

After a good deal of anxiety and labor we reached the mouth of the Angara in
good time, and in good condition. On the 16th I set out in the evening for
Irkuzkaja, a distance of more than 40 miles, in the road to which there are
way-houses every four or five miles, and arrived there early on the 17th. I
stopped at this place as long only as it was necessary, and, on the 22d,
pursued my journey to Krasnorjarskaja, a distance of 614 miles, the road to
which I described when I passed it before.

On the Oka, just below the highest mountain, lies Okinskoi Karaul, the
outermost guard-station of the district of Udinskoi, subject to the regency of
Irkuzkaja. It is 121 miles from the last frontier-guard of the district of
Kjachta, and from the frontier-mark on the mountain Gurban, 103 miles, but from
another, situate on the Choin-raban, 105 miles. Measured from the western
frontier-guard of Winskoi, it is 115 miles. In almost all villages, from
Irkuzkaja, 200 miles forward, I found children inoculated with the smallpox, in
this month, July, by the surgeon of Irkuzkaja. This salutary operation has the
most prosperous event in this regency. Trials have already been made among the
Burats, who reside about Irkuzkaja, whose diet and way of living is so
unwholesome, and by this means the smallpox will soon become less dangerous
among the heathens, whom it frequently carries off.

Udinskoi. -- About half way from Irkuzkaja, to Krasnojarskaja, is Udinskoi
Ostrog, where I arrived on the 27th of July. It lies on the river Uda, and
though it is a place of little importance, has a governor and two
frontier-guards, under the command of the governor of Tomskoi. Here is also an
inspector of the district of Udinskoi. In this district, which consists of 553
men that pay tribute, they reckon 16 little tribes of heathens, some of
Tartarian, some of Buratian origin. These little tribes, scattered about on the
wild mountains, are the offsprings of fugitives, the relics of several hordes,
driven from their possessions in Siberia, and who have flown here for refuge.
Some seem to be of different origin, speaking a mixed language, between Mongol
and Tartarian. The most remarkable is the tribe of Karaskoi, which, like the
Koibales and Matores, on the Jenisei, have preserved the Samjoede language,
with little mixture, though there are only 22 men. There are some, small tribes
on the mountains, who speak their own language, but I could gather no accurate
account of them. The Karaskassians live, like the rest of the mountain-Tartars,
by hunting, and have no other domestic cattle than a few reindeer, with which
they remove their household stuff from one place to another. Their superstition,
which, though baptized, they keep up, is the most simple to be met with. They
have neither idols nor magicians, but worship the heavens, and the sun. They
are ignorant of sacrifices, except that when they have killed a bear, or some
other game, they raise his head and heart, on a piece of bark, toward heaven,
and beg for a good chase in future. They also show a kind of reverence, like
other Siberian pagans, to certain rivers and mountains, feeding the former, and
carrying on the latter a little rice, or tobacco, and leaving it on the place.
They bury their dead on a scaffold of forks and bushes, or upon trees, with the
head toward the east, or only cover them with bushes. Those whom they
affectionately love, they burn. Their wretched jurts are covered with hides,
and they dress themselves in skins, seldom continuing more than two or three
days on the same spot, wandering about in search of the Sarana, or hilly onion,
which makes a chief part of their food. Two bags of sarana, or some good
cedarnuts, which contain about three and a half puds, they consider equal in
value to a reindeer; and after this manner they formerly calculated their
tribute, which made about 20 rein deer for the whole tribe. But at present they
do military duty, in the frontiers of Udinskoi, and pay also their jassak, or
tribute, which amounts to about two rubles a man. Their women wear, in summer,
broad, round hats, made of twisted reed, but no caps, and instead of stockings,
they wrap their legs round with the outer bark of Lonicera pyrenaica. I shall
give a specimen of their language further on, when I speak of their dialects.

Eight miles from Udinskoi, we were obliged to go down from the heights to the
brook Kamenka, through the narrow dale, in which a wagon has scarce room to
pass, and on the brook we see fine, lofty banks, where sand-rocks are so
tender, that they may be reduced to powder, by squeezing them in the hand.

On the 29th of July, I stopped at Rybinskoi, chiefly to view the Siberian
melting of iron by hand-blasts, performed by a smith from the Jenisei. The ore
he uses is one of the most remarkable things in the whole empire, and was
discovered by a fox that dug up the ground, and was caught at that time by a
peasant. It consists of large and small pieces of petrified wood, changed into
a rich, solid, brown, iron-stone, and shows even marks of the bark. The smith
of this place has discovered this wonderful ore in two spots adjacent to his
smithery. The one at three miles distance, on a flat mountain, covered with
birch-trees, lying in whole trunks, extending north and south, in a
sandy-matrix, much mixed with iron-ochre; the other at the distance only of
three quarters of a mile, and lying in the same nature. The metalized trunks,
though of the same appearance, will not yield any iron for melting, but the
smith got a species of raw iron out of it, which, being coppery, is of little
value.

I reached Krasnojarskaja the first week in August, and though the bloom, in
this district, was on the decline, and most plants in seeds, yet, through the
industry of Mr. Kaschkaref, who was here some time before, and had made many
little excursions to the river Mana, and the Sajanian mountains, I received a
complete collection of the plants which the mountains of the Jenisei yield in
summer; but these were chiefly rare plants, answering, in some degree, Mr.
Gmelin's account, who says, that eastward of the Jenisei nature changes at
once, and has an Asiatic bloom of its own. My curiosity, however, was much
deceived by this flattering account. Indeed, the district of Krasnojarskaja, as
a dry, open, and mountainous country, has, for this very reason, several rare
mountain-plants of its own, and some still more rare to be met with in the more
southern mountains, between the Yjus and Jenisei, etc. but no sooner is the
Jenisei crossed and left, than the whole country, between the Tunguska and the
boundary-mountains, is covered with woods and meadow-grounds, where the bloom
is little different from that about the Ob, Irtisch, and even the Uralian
chain, resembling those of the European Alps.

I was detained in arranging my observations on the natural curiosities of a
five months collection, and in the unexpected arrival of Mr. Surjef, till the
19th of August. He had not pursued his journey from Mangasei to the Frozen
Ocean, but had returned from Selakino, situated 475 miles beyond Mangasei, and
about 240 miles from the main-sea. His journal contained nothing curious,
except a heavy description of the navigation. I shall therefore abridge it, in
order not to tire my readers: presenting only such things as are most
remarkable.

In the vicinage of Mangasei reside chiefly the baptized Jakutians, whose
number amounts only to 127 men. The Tunguse in the Jenisei make out, in
general, a nation of 2000 men; 1282 of whom are within the jurisdiction of
Mangasei, and the rest of Jeniseiskaja. In the district of Mangasei are 640
Samojedes, 351 comprehended under the name of Eastjaiks, and 479 men
immediately from Jeniseiskoi.

Beyond Mangasei the river Jenisei is of a vast breadth, particularly toward
Selakino, where it begins to form bays. In some places, where there are no
islands, its breadth is more than eight miles, so that the opposite shore is
scarcely visible. The right border of the river is every where mountainous, yet
the mountains are not high; the left is free from mountains, yet very elevated,
and, like the mountain-side, covered with woods. The snow and ice on the border
does not melt till the end of June; and in the narrow valleys, excavated by the
snow-water, and on the land of the free, open heights, it thaws only to a small
depth: for we found often underneath the moss and roots of the little willows,
which grew on that moss, bare ice, or hard, frozen ground. Alders, larches,
willows and birches, generally bloom there about the end of June; other plants
show their blossoms much earlier; and this is in the 66th degree of latitude.
Beyond Plachina were found some petrified muscles, and above Selakino, a tooth,
and some other remains of elephants.

The river Jenisei, in its lower districts, is much more peopled with Russians
than the Ob, as being more fertile. Chantaiskoi Pogort, 225 miles beyond
Mangasei, has, besides a church, only four dwellings, three of which are the
habitations of some Russian priests; but there are a great many scattered,
single houses, all along the banks of the river, as far as the frozen ocean.

On the 19th of August I left Krasnojarskaja, and the same afternoon directed
my journey to the Sajanian mountains; and as I was to travel a road that had
not been trod for 20 years, and was marshy, and entirely overgrown with wood, I
sent people before, to clear the way, and prepare me passages over rivers and
brooks. Some days I could get on pretty well, and some others, I could not
travel more than about 20 miles.

On the morning of the 21st of August we had a very difficult road indeed to
pass, through a bewildered forest, many marshy defiles and bogs, rendered worse
by a two-months rain. We could not cross the mires, but by placing faggots
every step before us, to prevent our sinking; yet, with all this difficulty, we
made shift to advance 30 miles. We slept in a forest; it thundered and rained
all the night, but the darkness of the night added something to the pleasure we
received in the sight of a number of glowworms, which were collected in heaps,
in rotten leaves and sprays, which shone every where with great brilliancy.
They are scarce six lines long, somewhat thicker than a horse-hair, and look
like cheese-maggots. These woods are also remarkable for a species of
nightingale, with cinnabarred throats (Motacilla Calliope.)

On the 26th I crossed the Yjus, and continued my way up the river, to Kokowo
Uluss, where I spent the night. From this place we see, higher up on the west,
side of the Yjus, a mountain of a peculiar form, called by the Tartars Anlo; it
is situated about eight or 10 miles from this place, about three miles from the
left banks of the river, and near 27 miles from Karyschkoi Rudnick. The
mountain rises gently on one side to the top, and there forms a wide cleft,
with a square, rocky precipice, and from the center of the cleft projects a
small rock.

This square rock is what is properly called Aulo, and is worshipped by the
Tartars. Orix Dmittrei, Wassilief, from Tomskoi, who was exiled in his youth
from Russia to the huts of Barnaul, has begun a regular mine-work, on a
western, adjacent mountain, either from whim, or some imposing view; under a
pretense of some treasures being here buried by an ancient Mongol khan, called
Altyn. According to his own account, one Samet Arschanof, a Tartar of
Katschinskaja, who had been often sent with Imperial dispatches from Russia to
the Mongols, under the protection of the Chinese, had often heard it said, and
that indeed it was an old saying among them, that Altyn-chan had formerly
reigned in the district about the Yjus, and having been obliged to retire, had
concealed all his riches and jewels in some hidden cavern in the environs of
the rock Anlo. This saying is the only reason of their digging. His impostures
go still farther, pretending, that on the river Tschulym live some Mongol
women, who possess Mongol manuscripts, describing all the accesses to the
cavern in which the treasures are concealed.

Hence it must be concluded, and from the character of the man, that he is an
able impostor, who, by the above pretexts, has persuaded some credulous people,
and some of his own children, who are substantial persons, to advance him money
on this project, which allows him to lead an indolent life. He has ordered
shafts to be dug in two places, where this mountain has clefts, to the depth of
many fathoms, and has employed people several winters in this work, and still
goes on with hired workmen, digging into this hard rock, and blowing it up with
gunpowder. A large, white-headed vulture, who once lighted on the top of this
mountain, after hovering a long time above it, and looking down on the spot, he
took for a messenger sent to point out the treasures. On some places are the
remains of bones, and the teeth of animals, and some dead serpents were found
in the clefts. These are, he says, the remains of sacrifices offered to the
evil spirits, when the treasure was deposited, and thus given to them. These
goblins, he pretends, play him a number of tricks, throwing stones at the
workmen, and extinguishing the light brought to fire the powder, and often
deceive him and his men, by calling and other means, and by this method colors
his enterprise with the appearance of importance, and captivates the belief of
the Siberian peasants. As he writes expeditiously, he keeps a journal of
suchlike hardships, of which whole quires were laid before me.

I thought it not worth my attention to inspect any part of the works of this
wrong-headed fool, but sent Mr. Surjef there on this object, employing my time
in botanical researches, and viewing the bitter, salt-lakes in the
neighborhood, where large quantities of salt are prepared, and the place
guarded by Cossacks.

On the 28th of August, I reached the mines of Karyschkoi Rudnick, and staid
some days to examine them. These were first worked by a private person. This
man did not dig very deep, being contented with the day-ores, the chief of
which were very irony, and not knowing how to smelt them, he was discouraged,
and a barge-load of the best ore being sunk in carrying it along the river
Jenisei, he gave the mine up. In 1759, Counselor Kleopin came here, and set
some men to work, but he was tired in the course of one summer. Some noble
metals, however, breaking into lazuli-pebbles, called the attention of the
crown, who sent Captain Mettich, of Brunswick, and he began working it in 1764,
and continued it till last year. In the several trying-pits made by this
gentleman, the richest ore broke nestwise, and was usually better in the day
than in the depth. It consisted of fine, violet, or lazuli-like, and also
pale-green and yellow pebbles, partly sprinkled in with, and partly breaking
into, compact and rich nodules, with veins of verdigris, in a wild and
ferruginous matrix. At the depth of from eight to nine fathoms, this matrix
prevailed so much, that the works, though continued to 10 fathoms, were so
dull, that they are now suspended. Many thousand puds of ore, however, have
been here dug, especially of the abovementioned, rich pebbles, which, on an
assay, yielded, in one way, in a hundred pud weight of ore, 22 puds of copper,
and three pounds, 62 drams of silver; and in another, 20 pounds raw-stone, 15
pounds of refined copper, and nine drams of silver per pud, with many gold
marks. In the depth, the meanest iron-ore yielded 15 puds of raw-iron, 20
pounds of copper, and 25 drams of silver per cent.

Another mine adjoining has been opened this year, and is now working. Here is
a quartz lode, more than seven feet broad, which runs toward midnight. In it
lies a brown ochre, in clefts and in nodules, and yellow mulm, with some
verdigris, which, on an assay, yielded from two to three drams of silver per
100 puds. No mark of gold has appeared, and from the small quantity of silver,
etc. no great things are expected.

The best mine is about 13 miles further off, up the Jurba, in the granite
mountains. They work there on a quartz lode, with copper-green, one fathom
strong, to which adheres a brown mulm of gold alloy. Here they extract from 100
puds two and a half to three drams of gold-dust: the vari-coloured quartz
contains 23 pounds of copper, and six drams of silver; the green, mixed ochre
yields 25 drams of silver, and the ferruginous ochre, two drams of silver, per
100 puds.

Between the Yjus and Jurba are many other trying-pits; but this mountain has
not been so strictly examined as to give any great hopes.

An interpreter, whom I wanted for the continuation of my journey, being now
arrived, I left this place on the 1st of September, taking the same road as
last year, traveling straight to the south, toward the Jurba, where there are
some Tartarian Jurts of the tribe Kaidan-Aimak. This tribe, and that of
Arinskoi has one and the same governor, called Baschlyk. Part of these tribes
has settled among the Tartars, about the brooks Tess and Jurba. The tribe
Kaidan-Aimak reckons 30 bows, and their elder (Kasnez) resides upon the Uybat.
The tribe Buk Tjin Aimak. consists of 39 bows, whose Kasnez lives on the brook
Koma. The tribe Kasan Kaidan-Aimak has but 16 bows, and dwells high in the
mountains on the river Kyfir. These Tartars and the Koibuls are chiefly
employed in hunting of sables in the mountains situate about these rivers and
the Oi. Other Tartarian tribes may hunt there, but with the permission of
these, and on certain terms.

The little, river Uybat, which empties into the Abakan, serves as a
frontier-line to the Katschinzy Tartars, and those of the Sajaian mountains;
the former are under the jurisdiction of Krasnajarskaja, and the latter pay
their tribute at Kusnezkoi. As the step on both sides the Uybat is not only
very warm in winter, on account of the mountains, but has scarce any snow; the
richest of these Tartars drive their flocks and herds here in autumn, and look
on this district as their best winter-pasture. The Sajaian Tartars dwell on the
right side, and the others on the left. The step, full of old graves, is an
evident proof that the Nomades first settled here, and found the district an
advantageous situation.

On the 4th of September I continued my journey farther on the Uybat, and
directed it through the Sajaian step toward the Little Sir. On the high fields
in Dauria the Stellaria dichotoma was uncommonly abundant. It was now mostly
dried up, in globular, round bushes, and rolled every where by the wind; for
the calyxes of this plant, when dry, enclose the thick seeds, so as not to be
shed; and nature has, by a particular foresight, so disposed the flower-stalks,
(pedunculi) that they bend backwards like a leg, after it has done blossoming,
that they may not break, when the plant rolls upon the ground.

About 27 miles from the Sir, lies the Russian village Synowina, inhabited by
peasants; and eight miles from this is a high mountain, called by the Tartars
Temir (Iron) which, like the Kujum, two miles further toward the brook
Dshakdshul, is full of ochre-nests, in a white matrix, where the ancient miners
(Tschudaki) seem to have been very diligent. Many new attempts were made to
work this mine, for the rest of the ochres are mostly serruginous, and the
copper and silver ore of little value. During the modern works, they discovered
an adit so narrow, that a boy could scarce creep through: this narrowness must
be assisted by time, which has squeezed the sides together.

Between the Nyna and Sir, we left a remarkable lake, on our right, called by
the Tartars Bulanny Kul, who say, that in winter, it makes a certain roar
before it freezes. As they pass it, they leave some spray or stone upon an
adjacent mountain as a sacrifice, a usual, superstitious ceremony of the
Siberian pagans.

On the greater river Sir are several Tartarian jurts, where I learned they had
among them a famous Kahm, or sorcerer, whom the spirits had deprived of one
foot, and yet he jumped well. As this man was not at home, or had, probably,
concealed himself, to avoid the trouble of making his exorcisms before me, I
ordered his magic dress to be brought to me; his drum was uncommonly pretty,
more than an ell in diameter, and was painted green and red. Except the drum
and its beater, the whole dress consisted only of a cap made of red cloth,
edged with fox-skin, and ornamented with serpents' heads, having in the top a
bush of owls' feathers, and about the borders were several ornaments of striped
stuff, ermine-furs, etc. For in Sagai, sorcerers wear their usual clothes, when
performing their incantations See the plate Tunguse sorcery.
. They brought also, with the drum and cap of this wizzard, a bundle of 46
little sticks, of an equal size, four inches long, burnt at both ends, and,
made of a species of reed, a prophetic instrument of the magicians of the
place, which they call Sugge. When they prophesy, they take these in the left
hand, sitting before a fire, mutter some words over them, hold the ends of them
in the fire, and with loud invocations lift them into the air, then divide them
suddenly into three parcels, between the fingers of the left hand, and, by such
of the sticks as do not pass between the fingers, they presage good or bad luck.

Fifteen miles further on, whilst we changed horses, we were entertained with
another Sajan sorcerer, called Stepan. He would have kept his art a secret, had
not my people found out his drum, which he had concealed in another jurt. This
was a brisk, young fellow, who beat his drum, first kneeling, and then sitting
before the fire, and sung his incantations in a very harmonious tune. Soon
after this they grew more terrible, his motions were violent, and continued
more and more so, till he was seemingly in a fit; he then bent backwards, with
his heels and head to the ground, making a bow of his body, beating his drum at
the same time, which passed incessantly under this bow from side to side. This
difficult exercise he repeated several times, and was the best part of his
performance.

I rode this day, the 4th of September, to the mouth of the Akysch into the
Abakan, where is an open district. A church has been built within the last
year, of which the baptized, Sajan Tartars are the parishioners. Here is no
building but the church, the minister's house, and that of the Baschlyk, or
head of the tribe, who has embraced the christian faith some time. The priest
of this place is under the jurisdiction of Abakanskoi, though the tribe of Saja
belongs to the district of Kusnezkoi. These christian Tartars contributed to
the building the church, and the stipend of the minister, whilst those who
remain pagans adhere to their pagan customs. Some of them had commenced
husbandmen. Others wander, in summertime, with their flocks and herds, along
the brooks into the cool mountains, and return in winter to the snowless steps
about the Abakan. The whole consists only of 150 men, who pay a tribute, or
jassack, of three rubles per bow. Their complexion and constitution is not at
all similar to those of the Tartars of Katschinzkoi, but are more like the
Beltirs, and other Tartars who inhabit the mountains of Kusmezkoi. Few of their
faces are like the Kalmucks, but their features are truly Tartarian. They are
very hairy about the chin and body, and their limbs and body are larger and
stronger than the Katschinzians. It seems that these men, who inhabit such a
wild, mountainous district, have taken care not to mix their progeny with
Mongalian blood.

The most wealthy of them possess from 80 to 100 horses, as many cows, and some
hundreds of sheep. Poorer ones have hardly 10 or 20 head of large cattle,
which, among these step-people, are sufficient to maintain a family. Their
sheep, like those of the SAJAN TARTARS DIGGINGBESS REODODENDRON and A WILD HORSE
Tartars in the Jenisei, have little, fat tails, and many differ little from
Russian sheep, and are seldom larger. It is peculiar to the north-east of Asia,
that the long-tailed breed of sheep has generally such a fat lump. Besides
agriculture, the Sajan Tartars dig also all sorts of roots and plants for food,
and, like the Tunguse, search for them in the mice-holes. The following are the
roots which the poor Tartars, in general scattered about the Jenisei and
Kusnezkoi-mountains, collect, and almost live on, and of which they make a
winter-provision.

The first is the dog's-tooth root (Erythronium) called here Bess. It is the
principal business of the women to dig this root in the month of May; hence
this month is called, by the Beltir and Sajan Tartars, Bessai. As these roots
lie four or five inches under a tough turf, they use a particular, pointed
spade for digging them. They force the spade into the ground with the foot, and
the root is then easy to come at; having cleaned them, they put them in water
to soak, then wind them round with bass, and dry them. When dressed, they are
boiled gently in water, till they are soft, and eaten with milk or cream. They
resemble in taste the rawness of wheat-flour, mixed up with water and eggs, and
are very indigestible. Another root eaten by the Katschinzkoi Tartars, is that
of the common Siberian Piony. This is dried for the winter, and is mostly
eaten, ground in soup with meat, and is called Ure. The use of the common, and
deep red bunch-lilies, the former of which, Lilium Martagon, is called Sary
(yellow) Schep, the latter Lilium Pomponium, Aschep (white); and the Beltirs
call the month July, in which it is collected, Aschep-ai. What they do not eat
raw, they keep, and eat, roasted in the cinders, like chestnuts, or boiled in
water, with milk and butter. The Sajan Tartars collect a great quantity of the
red lily-roots from the provision-holes of the gray stepmouse (Mus socialis) or
else dig it with the abovementioned spades.

They also dig roots of the sanguisorbia, the knotty fumitory, the large
bell-flowers (camp. lilifolia), certain thistle (carduus seratuloides), the
viper herb (polygonunt viviparum); also a kind of herb called sosack, which
scarce a wild boar will touch. I heard of another plant, called uskum, but had
not an opportunity of seeing it; nay, I have been told that the poor Tartars,
if very hungry, will eat the bark of the white pine tree.

A dainty which they also dress for winter-food is the bird-cherry, which they
grind, kernel and all, and eat the coarse meal in milk as a desert. It would be
idle to mention all the berries they eat in summertime. The fresh roots of
hips, or wild roses, they chop and boil for tea. They make also a dish with
milk and the groats of buck-wheat, which I was told they did in the following
manner: after washing the grain in water, and taking off such as is light, and
swims at top, which is thrown away, they put the rest; into a wet bag, and let
it lie 10 or 12 hours to soak, then dry it a little over an iron stove, till it
becomes rather hard, which they try by the teeth; if quite dry, when pounded in
their mortars, which is a hollowed trunk of a tree, it would become flour; but
being a little moist, when pounded, it becomes groats; for having dried them on
a stove, the husks get loose, and, in beating, come off from the body, and are
cleared from the body of the grain by the hand or a winnow. The grain thus
prepared, is somewhat transparent, of a yellowish color, and is much improved
in taste.

Of medicines, and other plants for domestic use, I observed the following: the
Lychnis Chalcedonica, which grows in the valleys. The flowers of this plant are
used as soap, and the Russians call it Tatarskoi muilo (Tartar soap). The
onosma echioides, which grows in the steps about the Abakan, the Tartar girls
use as paint for their cheeks. The savin-tree, and the rhododendron
chrysanthum, which will be mentioned more particularly below, are medicines
known for the same use among the Tartars and Russians in the Jenisei. The
Tartars also dig the rhaphontic for internal use. The most common tea-plant
here is the saxifraga crassifolia, and the astringent decoction of the roots is
successfully used by the mountain-Tartars for looseness of the belly and
feverish complaints.

Amongst the plants of some utility in the Pagan, Tartar economy, are the
hemp-nettle, and little robinea pygmea. Of the former they make a coarse yarn,
for strings of self-shooting bows, which they set out in Autumn, and the tough
roots of the latter they use as bast. They also gather the Autumn leaves of the
hemerocallis, to make soft mats and saddle-cushions, which they twist together
in a very pretty manner.

It is not that all these roots and plants are used by one and the same tribe
of Tartars; but I have thrown them together, as used in general by some or
other of the Tartar tribes, for any useful purposes my readers may please to
try them.

On the fifth of September I continued my journey up the Abakan, more to the
South, and to the most remote Russian dwellings on the Taschtyp. As soon as we
cross the watery Askysch, we are in the district of the Beltirs, whose pastures
are along the Abakan, and who claim the right bank of it. Six miles from this
is the winter-residence of Eptisch, the present Baschlyk of the Beltir Tartars
and the Birjusses.

The Beltirs consist at present of 150 tributary men, who altogether pay a
Jassack of 300 rubles. Like the Saja-Tartars, they are under the jurisdiction
of Kusnezkoi, and have a strong resemblance to them in countenance, manner and
language. Many of them are rich in cattle and sheep, and most of them follow
husbandry. September is their harvest-month, which, like the Germans, they call
Orgok-ai. They thresh their corn abroad in the field, and burn the straw on the
ground. Their chief crops are summer-corn (arysch), particularly barley (asch)
of which they make groats. The ground is turned up with a pick-axe, called by
them abyl; but some have begun to make use of a plough, which they call salda.
In autumn, when they have plenty of milk, from which some neighbor or other is
always distilling brandy, they are seldom to be found sober but in the morning.

The rich Beltirs have generally two or more wives, which is seldom the case
among the Tartars in the Jenisei. Being substantial men, they are obstinate in
their way of thinking, and could not be brought over to christianity, of course
are rank heathens, and are always with their kamens or sorcerers. Of all the
Siberian nations, the Beltirs and the Teleutes of Kumezkoi, with some few
mountaineers, are the only Tartars who do not bury their dead, but put them in
coffins, and place them in trees in some remote parts of the woods. The Sajan
Tartars, who are not baptized, do this less frequently: the Beltirs will not
confess it; and I should, perhaps, not have found it out, if, when I was
collecting the plants, I had not met with such a burying-place in a forest upon
the Taschtyp, where there was placed a young woman and her mother, who died out
of a Beltir family that spent the winter here. The coffins were made of
rough-hewn boards, tied together with ropes, and in the same manner a board was
placed on the top, instead of a cover, and over it lay some birch-bark. The
coffins were distant from each other about 50 fathoms, tied with ropes over two
branches of two, old larch-trees, so low that a Cossack with me could easily
climb and look into the coffin, though the trunk below the branches was cleared
of its boughs. The body was in its full dress, and all sorts of women's clothes
lying near the head. On one side was a bag with groats, a pot with fat and
remnants of dried meat, the spade with which they dig roots, a crooked knife in
a case, an axe, and a horse-whip, with a saddle between her legs, that she
might be ready to ride in the other world. One corpse had the head turned
toward the west, and the other to the east: but this may be no certain rule.
On the tree next such corpse, hung the skin of a horse, slaughtered on the
occasion, with the tail and hoofs hung on a stripped branch, the head whole,
bitted and bridled, on another branch. Into the coffin with a man, they put
their best clothes, bow and quiver; and, if the deceased was fond of music, his
three-stringed lute, Kobys, and his horizontal harp jattagan, and they
sacrifice at his death, his best horse. Seven days after, among the rich, a
second horse and a mare are slaughtered, and the requiem is twice or thrice a
year celebrated by the relations. It is solemnized but once to the memory of a
poor man, and A BELTIR CEMETERY
on that occasion they hang near the deceased, a vessel of brandy, and the
bones of the victim are carefully burnt. The Beltirs however are said, in
certain cases, to bury their dead, and cover the grave with stones.

Like the Katchinzkoi Tartars, the Beltirs have a custom of hanging up little
rags and skins of animals about their tents. Among some I met also with the
Buratian rag idols (ongon) consecrated by the magicians at sacrifices.

In this district up the Askysch, begins that remarkable step which extends
between the mountains and the low grounds of the Abakan, and is covered more
than any district on the Jenisei, with old tombs and monuments of an
extraordinary size and appearance. Among these graves, which are surrounded
with a square wall of granite rock and raised with the walls, partly like a
flat, earth hillock, and partly paved with small granites, are many stones
ornamented with a rough sculpture of human faces, deserving a more particular
description, which, with other stone images on the steps of the Jenisei, have
been erected long before the time of the Kirguese. A mile and an half above the
winter-habitation of the Beltir chief, stood two, very narrow stones, seven
feet high, flat on both sides, narrower at the top, and truncated, which now
lie along upon the ground. Both have, at the upper end, the features of a human
face, quite flat, cut out on them; one of which is about half an ell higher
than the other, and called, by the Tartars, Kuss Tasch (the daughter), and has,
on the edge of the border, on the right of the face, carved figures of the
two-bunched camel, from top to bottom; and, on the other edge, the ghastly
image of a child.

The Beltirs call the other stone, Kusi Tasch (man-stone). On its right edge,
below, is cut a man on horseback, with his lance before him, on which a flag
hangs; and, a little higher, is carved a bent bow, with an arrow on it,
tolerably large and plain. On the other edge are different figures, rendered
undistinguishable by time; on the top is a lance, with a triple flag; and
farther below, some square lines and the form of a boat; and, at the bottom,
the figure of a child.

Some hundred fathoms from these stones, on the west side of a large tomb,
encompassed with granites, and surrounded with many others, stands a piece of
large granite-rock, as high as a man, so edged at the top that its point and
carved side turns eastwards to the tomb. Near the point of this granite is a
large female face, much more relieved than on other stones, having its mouth
wide open, and very much worn and decayed by time. On the middle of the stone,
on the same side, are some square lines, and elegant carved drawings, but quite
insignificant. This piece of rock is known, among the heathen Tartars of this
district, by the name of Kurtejak-tasch (woman's stone), or Ulu Kurtejak (the
big woman); and is industriously invoked for good luck in sable-hunting, by the
heathens that pass this way. They feed it devoutly, by smearing and filling its
mouth with fat or butter.

But, a mile and an half higher up the Abakan, is the finest monument I have
seen among all Siberian antiquities. This is a tomb, four fathoms high, and 150
paces in circumference, raised upon an eminence, so as to be seen at a great
distance. Four other tumuli lying about, north-west and south-west, at a good
distance, form a triangle with the great one; in the opening of which,
westwards from the largest tumulus, at 200 paces from it, three long
square-sided sand-rock stones, rather narrower at the top, are so placed, that
their flat sides face the north and south, each stone standing about four feet
from the other. On the northernmost of these stones, on the edge that faces the
east, a very long but distinguishable face is sculptured out, and much
relieved, which takes up the length of the stone. This is called, by the
Tartars, Kitschi Kurtejak (the little woman). Neither of the other stones have
any thing remarkable, but their eastern edge being hewn like the scales of a
fish. On the flat side of the stone, ornamented with the face, are some
drawings. A very large stone, standing on the west of the abovementioned
grave, more than three else high, and one and an half wide, has a great many
figures on the south side, which, as far as I could distinguish, are a kind of
Tartar hieroglyphics, as inscriptions, drawn or scratched on their tomb-stones.
Some of these pieces are probably the sign-manual of the deceased; for the
pagans in Siberia, like the common people in Russia, who cannot write, have a
particular signature, which they use to writings instead of their name, and
which is acknowledged as valid by their courts of judicature.

Among the great number of tombs of the fine winter-plains on the Abakan, there
are few but what are injured: however, as I observed some not dug into, and
desirous of knowing something of their internal structure, I ordered a tent to
be erected near the Kurtujak Tasch, determining to pass the night here, and
wait the opening of one of these hills. All the monuments about the Abakan are
so similar externally, that they must have been tombs of the same nation. The
only difference is, that some have the ground flat within the square walls, and
others raised, which may be a distinction only of rank, or tribe. The granite
stones that border these graves lay mostly along, with one edge on the ground;
none set up an end, but in the north-east, south-east, and south-west angles.
Those graves which have the largest stones, are not wholly surrounded with
them: some have only a long stone, like a pilaster, inclining over the grave.
On those graves which lie near the mountains, there is scarce a stone to be
seen, as the snow and rain from the mountains have washed the earth over them.
In some, the space within the walls is divided into two or three parts, by rows
of stones placed on end, and running from east to west; one of which is
generally larger, and stands higher than the rest. These are apparently graves
in which several persons of one family are buried. The chief difference in
these tombs is, that some are paved on the top with granite-stone, and others
only filled up with earth. I ordered one of the former, which seemed to be one
entire hill, to be opened, but no regular coffin was found, only a mixture of
decayed bones of several bodies, laid with the legs toward each other. These
relics were found at the depth of four feet and a half, and in visible
disorder. With the bones were found broken pieces of earthen vessels, various
large cooking-basons, a bead of a greenish-white, enamelled substance; and,
among the bones, a cheek-bone, with teeth of moderate size; but no other parts
of the head, or other small bones, were to be found. In another grave, only
filled with earth, and quite flat at top, were found, at the depth of not quite
four feet and a half, some large granite-stones, lying flat, but the earth
filled up beneath them; yet it was plainly to be seen, that there was a long,
square space, made with stones, running east and west. Here were found the
bones of a man, in such order, as to see that he was laid with his head toward
the east; but of the scull and teeth nothing was remaining; and every other
bone was very imperfect and soft. About the head were some single horse and
ox-bones; on the right, an earthen boiling-vessel, squeezed to pieces by stones
laid on it, and within it a brown dust was perceptible. On the left, the
undistinguishable remains of some piece of crooked wood; but, in the very
middle, near where the head lay, a very thin round piece of leaf-gold, as big
as half a ruble, bent over a raised copper button, quite rotten with
verdigrease, perhaps the button of a woman's cap. The great decay of these
bones, in so sandy a soil, is an indisputable proof of the high antiquity of
these tombs. Though we discovered but little that was curious, yet I wished to
open other tombs; but having no good diggers, or grave-searchers, among the
peasants that attended me, I was obliged to give it up.

It is said, by the Russian grave-searchers here, that the common graves
contain small gold and silver vessels; but are not so rich in other pieces of
instructive antiquity as the raised earth-tombs. Indeed, I was more pleased
with the antiquities found with the bodies of the first tomb we opened, than
with the piece of gold in the other. Perhaps, those interred in the raised
tumuli, were of that ancient nation who have left so many traces of their
knowledge in metallurgy. Contented, therefore, with what I had seen, I went, on
the 6th, toward the Taschtyp. At the distance of four miles, I crossed the
brook Isse, and changed horses at the Kobynzian jurts, on the brook Tie. Here I
met the elders of three Tartarean tribes, Kobyn, Kargin, and Kain, who are
under the jurisdiction of Kunezkoi, and who, like the Beltirs, received me with
great asfability. The tribe Kobyn consists of 53 bows; that of Kargin, of 40;
which last, with some other tribes of mountaineers, bear the common name of
Birjasses. The former once inhabited the mountains, and lived wretchedly on
hunting; but since they have settled on the Tie and Abakan, in the territories
of the Beltirs, they are grown rather substantial, by adding the breeding of
cattle to their employ of hunting. In their language, make, manners, and way of
living, they do not differ from the Beltirs; and live, like all the Tartars
about the Jenisei, in jurts, covered in summer with birch bark, and in winter
with sheep-wool felts.

There was here, in the southern parts of the more open mountains, an
incredible number of partridges, who, in winter, find abundance of food in the
warm and snowless meridional parts of the rocky mountains, and who run about in
crowds very tame, and not the least shy.

Taschtypkaja is the most remote Russian village on the waste part of the
Mongalian frontiers, which, from the Ob to the Jenisei, is not yet provided
with fortresses and regular troops. It is situated at the bottom of the high
mountains, where woods begin to cover their tops. On the left of the Taschtyp
are five dwellings, inhabited by Cossacks from Krasnojarskaja, who voluntarily
offered to do the frontier-duty, which used to be done by Tartars. This people
have found the place excellently adapted for agriculture, breeding of cattle,
and hunting. Sometimes the corn suffers by early, white frosts, and sometimes
by caterpillars; but, on the whole, the harvest is usually a good one. For
breeding of cattle, they have the finest meadows; and it is a rich place for
hunting. There are indeed but few sables; but these they can procure from the
poor Tartars, by giving them bread and groats in exchange. In fact, this
district well deserves numerous population. The Taschtyp is a large brook
which, in spring and rainy weather, flows so plentifully, that, on the
shallowest spots, it is scarcely fordable by horses. It flows here between two,
high, chalk mountains, which extend further up and down the Abakan, are from
hence covered with larch-trees and fir-woods, intersected with fine, open
valleys. From the village, to its mouth in the Abakan, it is about 22 miles. On
the other side of the frontier, which is Chinese Mongalia, no Mongols live, but
a people called Sojet, that subsist on hunting, keep reindeer, and, in
language and blood, seem related to the Motores, on the Oi and Tuba, and of
course to the Koibales and Samojedes. Before the Chinese had any guards on
their frontiers, there was always here a road of communication between Siberia
and Mongalia.

Besides the frontier-mark of this place, there is another eastwards, on the
Jenisei, at the mouth of the Kenitschuk, into that river; but there is no
getting to it, except over the ice, in winter.

About the Taschtyp are Tartars of the tribes of Kain and Kobyn. The former has
but 25 military men; but the tribe Schors, further down the Masna, has 50. As
these have no opportunity for agriculture, and are poor in cattle, their
subsistence consists in wild roots and hunting, living in wildernesses
inaccessible to others, and being rank heathens. In winter they wander, with
their little cattle, down the Taschtyp, where the snow does not fall too deep.
The sables being scarce in this district, they go to the wild morasses, on the
opposite shore of the Jenisei, in the district of Krasnojarskaja, to catch this
animal, in order to pay their tribute. But the Koibales, who pretend to claim
that district, will not suffer them to hunt with nets, but often take their
instruments and toils from them.

I continued at Taschtyp on the 7th of September, and spent the whole day in
climbing the mountains along the brook, in search of plants. Underneath a steep
rock, after having had the good luck to climb up, a young bear, by the rattling
of a falling stone, was moved from his abode, took flight, and as we, by
hallooing and shouting, frightened him still more, he swam through the
Taschtyp, in order to hide himself in an adjacent wood. I sent a Tartar, with
this intelligence, to the next jurts; and, in less than half an hour, a number
of armed Tartars, on horseback, hastened on all sides, pursuing the bear close
through an open field, over which he wanted to take refuge in a distant
mountain. They killed him in this field, and we had the pleasure of surveying
the chase from the high mountain; and were much astonished at the courage of a
Tartarean horse, which overtook the bear first, and beat him down on the rocky
ground with his fore-feet, previous to his being killed.

The plants here are common to the districts of Dauria, and the mountains in
the east of Siberia. On the chalky mountains grows, in many places, the
savin-tree (Juniperus Sabina). This tree is occasionally conveyed to
Krasnojarskaja and Tomskoi, as a famous, domestic remedy; the knowledge of
which seems to have originated from the Tartars; and the name they give it,
Artschin, the Russians have adopted. They use its branches, not only
superstitiously to smoke off malicious spirits, but the same is also
serviceable to sick children; and, in disorders of the head, to grown people:
and, if the smoke will not operate with efficacy, they swallow some of it. It
is also said to be of great service for various disorders of the belly.

But a more valuable plant still in all Chinese disorders, is a fine species of
snow-rose (described fully A BEAR CHASE
in Flor. Sibir. vol. iv. page 121, Tab. 54), which grows here on low bushes;
as also on the lofty Alps, and in Dauria; with sulphur-yellow flower-bunches
(Rhododendron Chrysanthum), and hard and thick leaves, like those of lauro
crasus. This rare plant likes the rocky mossy caps of the snow-mountains in
Dauria, where it is called, by the common people, Tschernogrif and Kelarsk, and
has been taken notice of by Mr. Sokolof, on the bare summits of the
partition-mountains, situated between the sources of the Kirkun and Tschikoi.
It is gathered here on two lofty mountains on the Jenisei, where it gows; and
also, abundantly, about the roads and paths that lead to the frontier-marks, by
the Cossack soldiers, who carry it home to their wives and relations, as a fine
medicine. The Tartars call it Schu, drinking only its leaves boiled in water,
in moderate quantities, as a wholesome tea. This tea, however, has no very
sensible operation, or efficacy, unless made too strong, when it attacks the
head. But if some of its small branches, with their leaves, are put into a
glazed pan, covered close down, and suffered to boil with water over a stove;
it makes a strong, bitter and brown liquor, which, if taken internally, throws
the patient into a feverish, drunken-like state of insensibility; during which,
the internal parts, or limbs affected, are in an incessant motion. This
intoxication quits the patient sooner than that of spirituous liquors, and
leaves no headache, nor the least in disposition; and commonly, after once or
twice taking c^^^s the disorder, or (...) part. The heat, excited by it, makes
the patient very thirsty, and if he drinks any cold water, will be attended
with violent vomiting; but this vomiting is salutary, and particularly
serviceable in all complaints of the belly. The Cossacks use it in all
rheumatic cases, and chronic pains in the limbs, which it is said to cure
infallibly, by a violent and continual twitching in those limbs. It is also
said to mitigate pains in the limbs, arising from, that scourge of mankind, the
venereal disease; and I saw living instances, in Dauria, where it cured this
disorder: however, this plant must certainly be classed among the specific,
strong, vegetable remedies; and might, by care, and proper management of able
physicians, become an excellent application in all podagrical, arthritic
complaints, and internal, chronic obstructions of the bowels; and deserves,
therefore, every experiment to be made of it. The abovementioned effects I
wrote down, not only on the universal report of numbers of common people, who
had experienced its virtues, but even on the assertion of Mr. Sokolof, who used
it with success on his return from Dauria, when he was rendered quite weak and
ill by an obstructed diarrhoea. I must also add, that the Cossacks generally
culled this plant in autumn, when it is in seed, and many of its leaves are
become yellow. How much more efficacious, therefore, must it be, if gathered
earlier, whilst in bloom! It blossoms in the beginning of July, and soon loses
its beauty, like all mountain-plants. It has been remarked, that stags, and the
Siberian muscus, devour its leaves, without any intoxicating effects. I found
some in the stomach of the former. Probably this plant, like the Kalmia of
North America, may be detrimental to the stag, but not to other domestic
animals.

The river Abakan, where we crossed, is more than 80 fathoms broad, very deep,
as rapid as an arrow, and difficult to pass; however, having prepared a ferry,
we effected it; and in my way to Sajanskoi-Ostrog, a distance of 82 miles, I
passed the night of the 9th of September in the jurts of the Koibales, about
four miles from the Jenisei, and eight from Sajanskoi-Ostrog.

The Koibales, with whom I got acquainted this day, are a very different set of
people from all the pagan Tartars hitherto mentioned; not in their persons,
manner of living, and dress, but in appearance and language, and, of course, in
origin. Their language is much like that of the Samojedes; and, though rendered
confused by a strong mixture of Tartar, yet it may probably be concluded, from
the considerable remains of the former language among the Koibal hordes,
Motores, etc. that this, and other scattered tribes, must be a remnant of the
Samojede nations, driven from their ancient abodes, as far as the Dolar
countries. The following list of words is a sufficient proof of the resemblance
of the languages of those nations; and that of the Motores seems to be most
like the Samojede.

Words. Samojede. Koibalian. Motore. Karagassian. God, Chai, Chudai, Burkan,
Tere. Heaven, Number, Number, Orchochairachan, Tere. Devil, Sjudybe, Staala, Sedkyr.
Clouds, Tir, Kinsiga, Ti, Di. Snow, Syra, Sir, Sir, Sira. Hail, Sirobta,
Tuskunak, Tusjunak, Siril. Rain, Sarju, Suruno, Sirru, Sjuru. Wind, Mirtschen,
Warsse, Mirga, Merge. Fire, Tu, Sy, Tui, Dui. Water, Uib, Bu, Bun, Bu. Earth,
Ja, Dshu, Dsha, Dsha. Mountain, Tanaba, Muija, Bia, Bia. Stone, Pai, Pi, Hila,
Tangait. Tree, Pa, Pa, Hah, Chy. Head, Aiba, Ulu, Nhamba, Aibada. Eye, Saiwy,
Sima, Ssima, Sjimida. Fur, Pany, Purga, Charga. Jurt, Mat, Mat, Mat, Ottok.
Fijh, Chale, Cholla, Ghalla, Kale.

Of the Koibales, round the Jenisei, they reckon 14 tribes, all which contain
only 384 men who pay tribute. They are almost all baptized, and have laid their
pagan customs aside, at least publicly. Aged and full-grown people they bury in
the ground; but children, when dead, they expose on trees, as do the Beltirs.
They are not very opulent in cattle, but live tolerably well by hunting and
agriculture; yet some of them will possess a hundred horses: they use the
Russian plough Saban; sow more grain than they want, and sell the overplus to
the Tartars. They gather also more wild-flax and nettles than the Tartars, and
make ropes of them. Many have wooden, winter-dwellings; and even those who
wander about in tents, keep poultry. They hunt in large companies, and kill a
great many sables, beavers and otters, which they claim an exclusive right to:
their first hunting-season is at the end of August. In December and January
they catch sables, beavers, otters, lynxes, and other scarce and dear animals;
but in March they hunt elks and stags in their snow-scates. Their furs are
mostly conveyed by commission to Kusnezkoi; but they pay their tribute in the
hides of elks and stags, and make up any deficiency in money. They catch the
hyena in the following manner. This animal is said to follow the track of
foxes, in order to share their prey; they, therefore, fix traps and
self-shooting bows about such tracks, to which the hyena falls a victim first.
When the Koibales are hunting in the wintertime, on the mountainous
wildnernesses, where their horses cannot feed on account of the deep snow, they
search for those stores of hay, laid up, in considerable heaps, under the
rocks, or about the trees, by the little cliff-hare (lepus alpinus). These
heaps consist of the most juicy plants, and, among the rest, a great deal of
wolf's-bane; but it does not hurt the horses. About these heaps are many deep
paths, in which these little, industrious animals run up and down.

There are but few, old customs remaining among the Koibales. Their women wear
tresses, hanging to the shoulders; and caps like those of the Mongols. They are
delivered of their children kneeling, and supported by some man, but a female
friend performs the office of the midwife. The lying-in woman is fed with a
great deal of butter and fat meat, and is not suffered to drink any thing cold
for the first three days, at the expiration of which time she returns to her
business; but during her state of impurity, which is eleven days, or a
fortnight, she must not dress any victuals for her husband. In the first seven
days she is washed thrice; and, after this, once a month for some time; but her
last purification is being smoked with the Irwen, which is the Sabin of
Linnaeus.

I will say a few words here of the Motores in particular. There are scarce 10
families of them, the smallpox having twice raged among them. Formerly there
were about 30, who paid tribute, and these resided about the mountains beyond
Sajanskoi-Ostrog, till they were removed from the frontiers toward Abakanskoi,
and beyond the Tuba. Their dress and clothes still differ from the Koibales.
They are poor, possess but little cattle, and live chiefly by hunting, and
serving the Russians. The few there are, were baptized about 30 years ago, and
formerly placed their dead, between three boards, upon trees. To keep their
tents warm, they cover them in winter with hay, at other times with birch-bark.
Their doors are made in the east side, and they either cannot or will not
remember their former superstitions.

Here is a mine also in this neighborhood, that contains silver, but these
works are at present suspended. On the 11th of September, having prepared every
thing for crossing the Jenisei, which is here only 200 fathoms wide, we got our
wagons over, but with difficulty.

In the village where we slept, I met with an old peasant, who was not a
searcher of ore, but an experienced digger of hidden treasures. He made no
secret of his art; and to him and his assistants am I indebted for several good
accounts of the nature of the ancient tombs on the Jenisei, and am therefore
less scrupulous of committing them to paper, convinced, by viewing fresh-opened
tombs, of the truth of what he told me.

The ancient tombs, he said, might be divided into two kinds; the first of
which consisted of tombs of stone, the other of earth-hills, surrounded with
stone. In stone-graves bodies are often found, described as above; their head
to the east, in a sepulcher, or case, made of stones. The bones of the head are
chiefly mouldered into dust. On the right side of the head are generally found
large, earthen basins, and relics of common, wooden household-furniture. In
the principal graves of this kind, which differed not externally from the rest,
except in the size of the stones made use of, have been found elegant, silver
vessels, gold plates, buttons, and other hornaments; horse-furniture, made of
iron, inlaid or plated with gold and silver, and sometimes, though very rare,
copper-furniture. Sometimes the bones of burnt bodies have been found in a
little space cased with stone.

The large grave-hills, made of earth only, are still more remarkable, and seem
to belong to a very different nation. These are in districts separate from
those where the stone-tombs are, raised on certain heights and level ground, as
numerous and close together as in a churchyard. In these are found plain and
complete timber-work, large, but decayed. Hence it appears that the bodies in
these graves were laid in a place lined with thick beams, laid upon each other,
something like the house of a Russian peasant; and the whole apparently covered
with birch-bark, and other wood, which broke in the cover of the sepulcher by
its weight. In these places have been found the bones of two or three bodies;
and at the feet several, little toys, interred with the corpse; earth and
copper vessels, remnants of wooden vessels and ladles; copper tools of all
sorts, daggers and knives; with traces of scabbards, and other small
instruments. About the head are found buttons, buckles, plated with gold, and
other appearances of dress. Occasionally, in the best-preserved tombs, have
been found visible pieces of gold and silk stuff, and remains of fable-hair. In
some were found bones of large and small animals; and several little, angular
pyramids of various figures, in cast-copper, representing chessmen, or
something similar. Remains of lances, and staves of honor are also met with,
where men have been buried; and crutches of cast copper, sometimes wreathed
with stripes of hammered-gold. Nay, sometimes, solid plates of gold have been
found, probably the ornaments of the neck or arms; girdles, and the handles of
daggers, decorated with gold. In other sepulchers, besides whole bodies, are
some burnt, whose bones lie in a heap together, commonly near the sides of the
tomb; and in such heaps of ashes often lie small plates of gold, and other
little things. In other graves again are seen things whose use or meaning
cannot be devised. An old digger of these graves, however, assured me he once
found a man's head, made hollow, of fine porcelain-earth, almost as large as
life, painted with green and red leaves; and another once found a duck, carved
in the bark of aspen, and thinly covered with gold. Another made me a present
of a wild sheep, cast in copper, standing on a round pedestal, the produce of
such a grave. They have also found many buttons, formed like bells, on which
the figure of a chamois was engraved, as I have mentioned once before. Every
thing in copper was cast. Some traces of iron have been found. One of these men
said, he once met with a rusty piece of an axe in iron, but such metal is very
rare.

They are of opinion that most of these tombs have been opened and plundered
long since, as the bones are often seen lying in the greatest confusion, and in
these graves nothing of any value is found. In large tombs are skeletons of
horses, with remnants of saddles, and other horse-furniture, without the wooden
case, but beneath the earth. The human bones found are generally of the common
size; yet they assured me they have found gigantic ones.

In the district about the Schusch, and other places, especially east of the
Jenisei, are graves, containing a great quantity of confused bones, rare
lances, and the copper points of arrows; evident proofs of battles.

Four miles up the Schuner, on the Jenisei, lies Sajanskoi Ostrog. It is a
fortress, 50 fathoms' square, the walls timber, with towers in the angles, and
two gates, encompassed with a ditch, and cheveaux-defrize. Within are five
caserns, a provision storehouse, a powder magazine, and six cannon: the
garrison consists of seven cossacks and a corporal. As the rocky soil of this
place will not admit of husbandry, the houses of these men are in the adjacent
villages, and two men only, at a time, mount guard here, to take care of the
powder and cannon; so that the place looks empty, though the buildings are in a
good state.

I made an attempt to go further up the Jenisei, by leaving my light-waggon,
and going on horseback, but could get no farther than about seven miles, to the
fortress Omai-Tura, which lies in a very rocky corner, close to the river,
under the mountains that join the Jenisei, and stop all further passage by
land. This place is called by the Tartars Logina Osida (the siege of Login);
but why, no one can tell. Before the Russian settlement, a Kirguese Horde is
said to have taken refuge here in winter, to be free from their persecutors,
till they went on further, in spring, in the mountains of Mongalia. When the
trying-pits on the Oi were worked, here was a passage on the river for the
workmen, the mouth of the Oi being just opposite this spot.

In my way, I saw an innumerable quantity of partridges and quails; the
adjacent mountains are crowded with them. These birds spent the winter here,
underneath the snow. The cause that prevents their wandering to warmer,
southern climes is, the high mountains, which are much sooner covered with
snow; and which, as the autumn drives them here from the low-lands, blocks up
their passage southwards into Europe.

On the night of the 13th, rose a violent storm from south-west, which
continued next day, and then changed to north-west, and caused a great frost.
However, I continued my journey, early in the morning, down the Jenisei,
toward Krasnojarskaja; and at the distance of 23 miles from where I set out,
my two wagons were passed over the Oi, which is here 60 fathoms wide, but not
without danger, as the storm continued. The village Ustoiskaja, on both sides,
lies not far from its mouth into the Jenisei. Besides the peasants of the
place, Cossacks here reside, who do the frontier-duty. Hence we are naturally
led 58 miles up the Oi to Oi-Kebesch Karaul, which lies on the very spot where
the Oi and Kebesch unite, and which is the middle, and most remote
frontier-post. The next post is 39 miles further up the Oi, and is distant from
Abakanskaja 145 miles. The post next following is 21 miles; but the distance
from that to the first frontier-guard of Winskoi, on account of the wildness of
the mountains, is not known. The frontier-marks are visited by three
guard-stations, each of which has garrisons, and are distant from
Oi-Kebesch-Karaul 83 miles. From the guard-post, last-mentioned, the line runs
up the Kebesch, over a high mountain, to the brook Taradanu; and then down the
brook, along the mountain-track Usimarga, to the river Us, from whose borders
the snow-mountain Choin-Taban rises sleeply to the skies: hence the boundary
runs east, over the Us; so that the loftiest mountains about its source, which
run along the north-east arm of the Jenisei, giving the Selenga its sources,
belong to Mongalia. This mountainous district is so wild and dangerous, that it
cannot be ridden over in the best of seasons. We were obliged to travel on
foot, driving our horses before us, not to run the risk of falling every moment
down the rocks.

Being assured that on the high rocks, about the Us, were many of these large
Chamoises, called by the Tartars of this place Toghe, and by the Mongols Takja,
which are not now found farther within Siberia; I had obtained orders for the
Tartars of Udinskoi to endeavor to catch me one in the month of January, 1773;
but I was lucky enough to receive two frozen ones from Udinskoi before I left
Siberia. They had been killed between the Uda and Birjussa by some
Karagassians. The one was very old, and had lost his left horn, probably by a
fall; and the other was a young, but full-grown animal. The Mountain-Tartars
call the buck Toghe, the she-goat Hima, and the young ones Bitschinja. The size
of the Siberian Chamois is the same in proportion to the Helvetian one, as the
Siberian stone-ram, or Argali, is to the Muslon of Corsica. His color may be
compared with the Cabrit of Guinea, and some deer-like Kirguisian she-goats.
The young buck was more light-coloured, and less black than the old one. The
general color is a light-brown gray. On the body the hair is not much longer
than that of the stag, but more like goat's-hair. The forepart of the belly is
long-haired, and so is the neck, hind-part of the head and forehead. The
longest hair, which is rather above four inches, is on the breast. It has a
short, deer's-tail, black above, and white on the sides. A stripe along the
breast, shoulders, thighs, and fore-feet, and a spot between the eyes. The
beard, which was about six inches long in the old Chamois, was all black; but
the young one had only some black spots on the feet, the joints of the
forelegs; and the beard, the breast, belly, and feet were otherwise white. The
horns were bent, in form of a scythe, very strongly pressed together sideways;
shorter about the upper edge, and strongly knotted; or else flat, wrinkled, and
striped. The left-horn of the old one was four inches long, and had 13 knots.
The feet of this animal are uncommonly strong and solid, and the shoulders much
more fleshy than the thighs, owing to the animal's leaping on it is fore-feet,
when it jumps from rock to rock. Betwixt the hair the Chamois has a rich, gray
fleece all over the back and neck, exactly like that of the tame-goat.

I shall say nothing of the old smelting-surnaces and bing-places met with
here, and about the Tuba, but now deserted, under the pretense of ore being
scarce, Mr. Gmelin having mentioned and described them in his tour. All I shall
observe is, that there was found near these bing-places an old, iron
plough-share, of a peculiar form.

My road led me over the mountain Kuna, where the way down on the north side is
steep. On the back of this mountain are two tombs, or heaps of stones, one near
the other, to which every Tartar, who passes this way, adds one, or throws a
bush. These tombs are said to have been made when the Kirguese inhabited this
district. The common story, among the Tartars, is that a rich Kirguese Bey had
two fine wives, so jealous, that he was obliged to have two jurts for them, one
on each side of the mountain, and that he lived on each side himself by turns;
but it unfortunately happened that these two met together, when changing of
pastures, fought, and killed each other, and are buried under these heaps of
stones.

Near this place are some Tartarian jurts, where I remained all night, but
could not sleep, owing to a Kusnez of the Aimak of Tubinskoi, remarkable for
having a large spot on his head, overgrown with white hair, which grew so,
after a sore he had in his head was healed. These white spots are always the
effect of sores. Some Jakutian and Tschulym Tartars are born so. This man was
perfect master of the lute, and a real Troubadour in telling and singing tales,
which, according to their interpretation, were similar to those of Ariosto. He
sung each stanza first to the lute, and then repeated it in a droll, declaiming
tone. The harmony of the voices of the Katschinzy Tartars is much like that of
the Kalmucks, and delightful in the open air. Their young people spend whole
evenings in singing to the lute, not songs, but some strange, insignificant
notes; for example, Oido-ido, tidum-dido, and with great enthusiasm.

Katschinzian Tartars. -- I shall here add some observations on these Tartars,
to complete what has been said of them in the preceding year. The remark I made
of their beardless, Mongol faces, was now more confirmed; and herein is this
horde distinguished from all other Siberian Tartars. Being very rich in cattle,
they neither profess agriculture nor christianity. Yet they sow a little
Siberian buck-wheat and barley, to make groats. Like the Mongols, they are
satisfied with one wise; often court for three, four, or five years; on which
account parents suffer their children to be courted early: but some have
already abolished the Kalym, or marriage-price; and those who do receive any
thing for their daughters, get it by instalments. The suitor is never suffered
to be alone with the bride, before the nuptials have been celebrated; as it
would be highly disgraceful to the lady to have any prior intimacy with her
intended husband. This, however, is quite contrary to the custom of the Mongols
and Kalmucks. The first nuptial-feast is given by the bride's father; the next
by the bridegroom; and for their second feast the bridegroom's father erects a
jurt for the young couple; but the household-furniture, and garments of the
bride are provided by her father. After the first courtship, the father-in-law
never sees his son's wife again, nor does he enter his son's jurt; and should
the father-in-law meet her by chance, custom enjoins her to throw herself
prostrate on her face, till her father-in-law passes, which he does with the
utmost precipitation. The mother-in-law and the bride's father may have free
access to the young couple's tent when they please. The bride is often richly
presented with cattle on her marriage, by her parents; and should her husband
grow tired of her, and send her home, after an interval of some years, he only
returns the number of cattle she brought with her. All the children, and the
increase of her flocks and herds, are his own. This blameable custom induces
many to court rich girls, merely to enjoy the produce of her fortune; and,
after several years cohabitation, the unhappy female is repudiated. Should she
wish for a divorce on her own account, without having had a son, she has no
return; and her parents are liable to refund the husband's kalym. Both parties
are at liberty to marry again after such a divorce. Daughters are made equal in
patrimony to their brothers; and, where there is no brother, the father can
give, verbally, his whole property to his daughter. Women do not cohabit with
their husbands after delivery for one whole month; and during the continuance
of their impurity, which is at least 10 days, she is not suffered to do any
domestic business. At the time of her delivery many women of the neighborhood
assemble at her jurt, but her father does not leave it. The child receives
either the name of the first stranger that comes into the jurt after its birth,
or the father gives it one himself; and hence many pagan Tartars have Russian
names.

The chief festival celebrated both by the Katschinzi Tartars, and other
heathens of that nation, is the feast of spring (Tun) when they begin to milk
their mares. This feast is not celebrated by all at one time, but by degrees,
one family after another, through the whole neighborhood. It consists in
tippling, and the host preserves his milk for three days, to distill a
sufficient quantity of brandy or spirit. After the first feast, several
neighboring tribes meet together, go up on a hill, and there perform a solenm
sacrifice, with prayers (Chudeiga Basheraga) directed toward the east. At
other times, as in cases of sickness and necessity, they offer to their Tus, or
house-god, called also Aima, little animals, skins, flesh, etc. At their public
sacrifices a Kham, or sorcerer, must be present, who consecrates a horse, which
they call Ysik, and which, according to the injunctions of the Schamans, must
be either a gray, fox-coloured, or black gelding. Such a consecration is only
performed when a magician thinks proper to bless the flocks of his countrymen.
This Ysik, or consecrated horse, is washed, every spring, during the feast of
the Tun, with milk and boiled wormwood (Irwen); and also incensed with that
herb, decorated with red and white rags about his mane and tail, and then
turned loose. The owner durst not ride him, unless some snow has fallen, then
he is obliged to saddle him; and, when the snow disappears, to turn him loose
again. When the animal is too old to ride, the owner may sell him, and get a
young one consecrated as his successor. If its owner dies, the sacred horse is
not slaughtered, but becomes the property of his heirs.

The Katschinzi Tartars are great cooks, and dress their food in the French
fashion. At present, they have two magicians of their own, but formerly were
obliged to borrow those of the Tomskoi Tartars of Kysil Aimak, residing near
the black Yjus. I saw the dress of a Katschinzian sorcerer, at Karysch, which
had been made many years before he entered the holy profession; or, at least,
before he wished to pass for a sorcerer. His dress, as a beginner, was but
moderate; he jobbed about without a cap, with parti-colored, leather
stockings, and, on his body, a narrow, dirty, great coat, of printed callico;
over his shoulders, he wore a red piece of cloth, like a collar, from which 13
ribbands (Sysim) hung down, of various colors, green, yellow, red, blue and
black, sewed together; and various colored silk and cotton rags, some worked
through with mock gold, so as that no one was like the other. Instead of the
magic drum, he held a piece of wood in one hand, round in the middle, flat at
both ends, like an oar, and ornamented with a little bell, on which he tinkled
very briskly, striking it alternately on each side with a wooden beater. Many
other sorcerers use the same magic instrument, saying, they are obliged so to
do, till their Spirits will suffer them to beat a drum; but the truth is, they
cannot afford to purchase one, and wait for the slaughter of some, good horse,
whose skin they can get to make one; for such a sacrifice is requisite, to
furnish them with a drum.

Of late years, a kind of rage has unhappily seized many girls, at the time
their menses first makes its appearance, and continues for several years. It is
so violent, that they often run out of their tents, make frightful faces, pluck
out their hair, and would either hang, or kill themselves, if they were not
prevented. These fits last but a few hours; but they have an irregular relapse,
weekly or monthly. I saw such girls, between the fits, very rational and
well-disposed.

The venereal disease is also become common of late years, and breaks out at
first in boils, on the head, body and groin. The Tartars call it, Kotur.

The smallpox (Tschetschiak) is here only occasionally, sometimes not heard of
for many years; but when once it prevails, makes great ravage, especially among
children and young people; when a fear of catching it, a bad attendance
therein, the uncleanliness of the diet and abode, and impurity of the blood,
seldom fail to carry the patient off. It raged here about 10 years since.

The Katschinzy Tartars occupy the finest district of the regency of
Krasnojarskaja, which is all the land between the White Yjus and the Jenisei,
to the Uybat and Abakan. They are divided into six aimaks; each has a presiding
kusnez, confirmed by the regency of Krasnojarskaja, who collects the tribute,
decides little causes, and maintains good order; but he has no salary, and pays
his head-money equally with the lowest of the tribe. They amount to 1155
tributary heads, or families, and pay annually a Jassak of 2196 rubles. In this
district are also settled four other hordes of Tartars, amounting to 222.

They live, like all substantial Tartars on the Jenisei, in felt-tents, in
winter only, which they stow away in summer in cavities of rocks, known only to
themselves, in order to preserve them dry, to cover their jurts again the next
autumn. For this purpose, they collect birch-bark, about the end of June, a
season when it is in the best state to keep out wet. By boiling, they clear it
of all gumminess, preserving only the resinous parts, which renders it smooth,
and not liable to rot. Hence the month of June is called Toos-ai (birch-month).

I observed, among these Tartars and Beltirs, a particular manner of making
milk-brandy, different from that of the Tunguse, and the Mongol Kalmucks; yet
more like the Tunguse brandy, or spirit, and better than both. The still which
they use is different; and they put a sheep's head into the milk, which, after
distillation, is boiled, with small, minced meat, as a soup, and which they
greedily devour as a great dainty. They also pour milk into the curds, which
they will sometimes eat fresh, and sometimes dry, in pieces, called Bischro;
and take it with them as a provision, when they go a hunting.

On the 16th I crossed the brook Koksa, and rode down the Jenisei, along the
limits abovementioned, to the place where we cross for the Abakan. Here I
copied some of the inscriptions already spoken of, that were most preserved.
Three of them I laid before Major Wolassof, a gentleman of great erudition, and
versed in antiquities, who was commissioned on frontier-business at
Selenginskaja; but the interpreters of this place could not make them out, not
being written in Mongol, or Manshurian language; but with an ancient, current
character, used by some Chinese.

I had now 38 miles to Karyshkoi-Rudnik, where Mr. Surjef waited for me, having
acquitted himself of the charge I had entrusted him with, that of inspecting
some bitter salt-lakes on the Abakan.

The autumnal season, which every day grew more cold and bad, determined me to
go back to Krasnojarskaja, where I had enough to employ me. I returned,
therefore, on the 18th, and arrived there on the 23d, by the same road I passed
last year. In order to return from Siberia, I was obliged to wait for the
sledge-season, and the arrival of Mr. Georgi, and some gentlemen students I had
left behind me in Dauria.

At Krasnojarskaja, on the opposite shore of the Jenisei, they often find
elephant bones; and I took up, myself, a grinder of this animal, from under a
high sand-bank, a mile or two from the town; but could find no mark, or traces
of marine bodies, south of this place, to the Sajanian mountains.

Professor Pallas has frequently spoken of some great change in the earth,
evident from the number of such bones found, and the marine substances, so
frequently met with in the low lands of Siberia. It will be rather interrupting
his narrative, but I persuade myself it must be gratifying to every philosophic
reader, to know his opinion on this subject. Buffon, and others, have thought
that mountains owe their origin to convulsive motions of the earth, being
thrown up by subterraneous fires. Pallas was of the same way of thinking, till
he traversed the extensive wilds of Siberia and Tartary. But, on a minute
examination of the contents of these mountains, and those of the plains below
them, he is now convinced that the hypothesis is an erroneous one. These
mountains are a continued chain of solid, granite rock, extending over a vast
continent, from sea to sea; not found in layers, but in blocks and lumps, or at
least in masses, heaped one upon another; not discovering the smallest trace of
petrifactions, or organic impression; of course, it appears to have been formed
prior to all organized nature. The highest eminences these rocky mountains
form, whether in ridges, or sharp pikes, do not seem to have been covered again
by clayey, or calcareous layers, originally from the sea, but to have been
there from the earliest periods of time, or ever since they obtained their
elevated and landed situation, above the level of the seas; of course, we are
to suppose, that this granite substance, which forms these mountains, and is
also the core of the vastest Alps of the known world, is the principal
materials, or substance, of the interior of our globe.

Leaving these chains of mountains, we perceive the calcareous beds rapidly
tending to the plain, taking a horizontal position, and becoming abundant in
all manner of shells, madrepora, and other spoils of the ocean. The same are
met in the lowest valleys at the foot of the mountains; the whole extent
likewise of Great Russia is filled with them, appearing no less on the hills,
than in the flat countries; sometimes solid, as if sown with marine
productions; at others, altogether composed of shells, and broken madrepora,
and that calcareous gravel always found in those latitudes where the sea
abounds with such productions.

As soon as, from the marshes of Ingria, which form, toward the Baltic, a sort
of gulf, in low lands, we begin to ascend the elevated soil of Russia, whose
declivity makes what is commonly called the mountains of Valdais, and
continually meet with ancient traces of the sea, over a country which has
visibly suffered from an inundation of the greatest violence; these are terrene
layers of a depositum, strewn with blocks of granite, broke from their original
rocks, vast banks of rolled flints and gravel, mixed with petrifactions, and
even the bones of animals. A similar inundation may be traced, as far as the
lake Onega, where the mountains, from the Lapland and Swedish Alps, begin to
rise. It is sufficient to cast the eye over the map, to see, in the great
number of lakes, between the gulf of Finland and the White-Sea, in the isles,
the rocks and the broken shores of these latitudes, the effect of a deluge,
which has run that way; of course, it may be concluded, that the Baltic and
White-Seas, those great breaches of the continent, have been excavated by the
same violence.

Hence it follows, that all those vast plains of the Russian empire, were
formerly the bottom of the ocean; and that the elevated grounds, and high
chains of mountains, have always been islands and continents, much less
extensive than at present; and that owing, probably, to the successive effects
of volcanoes, other subterranean powers, and a deluge, the seas may have left
it.

In the sandy, and other slimy depositums, are found trunks of trees entire,
and fragments of wood petrified, and often mineralized, by copper, or iron.
Petrified wood is often found in the sand-hills on the plains, nay, in the
sandy heights of the Sysran on the Wolga, changed into very fine hone, which
has preserved the original texture of the wood, and is remarkable for the
vestiges of those gnawing worms that attack the bottom of ships, and other
timbers laid in water, and whose proper origin is from the Indian sea. Here are
also interred the remains of the larger animals of the Indies: the bones of
elephants, of rhinocerosses, and of monstrous buffaloes, are frequently dug up
in numbers, and are the admiration of the curious. These great bones, laid in
beds, mixed with little calcined tellinae, bones of fishes, etc. prove
sufficiently that they have been transported by inundations; and was what
convinced Dr. Pallas of the reality of a deluge, that had happened on our
earth. But the carcass of a rhinoceros, which Pallas has deposited in the
cabinet of the Academy of Sciences at Petersburg, and which was found with the
skin entire, the remains of the tendons, ligaments and cartilages, in the
frozen lands, near the banks of the Uli, is another convincing proof, that it
must have been a most violent and rapid inundation, which could formerly have
carried such carcases toward these frozen climes, and, before putrefaction had
time enough to destroy their softer parts.

It must then have been that deluge of which almost all the ancient people of
Asia, the Chaldeans, the Persians, the Indians, the Thibetans, and the Chinese,
have preserved the tradition; and fix it within a few years of the general
deluge of Moses; to which subsequent inundations may have added their
influence.

The greatest curiosity in mineralogy, discovered in the district of
Krasnojarsk, is an enermous mass of pure iron, weighing 40 puds, or near
1500lb. on which I shall expatiate a little. This most curious mass was
discovered in 1750, on a mountain where they made a trying-pit for iron-ore,
and where it lay on the surface, but not then thought worthy of notice. Among
the miners who made the discovery, was a Mr. John Mettich, who gave me the
following account of the situation of this iron-mass, in writing. "In 1749, a
reformed Cossack, an inhabitant of Ubeiskaja, announced a hard iron ore at the
top of a high mountain (describing that where the mass stood). This iron-ore
stood lode-like, on a little rock-shelf, turned to the north. I was sent to
examine it, and found it on an assay, to have gold alloy. The lode stood in a
hard, chertz-like, gray matrix, of which the whole mountain seemed to consist.
About 150 fathoms south-west from this spot, I observed, at the top of the
mountain, thinly overgrown with red and white firs, a lump of iron, apparently
above 30 puds in weight, full of yellow, hard, little stones, of the size of a
cedar-nut, which could not be knocked out. This, and the sound, appeared to me
remarkable; yet I cannot say it grew thus naturally, or whether it was brought
there, as it was lying, on day, on the surface of the ground. On a strict
examination, I found no traces of old mine-works, or smelting-hearths,
throughout the whole extent of the mountain. I know, that this Cossack
afterward carried the lump away; but what is become of it, I cannot tell."

All these circumstances were found true, after the mountain had been strictly
examined. The iron ore is a solid, blue-black, with here and there a magnetic
quickstone metal, yielding on assay, a 70th part of raw iron. The Cossack, who
is now a blacksmith, could not tell the exact situation, or place, where this
iron lump lay; but what he said, was probably agreeable to what Mr. Mettich
wrote down. He averred, that it lay quite on the surface, on the top of the
mountain, without being encompassed with any other cliff or strata. He also
assured me, that he never found any mark of an old smelt-hearth, or work,
neither on this, nor on the opposite mountain. But as the malleability and
whiteness of the iron, and the sonorous found of the lump, made him suspect it
might contain some more noble metal than common iron; and his suspicions being
still increased by the Tartars, who considered it as a sacred thing fallen from
heaven, he endeavored, as no works were ordered, after having announced this
one, to convey it to his dwelling, at 32 miles distance, which he did with the
greatest difficulty.

I received information of this piece of massive iron, in November 1771, by a
Tartarean soldier, who was very useful to me in collecting matters relative to
natural history. This soldier entered by chance the house of the above. Cossack
who found the iron, and seeing it in his yard, it struck him as a curiosity.
Knocking off, with great trouble, a few, little pieces, he brought them to me
for an assay; but as this assay, though imperfect, seemed very ferruginous, I
ordered the soldier to go, without delay, to the village where this man lived,
which was 170 miles distant from Krasnojarskaja, and bring me the whole mass,
which weighed above 42 puds.

The whole seems to have been encompassed by a raw, ferruginous crust, which
was lost by hammering it, to knock off some pieces. The whole, internal part
consists of a slender, white iron, interspersed with little holes, or cells,
like a sea-sponge; and the interstices filled with round and oblong drops, of a
yellow, transparent and pure glass, or hyacinthus-flux. These drops have
various, oblong, round shapes, and a very smooth surface, with one, two, three,
or more flat sides, about the truncated part of their rounded bodies, which
flow often together, with other drops. This texture and drops are from the size
of a grain of hemp seed, to a large pea, and either of a pure yellow, or a
yellow-brown, or greenish color; and are uniform throughout the mass, without
any appearance of smelting, or artificial fire. The iron is so tough, that
three or four smiths were working a whole forenoon, to knock off a piece from
one of its corners; though such piece weighed seldom more than a pound or two,
except one piece that weighed a pud, and was sent, for assay, to the Academy of
Sciences at Petersburgh. By the blows, the flux is reduced into a kind of
glass-dust, and often falls out in whole drops, with which glass might be cut.
In short, the whole mass, and each piece cut out from it, proves incontestibly
that this huge production came out of Nature's lap. But he whose eyes cannot be
convinced by the sight of it, will find the following remarks not quite useless.

It appears, that the ancient miners, whose bing-places and smelting-hearths
are to be met with in the metallic districts about the Jenisei, never worked
any iron, nor had any knowledge of it; as all tools, even their military
weapons and knives, were made of cast copper; but wherever these trying-pits
are seen on ferruginous ochres, they had gold alloy in view. Their bing-places
consist of raw stone, and melt-copper pebbles; and wherever any iron
bing-places are found, it is known, that their proceedings were so poor and
imperfect, probably on account of their unsettled and vagabond way of living,
that they would never have been able to melt a lump of four puds, much less one
of 40 puds, which would require a very, high blast; and should this be
considered as possible, against all probability, yet there could be no cause
why such a huge mass, unfit for smith's work, on account of the slux with which
it is mixed, should have been conveyed from the place where it had been
smelted, to the lofty and steep top of a mountain, destitute in itself, and its
vicinage, of all marks of works, or smelting.

That such a large mass of iron must have been melted by a very, high blast,
has been the opinion of Mons. de Engelstrom, in a discourse he held, on the 4th
of May, 1774, in the Royal Academy of Sciences at Stockholm, occasioned by the
description here given of this mass of pure iron, published in the Petersburgh,
and other foreign gazettes. Before I had seen the whole mass, I was almost of
the same opinion; but afterward was very particular in enquiring and
examining, whether there were any traces of smelting-hearths on the mountain
where the lump was found, or its environs; though its huge size alone, showed
the incontestible impossibility of its being so produced; which I found
confirmed by my search. Mons. de Engelstrom says, The transparent flux
intimates a previous smelting. He must certainly mean, a smelting in the bosom
of Nature, or his reasoning deserves no assent of mine; though I never saw any
mark of ancient volcanoes in the Siberian mountains. I would not have him,
however, pin his faith on my credit; but on the credit of the whole Academy of
Sciences at Petersburgh, and many others, who have seen bunches of this massive
iron, not containing the least appearance of coals melted in, nor the least
mark of fire, produced by human hands; and the whole mass, which weighs still
more than 39 puds, and has been brought to Petersburgh, will be an eternal
proof of it, in the Imperial cabinet of natural history. The want of natural
iron, in the most metallic mountains of Sweden, is so little a proof against
the existence of it elsewhere, as against the truth of there being red-lead
spar in Siberia, because there has not been any found in foreign mines; or of
the tin ores in Russia, because they have not yet been discovered in the
Uralian and Siberian mountains.

The true account above given, and the following arguments, must insure the
belief of every one; because, if all other circumstances were unfavourable, and
contrary to fact, the following reasons must prove, that the lump of iron in
question is natural, and no production of artificial fire. Iron melted in fire,
looks blackish, dry, and not transparent; but the flux, in the massive iron we
have been speaking of, is pure, transparent, looks fattish, and falls to
pieces, if the bunch is put into the fire. Had the grains been mixed with iron
in artificial fire, the whole mass would not have so closely been filled up,
but the iron must have been impure, and full of holes. There is no artificial
fire that can give iron so regular a form, resembling a sponge; it would have
been in grains, and rough pieces, blown together, like impure bings, when taken
out of the blast. All these circumstances put it beyond the shadow of a doubt,
even to those who have not seen the lump; and those who have, must be convinced
by ocular demonstration.

Winter began very soon in the present year, and spread, in December, its
uncommon, chilling blasts throughout the country. On the 6th and 7th of
December was the severest cold I ever yet felt in Siberia; the air was still,
and, as it were, thickened by it; and, in the serene sky, the sun looked as if
enveloped in a fog. The 6th, in the morning, I looked at my hair-tube
thermometer, acknowledged to be an excellent one, and it pointed but at 235
degrees; the mercury had retreated into the little globe which this instrument
has, and some little columns stuck in the tube, and stood fast; a circumstance
I never observed in my thermometer, for the eight years I had used it. The
warmth of a moderately heated room, to which I carried it from the gallery of
the house, occasioned the stopped column of quicksilver to drop instantly, and
the quicksilver in the little globe rose, after the space of half a minute. I
repeated this experiment different times, and always with the same success; so
that sometimes but one, and sometimes more than one, little piece of mercury,
stuck in the tube. When the globe was warmed by the fingers, the quicksilver
rose, and we saw plainly that the frozen, sticking columns made a long
resistance, and were finally drawn up by a kind of sudden impulse. During this,
I put into an open basin, about a quarter of a pound of mercury, which had been
thoroughly cleaned by vinegar and leather, and also well dried, and set it in
the cold, in the gallery on the north side of my lodging; and, in less than an
hour, I found its borders and surface fast frozen; and, in a few minutes more,
the whole was condensed, by natural cold, into a soft and little mass, whilst
the part beneath the surface was not frozen. The frozen part exhibited all
sorts of branch-like wrinkles; but the most part remained smooth. The frozen
part of the mercury was more flexible than lead; but bent short, it was more
fragile than tin, and, in thin plates, was somewhat granulous. When struck with
a hammer, if the hammer was sufficiently chilled, the quicksilver fell into
drops at every blow; so it did with the finger, whose end, when touching the
mercury, felt, as if benumbed. In a temperate room, it thawed, like wax, over
the fire, drop by drop, from the surface, not melting at once. If the frozen
mass was broken in the cold, the broken pieces stuck to each other, and to the
basin wherein they lay. Though the frost seemed to abate a little before night,
yet the frozen mercury lay unchanged; and the same experiment, with the
thermometer, could be always repeated. On the 7th of September, I had an
opportunity to make the same observations, during the whole day; but, a few
hours after sunset, arose a north-west, wind, which raised the thermometer to
215 degrees, and here the mass of quicksilver began to dissolve.

Shortly after, Lieutenant General De Brill, governor of Irkuzkaja, assured me,
he found there, on the 9th of December, at four in the morning, that all the
mercury in a thermometer and barometer, made by the most skilful hand of
Professor Laxmann, during his residence in Siberia, was hard frozen. In the
barometer, it stood at 28 inches seven lines, and was in small pieces of
five-lines each, to the top. Toward 11 in the morning, it was fluid again;
and, at one o'clock, the barometer was 29 inches seven lines high; and at nine
at night, 29 inches. The thermometer was chilled to 213, and beneath 226 was an
empty space of nine degrees; about 11 o'clock all had entered the globe, and
about 10 o'clock next morning, when it thawed again, it rose, and pointed 254;
and, at three o'clock, and some minutes, 194: all, according to De Lisle. The
air, the whole day, was calm and serene.

From Mr. Sokolof's tour along the Daurian frontiers, which he undertook, in
pursuance of my directions, in the course of the last summer, I must not omit
mentioning a hot well, which he visited on the 25th of July, famous, among the
Tunguse Tartars, for its salubrious qualities. It lies straight north from the
frontier-guard, on the banks of the Balyra, at the distance of two good day's
journey, or 112 miles. The water is perfectly clear, but a little bluish, has
the smell and taste of gunpowder, or rotten eggs, and is so hot that one can
scarce bear the hand in it. On account of the great heat, thick vapors rise
from it in summer-evenings. Many rich people come here and bathe in it, and are
very often radically cured. The Tunguse adore this spring, drink the water with
a sacred awe, and dare not bathe in it with any part of their clothes on. There
are other hot baths, in this district equally salubrious.

Not far from Altanskoi-Karaul, is one of the highest mountains of Dauria,
called, by the Russians, Tschokonda, and, by the Tunguse, Sochondo. Mr. Sokolof
traveled on it from the 3d of July to the 3d of August; it is very steep,
wooded with cedars and larch-forests, and the underwood consists of
birch-bushes. Near the source of Aguzakan, on this mountain, is a very steep
cupola, or tower, where the huge, bearded vultures annually build their nests;
close by, is a level ground, encompassed by the forest, from whence one may
overlook every thing below; and beyond it we view, with awful amazement, the
steep, rocky clifts, whose snowclad, blue summits are veiled by the clouds. It
rains here almost every day, and the air is in continual motion. In the middle,
the north wind causes snow, and white frosts; the trees, at the same time,
clothed in their best green. The snow-covered clifts occupy a great space
below, and between which are the sources of brooks that flow down into the
rivers beneath. There are also, two principal clifts, running from south-west
to north-east, with a dreadful, deep valley between them, in which the river
Aguza has its origin. The nature of these two clifts, or summits, is
extraordinary; they consist of enormous, bare strata of mouldering granite,
towering up, one over another, into the skies. Mr. Sokolof was the whole day
ascending that at south-west: it rises, like the other parts of this mountain,
with huge, steep rock-shelves, of which he counted six, resembling broad
stairs. Over each shelf, the rocks form a flat space of ground, near half a
mile broad, on which various springs rise, and tumble down the cliffs with a
frightful roar. The utmost summit of the clift, which cannot be ascended
without danger, is very horizontal and flat. Upon it are two frightful abysses,
encompassed by steep-rock walls; at the bottom of each is a little lake, formed
by the snow-water from the rocks, gathering and flowing into them through
clefts; and thus into the middle of the valley, in which the Aguza springs. The
superstitious Tunguse worship this mountain, as the shrine of the offended
gods; and, for this reason, they do not attempt to climb it, supposing the
ascent impossible: of course, they stood amazed at Mr. Sokolof's journey on it,
and his safe return.

As no remarkable part of the southern district of Siberia was now left
unexplored, and it would have been useless to have traveled over the district
of the Lena, and the eastern parts of Siberia, Messrs. Gmelin and Steller
having gone before me; and as it was impracticable to penetrate into Mongalia,
or China, I resolved to return this winter, in sledges, at half the expense I
came here; and, if possible, to go as far as to the Kama. I had now fulfilled
my commission, and traveled over all the ground pointed out to me by the
Academy of Sciences; and having dispatched Messrs. Sokolof and Bykof, in
December, to the Wolga, there to wait, to collect the vernal plants on the
opening of spring, my own departure from Krasnojarskaja was fixed for the
beginning of January, my plan being to wait at Tura, for the arrival of Mr.
Georgi; but receiving, from this gentleman, a proposal to wait for him at
Krasnojarsk, he being detained longer in his tour than he expected, I consented
to it. Mr. Georgi having sailed round that immense lake, called the Baikal, as
far as to the mouth of the Selenga, which he reached in autumn, he went out
here, partly on account of the stormy weather, and partly to see the Daurian
mine, at a good season of the year; and sent his vessel back to the mouth of
the Angara. Mr. Georgi, and his attendant, arrived in Krasnojarskaja, the 22d
of January; and having settled with him our plan of future proceedings, I left
that place the same night, and made the best of my way, in sledges, to Tomskoi,
a distance of near 500 miles; traveling, night and day, for that purpose, and
arrived there on the 26th.

The colonies about Tomskoi, are in the most wretched state, as to people.
There is, every where, a want of women; so that the young men abandon
themselves to all sorts of vice. The better class of people, who have the first
choice, are most unreasonable. Among the number of new colonists, I saw many
sick and infirm people, several madmen, and married persons without children,
and a great many old people. Of course, this must be very unfavourable to
population; but what is still worse, they have taken many fathers from their
wives and children, and sent them, heart-broken, broken, into these places of
wretchedness; and those who can forget their families, have been constrained to
take other wives, in order to solace their hours, in their employment here.
Many of them told me their stories, bathed in a flood of tears, and their
hearts bleeding, at the recollection of having left their children behind,
under the most intolerable yoke of tyrannic despotism.

I remained in Tomskoi till the 29th, that I might not follow my baggage too
closely, when I set off, in the evening, for Tara, or Tura, a further distance
of 480 miles.

The Tartars on the Barabynian step, where, on occount of the number of lakes,
there are vast quantities of water-fowls, etc. are much employed, in catching
plovers (Colymbi); the silver-like, glittering, breast-skins of which, they
sell to passengers, at from three to five copecs a-piece; and, also, in
collecting the beautiful, violet-bluish throats of sea-plovers (Colymbi
arctici) and the glossy, green heads of the wild March-ganders, which, when
sewed together, have a beautiful appearance, and make very splendid muffs for
the ladies.

In this country, particularly about the fortress Kainskoi, where the brook
Kainska flows into the river Om, are numerous colonies, settled on account of
the great fertility of the soil, which yield plenty of corn and flax.

I reached Tara, during the nights of the 3d and 4th of February, and Mr.
Georgi a few days after me. He brought with him a rare collection of plants,
minerals, and other curiosities, which were to be sent on to Petersburgh, on
sledges; and we chose this city for business, as we could be here well
accommodated: and I continued here till the 23d.

Tura. The city of Tura, or Tara, lies on the elevated, left border of the
Irtisch; and is two or three miles in extent, along the bank of the river. This
place is to be built, by degrees, with geometrical exactness; and has already
above 100 new houses, which give it a gay appearance. They are increasing these
buildings every year. The number of houses, in all amounts to 669; and the male
inhabitants, are 1715, of which 252 are of Bucharian extraction, and one
descended from the Siberian Khan Kutschum. The place has five churches, and a
cathedral now building with stone. This last, with a court of waywodes, some
Imperial storehouses, the treasury of the fur tribute-office, and the
gunpowder-magazine, are encompassed with a wooden wall; otherwise, there are no
partitions, except the vestiges of some old palisadoes and bastions.

Tara has a governor, a small garrison, and a court of waywodes, subordinate to
Tobolskoi; to which also belongs the towns, Omskaja, Tschernoluzkaja,
Tatmyzkaja, Tjukalinskaja, Bergamatskaja, Ajefskaja, Ust-Tartaskoi-Pass, 103
Russian, and 138 Tartarian villages. The number of tributary Tartars in this
district, including a few Cossacks, is 5,248; among which there are 2344
Barabynian Tartars, and 574 citizens, of Bucharian origin.

As the district of Tara has very extensive wildernesses, and, in its northern
parts, some dark valleys, it abounds with game. The sables here are not even so
valuable as those of Tomskoi; and, of course, are very bad. The other animals
are bears, wolves, foxes, martens, ermines, squirrels, beavers, otters, lynxes,
and hyenas. In the northern woods, they catch reindeer; and, in the Barabynian
step, elks, deer, and wild boars.

This district is also rich in fish; and the Irtisch abounds with sturgeon,
husos, nelma, taimeni, and lenki; and the lakes of the Barabynian and Ischimian
steps are crowded with pike, barbel, and whitings, plentifully caught during
the whole winter. Notwithstanding the land lies low, it contains some
remarkable, mineral earths.

Our business being completed, on the 23d of February, Mr. Georgi left me,
according to a plan agreed on, and took his road to Tobolskoi. He traveled in
sledges, as far as the Iset; and, in spring, went up the mountainous side of
that river, as far as Catharineburgh; then down the Tschussowaja to its mouth,
in order to take a view of the habitations betwixt the Sylva and Kama; and then
along the Ufa and Djama, to the Jaik; and so, by a new road, through the
Jaikian step, to the Wolga. I went the straightest road, through the Ischimian
step, the province of Isetskaja, and the northern part of the country of the
Baskirians, intending to go, the next spring, from the Kama toward the Jaik,
and through the southernmost part of the deserts, situated between that river
and the Wolga, in order to collect such vernal plants as I missed the time
before.

Having traveled the chief part of this road in 1770 and 1771, and given my
readers every thing worth notice, it would be idle to repeat it. After
traveling over 1100 miles of ground, we reached Sarapul, on the 11th of March;
and having, in this journey, met with the Wotiaks and Tscheremisses, I will
here give some account of them.

Among all the little nations, of Finnish origin, for such are the
Tscheremisses, Wotiaks, Eastjaiks and Mordvines, the Wotiaks are the least
dispersed in the Russian empire, and still inhabit their ancient abodes.
According to their own account, their princes had formerly, in the place where
Askoi Prisgorod now stands, a fortified residence; but the Tartars obliged them
to quit the same, and take refuge in the thick forests, toward the Wjatka, and
Upper Kama, which has its name from them; Kam, in Wotiak, meaning a large river.

The Wotiaks, or Oudmurt, as they call themselves, which signifies Man, have
some characteristic marks which distinguish them from their neighbors, the
Tscheremisses. They are more lively, more gay, and less obstinate; both men and
women are addicted to tippling, which must be attributed to the liberty they
formerly had of distilling spirits, without any impost; being very little mixed
with Russians, or other strangers. There are not many tall and well-formed
people among them; the women, in particular, are little, and of mean
appearance. No nation is so red-haired as this; yet there are some few with
black hair, and some men have light-coloured hair on their heads, and reddish
beards. They are not so cleanly as the Tartars, yet more so than the Mordvines,
and Finlanders; and, in their houses and clothes, are similar to the
Tscheremisses. As their vessels and victuals are most disgustfully nasty, so is
their strong liquor disagreeable to the taste; though, in the distilleries,
they spare neither malt, nor honey.

The head-dress of their women is the most peculiar, and enormous, of all the
nations subject to Russia. They bend a piece of birch-bark, about six inches
broad, into the form of half a cylinder, so as to fit the WOTIAKS.
top of the head; it is kept in this form, by a bow of wood in the inside; and,
in the opening behind, a narrow piece of birch-bark is placed. On the top of
this cylinder, they fasten another piece of birch-bark, bent into a square, six
inches broad, inclining a little forwards, like our grenadier's cap; the upper
part is covered with red, and the lower with blue cloth, which is usually
ornamented with copecs, and little tin plates. What gives the best appearance
to this scaffold, is a cloth, an ell long, sewed on the edge with red, blue and
brown needle work, and has, round about it, blue, red and white fringes, three
or four inches long. This cloth is fastened on the upper border of the
birch-bark, so that the ends hang down on each side, having the ornaments
visible between them; and the rest of the cloth hangs down behind on the back.
Underneath this head-dress, the women wear their hair twisted, on both sides,
over the ears, so as to resemble a thick knot, ornamented with beads and
jingling toys. No married woman will appear before a stranger, without such a
bonnet; and should any one enter a Wotiak house, at night, they will even go to
bed in this head-dress; which they wear, also, in doing the business of the
house. Widows, and very old women, free themselves from this encumbrance, and
wind a cloth, like a handkerchief, round the head, letting the ends, which are
embroidered with needle work, hang down behind.

Their clothes are also singular. Their upper-garment is long, made of cloth,
or linen-stuff, with long sleeves, and open, like those of the Polanders;
through which they put their arm, fastening the narrow end to their girdle
behind. About the neck is a square fall-down cape, like a collar. They wear
shifts, embroidered with needle work about the neck and wrists, and breeches
quite tight to the limbs.

Girls, like the Tartars, wear round bonnets, ornamented with beads and coins;
with this difference, that they hang an embroidered cloth, floating down
behind, with a kind of bead-necklace, hanging loosely from one ear to the
other, across the neck before, braiding their hair behind, and concealing it
beneath these cloths. From the girdle hang strings and fringes.

The architecture of the Wotiaks is but little different from that of the
people of Tschuwa. Their houses are scattered, without pales, or enclosures;
and contain large, sleeping benches, and Tartar furniture. They are good
husbandmen, keep bees in hollowed trees, hunt all the winter, and are able
shooters.

I can say but little of their religion, but what has been said in the
Collections of Russian history. There are but two heathen villages remaining
among them; and though the christian Wotiaks, in the regency of Casan, chiefly
profess paganism clandestinely, yet they are afraid to be noticed, in so doing,
by the Russian clergy that reside among them. I gathered, however, the
following account of these pagans, who inhabit the regency of Orenburg. Besides
the great god, called, by them Inmar, they worship the god of earth and
prosperity, Mu Kalzin; the god of water, Wu-Inmar; also, the sun, as the throne
of the Supreme Deity; and other subordinate divinities. They call upon these,
in the hour of necessity, especially on their annual festivals, and at their
solemn sacrifices, where an old, sacerdotal man, called Tona, says prayers.

Their keremets, or places of sacrifice, are in pinewoods, especially on a well
situated and elevated spot (Kuss), surrounded with white firs, and enclosed.
They celebrate four, general feasts in the year: the first, Butschun-nunal, is,
in the Russian easter-week, at which time begins their new year, with
feastings; the second, or Tulys-nunal, falls after summer seed-time, at which
they offer prayers, and victims, to the god of the earth. Wissasko-nunal, is a
day of supplication for a good harvest, celebrated in one, or more, houses, of
a village; and in which they sacrifice sparrows (Kutscho), caught in snares,
and fed for that purpose. These they burn in a fire, to obtain good weather,
and easy work. Keremet-nunal, is their greatest festival; this is celebrated
after harvest, by the whole village, in its keremet, with solemn sacrifices. On
this occasion, they consume a horse, of any color except black, a bullock, a
sheep, a goose, and a duck. The horse is the last slaughtered animal; and this,
by an assistant of the Tona; and all are dressed for a sacrificial meal. The
fat and blood are burnt; but the head of the bullock, and sheep, with the whole
skeleton of the horse, are suspended on a fir tree, in the keremet. The skins
are taken home, and sold. The prayers, repeated during these sacrifices, are
directed toward the meridian sun, never toward the east.

Took tells us, from this Collection of Russian histories, that the dress of
the Wotiak men, is like that of the Russian boors; only that it is commonly
made of coarse, white cloth; that their winter-caps are of cloth, with a border
of a different color; that they tie a knife to their girdle, and a case, for a
hatchet.

He says, they are honest, peaceable, hospitable, and sober; but superstitious,
of cold complexion, and extremely simple. The women have winking eyes, and
smile, even to ugliness. They are short, timid, very modest, chaste, laborious,
and complaisant.

These people speak a language of their own, derived from the Finnish language,
but have no writings, or letters. In reckoning, they make use of little sticks,
which they call Pos, a kind of tally, which they notch. Instead of a signature,
they use certain marks, called Hand-marks. They do not reckon their time by
years, but give different names to the months, in conformity to natural events.
Thus the month of March is named, Silpron Talis; i. e. the month of the
breaking-up of the ice; the like of the rest. Friday is their sabbath, or day
of rest. With them, as with other nations of Asiatic Russia, Wednesday is
called the day of blood; on which day they never undertake any thing of
importance.

"The Wotiaks, or Votiaks," as Took calls them, never compose large towns; but
live in villages, and are always ready to transport their habitations from one
place to another, as appears eligible. The interior disposition of these
villages, the houses, the economy of the people, their food, taxes, and
general constitution, are like the Tscheremisses, which will be treated of. To
the chief of villages, they give the name of Ellir; and to their starosts, or
elders, that of Kartlik. They are a very retired, reserved people, and suffer
no strangers to come among them; and it is very seldom that any litigation is
brought before the tribunal of the province.

They are assiduous in rural economy; and, at their leisure hours, employ
themselves in turning cups, spoons, shuttles, etc. and varnishing all kinds of
bowls and cups. The women employ themselves in sewing, making linen, coarse
cloths, and felts, making clothes, and embroidery. There are not many rich
among them, neither are they poor; he who possesses from 15 to 25 desettines of
land (which is a piece of ground 560 feet long and 280 broad), with 30 horses,
and other cattle in proportion, passes for a rich man, of the first class.

Their manner of salutation is to give hands, and say, Diesban; that is,
Health, or Prosperity! The women, instead of embracing, strike one another with
both hands on the shoulders. Abusive terms among them are, Schou ourdam! Thou
walking carcass! Vistan schaitan! Thou stupid devil! Schaitan med bastos! The
devil take thee!

Every village has a number of baths; here the women lye-in. On the birth of a
child, the father sacrifices a white ram, to the genius, or tutelary angel of
the newborn infant; at which time, they feast, and make merry. The names of
men, peculiar to this people, are, Ischmak, Danabai, Kamai, Eltemir, etc. that
of women, Dalisch, Bidelet, Beke, Akston, Tschanga; which last signifies a
crow.

Wives are purchased: some pagan Wotiaks buy as many as they can; but they
seldom have more than one or two. The marriage-contract is called, Yeraschou;
the price paid Yerdoun, and which is generally from two to fifteen rubles; and
the dowry of the bride, is always in proportion to the marriage-price. They
never marry their sons under ten years of age; nor their daughters, till they
are 15; and it is always interest that determines the choice.

On bringing the Yerdoun to the father-in-law, the young man takes back his
bride, who is delivered to him veiled. On his return home, he finds guests
assembled, at his father's house, to whom the bride is presented, after being
previously taken aside into another room, and clothed in the dress of a
married woman, who, whilst the Torkai, or priest, makes the oblation of a cup
of beer to the gods, sits in the door-way, on a piece of cloth, laid there for
that purpose. The object of the offering, is to procure bread, riches, and
children, to the new-married couple; who drink of the beer, blessed by the
priest, which act may be called, the sacerdotal benediction of the nuptials.
This done, one of the bride-maids presents beer, or mead, to all the guests,
and the bride kneels down before every one of them, till he has drank off the
goblet; they then eat and drink, as much as they can, and dance, till the young
people are put to bed.

Some weeks after, the bride's father pays her a visit, examines into the
housekeeping, and pays her husband the remainder of her fortune; or, in lieu
of it, gives some pieces of houshold-furniture, and takes back his daughter
with him, whom he keeps from her husband two or three months, and sometimes
even a whole year. During this time of absence, she dresses like a virgin, and
is employed at work for her parents and herself, occasionally. At the
expiration of the determined time, the husband comes to demand his wife, who
shows as much repugnance at following him, as she did on the day of her
marriage, cries as much at leaving home, and goes to bed to her husband with
the same reluctance. She soon, however, suffers herself to be persuaded, and
easily admits of consolation. The friends of the family are again regaled, and
make even greater merriment than they did on the wedding day. A widow's wedding
is conducted with much less ceremony: they dance, to the found of the pipe,
called bys; of the Russian balaleika, a kind of guitar, with only two strings;
and of another instrument, which they call, oumkress.

Before they bury their dead, they wash the body, and cloth it in complete
apparel; and, as they always carry a knife, fastened to their girdles, so they
give one to the deceased, taking care, however, to break off the point. They
lay a cake upon his breast, and fix a lighted torch by his side. At the
interment, they throw some copecs into the grave, and pronounce these words,
Yougt inti sot soui! O earth, make thou room for him! The body is laid in a
kind of coffin, with some skillets and hatchets, lasts for making mat-shoes on,
and other useful implements; As soon as they have filled up the grave, they
stick some lighted torches on it, then, throwing three eggs, boiled hard, and
cut into small pieces, on it, they say, Tiogafet medou sos! There, keep that
for thyself! On coming from the burial, the friends walk over a fire made
before the house of the deceased, rub their hands in ashes, bathe, and change
their clothes, and then make merry. These ceremonies are always the same, to
people of every condition, age or sex.

On the second day after the interment, they celebrate the first, commemorative
festival called, Pemiouka. At this feast, instituted in honor of the dead, his
friends assemble in his house, and partake of cakes and beer, a portion of
which they carry out into the yard, and repeat, as before, Tiogafet medou sos!
The words are addressed to the deceased; but the dogs take care of the
provision. On the seventh day, they sacrifice a sheep; on the fortieth, a
horned beast, or a horse. All the victims are eaten, in memory of their
departed friend, to whom they send his share. On the Thursday in Passion-week,
they celebrate a general, commemorative festival; at which they assemble, every
one, at the tomb of his relation, light up torches, eat cakes and the flesh of
some victim, leaving a portion on the grave of his family.

It will readily be conceived, that amongst such a people, there is as much
superstition to be met with, as among European nations. Some of the nations of
the Wotiaks think, that Wednesday and Friday are unlucky days; that the flight
of a blackbird, or a crow, across their path; a cuckoo perched on the top of a
house, and the meeting of a hedgehog in motion; are so many presages of death,
or at least of dangerous sickness. He who dares to kill a swallow, a lapwing, a
pigeon, or a water-wagtail, exposes his flock to all sorts of misfortunes. They
even build nests for the swallows. They suppose that a bear, that has been
wounded in the chase, knows his enemy, and seeks and pursues him all his life.
They take great care not to call a bear by his name, but Maka, that is, old
man. If a tree is struck by lightning, it was to destroy a devil which had
there taken its abode. Noon is a dangerous time with them, from the first
appearance of roses, to the end of August. At every eclipse of the sun, or
moon, they fancy it a metamorphose to which these bodies are subject. Among the
christian Wotiaks, they attribute the cause of bad harvests to their making no
offering to the gods. Whoever would be sure of crossing the water in safety,
must first throw a handful of grass into it, and say, Ero koul monae, Do not
hold me. They have an astonishing number of similar, superstitious opinions,
too tedious to relate. They have also, among them, Vedirs, or magicians, who
they conceive hold correspondence with evil spirits, and have even the power of
metamorphosing men into animals. They call him Oubir, who has been thus
metamorphosed; and imagine, that, after he has undergone this ideal change, he
must for ever be a vagabond, and a wanderer.

Among the malevolent deities, Schaitan, or Satan, is the chief. He lives in
the water, and is hence called Vou-mourt, or watery-man. They have a god, named
Palas-mourt, or Alida; the former signifies half-man; the latter expresses the
idea of a satyr, or demon of the forests. This god dwells in the woods, has
but one leg, and one eye, which is very large, and a monstrous nipple to his
breast, with which he stifles men, by thrusting it into their mouths. The
Albaste of the Wotiaks is much the same as our Ignis fatuus, or
jack-a-lanthern; he plays his tricks, holds his wanton revels in deserted
houses, in bathing-rooms, and uninhabited villages; on which account they burn
all the houses and villages they abandon, that they may not become a retreat
for these wicked phantoms.

They imagine a twofold existence after death. The first is, Dounja yougguit,
a resplendent life, the inheritance of the good, wherein they enjoy every kind
of happiness a Wotiak is capable of conceiving in this world; the other,
Kouratzin inli, or the abode of bitterness, containing a vast number of
cauldrons of pitch, in which the wicked are for ever boiling.

Whenever any epidemic sickness rages among them, they sacrifice a black sheep
to Inmar, that he may prevent the devil from doing them harm. The ceremonies of
this sacrifice are performed on the bank of some river; and whilst the flesh of
the victim is making ready, every father of a family goes with a stick into all
the rooms of his house, and beating about him, at every stroke, cries, Get out
of my house! This done, they fire off a fowling-piece, or shoot an arrow, at a
dog, or cat, of the village; which, when killed, they drag with a cord to the
place of sacrifice, always going down the stream to it; then leaving the
animal, with the cord fastened to it, every one throws his stick into the
river, and proceeds to the sacrifice, to which they give the name of Orvas.

In general, the Wotiaks are very zealous in their religious observances; are
very desirous to obtain the approbation of the gods, and use every means to
deserve it: in a word, they are devout, and very pious idolaters; but,
notwithstanding this, in 1774, there were reckoned 27,228 males, and 27,169
females, who had been baptized, in the kingdom of Casan alone.

My account of the Tscheremisses, who chiefly inhabit the districts about the
Wjatka, and the Kama, will be much shorter, as I could not meet with an
opportunity of being better informed. They are of a middling size, with light,
fair, or red hair, especially their beards, which are thin. Their faces are
fair, with strong features. They are weak, slothful, timid, very roguish and
more obstinate than any people I ever saw. Some of their women have fine faces,
but far inferior to the Tartars; and their common dress is very unfavourable to
beauty. Their hair they twist into two tails, one on the crown of their head,
the other on the back part; the rest of the hair is formed into knots; and,
after all, the head is covered with a small cap, embroidered with various
colored needle work. This is the head-dress of the married women; and, when
they go abroad, they tie a cloth, worked in the same manner, over the head, and
under the chin. Girls, who generally go bareheaded, braid their hair behind, in
two floating tails; and, when they go out, tie the same kind of embroidered
handkerchief, or cloth, about their heads; but married women are ashamed,
particularly before their father-in-law, to go bare-headed. All the women wear
breeches, and shifts of coarse linen, and a long outer garment of cloth, or
linen, with close sleeves, and a fall-down cape, like that of the Wotiaks. The
lower seam of the garment is embroidered with various colored thread, and
ornamented with colored crosses. The shift, on the bosom, is embroidered in
the same way, and kept together with two or three large brass buckles. They
often wear armlets, or rings, on their arms; and wrap up their legs to an
enormous thickness, like the Mordvine women.

Their houses are richer than those of the Mordvines, Wotiaks, or Finlanders;
they are scattered about, but without enclosures, and generally consist of a
winter and summer apartment, with a portico and stairs. Their inward
construction is wholly Tartarian.

They are industrious husbandmen, rich in corn, and in no want of horses or
horned cattle. They keep also a quantity of bees. The Tscheremissian heathens,
of which there are many, celebrate some of the Russian festivals; such as the
week after Christmas, and the Carnival, but only by banqueting and drinking.
They have also a strong belief in some Russian saint, and in the Mahomet of the
Tartars, whom they call Piambar (Prophet). Their own great solemnities are
thrice a year; the feast of spring, similar to the Saban, a field-feast of the
Tartars, is celebrated a little before Midsummer; every one then cleans himself
in a bath, puts on clean under-garments, and assembles for the general
sacrifice, when a red-brown horse, and a white cow are solemnly slaughtered in
the keremet, the fat, blood, and bones of which are burnt, and their skins
suspended on poles during the general supplication. Their second festival, like
that of the Wotiaks, is called Uginda, and celebrated before hay-harvest, its
principal object is Agebaren, the god of Plenty, and to supplicate his blessing
on the harvest. The third is the feast of general thanks after harvest. They
begin their new year with the Carnival week in March, and this is the
commencement of spring.

"The Tscheremisses" says Took, call themselves May, men, and are settled in
the government of Casan and Ninei-Novorogod on both shores of the Wolga, but
chiefly along the left side of that great river, quite into Permia. They are of
Finnish origin, and speak a language peculiar to themselves, but have no books
or writings. During the sovreignty of the Tartars, they were like the Wotiaks,
subject to that people.

Though I spell, the word Tartars according to the old pronunciation; yet the
original word is Tatars, and the French and German writers have within these
few years adopted this orthography; but, as it will require a better authority,
than mine, to change the spelling, I have continued it according to the old
method, as I have in calling the city Moscow, which should be pronounced Moskva.

The Tscheremisses, though formerly they had princes of their own, now have
neither princes nor nobles, and though in early times they led pastoral lives,
being confined to a small district, they are obliged now to turn their thoughts
to agriculture.

Their farms consist of a hut of only one room for the family, a few stables
and outhouses in the yard, detached from each other, and several, little
magazines built each on a perpendicular bank, which serve them also for
chambers in the summer-season; all these buildings are of wood, forming a
square, the area of which, between the different huts, is all open. Their rooms
for winter are built at the height of about 4 or 5 feet, over a cellar, to
which you ascend by a few clumsy steps, under a covering of planks. Each room
contains, besides an oven, a hearth for culinary purposes and a broad bench for
the family to sleep on; sometimes the kitchen is in the dwelling house, and
often is called the Blackroom, and black enough, in truth, it is, from the
smoke which has no chimney or vent; the doors of, their rooms are very low, and
instead of a window, a hole is made about a foot and a half square, covered
with a bladder, or linen, as a substitute for glass. Their furniture is like
that of the Russian villagers. The woman are employed as are the Wotiaks, and
indeed the two nations resemble each other in their persons, manners, and way
of living.

The dress of the men is nearly like that of the Russians, excepting that they
comb their hair straight down from the crown, and then cut it all round nearly
close to the head. The collar, waistbands and bosoms of their shirts are
embroidered with colored worsted; their coat is made of a coarse Russian
cloth, composed of black-wool, and the cape like that of an English surtout,
and an opening in the skirts on each side; such also is the dress of the Wotiak
men.

The dress of the married women is the same with that of the unmarried, only
better worked; they wear trowsers, and instead of stockings, wrap their legs in
linen rags, and often when they ride, with hay-bands, fastening them on with a
rush, or a piece of packthread, wound several times round the calf. Their shoes
are made of the bark of trees, cut into slips and matted. In summer they wear
only a shift, which is not tucked into the trowsers, but hangs loose all round
them. It is also at the neck and wrists cut into a shape and comes down to the
knees; the neck, wristbands and seams all covered with a whimsical embroidery
of different-coloured worsted. A large buckle holds it together on the bosom,
and a girdle round the waist. When they would be more dressed, they put over
this shift a habit like a morning gown, made of various colored cloths and
tolerably fine, and edge it with brown fur. Their caps are in the shape of a
cone, made of birch-bark, covered with linen or stuff, and ornamented with
glass-beads, little, white shells, and flowers. From this cap, a ribband, three
inches broad, ornamented as the cap, falls down the back. Some wear a broad
ribband on the forehead, covered with pieces of money and beads, instead of the
conical cap. Others wear a number of rings, thimbles, and all sorts of jingling
pendants, at their girdles, which ornaments reach down to the joint of the knee
behind; and as they walk, thus curiously adorned, these trappings are offensive
to the ear.

The women, like the Russian country-women, generaly choose to lie-in, in the
bath-rooms. The first man that visits her, after her delivery, names the child,
if it is a boy, and the first woman, if a girl; the children call such persons
afterward Atai, Name-father; and Abai, Name-mother. Common names of males are,
Sengoul, Kispelat, Erbaldi, Ilmet, etc. of females, Pidelet, Astan, Nasouke,
etc. husband and wife they call Mari and Vata.

The wife is here purchased, as in other Tartar nations, and the usual price
paid is, from 30 to 50 rubles; some are worth 80, and there are girls that will
fetch a 100. As wives are destined to submission and labor, it often happens
that a rich father buys wives for his sons, when they are no more than six
years old, yet the wives are never younger than fifteen; the wife's portion
consists of cattle, so that a boy TSCHEREMISSIAN FETCHING HIS BRIDE.
married thus early, finds themself, at the age of maturity, often in
possession of a numerous flock. Degrees of kindred are observed among them in
their matrimonial contracts, and though if one sister dies, they make no
scruple of marrying the other, yet one man never marries two sisters at the
same time. A boys' name-father commonly asks a daughter in marriage for his
name-son, and when he has concluded the bargain, the young people are permitted
to visit one another, and then perform the ceremony of changing rings, which is
called, Schergas vaslaltas.

On the day of marriage, the bridegroom, accompanied by his friends, goes to
the bride's house; and as they have musicians playing before them, numbers of
people join the procession, as it passes through the villages. The bridegroom
then pays the rest of the purchase money, distributes presents, and after this,
the whole company sits down to eat and make-merry; the next day, the bride,
being covered with a veil, he takes her home, notwithstanding all the tears she
sheds, and all the resistance she makes.

In the house where the nuptial ceremonies are performed, a Kart, or priest
rehearses a prayer before the Idol of the house placed on a table; the prayer
ended, a feast and diversion succeeds, with songs and dances, and the sound of
the Gousli, the Schibber and the Kobasch. During these different amusements,
they take the bride apart and transform her into a woman; that is to say, they
dress her as a married woman. The husband then conducts her into the
eating-room, when the Kart repeats another prayer, the bride kneeling before
him. After this ceremony; she distributes presents, often beer or mead, to
every guest, and then returns into her hut. In the evening, the bride undresses
herself, but it is not without a deal of resistance, that she suffers the
bridewomen to put her to bed. On the entrance of the bridegroom, the door is
barricaded, and the next morning, he that represented the father of the bride
enters the nuptial chambers with a whip in his hand. If, after proper
enquiries, there appear no token of virginity, he shows the bride the whip in a
threatening manner, and, in a day or two after, makes her feel the lash of it.
In this manner, according to the degree of crimination, they punish the
levities and misconduct of their wives, and their negligence in the duties of
marriage. The morrow of the wedding day is spent, also, in jollity, and every
one, on returning, throws into the last cup he takes, some copecs, as a present
to the new-married folks. Among the christian Tscheremisses, almost all the
weddings are preceded by this pagan marriage, and often a long time prior to
their solemnization by the christian priest. Nor is it uncommon for a
Tscheremissian-rake to take the liberty of dispensing with this ceremony; he
lays hold of the girl, takes her home, and as soon as she is with child, gives
her father as much for her as he thinks proper.

Interring the dead, they dress the deceased in his best clothes, and put him
into a Schupar, or coffin. The burial is performed on the day of the person's
death, and the procession consists of persons of both sexes. The grave is dug
east and west, and the head of the corpse is laid to the west. As they believe,
with the generality of the Pagans, that the existence after death, is but a
prolongation of their actual life, a few particulars excepted, the friends of
the deceased put a number of copecs into his girdle, and furnish him with
certain, other things that have been neccessary to him in life; such as a last
for making shoes upon, a stick to drive the dogs from him, and a little bunch
of rose-tree twigs for repelling evil spirits. As soon as the grave is filled
up, every one of the company places a little torch on the grave of each of his
departed friends throughout the Sulugartla or cemetery, repeating several
times, Live in harmony and friendship; he then takes a cake, and having eaten
part of it, near each of the lighted torches, lays three pieces of it on every
grave and says, This is for thee. The ceremony closes with placing over the
grave a sheet of linen fastened to a pale, like a flag. On their return home,
they bathe and change their clothes, throwing away the old clothes of the
deceased, and hanging out the serviceable ones, to be purified in the air. Like
the Wotiaks, they honor the dead with commemoration-festivals, and the whole
village, every year, celebrates a general one.

Their religion is idolatry, and in the performance of it, they implicitly
follow the precepts of their priests, who are also magicians, the interpreters
of dreams, and the foretellers of fortune. Every community replaces the Kart,
or priest, by its own election, and they take care to bestow the charge on a
man reputed for discretion and respectable for his age and irreproachable
manners. To every priest is given an Oudschou or sub-presbyter, as an
assistant.

Youma, in their language, is the general name for God; and that the Almighty
may be completely happy, they give him a wife, called, Youmon-ava, mother of
the gods. They have inferior divinities and conceive them to be the offspring
of the two supreme deities, and that the government of the world is their
proper inheritance, as the sons of god; some of whom are married, and others
live in celibacy. The men address the gods, and the women the goddesses. With
them the devil, whom they call Schaitan, is the parent and origin of the
malevolent god. He has his dwelling in the water, and disseminates calamities,
misfortunes and disasters. But the object of their greatest fear is
Koudortscha, the god of thunder, to whose power they ascribe the fertility of
the earth and plenteous harvest: they represent him under the figure of a
puppet, clothed in Tscheremissian garments, put him into a box made of the
bark of birch, and place it a corner of the house. They, like the Wotiaks, keep
festival days, on which they sacrifice animals, and with similar ceremonies.

In the government of Casan, the number of baptized Tscheremisses is
calculated, from 1724 to 1774, to be 6,580 males and 5,951 females; but the
greater part of these new converts, celebrate secretly the pagan festivals, or
at least assist at the ceremonies of their heathen brethren, as much as they
can, without being discovered by the clergy, and punished for their obstinacy.

Soon after my arrival in Sarapul it began to thaw, and as I had planned my
summer's tour, to be by water on the Kama and Wolga, and this place was
unfavourable for the preparations necessary; I set out the 12th of March for
Casan, a distance of 200 miles, and proceeded from thence on my return to
Sarapul on the 7th of April. As this is not a journey of observation, that
having been done by professor Falk, who spent his winter here, I forbear saying
any thing on the subject.

Sarapul. Sarapul, which was my residence in spring, is so populous a village,
as to surpass many market towns. It lies along the high border of the Kama,
chiefly at the bottom of a height, in which there is still a decayed, wooden
fortress, which is said to have been erected during the Baskirian troubles, a
parish church, a house for the bailiff, a courthouse, and a comptoir, two
wooden churches, and 343 dwelling houses, built in very narrow, winding
streets, which are amazingly dirty in spring and autumn. Through this place
flows a brook into the Kama.

The villages under the jurisdiction of Sarapul are mostly inhabited by
husbandmen, and contain 2640 tributary heads. The Kama supplies the inhabitants
with plenty of fine fish, particularly the white salmon, (Eriox) and the
inhabitants call it Krasnaja Kyba, which is usually caught from one and a half
archines to two archines long. An archine, or Russian ell, is of an English
yard.
The only remarkable, small fishes in this river are fishes of passage, which
come annually up from the Wolga, among which is the gold-fish (Clupea alosa) and
the Tschechon (Cyprinus cultratus).

Between 50 and 80 miles above Sarapul, are two large iron-manufactories,
belonging to the crown, in which more than 7000 Casanian peasants and 600
forgemen are employed, and where they forge annually from 130 to 150,000 puds
of bar-iron, which is conveyed down the Kama in barges, and from thence on the
Wolga to Astrachan, and so to Petersburgh. Both these manufactories are so
situated, as to have inexhaustible woods for fire, and great plenty of water. I
speak here from actual knowledge, having visited their works myself.

On the 21st of April, I left Sarapul. The peasants about the river Kama begin
now to increase among themselves the linseed, or hemp seed of Wallachia, the
first seeds of which were brought there by the colonists from Poland. It is now
planted with success in the southern parts of the district of Selenginskaja. On
the Kama it grows three feet and a half high, and yields a far finer yarn then
that of the common flax.

After traveling 380 miles, I reached the river Samara, at Sorotschinskaja, on
the 5th of May, 1773. The bridge here, being not in a proper state to pass
over, I sent an express to Busuluzkaja, in order to get proper assistance in
this place, according to the order I had received for this purpose from the
governor of Orenburgh. I therefore pitched my tent in the plain and dispatched
some of my people, and they not only brought with them on the 7th at night, the
assistance I wanted, but a live, wild colt, which had been caught about eight
days before, near Tozkaja-Krepost.

The tarpans or wild-horses have increased much within these few years in the
steps of this district; for as the wild country between the Jaik and the Wolga
has been uninhabited for a considerable time, these animals used commonly in
summer to advance as much toward the north as they could, in order to shelter
themselves from the troublesome insects, scorching heat, and avidity of
pasture. I am still more and more of opinion, that the wild horses, found
roving in the steps of the Jaik, Don and Baraba, are chiefly the produce of
some bewildred Kirguese and Kalmuck horses, or of the stallions of the Nomades
belonging to this district, with either single mares or whole herds which they
carried off. Hence the variety of color and breed in these horses, though the
chief are yellow, brown or yellowish. The colt brought to me was one of this
color, and was taken from its dam a few hours after it was dropped. If compared
with a tame colt of the same age, it bore the following distinctive marks. It
was taller, stronger limbed, a larger head, with more hair about the mouth, the
ears considerably longer, and the points bent more forwards; he carried his
ears generally backward, like a biting horse, and the forehead was much
vaulted, the mane appeared to be thicker and extended further on the withers,
the tail was blackish and not much different: the back was less, rose a little
curved, the hoof smaller and more pointed, and the fetlocks curled; the color
was a fallow-fawn with a stripe down the back, a blackish mane, and
ass-coloured about the mouth. It looked like a mare-colt; or filley; and the
mother, according to the accounts I received from the persons who caught it,
was in company with seven other mares, that composed the suite of a wild
stallion of the same color. (See the representation in the plate, with Sajan
Tartar digging Bess).

As far as I could learn, that wild species of horse or ass, called by the
Kirguese and Kalmucks Kulan or Chulan, and which was never yet tamed, is not
only different from these horses naturally wild, and called by the Kalmucks
Takja, but also from the Dshiggetei of the Mongols. Most people described them
to me as bluish, or ass-coloured, with a common ass-cross on the shoulders.
Others report that they are of a yellow-brown color, with a black stripe down
the back and a double cross stripe over the shoulders, with shorter ears than
those of asses, and a cow-tail like the Dshiggetei. The last description I
received from an old Cossack, who had escaped from Kirguese captivity, is, that
the Chulan is a medium between the Dshiggetei and the ass. According to the
first account they should be the Onagri of the ancients; and all agree, that
the Chulan is so wild as not to be tamed, and swifter than the fleetest horse.
These animals go in large troops, especially in spring, when they wander
northwards from the Ural to the mountains Tumada; and when they return in
autumn to the warm districts of Persia and India.

On the 14th of May I arrived at Jaizkoi Gorodok, and found the condition of
the Jaikian Cossacks much changed since I was there, and by their own fault.
The former liberty and constitution of their court of waiwodes was no more, but
Lieutenant Colonel Simanof governor of Jaizkoi, commanded them, and had two of
the first Starchins or elders, whom the fury of the people had spared in the
troubles of 1771, for his assessors. Four battalions of light troops, and a
certain number of irregular regiments were quartered in forts before the city
and within, also, to keep the peace. Many Cossacks, even of the rank of
Starchin, to avoid punishment, were obliged to leave their effects and fly, and
some few, who escaped from prison, were roving in the street, and living upon a
miserable subsistence, which they obtain by hunting, or privily from their
friends. Though matters were not yet settled, they were under proper
regulations respecting the fisheries, and one battalion was quartered on the
Kirguisian side, to prevent any hostile surprise, and another, as usual,
attended the fisheries, commanded by an officer they called Jertaul.

The horses and guides being ready for my departure, on the 19th I set off at
noon, with an escort of twelve cossacks for Sundaef, in order to meet Mr.
Surjef, whom I had sent before to gather the vernal plants on the mountains of
Indeskoi, and arrived there the 21st. On the 24th, we left Sundaef, and took
our farewell of the Jaik for good, directing our journey south-eastwards,
through the desert step, and the next day, in these wilds, I met with an
interpreter in his wayfrom Astrachan, sent with dispatches to Orenburgh. This
was the same person I had met at Stauropal in 1769; he was overjoyed to see me,
and we spent the night (with his escort, consisting of four Kalmucks) on the
same spot.

On the steps of the river Kuschum, the Saigaks, or step-goats were seen,
sometimes singly and sometimes in large flocks. The Cossacks, in summer, when
they have nothing else to do, go out in small parties to hunt these animals,
and being unable to consume the flesh or carry it home, skin the best of them,
and carry off such skins and their horns. They had also many horns of those
that have been killed by wolves or other accidents, which they sell to the
Chinese merchants. On the Jaik a couple of Saigak horns are sold from ten to
fifteen copecs, but on the Chinese frontiers for four times the price. The
Cossacks of the Jaik, who kill annually a great number of these animals, assure
me that there some with three horns; and two or the Cossacks, in my escort,
declared they once killed two, that had but one horn each.

Every where on this step, where the titmouse makes a hole, is a quantity of
muscle, and other sea-shells, calcined by the weather, by lying on the surface
of the ground; but underneath the soil, in dry, loamy ground, they are found
entire, having been so preserved a great number of years, since the time that
the Caspian sea covered this district. The whole step along the Kuschum is arid
and dreary, and the soil salt; of course unfit for any kind of husbandry, or
even for rearing of cattle. The lowest spots are scarce green in spring, and
there is not a tree to be seen. On this step we took up our night's lodging.

Whilst we were stopping on the 30th of May, on one of the steps to feed our
horses, some one of our company had kindled a fire; and the wind being high,
blew it among the high grass and set fire to it. It burst out with great rage,
and the flame ran like wildfire, so as to set the whole spot in a blaze, and
we had scarce time to save our wagons, and avoid the fire by running from it.
This day we met some armed people on horseback, who were undoubtedly vagabond
Cossacks, from the Jaikian district of Umno. We were obliged to lie all the
next night under arms. No interruption however ensued, and the next day we
traveled on, reached some quicksand hills, and met with, between them, the
first water-pit we had seen, and indeed the first water for many days. Yet,
notwithstanding we had water with us, and a great number of young toads were
swimming in these pits, we were induced to make our tea with it, and found it
excellent. This same evening we were saluted near the water-pits, by that
scarce, black step-lark (Alauda Tartarica), which I have spoken of before. They
flew here either singly, or in couples, and may be compared in flight and song
to the Alauda Calandra. Here also in this sandy desert was plenty of those
venomous serpents I have mentioned, Phalangium araneoides, and a large species
of beetle (Carabus bucida). If it be true, as the Kalmucks say, that the bite
of these beetles of prey is sometimes mortal to cattle, they may be said to be
the buprestis of the ancients. This sand-desart, which we had just got upon, is
called by the Kalmucks naryn (the small sand). It begins at 49 degrees. N.
latitude, between the Great Usen and the salt-lake Altannnor, joins a tract of
hills, and continues uninterrupted in the middle district, between the Wolga
and the Jaik, as far as the Northern coast of the Caspian sea. There it forms a
cape. This sandy desert, in general, consists of large, green sand-layers,
which rise flat above the salt loams, and scattered with high, quick-sand
hills, like little mountains.

Though this sand seems very unfavourable to the growth of vegetables, yet the
plains are full of green, juicy, and fine plants, the cause of which is the
wonderful nature of this district, being so full of saltsprings. By digging,
the Kalmucks have found large water-pits. This sandy desert has some rare and
curious plants. The high, quicksand hills are full of elymus, arundo, et carex
arenaria. Instead of trees, nature has provided these sand heaps with bushes.
Among them is the most rare, wonderful, and leafless long, thin-limbed
Calligonum polygonoides ( This rare plant was quite unknown to me, till, in my
journey, I met accidentally with Tournefort's Voyage au Levant, where it is
described, Part. II. p. 147, and tolerably well represented by the name of
Polygonoides Orientale Ephedra facie. It is to this first, original passage, I
am indebted for my knowledge of this curiosity, which I could never have
guessed at, by the description given, with an improper, distinctive mark in
Gener. plant. of Linnaeus, who calls this bush of Tournefort, Calligonum
polygonoides. I therefore described it before, by the name of Pterecoccus. See
the plate given, Anas mersa, etc. p. 6, vol. iii. Linnaeus ranges it in his
13th class. The bush properly blooms about the middle of May. The fruit is
large and beautiful, has green, yellow, or handsome red-shaded wings, and the
same taste as the branches of the plant; if chewed, something like that of
sourish apples. For this reason the Kalmucks burn the branches when dry, and
consider the smoke as beneficial to the eyes. The representation given by
Tournefort in his Corollarium, is quite false.
), which has no where been discovered except by me here, upon some
sand-mountains on the Southern Wolga, and about the mouth of the river Kama,
and by Tournefort, at the bottom of Mount Ararat. It had now, on all it is
branches, full grown-fruit, which gave a beautiful appearance to the bush,
seemingly created for a sandy soil, and whose roots extend often to the depth
of many fathoms. As abundantly grew here the Artemisia santonicum, with thick
and woody stalks, which rise in autumn to the height of several fathoms. Here
grows also the Prenanthes Chondrilloides, changed into a bush.

The oldest and best water-pits, in the valleys between the hills, are
sometimes delightfully shaded with fine narrow-leaved willows, and the wild
olive tree (Elaeagnus), or small, white poplar-bushes, whereof the former
become often fine and tall trees.

The plants that cloth this sandy desert are many, "but not being entertaining
to a general reader, I will not enumerate them." Of animals, this district
abounds with wolves, foxes, antelopes, and in reedy valleys, wild boars, little
titmice, and race-hares. Of birds, none (except near some springs and
salt-marshes) but the Bergander, common small larks, large black ones, sparrows
in great numbers, and step-hawks (Falco lanarius), which build their nests on
low trees in the valleys. I met with but few serpents, except the
lizard-serpent, in low, grassy valleys (Lacerta apoda), and still fewer vipers.

We were several days traveling in this desert, encamping on it every night.
One day we met with some pretty partridges, with long, pointed wings; they have
uncommonly short feet, and fly almost like pigeons; as they drink often, they
are seldom seen far from the water-pits, and when these are dried up, they
retire about the Southern Wolga. Their food is the feeds of the Astragalus
cicer and alopecuroides, but in autumn the salt-plants. They generally fly
single, and in pairs, but, in autumn, in whole coveys. When they soar, they
squeak, but fly without noise. Their flesh is good, but tough. They probably
came from more Southern districts, because they had but just began to breed,
laying large white-eggs, like pullets eggs.

On this desert is a mountain of rock-salt, discovered by the Kalmucks many
years since. I went to see it. It is about six miles in circumference, and
divided by a salt-valley, making various windings, befet on each side with
stony hills. In a salt spot in this valley, Mr. Gmelin, when he was here, dug a
trying pit, and found the rock-salt pure as crystal, and reaching quite to the
day or surface of the ground. It cannot be ascertained how far the salt
penetrates into the mountain, but there is no doubt of its advancing a great
way.

KUNDARAU TARTARS


Our journey, on this scorching, sandy step, took us ten days, and having
nothing to drink but the water we carried with us, which became foul in the
vessels, and absolutely stunk, I scarce know how to express the pleasure we
enjoyed at reaching a river on the further side of the step, where we hung over
the stream, men and horses, for a considerable time. On the road I had the
pleasure of being an eye witness of the gipsey, or Egyptian-like way of living
of a tribe of Tartars of Cuban extraction. They have about one thousand tents,
and have at present obtained permission to travel with their flocks along the
river Achtuba, from Tschigit to near the seaside; they call themselves
Kundurau, and are, like most Cuban Tartars, what the ancient geographers call
Hamaxobites.

Campestres -- Scythae
Quorum plaustra vagos rite trahunt domos.
Horace. We saw three of their wandering tribes. Their jurts or tents are in
form and structure different from those of the Kalmucks, and other Nomades.
They cannot be taken to pieces, "being so interwoven with bushes," but being of
much lighter structure, "and scarce twelve feet in diameter," can be put upon a
large cart. The round wall of such a tent is a lattice-work of very slender
rods, and the roof a flatted vault of bent rods, one end of which is fastened
to the lattice-work, and the other to a hoop that forms the smoke-hole,
resembling our chicken-rips. The walls of this tent are covered with a
reed-mat, and over the whole a light felt; so that this covering needs not to
be removed. In order to transport these tents, they put them on a cart, with
two high wheels, so as that the wheels are within the tent; on which they also
load their timber, furniture, women and children, and thus wheel off all
together. Rich men have two, or more, such tents, and carts, according to the
number of their families; and they have also another cart covered, in which
they sleep, with their wives. If they do not remain for a length of time in one
place, they do not remove their tents from the cart, but fit underneath it, and
perform their work in the shade of it; and, to prevent their young cattle from
doing the same, they hurdle it in; but if they wish to make some stay, they
unload their carts, and hang in the smoke-hole, on the windward side, a felt,
embroidered with the needle in colored worsted, partly to prevent the smoke's
beating down into the tent, and partly by way of ornament. Their appearance is
wild, and many of them are soon smoke-dried, and so much scorched with the sun,
that they look like Indians. Their women, however, when young, are pretty. In
horned cattle they are rich; "they ride them in preference to horses;" and draw
their carts by two or three oxen, yoked in shafts, one before the other. They
formerly paid a small, annual tribute to the khan of the Kalmucks, in cattle,
butter, and other provisions; but are now free from every tax, and yet are
continually robbing the Russian inhabitants and travelers. In manners, dress,
way of living, etc. they are like the Baskirians. Those who cannot afford to
keep cattle, maintain themselves by following the trades of shoe-making,
tanning, and other handicrafts; whilst some alleviate their poverty, by
sheep-stealing, and other kinds of rapine, which they exercise to advantage
among their neighbors, and the nearer hordes.

At Selitrenoi-gorodok, on the river Achtuba, are the remains of two
magnificent buildings, the most splendid of which has been cleared from the
rubbish, in which it was buried, partly for the saltpeter found therein, and
with which the salt-petre-works adjoining are supplied, and partly with the
view of finding hidden treasures. The extent of this heap of rubbish, which
marks the extent of the ancient, Nogayan city, which here stood, is a mile and
an half. The other ruin, is supposed to have been some mansion, from the many
little divisions of rooms in it. The former, from which has been dug out many
valuable things, and coffins plated with silver, seems to have been the
mausoleum of some khans, and a temple. The whole appears to have been erected
in form of a long quadrangle, from N. N. E. to S. S. W. and is about 12 fathoms
long; and, on the south front, 9 fathoms broad. I remarked a judicious
proportion in the divisions, and the burial-vaults under the northern one; but
the more southern front, whose foundation-walls are still the highest, and are
now 14 feet above-ground, and have their foundations three-quarters of a yard
thick, was embellished with Gothic pillars and arches, the remains of which are
still to be seen. Throughout all the remaining buildings, reigns a most regular
magnificence; of which I never saw an instance in any Tartarean ruins. The
outside of the wall is not only ornamented with colors of green, yellow, white
and blue, in triangular forms; but, in the chief points of the building, are
the remains of Gothic carving, and Mosaic workmanship. Time, however, and the
covetousness of the people, have many years since converted these relics of
antiquity, into heaps of stone and rubbish. Formerly, they loaded whole vessels
with the bricks and tiles of these ruins, and conveyed them to Astrachan; and,
in so doing, for every 100 bricks they took away; they reduced, at least, 2000
into useless rubbish. It is reported, that many coins, and valuable jewels,
have been here found; but I doubt whether any of these objects have fallen into
the hands of real amateurs; or into that treasure of inland antiquities which
the Academy of Sciences at Petersburg has established.

A quarter of a mile to the north of this place, is a large tumulus that has
been dug into; and to which the Kundurau, and other Tartars, when in this
neighborhood, come and say their prayers on it; from an opinion, that a saint
of their religion (Mahomedan) was here buried. The Tartars assert, that this
saint still performs miracles, cures the sick, and sometimes appears to them in
their sleep; the effect of a weak imagination, among many other people in
un-enlightened ages.

Not being more than about 65 miles from Astrachan, I resolved to visit that
place, accordingly paid off my escort, and set off on the 10th of June, with
posthorses. The road to that place is bad and difficult, owing to the number
of quicksand-hills we are obliged to pass. The next station (eight miles) is
Krugloi-gorodok, or Dshamjanowa; so called from the Kalmuck prince Dshamjanowa,
who lately died here in a fine wood-built palace, with a chapel and adjoining
stables, erected for him at the expense of the Empress; and whose widow and
successors still reside in it, attended with a lifeguard of Cossacks. This
whole district is rich in saltpeter; but I shall not say more on that subject,
it having been long since described by preceding travelers.

I remained in Astrachan till the 10th of June, and took leave of Professor
Gmelin, who was preparing to take his second tour into Persia, which ended so
fatally to him. He was seized by a Tartar prince and confined, under an idea
that many Tartars were slaves in Russia, in which confinement he died. In my
way back, I passed through the fortress Jenataefskoi, or Schina Balgasun (the
new city), situate on an arm of the Wolga, 100 miles from Astrachan. It is a
place badly peopled, being inhabited only by eight merchants, some reformed
soldiers, Cossacks, and a few private persons. It is a quadrangle, with good
earth-walls, and four bastions. Within the fort are only Imperial buildings, a
house for the governor, a mansion formerly designed for the khan of the
Kalmucks, and a house for the Pristaf, or chief officer of the Kalmuck hordes.
The mansion of the khan is now inhabited by a Kalmuck prince, of Torgutian
extraction, who has been baptized by the name of Alexei Dondukof, was brought
up among the Imperial cadets at Petersburg, and is advanced to the rank of
colonel.

Near Zarizyn (the environs of which are become famous by the last and total
overthrow of the traitor Pugatschef, and his wretched followers, in August,
1774), is a kind of loam, which seems to be fit for potter's work, and becomes,
in calcining, almost as red and tender as the Chinese sealing-wax. Some Turkish
prisoners at Zarizyn, make of it a variety of little vessels, ink-stands,
tobacco-pipe-bowls, etc. Many pieces of selenites are found in the same loam.

Colony of Sarepta. Within 30 miles of this place, on the brook Sarpa, is a
fine colony of Moravian brethren, established within these eight years, and
called, by the founders, Sarepta. It was erected in the year 1765, and has been
endowed, by the Empress, with many distinguished privileges. It was begun by
five of the brethren, deputed by the rest to make choice of a proper spot, and
to mark out the site of the chief house. Since this time it has been annually
increased by families of the Unitas Fratrum, who voluntarily came here, as
colonists from Germany and Holland; so that now, in 1773, it amounts to 250
persons of both sexes, and is yearly increasing by new comers. The place is not
yet finished, according to the plan laid down; yet consists of a considerable
number of well built houses, some of wood, and some of birch.

The largest and finest building, is a new stone-built chapel, consisting of
two stories, and a turret, with a clock. Near it stands two large edifices; one
occupied by the unmarried brethren, and the other by the virgin sisters. They
are all obliged to maintain themselves by their own labor; and, every week, to
deposit a certain product of their labor, in the hands of their superior.
These cannot marry, without the consent of their superior; who seldom grants
them this liberty, till they are advanced in life. Among the brethren in the
former house, are a number of good artisans, as tailors, shoemakers,
stocking-weavers, tanners, upholsterers, blacksmiths, bakers, skinners,
silversmiths, etc. also, a manufactory, where they make half-silks, cotton, and
colored linens, stuffs and handkerchiefs, and all of quality; but, according
to the custom of all Moravian establishments, they ask a high price for their
goods. Young women earn their living by needle work, spinning cotton, bleaching
and knitting. Both buildings have considerable outhouses belonging to them,
for the various purposes of household business, stables, cow-houses, etc.

The other public buildings are, an inn, with a brandy-distillery, a
tallow-chandlery, a soap-manufactory, a place to make snuff and tobacco, a
dispensatory, with a saw-mill, a corn-mill, etc. for which the Sarpa is dammed
up. There are no more than ten principal houses, to each of which is a small
kitchen-garden; and one house for the physician of the colony. Without the
place, along the Sarpa, are several plantations of tobacco, which turn out very
profitably.

The town is fortified by a rampart, ditch, and chevaux-de-frize, with six
batteries, of two pieces of artillery each; and it is otherwise fortified by
nature. A small garrison of soldiers is quartered here in barracks, and
relieved from Zarizyn.

Contiguous to the colony, they have established a farm on an elevated plain,
where they breed a great quantity of cattle; and, close behind this, is a
plentiful spring of water, which, by pipes, supplies the town: a village is
likewise begun in the neighborhood. The soil is a sandy one, and, to all
appearance, no plant can be cultivated to so much advantage, as flax. The
colony has a share in the fisheries of the Wolga; and the Sarpa supplies it
with plenty of common fish. The spring-season yields them river-game in
abundance; and winter, a number of hares and partridges. In 1774, this colony
had the misfortune to be plundered by the Besarabian Tartars, who inhabit the
step of Kuman; and the people thus lost great part of their property; but the
Empress has determined to repair their loss, and protect them in future.

All the buildings here have been erected at the expense of the community, and
out of the general fund; and the proprietors of the house pay a yearly rent of
six per cent.; and, as the principal fund consists of a capital of 40,000
rubles, advanced by the Crown, without interest, for ten years, these annual
rents will nearly, in the said ten years, repay the sum advanced. At the end of
30 years, they are to pay a quit-rent of 25 copecs for every desettine of land
assigned them, of which they have about 4,000; each desettine, 560 English feet
long by 280 wide; so that the whole will amount to no more than 1,000 rubles,
or 250L. sterling. Such of the colonists as wish to return to their own
country, before the expiration of the said ten years, are obliged to re-imburse
the sum of 32 rubles each, which the Crown advanced them for their journey
here. After the ten years, this 32 rubles is considered as a present to them.

Besides these advantages, the colony of Sarepta enjoys, beyond all other
German colonies established in this empire, the privilege of holding
immediately of the chancery-wards at Petersburg, without being dependent on any
other province. To promote internal harmony, and order, they have chosen
presidents from among themselves, and allowed them a handsome stipend. Their
priest has the title of a bishop; and the physician, and other officers, have
annual salaries, from the general fund. They have, likewise, a male and female
warden, to preside over the choirs of the unmarried brethren and sisters, and
maintain that strict discipline, for which the sect is characterised. To these
overseers are given a certain number of assessors, selected from their own
body, who are called counselors; these, with the pastors, administrator, and
warden of the bachelors, compose an assembly, called, the college of wardens;
whose office it is to attend the temporal interests of the community, to decide
disputes, and inflict ecclesiastical discipline; in short, they have a power,
subject to very few limitations. Besides this, they have a secondary council,
called, the assisting conference, before whom matters are brought, prior to
their being laid before the college. Lastly, there is also an assembly of
grown-up men, that have been admitted to the communion, and called, the great
common council. These assemble once a month, when every one is at liberty to
propose what he pleases; and all is determined by a plurality of voices.
Nothing can be altered that is once established, but with the concurrence of
this other house; and the overseers, or wardens, are obliged to give an account
of their administration, to the great council, at the end of every year.

I mention these things, only for the information of those readers who are
unacquainted with the regulations of this sect of people, made by Crantz; and
to amuse them further, I will add a short account of their several spiritual
meetings.

The settled order of their religious assemblies is never interrupted, or
changed, unless for very cogent reasons. They are sometimes held in public,
with the doors open to every comer; and sometimes in private, for the
communicants, or for the choirs of unmarried brethren, or sisters. This private
meeting is styled, the congregation of the choirs. By an established order, two
assemblies are held every weekday; and three, or even four, on Sundays. In
winter, the weekday assemblies do not commence till seven in the evening; and
when it is public, it is called, the hour of lecture, because they then read
aloud some chapters from the bible, or a sermon. Sometimes, also, the minister
preaches, particularly on Wednesday, and sometimes on Friday. But this assembly
is not always general; for twice a week, and, at certain times, thrice a week,
the fraternity of the holy supper hold their assemblies of devotion, in which a
hymn is constantly sung. At times, likewise, any accounts particularly
interesting, that may have been received from the brethren spread abroad in
other countries, are read aloud. In summertime, this first assembly is
transfered to eight in the morning; but the second, is always at nine in the
evening, and is called, the hour of singing, because verses from sacred
canticles are sung. The Sunday assemblies have their order: namely, the
litanies at eight in the morning; that is to say, one public and solemn prayer,
at ten a sermon, and at eight in the evening another sermon, called, the hour
of commons.

The Lord's Supper is celebrated every four weeks, and is preceded by a special
and very rigid confession, and subsequent absolution. This private confession,
is termed, the speaking; and is heard by the administrator in each of the
choirs, who exercises, in this office, the utmost of his authority. All the
communicants receive the sacrament at the same time; and the administering
ecclesiastics, who are chosen for every assembly, by the bishop, from the
administrators and wardens, are then clothed in white surplices, whereas, at
other acts of d^votion, they preach in a secular habit of any color, sitting
at a table.

What is called, the congregation of choirs (for the men and women are divided
into different choirs), is their hours of prayer, or the extraordinary prayers
of the unmarried brethren and sisters. This is held at the discretion of either
division; or as the administrator directs. The signal for these private
assemblies, is made by the sound of a horn, or trumpet; whereas, that of public
assemblies, is, by tolling a bell.

Besides these meetings, they have another, called, a love feast. At these
times, they meet in the hall, that serves for a church, and are presented with
white bread and tea, the distribution of which is accompanied by music, and
spiritual songs. Exclusion from these agapae, is looked on as the second degree
of ecclesiastical punishment, and is commonly preceded by a prohibition from
the communion, on the eve of which sacrament they are held; as, also, on those
of the principal feast days. In these baptisms they use no exorcism. The child
is brought to the font, godfathers and godmothers answer for it, as in other
churches, and the infant is sprinkled three times on the breast. Who would not
suppose that these repeated exercises of piety, should enable a man to conquer
his passions, destroy every vicious affection of the heart, and render the
members of such a society, patterns of true and exemplary holiness! Yet they
often give way to human frailties, corrupt manners are but too visible among
them; and the excellent rules of this sect are always the most favorable side,
in which it can be viewed.

The burial of their dead is attended by no ceremonial rites: no sighs, no
complaints are to be heard, nor any mourning seen; on the contrary, they dress
themselves with more than ordinary care on these occasions, to indicate the
satisfaction they have, that another person has run his career of duty, and is
gone to lay hold of the crown of everlasting life. Early in the morning, on
Easter Day, the whole community meets in the churchyard, and celebrates an
office, in honor of the resurrection.

The Caspian sea. On the left, or western side of the river Sarpa, there
extends to the southward, into the step, a ridge of ground, describing a number
of bays and promontories, and which, seen from below, has the appearance of a
chain of hills, when, in fact, it is no more than the slope of a country very
much elevated. This high bank extends from Sarepta, along the Wolga, and thence
toward the north, as far as the middle Elshenka, which runs nine miles, above
the colony, into the above river. Now, this sudden elevation of ground, the bay
and creeks which it forms, and especially the saline quality of the low
loam-step below, whose surface is mixed with vast quantities of muscle-shells,
gives birth to the most probable, geographical conjectures, not only about the
ancient state of the Kuman, the Kalmuck and Jaikian steps, which are so
thoroughly like each other, but also, concerning the extent of the Caspian sea,
in the remote ages of the world; and on the communication it may have had with
the Euxine sea: conjectures which coincide with the opinion of M. Tournefort,
who has been ever acknowledged an accurate observer, though he might advance
and say a great deal, with great appearance of truth, on the ancient separation
of the Euxine from the Mediterranean; on the rise of the waters of the former
above the level of the latter, and of the influx of this water into the
Mediterranean; probably in the deluge of Deucalion.

That multitude of shells scattered over all the steps of the Jaik, the Wolga,
and the Kalmucks; shells similar, in all respects, to those found in the
Caspian sea, and never met with in rivers; that uniformity of soil, in all
parts of these steps; consisting of nothing else (except in places covered with
a flying sand) than a pure sand, connected with such slime as is sound at the
bottom of the sea, or a yellowish clay, without the smallest appearance of
turf, or any layers of mineral earth, till we come to a bed of clay, at a very
considerable depth; that general, saline quality of the soil; the innumerable
flats, and lakes of salt water; and, above all, that continued equality of
country, in all these vast deserts, are so many incontestible proofs, that they
must have been covered formerly by the waters of the Caspian sea: and, though
these plains have been forsaken by the sea, for a great number of ages, yet,
whether by the effect of the aridity of a hot climate, whether in consequence
of the saltness inherent to them, and maintained by the clayey nature of the
inferior stratum; in short, whether by an effect of that property, they have
only produced plants, requiring a saline earth and water, and which, by their
decay, make but little earth, and a great deal of salt; from whatever cause it
be, yet these plains have never hitherto been clothed with vegetable earth, or
turf; or by any kind of wood whatever.

It is then plain, that the elevated ground, between the Don and Wolga, as well
as the high lands between the Wolga and the Jaik, have been the ancient banks
of the Hyrcanian sea; for it is in these high lands, that the disposition of
the earth, in strata, is first discovered, that the general saltness of the
ground first disappears, that its surface is covered with black mould and turf,
and that the marine productions peculiar to the Caspian sea, are no where to be
met with; and if we meet with whole banks of shells and corals higher up the
Wolga, where the lands begin to be more mountainous, they must necessarily
arise from an inundation of the globe, so much the larger, and the more remote,
as all the marine productions contained in these layers, are of a nature not to
be found, either in the Caspian sea, or in the Euxine; but only in the depths
of the ocean.

After saying thus much, it may naturally be asked, how the Caspian sea, which
acquires, from the rivers constantly running into it, as much water as it is
supposed to lose by evaporation, for no sensible reflux has been observed in it
for many years; how this sea could have lost, at one time, so great a body of
water, as to leave dry a space of country, doubtless more than 15 fathoms
higher than the actual bed of that sea, and of so vast an extent as the plains
of the deserts from the Lower Don to the Jaik, thence to Lake Aral, and behind
this lake to the Uralian mountains, which are a southern prolongation of the
Moguldsharian mountains? If we admit Tournefort's supposition, which he has
rendered probable, namely, that the mountains of the Thracian Bosphorus were in
perfect contact, and formed a boundary, which divided the Euxine from the
Mediterranean; so that the former, which received into it such great rivers, as
the Danube, the Dniester, the Don, and the Kuban, was an immense lake, whose
level was above that of the Mediterranean sea, or the ocean; but by a rupture
of this mighty dam, occasioned either by the successive action of the waters,
or by an earthquake, the waters of the Euxine, rushed into the Mediterranean
sea, to gain its level; and that the first influx of this enormous torrent, was
the reason of these inundations; which, according to the most ancient records
of history, deluged a part of Greece, and the isles of the Archipelago; we
shall be able not only to account for this diminution of the Caspian sea, but
the visible traces that still subsist of the ancient elevation of the Caspian,
will corroborate the opinion of Tournefort.

It appears, that the eastern steps, which shows the traces of the retiring of
the Caspian sea, has an open communication, by low districts, with the Crimean
step, and others, situated toward the Black Sea; which steps, as far as I
could learn, are of the same nature with this eastern step. And hence, if the
level of the Black Sea was many fathoms higher, before the waters burst through
the channel of Constantinople, than at present, to which, perhaps, the rivers
which flowed in those times, from wild, woody, and moister districts, might
have much contributed; it is a plain probability, that the steps of the Crimea,
Kuman, Wolga and Jaik, and the low countries of Great Tartary, till we pass the
lake Aral, has been one common sea, which, by a narrow and shallow straight,
whose marks the river Manytsch exhibits, flowed round the northern angle of
Mount Caucasus, and formed, by the present Caspian and Black Seas, two vast
deep bays. At this time, the sea-dogs, the several species of sturgeon, and
other fishes of the Black Sea, the atherina, the syngnathus pelagicus, and the
shells called combs, might have been carried into the Caspian sea; which, by
its actual situation, is too remote from all other seas, to permit us to
suppose, that these different, living animals could have come from them.

That as soon as the Black Sea could discharge itself, through the Propontis
into the Mediterranean, the first fall of its level converted a great part of
the flat and shallow sides into salt deserts: and the Caspian sea having been
joined by the Euxine, or Black Sea, by a shallow straight, was, in a little
time, detached from it; the level of the Euxine being much more lower than the
bottom of that straight, and, of course, the Caspian sea must have then become
a lake, confined within the land; but as it did not receive such an acquisition
of water, as the Black Sea, by not having so many and such large rivers
emptying into it The rapidity of the current, in the channel of Constantinople,
toward Archipelago, seems to prove, that the Black Sea receives more water
from the rivers that flow into it, than it loses by evaporation.
, and as, for want of communication with the Euxine, it received none of its
waters, this, with the natural evaporation, must contract the waters of the
Caspian, and leave more land bare; and it was at this time, perhaps, that the
communication it had with the lake Aral ceased. The sand-banks which the waters
had left, now changing into quicksands, which by the wind accumulated into such
hills as are met with in the sandy deserts of Naryn, and the Wolga; old islands
appearing in the dried bottom of the sea, as so many little mountains; such,
for example, as are those of Indeskoi, and others, and many depressions of the
lands, after the sea had left the level ground, remaining as lakes, or
salt pits, many of which are to be seen upon the steps; are all corroborating
arguments of the visible decline of the Caspian sea.

In vain is the objection, that travelers relate what they have observed near
Baku; that the sea gained upon the land, and had already swallowed up part of
the town; for if we consider the phlogistic nature of the soil in those parts,
we shall find infinitely greater reason for admitting a sinking of the earth,
and of the mountain, than an increase of the sea, which could not any way be
the case; whilst, on the contrary, a bare inspection of all the countries that
surround the northern part of the Caspian sea, leaves no room for doubting that
it has undergone a diminution, much more considerable than the Mediterranean,
or any other known sea; nay, it is highly presumable, that it is still
decreasing every day. But even without supposing, as we do, that the Euxine sea
was never separated from the Mediterranean, might we not, from the diminution
merely, which every sea experiences in its waters, attribute the separation of
the Caspian sea from the Euxine, and from the lake Aral, as well as the
drying-up of the straight of communication; and may we not conceive, that this
communication once stopped, the sole disproportion between the body of waters
that entered the Caspian, by the rivers that run into it, and what it lost by
evaporation, might produce the same effect, and sink its level much beneath the
general plane of the seas?

In the extracts of Stritter, from Byzantine authors, I find a passage, which
would make it credible, that the low lands, or depressions, at the northern
bottom of Mount Caucasus, through which, according to my opinion, both the
Euxine and Caspian joined, were not quite dry, between the fourth and fifth
century, Priscus, who was accompanying an embassy sent by Theodosius II.
emperor of the East, in 449, to Attila, king of the Huns, relates Memoriae
populorum olim ad Danubium, Pontum Euxinum, Paludem Moeotidem, Caucasum, mare
Caspium, cet. incolentium e scriptoribus historiae Byzantinoe erutoe et
digestae. a J. G. Strittero, tom. I. p. 513.
, from the mouth of a deputy sent from the emperor of the West, whom he met
with in his road, that which the Scythians and Huns used to take, when they
made their inroads into Persia; that they traveled part through a waste
country, or step; then crossed a marsh (which the Roman has undoubtedly
confounded with that of the Maeotis); then went over a mountain, which was to
be traversed as far as into Media. But let this be mentioned only as an
accidental, doubtful conjecture; the natural marks of the decrease of the
Caspian, are more infallible.

On the 26th of June I went to Tzaratzin, or Zarizyn. Here I met Mr. Bykof,
whom I had sent, in winter, from Siberia to the Wolga, and who had spent his
spring usefully, in collecting remarkable plants and insects. Mr. Sokolof, who
came here with Mr. Bykof, in the beginning of spring, made a tour up the Sarpa,
through the Kumanian step, and was not yet returned. Mr. Kashkerof, who had
gone by water on the Kama, arrived here with the wagons just before me.

I chose this place for my autumn abode; as this district affords many
observations in natural history. The remainder of this month, and the next, I
was busy, in the vicinage of the Don and Wolga, among the Kalmucks, which gave
me an opportunity to examine my account of that nation, and set it to rights.
At the end of July, Mr. Sokolof joined me, who, during his spring-tour, through
the Kumanian step, came, not without danger, to the Cossack town Mosdak,
situate at the bottom of Mount Caucasus, and from thence through Kirlac to
Astrachan, and so to Zarizyn.

There is nothing remarkable in the Kumanian step, which Mr. Sokolof traveled
over, but Mount Caucasus, on one of its borders, whose snow-clad summit was
wrapped in the clouds, and which begins to rise on the opposite bank of the
river Terch; and the ruins of a considerable city, situate in the very angle,
formed by the like Baibalinsky, with the river Kuma, and well known in the
regency of Astrachan, by the name of Madshar; a proof that this district once
was well peopled, and deserves population now, being a warm climate, and
favorable for every sort of culture. I had requested Mr. Sokolof to visit, and
describe particularly, the abovementioned ruins, which the Kalmucks call
Zaghan Balgasun (white town), and also, Madsharan-ka-Balgasun (the fine city of
Madshar); and illustrate, with many fables of their own invention: but the
escort which attended him from Zarizyn, was so small, and the danger of
vagabond parties of Tartars, so great, at this time, in the district of
Madshar, that he was as much afraid to approach them, as the Cossacks that
escorted him.

This city is thought to have been the residence of Achmet, king of Grand
Tartary, or the capital of the Golden Horde, and was called, by the Russians,
Tzarevi Podi: but there are no remains of any considerable edifice to be found
entire, the whole being a heap of ruins. Here and there we met with several
kurzans, or elevated tombs, built with brick; and, by the side of a fresh
water-lake, at the foot of a hill, is a place where the wife of some king is
said formerly to have resided. On the summit of the highest hill in all that
country, they show you the spot whereon, they say, the palace of their kings
stood; which the vast extent of its ruins, and the great circuit of its
court-yards, as well as the delightfulness of the situation, seem to confirm.
The ruins of this ancient residence, extend to the length of no less than 29
miles, taking in all along the edge of the step; whilst, in breadth, they are
only three-quarters of a mile. The Tartars, however, relate, that as they
proceed in the step of the Jaik, to the river of that name, they meet with
numberless other ruins of small edifices, built of brick. We know, from
history, that this capital of Grand Tartary, was destroyed, in 1462, by the
great-duke Ivan Vassillievitsch, grandfather of the Czar of that name; and
that, some years afterward, it was razed to the very foundations, by the
Nogayan Tartars. In these ruins, we can scarce pass ten steps, without stirring
up a serpent; indeed, they are general all over this district, whose soil is
salt and nitrous. Their hissings are heard all round; but they are only
harmless snakes, and the black, aquatic serpents.

Whilst I am on the subject of Mount Caucasus, I will say something, from the
authorities of Messrs. Schloetzer and Guldenstadt, of the settlements about
this chain of mountains, which fills the space between the Caspian and the
Euxine seas, extending from the west, eastwards; bordering on Persia, to the
south, and on Russia, to the north. It is a territory which the Russians are
now contending with the Turks for; and contains a greater diversity of nations
and languages than any other country, of the same extent, in the world. Here
are Greeks, whose ancestors have dwelt here from the earliest periods of
history; here are the descendants of those Genoese who held possessions, with
so much authority, on the shores of the Euxine, about the 13th century: and
here are also, Moravians, Persians, and various colonies of Tartars.

According to the geographical description of these countries, Georgia, and its
provinces, occupies the southern side of Mount Caucasus, the Kabardines (among
whom the Tscherrkessians, commonly called the Circassians, are a part) the
southern, the Leguistans and Troughmenians the eastern, and the mountaineers in
subjection to Turkey, the western side, that is toward the Euxine, or Black
Sea, called the Crimea. According to my general plan, no notice should be taken
of countries not under the protection of Russia; but as they lie so contiguous,
and the Russians claim this territory, it may not be improper to say something
of it.

The Troughmenians are the ancient Turcomans, and occupy the eastern part of
the south side of Caucasus, from the western shore of the Caspian sea, as far
as the province of Kaghetia in Georgia. Several of them have their particular
princes; and others are in subjection to their neighbors.

This tribe is unmixed; the people from whom they sprung, wander still about,
in their ancient country, on the eastern shore of the Caspian; their
possessions extending to the lake Aral, and touching the frontiers of Persia on
the south. It is now above 40 years since the hordes of this nation fell under
the Kalmucks of Ayouh, and being then out of humor with the Persians, in 1743,
they determined to put themselves under the protection of Russia, to the number
of 30,000 families; but the Persian Schah prevented them: however, a
considerable number joined themselves to the Tartars of Orenburgh, Ufa and
Astrachan; but, at the time, a party of the Kalmuck horde, in 1770, fled into
Dsungaria, the Troughmenians of the river Ural obtained their liberty by the
sword, and are at present free subjects of Russia, leading a retired life,
about the mouth of the Kuma. The reigning khans are brothers, and saltans; that
is, sons, and princes, of Nour Hali, khan of the Kirguese.

In their figure they resemble the Tartars; are as well made, polite and brave;
acting, like the Swiss, in time of war, and entering into the service of any
neighbor that will take them; and, as they ask no leave, they often fight
against each other.

In short, the people of Caucasus are but so many different remains of many
European and Asiatic people, which, by a succession of many generations, have
acquired a great resemblance to each other, in person, constitution and
character, which border very much on that of the Tartars, who predominate among
them, though they are, in many respects distinguishable. Generally speaking,
the people of Caucasus, are large, well-made, not corpulent, of a tawny
complexion, strong features, small nose, small eyes, and lively, thin
eyebrows, and their hair red or black. They are active, polished, bold and
resolute, voluptuous, very ostentatious in dress and feasts, generous, and
given to dissipation, through pride; and, at the same time, severe, unjust,
perfidious, and addicted to rapine and revenge.

They show great attention to their women, who are well-made, more frank and
open, and more agreeable than Tartar women in general. The Circassians enjoy,
with justice a preference, their beauty, vivacity, ease, and refinement of
their manners; and the justness of their taste, have rendered them famous. Red
hair is thought so great a beauty, that such as are not so blessed, color
their hair with red pomatum. The languages spoken here are as various as the
people; and we find some villages so insulated, as to have a language of their
own, not in the least understood by those of the next village. These languages
are, however, so guttural, so harsh and dissonant, that we have no letters to
express the sounds by.

All the nations of Caucasus, together, may be able to furnish 100,000 cavalry;
notwithstanding, some of them would find it difficult to raise 50 men to march
against an enemy. All these societies together form a kind of irregular
aristocracy, composed of many smaller ones. Every chieftain looks on all the
males of his territory, capable of bearing arms, as his soldiers; each of whom
is obliged to equip himself, and attend his chief when called on. Some of these
people scarce pay any tax, whilst others give a fourth of what they possess; a
tenth is the usual tribute, with a certain number of horses and cattle,
according to the circumstances of the possessor. Merchants, and artisans,
furnish different sorts of merchandise, ammunition, etc. The administration of
justice is conducted in the Turkish manner; an arbitrary sentence is pronounced
immediately, often without enquiry, and sometimes without crime, or any
proportion to the fault.

Many of the Caucasians lead a wandering life; but the chief part live in
villages of from 20 to 50 houses. Each village has a stone tower for defense,
in case of attack, in which women and children are sheltered from the first
assault. Their ordinary houses are but poor, wooden huts; and there are many
families that dwell in jurts, or tents, of white felt. The mansions of their
princes and nobility, are built of wood, some few of stone, all of them badly
built, and badly furnished; and surrounded by the tents and huts of their
domestics and attendants, stables, etc.

Agriculture and pasturage are their principal occupations, though several
follow trades and commerce. Some have plantations of cotton, and breed
silkworms. Vines grow on these mountains, without culture; but they turn their
grapes to no account.

Cattle thrive abundantly with them; but their flocks are not numerous, their
villages being too near each other. The horses of Caucasus are little inferior
to those of Arabia, and one, if properly broke in, will fetch 100 ducats; for
which reason, princes and nobles have fine studs. They are taught to understand
and obey different words of command, to kneel down for the rider to mount,
dismount, etc.

Besides the common trades, these people are excellent workmen in iron. They
make sabres, plain and damasked, and angular poignards, for piercing coats of
mail at the joints, and to render the wounds they give mortal, they make them
of arsenical steel: they make also all kinds of armor. They trade by barter;
but take the coin of every country by its weight.

Some of these Circassians are so expert in stealing cattle, and carrying off
women, that they make a trade of it. Their principal endeavors are directed
toward carrying off beautiful virgins, or handsome women. Such as they take,
they keep as concubines, or sell them to the Armenians, who supply the Turkish
harams, making them pass for christians, in order to enhance their value. What
has been published on the subject, of this famous commerce with the Circassian
women, is undoubtedly exaggerated, though the fact is true. They also carry
their children to Kaffa market, with their cattle, where they obtain 7,000
Turkish piastres for a young and handsome girl. Kluman, of Vienna, one of the
latest travelers of credit, in his Voyage to the Crimea, asserts the same
thing. 'These female slaves, when brought to market, are locked up in a small
private apartment. When there, says he, I was desirous of seeing some, and
spoke to the salesman, for that purpose. One of them was, consequently, brought
out to me, into a room where I was waiting. She was well-dressed, but her face
was veiled; she kissed my hand, agreeable to the eastern custom; and her master
ordered her to walk to and fro. She was elegant to the extreme; when she
unveiled her face, she absolutely enchanted me, so inexpressible was her
beauty. Her hair was light, her eyes full and blue, her nose a little long, her
lips lovely, her features regular, her complexion white and soft, and her
cheeks tinged with a fine carmine; she had a long neck, and a fine bosom
completed the charms of her person. She was desired to wipe her face with a
white handkerchief, CIRCASSIANS BROUGHT TO MARKET.
to show me, her beauty was not owing to paint. She then showed her teeth,
which were white and regular. I was allowed to feel her pulse, in order to be
convinced of her health. After this, she was ordered to withdraw. The Armenian,
who had the disposal of her, assured me, she was 18 years old, and yet an
unspotted virgin. Her price was 4,000 piastres, or about 125L. English; which,
he said, was the value of such a slave. Having viewed this girl, another was
brought out to me, and underwent a similar examination.

It is easy to see, that none but the rich can make such purchases; so that
these victims to voluptuousness, stand a fair chance of being better provided
for, than they would have been at home. This kind of traffic appears shocking
to those of refined sentiments, who seek, in marriage, for a faithful and
inseparable companion, the equal sharer of their good or bad fortune; but, in
other societies, less civilized, we find they are considered in no other light,
than as ministering to the pleasures of sense.

All the Kobardines, and Circassians of Caucasus, when well dressed, wear a
shirt of fine linen, large trowsers, Morocco-leather boots, a long cassock,
tied by a silk sash, and a long upper garment, of fine cloth, or silk, with
open sleeves, in the eastern style. They shave the head, and wear mustachios,
and the beard pointed at the chin; the head covered with a scullcap, of some
rich stuff, and over that a cap flattened at top, and wider there than at
bottom. They seldom go abroad without a poignard, and a sabre; the former in
the sash, and the sabre in a leather belt. The poor wear cloth, or cotton
stuffs, of their own making.

The female dress is a shift, trowsers, a vest, and a gown, sometimes with
sleeves, and sometimes without. In winter, they put on furs, reaching to the
feet. They always wear earrings, and a necklace. The head is covered with a
tastar, or Tartarean veil, which is brought over their faces, when they go
abroad.

They eat, like the Tartars, but their viands are made more relishing. At
meals, they sit on chairs, round a table, are very fond of strong liquors,
confining the interdiction of the Prophet to wine alone, for they are all
Mahomedans. Their common drink is mead, and a kind of English ale, brewed by
themselves.

Polygamy is allowed among them; the first wife having many more privileges
than the second, or third: few, however, have more than one wife, and she winks
at her husband's intrigues. They are too proud to confess that they purchase
their wives, but call the price paid, a nuptial present; which they will fix,
however, with as much precision as a Tartar.

As to their funerals, they wrap up the dead in large winding-sheets, and bury
them without a coffin. In different places, about Caucasus, we meet with
epitaphs, crosses and inscriptions, which indicate them to have been made by
christians. Probably, these are the remains of the Greek empire, when the seat
of it was at Byzantium; or else of the colony of Moravians, who quitted their
country about the end of the 15th century, to which they were exposed, and
sought an asylum here, though they are now entirely degenerated, and mixed with
others, preserving only their name and language; or, they may be vestiges of
the zeal of Ivan Vassillievitsch, the great Tzar of Russia, for the conversion
of the Caucasians.

As I shall, probably, have occasion to mention the Circassians again, I will
say no more of them here.

On the 4th of August, continues Dr. Pallas, I made a tour up the Wolga, in
order to visit the German colonies; and saw, on the heights, along the road, a
great number of water-melon gardens, in the open step, where this fruit grows
very large and fine, without watering. The water-melons of Zarizyn, surpass
almost those of Astrachan. The same high grounds, and many others, as far as
Dubofka, are excellently situated for vineyards; and the garden of Colonel
Zipletof, governor of Zarizyn, which has been made but four years, is a proof
of it; as it yields, annually, near 20 puds of fine grapes.

This garden was planted on the spot where there was formerly a wild orchard,
and is at present not only increased, but prodigiously improved. It contains
various species of fruit trees and vines, of Hungary and Astrachan. The upper
corner of this garden exhibits a handsome flowers of Glauber's, which visibly
spring from some invisible sources; and the adjacent heights have, perhaps, the
same vitriol layers, as are observed upon the Etshenka.

This district, between the upper and lower Metschetna, near the Wolga, is
remarkable for the remains of an old Tartarean city, which has been almost
levelled with the ground. Among the ruins, are the foundation of a great, stone
building, which has been either a caravansera, or a mart. It is a large square,
with several alleys, and divisions, like small chambers. Here are but few
bricks among the rubbish, but great quantities of freestone. It is said, that
on the spot where the governor's villa stands, was originally a metsched; and
that several valuable things, and some golden saddle-plates, were dug up in the
foundations. Probably the whole has been a suburb of that Tartarean metropolis,
whose remains are found a little lower down than Zarizyn, on the Achtuba.

At Dubofka, about 40 miles from the last place, is a fine stone-built,
spacious mansion, erected in the Gothic taste, formerly belonging to Ataman
Porsizky, who lived to the age of 120: he founded this town. The proprietor did
not live till it was quite finished, and it now stands waste, his successors
liking rather to live in their wooden dwellings. The Cossacks of Dubofka were
selected, in the beginning of this century, from those about the Don. At first
they consisted of 1,017 heads, but at present they are reduced to 500; yet have
still their ataman-djak, starchines, and stanixatamans. They possess a great
deal of horned cattle, and a great extent of arable land along the Wolga; and
trade much toward the Don, in boards, resin, brick, tar, timber, barges and
wagons. They fix great vessels on rollers, and drag them to the place of sale,
with 15 or 20 yoke of oxen. In summertime, many of them will leave their town,
and travel to the upper districts of the Wolga, through the Kama, with all
sorts of materials for shipping, in order to sell them.

About 90 miles higher up, is the fortress Dmitresskaja, or Kamyschenka, lying
in the lower angle, which the brook Kamyschenka forms with the Wolga, in a low
and moist soil. The first fortress erected here, in the last century, had a far
more healthy and advantageous situation; the remains of which are still to be
seen, on a height in the neighborhood. The present, new fortress is quite
commanded by that height, and consists of a wooden wall and bastions, etc. The
works enclose a stone-built cathedral, a well built townhouse, the governor's
mansion, and some other dwellings of note. The city lies in length down the
Wolga, in long, parallel streets, of which the principal one consists of of
moveable shops, and extends from the fortress to the salt-magazines. This city
has also two, wooden churches. The shopkeepers here sell a great deal of
provisions, and waggoner's-tools, on account of the salt that is conveyed
through this place. Formerly a great trade was carried on here, with the
Kalmucks, and would be now, if that canal was made from this river to the Don,
which Peter the Great planned. I found here Professor Lowiz, and his assistant,
Mr. Inochodzof, employed in taking the level of the country, through which this
road is to pass. It was begun in the reign of Peter the Great, by Captain
Perry, an Englishman. The soft nature of the high grounds, which stand in the
way, and the rivulets of Ilowla, to which this canal is to run, give the
greatest hopes to the execution of this project.

In order to reach the river Jeruslan, or Ulustan, about 13 miles from the
river Targun, we passed over the step of Targun, which is arid and barren to
the extreme. The slime which covers the soil, becomes fine dust in summertime,
rises in the air with the least wind, and is very troublesome to travelers;
add to this, the whole district is very unsafe, on account of several gangs of
Kirguese, who live by the plunder of incautious travelers that fall in their
way. The Jerusian runs parallel with the Wolga, a considerable way; but, where
the road leaves it, there is a umet, or way-house, where they sell bread and
hay, and where there is a bridge, if the water is high. It is just 75 miles
from this place to Saratof, and as far to the lake. Some of our people
carelessly let some fire drop on the step, which kindled the parched grass, and
the fire spread with such rapidity and violence, as to become inextinguishable,
and we had a great deal of trouble, as before, to bring off the wagons through
the fire, which had made a circle round us; so that we were in danger of being
burnt alive, or suffocated by the vapors and smoke; yet we saved every thing,
and got off without any material damage.

Eleven miles from the Jeruslan, we pitched our tents on the side of a brook,
and took up our lodging for the night, on the 12th of August. From the heights
situated about this brook, we could descry, westward, the high mountains of
Selotofsk, beyond the Wolga; and as, in this district, are situated the
lowermost German colonies I intended to visit, we had these mountains for our
landmark, it being 23 miles to the nearest colony, Kotschetnaja.

This village, consisting of 49 houses, mostly Roman-catholic families, from
the bishoprics in Transylvania, belongs to the circle of Warenburg, well
colonized, under the direction of one Le Roi and Pictel. The above circle
contains 16 colonies, planted along the Wolga; of which the lowermost lies six
miles further down the said river, and at 60 miles distance from Saratof. They
have taken Russian names, and the people speak the Russ language, with uncommon
ease and purity. These 16 colonies consist of 874 families, or 3,850 persons,
from almost all parts of Germany; and are of different, and partly of mixed
religions. They have, amongst them, one Lutheran minister, and two Romish
priests. The houses, throughout all the colonies, are wood, and built on a new
plan, so as to unite two habitations under one roof. Each colonist has a good
chamber, parlour and kitchen; and sometimes a little closet besides. These
villages are situated along the Wolga low-grounds, which supply them with
plenty of hay and wood; but they are too near each other, to afford them all a
sufficient quantity of good, arable land; and though they are rapidly
increasing, they cannot prosper well, unless some change is made, and they are
separated farther from each other.

All round Saratof, to the distance of 50 or 60 miles, along the banks of the
Wolga and Karaman, there are a number of colonies, either erected by the
Empress herself, or by the agents of Le Roi, Pictet, and the Baron de
Beauregard, 85 in number, besides the 16 already mentioned; comprising 5,125
families, and 20,162 persons, of different countries, Germans, Dutch, French,
etc. and different persuasions, with Lutheran and Romish clergy; all properly
established, under certain chiefs and regulations.

Between Saratof and Astrachan, there are several more colonies, pretty near
each other, in which are manufactories of cloth, linen and stuff. That of
Rossoschi, consists only of French families, and belongs to 11 others, erected
by Governor Bosse, and are immediately under the command of the Empress. The
houses here are all built with stone; but the inhabitants are dull and slothful.

Here is also a Holstein colony, though most of the inhabitants come from the
Rhenish countries. The Noah of these colonists, or the person who first
introduced the plantation of vineyards, is one John Philip Peiler, from
Messingen upon the Rhine; he has, in two gardens belonging to him, upwards of
2,000 bearing vines, which yielded him, last year, more than 20 puds of grapes.
He does not water his vines, though they stand upon a very dry soil. It must be
ascribed to the saltness of the ground, that the grapes, though unlike those of
Astrachan, in size, beauty and taste, yields far better juice, which, if
suffered to stand long in casks, becomes a high, red, light wine, equal to some
French wines, and a nectar compared with that of Astrachan.

That I might collect a proper account of these colonies, I went to the colony
of Catherinestadt, and staid there a whole day. The plan of this place was
projected for 300 families (though it has only 163, consisting of 615 people);
the chief part of whom seem to be mechanics. Here is a fine Lutheran church,
which has its own preacher; also, a Calvinist and Romish chapel, but they have
no ministers appointed to them: to the latter, a priest came, occasionally, to
say mass. The dwellings are all built of wood, in regular streets. No colony
has better, mechanical professions than this, and some acquire a good living,
by its being so near Saratof, from which it is distant 39 miles. It has at
present an upholsterer, an able turner, some hatters, dyers, clothiers and
weavers, carpenters, cutlers, locksmiths, and watch-makers; and some of more
common trades, as tailors, shoe-makers, bakers, millers, butchers, etc. even
some miners came here, but finding no employ, they are turned husbandmen. If
there was more business for these people, Catherinestadt would soon be a
substantial place. Formerly, the planting of tobacco was the best subsistence
of the colonists; and the Kalmuck hordes, who used to pass this district in
summer, purchased almost all they grew; but now this commerce is on the
decline, though connoisseurs esteem the tobacco raised here, not inferior to
that of Virginia. In the district of Catherinestadt, there were more than 20
desettines of land planted with tobacco. They attempted here to plant
mulberry-trees, but the young plants were entirely devoured in winter by the
hares. An attempt has also been made, with success, to make Dutch and Swiss
cheese. But before I quit these colonies, I must mention a kind of vinegar,
prepared by the inhabitants of Catherinestadt, from curds, for want of a
stronger acid. They take, for this purpose, the curds of turned milk, put them
into a little barrel, with the addition of leaven, or sour dough, or without,
until they have finished their fermentation, when they yield a very strong and
pleasant vinegar.

Saratof. From Catherinestadt I went, on the 15th, to Saratof, and arrived
there on the 18th of August. This city was first situated on the left side of
the Wolga, on the brook Saratofka, where the vestiges of it are to be seen. The
present city was built about the end of the 16th century, and is now a
considerable place, increased, within these ten years, by the establishment of
the German colonies. It lies along the steep border of the Wolga, at the bottom
of some high mountains, which form a chain along the Wolga, Ilawla, and Don.
The place is divided by a deep cleft, and an old wall, into city and suburbs.
The low part of the city lies chiefly on level ground, has broad and regular
streets, seven churches, one convent of friars, and another of nuns. Here is
also a court of waywodes, a salt-office, a court of tuition which superintends
the colonies, and a court of police.

The court of waywodes is a stone building; and, opposite to it, are several
stone-built comptoirs. The city has many substantial inhabitants; and some
lords of adjacent manors, have here some fine mansions. The great market is
built of wood, and contains a great number of shops. Among the inhabitants are
about 100 German citizens, some of very lucrative trades. Three miles from the
city, one Verdier has an extensive mulberry-plantation, but his success in
silkworms has not been very considerable. Saratof receives great benefit from
the ships that are here moored, laden with hides, tallow, fish, salt, and
Persian goods, bound from Astrachan, and other lower districts, to the upper
parts of the empire, and returning from those parts to Astrachan, with corn,
wood, earthen and wooden vessels; and also, from the carts and wagons,
thousands of which pass this town every week, especially in winter, conveying
salt and fish to the eastern parts of the empire.

On the 24th of August, we went to the Elton salt-lake, called, by the
Kalmucks, Altan-nor (the golden lake), on account of its red luster under the
sun. The salt, in this lake, is dug by volunteer workmen, who come here in
spring, and work the whole summer. This year there were employed only 550 men;
but other years they have seldom been less in number than 1,768; at times,
4,000 have been employed.

At present, the lake was very shallow, and digging of the salt very difficult.
They broke it, at two miles from the borders; and even there the water was not
more than three quarters of a yard deep: the salt-rinds are broke with heavy
bars, similar to those used in Russia, to break the ice in rivers. Having broke
it into small pieces, they wash off the slime with the salt water, and then
carry it on shore, to a place enclosed with pales. Each set of salt-breakers
sell the salt they dig to the salt-conveyers, dear or cheap, according to the
nature of circumstances. Formerly, when there were many workmen, and the work
was easier, the salt-conveyers paid them for a waggon-load, drawn by two
bullocks, which carries about 120 puds, from 25 to 30 copecs only; but, during
the present year, the price rose to 50 or 60 copecs. The waggoners, or
conveyers, when arrived at the mart, get the carriage paid by the pud. The
distance from the lake to Saratof, is computed to be 135 miles, and the
carriage is generally six copecs, or three-halfpence per pud, or 36lb.; but the
distance to Dmitresskoi, being only 85 miles, the carriage is only four copecs
per pud. From this sum, they deduct one denuschka, for the repair of bridges,
and fresh water wells. A wagon cannot go more than five or six journeys in a
summer, to Saratof; and does not get more, for each load, with two bullocks,
than between seven and eight rubles; therefore, the more beasts of draught a
waggoner has, the better. A salt-dew very frequently falls about this lake; I
found it on the 23d of August, in the morning, upon the reeds, in a kind of
milky drops, very salt to the taste. It has been observed, that the seeds of
water-melons, exposed one night to this dew, will never grow. The borders of
the lake, are full of all sorts of salt-plants.

On the 25th of August, we had to travel over a parched step, where no fresh
water was to be had; it was more than 38 miles over. Our horses were so spent,
that they could scarce lift their feet; and though we were within sight of the
Wolga, one of our horses fell from thirst, and died the next morning, though
immediately after he fell, it rained a heavy shower, which would have relieved
him. When we reached the river, we were told, by some fishermen, that we were
within seven miles of Dubofka, from which the lake Elton lies directly west.
The next morning, the 27th, we rode to Dubofka, but found the commander of the
Cossacks so drunk, that we were obliged to wait till the next day, for horses
to convey us on to Zarizyn.

Zarizyn. As I passed the following winter in Zarizyn, where I met with Mr.
Georgi, I will give my readers some account of this city, the district, the
weather, and its natural productions.

Next to Astrachan, Zarizyn is the most ancient, inhabited and fortified place
in the lower district of the Wolga. It lies just beyond the mouth of the brook
Zariza, on the right hand bank of the Wolga. The town belongs to the government
of Astrachan, is 278 miles from it, and lies in the latitude of 48 20 min. N.
latitude. As there is no circle dependent on Zarizyn, it has only a
commandant's chancery. The fortress is an antique structure, and consists of a
high rampart and bastions, The works, decayed by age, were lately repaired by
the Turkish prisoners of war; and it was so well done, that, in 1774, when a
numerous body of rebellious peasants, under Pugatschef, attempted an attack on
this place, they found themselves obliged to raise the siege, without injuring
the fortress at all. The heavy cannon in the place were of the greatest service.

The buildings within the fort are mean. There are but few, good
dwelling-houses; every thing in the city being built of wood, except the three
churches. The marketplace is extensive, has many shops, and here live many
substantial merchants, who carry on a great trade with the Kalmucks, and the
numerous travelers that pass this way. The smaller number of the inhabitants
live by breeding of cattle, and raising cucumbers, melons, and water-melons;
also, by fishing, and carrying goods from place to place. Good trades are very
much wanting; and, of course, this is a great advantage to the neighboring
colony of Sarepta. The garrison consists of a batallion of light horse. The
commander of the fortress was formerly the chief of the citizens, and the whole
district; but, in 1773, the Empress established a court of waywodes.

Quitting the fortress, there is a suburb belonging to this place, inhabited by
Cossacks. It is irregularly built, but has a stone church, lately erected; it
was found necessary to set fire to the place, when threatened with an attack by
Pugatschef's party. The Zarizinian line, or boundary, consists of a strong
wall, on the south side, with pallisadoes, beginning near the fortress, and
continuing uninterrupted as far as the river Don, which lies at the distance of
45 miles from the Wolga. On this line are four redoubts; and between these, at
proper distances, a guard-house, encompassed with chevaux-de-frize. The whole
is guarded by Cossacks of the Don, who receive a pay of 12 rubles a year: and
commanded by the governor of Zarizyn.

"Six hundred Cossacks of the Don," says Gmelin, who was there in 1769,
quartered at Zarizyn, are dispatched regularly every year, in conjunction with
some regular troops, to guard this line. At such guard-house, 24 Cossacks,
commanded by a sotnik, are lodged in miserable, subterranean barracks. These
posts are only relieved every four months; and the service of the line, lasts
for one or two years.

Their advanced posts are likewise charged with furnishing travelers, that
have passports, with relays; and, when they go in boats belonging to the Crown,
the Cossacks are obliged to perform the office of rowers. If the reader could
picture to himself, the idea of the most wretched of the human species, he
would form that of a Cossack, employed in the lines of Zarizyn. None are sent
there but the poorest and most deplorable of all their race; and such as have
no condition in life, and, destitute, of either friends or money, have no means
of avoiding this painful service. From the instant they arrive, their treatment
is such as a pitiless and unfeeling peasant would scarce show to his beast.
Though the unhappy Cossack can scarcely obtain a small allowance of bread, very
hard and very black, to assuage his hunger, he must yet endure all the
extremity of heat, and severity of cold, with no other covering than the few
rags he brought with him; or shut himself up, in some cavern of the earth, with
the companions of his wretchedness, where it would be impossible for any man,
not trained to hardship, and accustomed to distressful situations from his
birth, to exist for one minute, and brave the putridity of the air. As to his
horse, or two horses, which is all his property, they must be satisfied with
much less provender than the unhappy master can allow them for performing the
harrassing service of his landlord, to whom every horse of the Cossacks is
bound. When the term of this slavery is expired, he goes home with his starved
beasts, if, perchance, he has been happy enough to preserve their lives, with
his own, in a poorer plight than he went away. If, among the number of these
poor wretches, some should be discovered to have a small matter of money about
them, the fate of such as are pennyless is perhaps less to be pitied, for the
money is sure to increase the revenues of the officers of Zarizyn; and it is
well known, that every Cossack who has any coin, however small in value,
commonly disappears before the expiration of his term. Their difficult service
as rowers, may be collected from what Mr. Gmelin further relates: He says, That
when his two companions got into one of the government-boats, on the 20th of
September, and had only proceeded a few miles on the Wolga, there arose so
furious a tempest from the west, that the waves went over the vessel, and the
boatmen, unskilful in their business, knew not how to get forwards. Whilst they
were in the greatest distress imaginable; they struck, perhaps to the saving of
their lives, on a sand-bank, from which they could not get loose till toward
midnight; and this relief of mind did not continue long, for soon fresh
hurricanes and squalls threw them, alternately, on the two shores of the river;
so that, before they reached the advanced post the next morning, they had been
cast on six sand-banks, and had delivered themselves from each with the
greatest difficulty.

This district enjoys plenty of every thing, and surpasses the whole country,
farther down the Wolga. It is not only excellent, as has been before observed,
for the culture of water-melons, but for all sorts of fine fruits. Here grow
wild many productions, not to be met with higher up the Wolga, and in other
parts of Russia. Wild pears are in great plenty near Dubofka; mulberry-trees
abound in the low grounds of the Achtuba; tamarisks begin to grow near Zarizyn;
and wild plums are abundant toward the Mantysch, and the river Kuma. I sowed,
in a water-melon garden near Zarizyn, some seeds of phaseolus, which I received
from China, and which in Sweden will not grow but in the warmest hot-houses;
and they yielded, in August, the finest blossoms and seed.

The weather of this country is as follows. Heavy frosts generally in January,
which lower the mercury to 180, and to 200, equal to 13 and 23, below the
freezing-point of Rheaumur's, thermometer. When at 200, the weather is stormy,
and the frost less sensible. February is variable; has calm frosts, sometimes
stormy from N. W. attended with snow, and ends with a thawing wind from W. S.
W. In 1774, I was able to observe the whole winter, and February was
exceedingly delightful and sweet. About the middle of the month, arrived little
birds of passage; and, toward the end, swans, ducks, and other waterfowl.
February the 25th, the Wolga was freed from ice: the same day we had thunder;
but, on the 28th, to the 11th of March, we had such continued, sharp cold, as
froze the river again. The month of April is incontestibly, in this climate,
the most settled and finest of all months. No rain falls, but the rivers
overflow, and water the land. At this time the water-melons are sown, and the
wind, which blows constantly from one district, viz. the east, mitigates the
heat. During the latter days of April (in 1774, on the 18th of April), or the
middle of May, the wind changes to the south, or south-west, and brings thunder
and warm, nightly rains. This fine weather lasts generally three or four weeks,
when the wind changes to south, and south-east: then begins the dry weather,
which continues ten or twelve weeks. In June it is more supportable; as, during
the time when the water stands high in the Wolga, which is always highest this
month, the night-dews are most copious, and refresh the earth exceedingly. The
rest of this month is generally so serene, that scarce a cloud, the size of a
man's hand, is to be seen.

The hottest and most intolerable of all the summer-months, is July, when it
blows constantly from the arid step and sea, S. S. E. or E. After this arise
the hot winds, which, though they blow irresistibly, so as to sweep off all the
dust from the step, and carry it through the air, are yet as hot as if they
came from a fiery furnace. These winds usually commence about two in the
afternoon, and continue till past midnight; they seldom last longer. During
their blowing, sheep often drop down dead, like flies, froth, bleed at the
mouth, or swell, and become so suddenly puffed, that even their skins are of no
use. This hot, glowing wind is often owing to the burning of the step, and is
then of longer duration. In July, 1774, the mercury rose as high, in the sun,
as 60, in De Lisle's thermometer, this is to 56 in Rheaumur's; and a
thermometer-glass, filled with spirit of wine, burst. In the river Sarpa, so
great a number of fish and crabs died, that the stench was intolerable. Soon
after, it was known that this insupportable hear, had risen from the burning of
the Kumanian step, which was set on fire, to the circumference of several
hundred wersts, each werst three-quarters of an English mile: great numbers of
people fell sick by it. At other times, however, it is not uncommon to see the
quicksilver, in the thermometer, rise, in this month, in the shade, up to 90
and above (above 27. in the thermometer of Rheaumur higher than the heat of
Pondicherry); and it was observed by Dr. Wier at Sarepta (for it is from him I
had this information), to rise in the sun, in 1773, on the 18th of July, and
the 1st of August, to 75; and, on the 28th of July, in the same year, to 74;
and, in 1767, it was seen, on the 12th of July, to rise all at once to 60. The
air, during the sultriness of July, is generally so thick, that we cannot see
far before us on the even step, though we imagine, by optic error, that we see
a great way. This error, or deception, is produced by certain, undulating
vapors visible to the eye, arising on the step, hills and high grass, and
giving the appearance of distant, high mountains and woods, and representing
all objects larger than they are. Shaw, Niebar, and other oriental travelers,
tell us that, in the great deserts of Arabia, trembling vapors will obscure
the horizon, and lead the eye to suppose every thing at a distance to be larger
than it is. In the district of Zarizyn, during this sultry month, it often
appears from far, as if we saw a hill encompassed with water, when we have only
an arid step in view. The beginning of this month ripens the water-melons; and
the latter half of it, the grapes.

In August, thunders are frequent, arising from S. and S. W. drawing northwards
over the Wolga, and falling away about the sea, eastwards; so that they
describe a semicircle. Sometimes, they are accompanied by so violent a hail
and rain, as to cause inundations: sometimes, such tempestuous whirlwinds rise
as raise the dust from the blossoms of the several species of wormwood, so as
to darken the air, and leads one to suppose it to be a thick, brown, yellow
smoke, or fog. I was eyewitness of such a whirlwind in Zarizyn, and was
astonished at the wonderful phenomenon. After some thunder-clouds had obscured
the sereneness of the day, and shook the whole district with a dreadful
hurricane, which only lasted for a quarter of an hour, and withdrew, with a
wind-column like a cloud, over the Wolga; my tent, which was pitched in the
open step, was suddenly enveloped in a thick, brown smoke.

September is generally serene, clear and temperate; the wind changing to S. S.
E. and N. E. October remains always temperate, the winds blowing from N. E. to
W. which causes a great deal of fog and moist weather. In November, which they
here call the rain-month, in temperate years, the rains change, toward the
end, into north-eastern storms, and snow. Frost and storms often prevail, even
in the beginning of this month, and the Wolga soon drives ice. In 1773, the
thermometer fell, on the 5th, to 190 degrees; and, in the night of the 13th and
14th, the ice became quite fixed.

When the year is mild, the Wolga is not frozen till December; then after a
driving of ice, for a week or a fortnight, an east wind, falls in, and fixes
it. During this month reign continual storms, with flakes of snow, that
continue six or seven days.

December and January can be called only, in general, the winter-months of this
district; and they are often so mild, that ducks will remain the whole winter
in the open water-spots beyond Zarizyn. Larks, and partridges, will not leave
the place, but to go to such salt-spots as are not covered with snow, where
they can feed on the seeds of plants. Partridges, which gather here in greatest
quantities in September and October, are caught, in the said months, in nets,
and till December.

As soon as a violent frost begins in November, the snow larks come into this
district, as the last birds of passage from the northern zone, and reside,
during the whole winter, in the lowest Wolga, among the field, and tuft, or
crested larks. The black step-larks (Alauda Tartarica), come from the step,
when the snow and winter storms rage, and take up their residence in the
vicinage of villages, but never leave the district.

Other small birds of passage, that spend the winter in remote countries, come
here in September, remain whilst the weather continues mild, and grow fat, by
feeding on the seeds of plants. The northern duck (Anser Erythropus), arrives,
at the end of September, in large flocks; and, after a short stay, draws away
southwards. Those water and strand-fowls which do not wander far to the north,
as the sea-raven, and stephen (Charadrius gregarius), hie to their
winter-abodes about the end of August. "In September," says Gmelin, the
bee-bird (Merops apiaster), passes, by thousands, into other countries. We may
judge of the quantity, by the number of their nests. This bird builds in the
clay, hence it is that the hills which rise one above another, along the
western bank of the Wolga, from Zarizyn, are stuck as thick with them as the
cells in a bee-hive.

In spring, the birds of passage begin to swarm here, in the middle of
February. In the beginning of this month, snow-larks, and snow-ortolans, draw
abundantly to the north. About the 25th, one sees, in the Sarpa and Achtuba,
every species of swan, and the first wild geese; and the dry rushes are
plentifully crowded with tom-tits (Parus biarmicus et coeruleus). At the end of
the month, the steps are every where on fire.

When the month of March has frost, as it had in this year, the birds of
passage hide themselves. This was the season in which during the present year,
the wagtail, and black and white rock-nightingale, did not appear, till the
28th. On the 3d of April arrived the first swallows; and, about the same time,
the insects burst into life, notwithstanding a cold east wind blew very sharply.

Between the 6th and 10th of April, we saw, about the Sarpa, whole flocks of
the Anser pulchricollis, or red-necked geese; but these left the district very
soon. Next we saw, for the first time, the male of the bull-finch, fringilla
^^lebs, with the linnet, fringilla petronia; and, afterward, the woodcock, and
great numbers of various other species of birds of passage.

This shows how early the birds of passage arrive in this district; and, of
course, the warmth of the climate. On the opposite side of the Wolga, are a
great many saigaks and antelopes, which draw northwards in winter; also, little
mountain-foxes, or korsaks. There is plenty of common, red foxes in the
heights, between the Wolga and Don; and a great many hares, which remain also
gray during the winter. Wherever there are any roots, there are found the great
blind mole, and the lesser mole. Common ermines and weasels, are here in
plenty; and, where oaks and hazels grow, the field-mouse, Quercinus; also, a
great number of race, or jumping-hares, with three toes.

Of insects, they have the scorpion-spider; but the pain, and ill effects of
its bite, are soon relieved by the application of oil. They have, also, a very
large kind of millepedes, or scolo pendia; and fleas engender to such an
enormous degree, that all the flocks and herds, and half the human race, would
not suffice to furnish them with room. If a man stops a while, in summer, on
the low grounds about the Wolga, and in the houses, he immediately swarms with
these vermin; and they fasten to the noses of the unhappy horses, in such vast
quantities, that they seem all black. Other domestic insects, as crickets and
moths, are here, as in other places; and the Blatta Asiatica, or little moth of
China, which begins to be general, extends from Astrachan to the towns above,
and will, it is feared, be shortly troublesome to all Russia.

There are a number of chalybeate springs about Zarizyn, some of which are much
frequented by the inhabitants, on account of their cooling quality and
promoting urine; but, by the use of them, I and my company had all our teeth
loosened.

The district of Zarizyn is richer in plants than all the step below; but yet
only in vernal plants; for, in May, all the grass and herbs on the hills, begin
to wither; and, in the two ensuing, summer-months every vegetable production is
burnt up. Our author enumerates all these plants; but I have omitted them, as
they would only swell the work, and be no entertainment to a general reader.
They have a good deal of wild asparagus, very fine, and good-flavoured. The
natives, who are not Russians, are very fond of it; but the Russians never
notice it. Very fine tulips, of different species, grow wild in the step; and
boys search for, and get their bulbous roots, with avidity. I must observe
here, that the elm of this country (Ulma campestris), has a purgative quality.
Water, in which the gummy leaves, gathered in summer, or autumn, have been some
time steeped, if drank, will open the body, like manna.

The silk-manufactory, belonging to the Crown, is one of the most useful
establishments in this neighborhood. Mulberry-trees (Morus Tartarica), grow in
such quantities, that there are whole forests of them, mixed with other trees.
These supply the silkworm; the only inconvenience is, that at the time the
chrysalis bursts, and the worm is in want of food, the rivers here overflow the
country, and they are obliged to gather the leaves in boats. No one can
remember the planting of these trees; but the ruins of stone-edifices, all over
the step, render it easy to conjecture, that they were planted by those
Tartars, who formerly inhabited these deserts, and whose tribe was known by the
name of the Golden Horde.

It was now the 24th of April, and, notwithstanding the frequent robberies
committed in the wild step by the Kirguese, which rendered the district of the
Wolga unsafe, all the last winter, I determined to make a tour along the
Achtuba. The fruit of the wild mulberry, which grows along this river, is
little inferior to that which grows in gardens. It ripens in the month of June,
and may then be gathered, in large quantities; and its juice has been found, by
fermentation, to yield a very strong spirit, which has nearly the smell of
Hungary water. The Achtuba had not yet received the waters of the overflowing
Wolga; and it was so shallow, that we could cross it without wetting the
axle-trees of our wagons. Mulberry-trees grew along the banks of this river,
to the distance of 15 miles; and Counselor Rytschkof has established here a
very flourishing silk-manufactory.

Toward night I reached Nishnoi-Achtubinskoi-Gorodok, which consists of two
villages of that name, celebrated for their silk-manufactories. On the 25th, I
traveled down the Achtuba, with an escort of 20 Cossacks from the Don.

On the 28th, we went partly over sand-hills, partly through valleys, to the
Salt-lake, and the mountain Bogdo; and though we traveled with the same
horses, they seemed quite fresh and in spirits, even after a difficult and
heavy journey of several days. One of our suite, who accompanied the last
wagon, met with a fall, and was so much bruised, that he died four days after,
in strong convulsions; and the weather being warm, I ordered his interment on
the step.

This remarkable mountain, Bogdo Oata, as the Kalmucks call it, ( Bogdo
implying, royal, or sublime) has a high eminence, which, at a distance, the
Kalmucks compare to a lion couchant, and, from this, sometimes; called it,
Arslan ula, or, lion's mountain. It Is strata may be easily counted from its
top, which has about 50 or 55 fathoms perpendicular height. The limestone
stratum, at top is gray and hard, and breaks away in great stones, full of
petrifactions of shellfish. Under this lime, it mostly consists of loam, mixed
with marle, or sand, 22 fathoms deep; and its top layers are much impregnated
with common salt. The drains have, in several places, deeply excavated the
loam, and formed many, subterranean holes; so that, as I was climbing up the
side, the ground sunk under me, and I fell into a pit, up to my arms. Into
these holes, the Kalmucks are accustomed to throw coin, clothes, arms, etc. as
gifts, or offerings. The cleft, generally fed thus superstitiously, is said to
have broke in a little before the Kalmuck horde left this district; and was
filled with water, to the depth of several fathoms; but, at present, there are
no signs of it. On the loam layers, is often found felenites, and pieces of
common salt, as pure as crystal, and as large as a man's fist. The eastern
shelf of the mountain has a very peculiar appearance. Owing to the tenderness
of the sand-stone, probably, several little round holes, and grottos, have been
formed, by the rapid dashing of the billows, whilst this step was covered by
the sea, for these excavations are not to be seen to the whole height of the
shelf; and, on its level, toward the salt-lake, lay also some bruised rocks,
scattered, which appear to have been wholly covered by the water; and near them
we find, rolled balls, of different sizes, which, if beaten to pieces, are
partly hollow, and contain sand. From these circumstances, and the mountain
being entirely insulated, and full of petrified bodies, that could have lived
no where but at the bottom of the sea, it is evident, past a doubt, that what
is now land, was formerly covered with water. If east-winds blow violently
against the grotto-work of this shelf, to one that stands at the top, a noise
is heard, seemingly the distant muttering of many hundred people, with various
voices, sounding more or less at different times. I observed this plainly
today, as a violent east wind blew. The priests of the Kalmucks told the
people, that the wise, old man, Zaghan Ebughan, or spirit of the mountain, has
his residence beneath it, where there is an assembly of the blessed, who are
constantly praying, and singing hymns.

Underneath the sand-stone, is a high-red strong-coloured bole, encompassing a
sand-slate. The superstitious Kalmucks fetch this bole, considering it as the
most sacred color, and paint their tents with it. On the south side of the
mountain, is a field of alabaster, with gypseous rocks, and a number of holes,
sunk by the subterraneous passage of snow-waters. On the highest part of the
mountain, where it consists of sand-rocks, the Kalmucks have erected monuments,
consisting of high, square, stone-pillars, which may be seen at a great
distance. Otherwise, we see here, but very few traces of their superstition;
and I examined the whole of the mountain very particularly. But four miles and
a half from it, toward the Wolga, is an old Kalmuck altar, erected of reeds
and earth, the remains of a festival there celebrated.

The Tartars have the most extravagant notions respecting this mountain; and,
among others, say, that Bogda stood originally on the side of the Jaik; but
that two Kalmuck saints took it into their heads to remove it to the banks of
the Wolga. However, previous to their undertaking this painful work, they
passed a considerable time in fasting and prayer: this rather weakened them,
but they soon got it on their shoulders, and, when they had brought it as far
as where it now stands, a sinful thought came into the mind of one of them
(other traditions say, that he fell in love with a Kalmuck woman, and had
carnal knowledge of her), which so enfeebled him, that he could no longer bear
the weight, which fell on him, and crushed him to death; and, that his blood
being shed on the ground, produced that red color, visible in the mountain. As
the other was not able to carry it alone, it has stood where it fell.

The situation of this single strata-mountain, though peculiarly remarkable,
has yet, within a quarter of a mile of it, a no less remarkable object; viz. an
inexhaustible salt-lake, called Bogdoin Dabassu. Its form is oblong, from west
to east, and 12 miles long; toward the western bay, its breadth is about five
miles, and its circumference thirty miles. Its distance from the next place, on
the Achtuba, in a direct line, which is to the lower Pristan, or salt-lake, is
reckoned twenty-eight miles; and to the fortress Tschernojarskaja, over all the
arms of the Wolga, 32 miles. Carriages, drawn by oxen, go and return in five
days; and, drawn by horses, in three days. The western, wide part, on the west
side of the mountain, forms a small bay, ending in a wide, round bay, which the
salt-diggers call Kultuk, or sea-gulph. Beneath the high border of the lake,
near the mountain, are several little bitter and fresh water springs, overgrown
with reeds. The whole lake is very shallow; so that, even when the wind blows
and raises billows on the shore, any man may cross it, and not be up to his
waist. Standing near it, in the sunshine, it has a fine, greenish color; but,
at a distance, glitters with a silvery white. The water is exceedingly pure,
without any bitterness; and even about the springs, it has no bad smell. The
bottom is a sandy slime, which sinks in, here and there, but annually covered
with salt-rinds, or crusts, as white as snow, being a sediment from the water.
The salt, settled this year, was not yet become firm; it was, however, an inch
thick, very pure, white, without smell, or any mixture of bitter salt; and,
consequently, far better than that of the lake Elton. By autumn, the year's
crust is said to grow full three inches in depth, or thickness. There are
several of these layers, one upon another, but always separated by a layer of
mud. The lower kinds are as hard as stone, and, therefore, the salt-breakers,
to save trouble, will only take the salt from the surface, which is not crusted.

This lake has long since been made known to the Russians, inhabitants of the
Wolga, by the Kalmucks; who, as long as the salt was free to be collected,
supplied themselves with it. After it became a prerogative of the Crown, it was
conveyed, in 1771, to the Imperial salt-marts at Astrachan, and other places.
They first established a salt-mart on the Achtuba, at the distance of 24 miles;
but this mart was afterward removed to a much more distant place, 37 miles;
for which the carriers received three copecs a pud. The chief salt-factor is a
merchant of Tschernojarskaja, and pays, at present, only two and a half copecs
per pud, which the carrier must pay. The salt is far better than that of the
lake Elton, and more productive to the public revenue.

The Kalmucks relate, in their ridiculous legends, that, one day, their
Delai-Lama having taken his dinner in this place, and thrown on the ground what
remained of his sallad-sauce, it produced this lake, which has gradually
increased ever since; and that the mountain has been also enlarged to its
present size, from Delai-Lama's, taking his rest thereon by night.

Immediately at the foot of Mount Bogdo, on the edge of the desert, at Saikol,
the Troughmenian Tartars, subject to the Kalmucks, have their habitations. They
are said to have been first settled in this country, by Saissin Chorlin, who
came first into the territory of the Moguls in Russia, in 1593, with 50, 000
Kibitkas, or families, and 300 Troughmenian families, whom he picked up on the
way: others think it was later.

The round-leafed rhapontic, or rhubarb, grows plentifully on the eastern
precipice of this mountain, and on the whole alabaster rock. The Kalmucks seek
eagerly for the roots, which grow on this sacred spot; and often take secret
journies to collect them, particularly as the plant is not be found west of the
river Wolga. They use it as a tea, and take it as a medicine. There are, also,
a number of other fine plants, too tedious to mention here.

Not far from this mountain, the Cossacks of my escort, who were moving the
stones lying about on the ground, brought me the first scorpion that has been
seen in the Russian empire. These conceal themselves among the dry stones, are
small, and of a peculiar species; but exactly like those I have seen brought
from Persia.

Mr. Bykof, in a botanical excursion he made eastwards, from this district to
the desert Naryn, in 1773, at 11 miles from Tologoi Kol, met with, in the step,
a pyramid, built with bricks by the Kalmucks, but much decayed, called, by
them, Schorolgun-Balgasun (the earthen city).

Having now fulfilled the design for which I was sent out, and nearly completed
my six years tour, I determined to go the nearest way home, and make the best
of my road to Moscow; of course, the rest of my journal will not contain any
thing remarkable, having been traveled over and explored by Professors Gmelin
and Guldenstadt. Mr. Georgi having returned with the last snow through Casan, I
set out for Moscow, with all my students and attendants, on the 4th of June,
1774; and reached the city of Tambof, on the 20th. Tambof is situated on the
Zna, is an episcopal see, or provincial regency, contains 16 parish-churches,
10,000 inhabitants, an important, annual fair, cloth manufactories, and
excellent tradesmen: here I continued three days. Between this, and Moscow, the
country is embellished with the seats of the nobility and gentry. In my way, we
shot a milk-white bird, of that species called blackbird; and one black,
spotted with white. On the 3d of July, I reached Moscow, and having received my
recall, by a mandate from the Empress, sent by the Imperial Academy to all its
absent members, then on their travels, in quest of physical or geographical
knowledge, I ordered my wagons to be speedily repaired, that I might reach the
end of my career; which I did on the 30th of July, though with an infirm body,
and a hoary head, at the age of 33, yet in better health and spirits than I was
whilst in Siberia; and full of grateful acknowledgments to Providence, who had
preserved me to this day, amid the numberless dangers to which I had been
exposed.

Jamque hoc immensum spatiis confecimus aequor,
Et jam tempus equum fumantia solvere colla.
VIRGIL GEORG. END OF THE FOURTH VOLUME,
ERRATA.
VOL. II. page 80, line 12, dele as it. -- 81, 24, for read read red. -- 89,
16, for as read that. -- 127, last line but one, for any, where read any where
VOL. IV. page 144, line 17, for cembra empetrum rignum, read cembra, empetrum
nigrum.

