MAP of the CIRCLE of FRANCONIA
map of Franconia

THE Habitable World DESCRIBED.

Inscribed by Permission to His Royal Highness Frederick DUKE OF YORK, etc. etc.

HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE

blazon or coat of arms

LONDON: Published as the Act directs, by the Author. No. 62. Wardour-Street,
Soho.

1788.

THE HABITABLE WORLD DESCRIBED, OR THE PRESENT STATE OF THE PEOPLE IN ALL PARTS
OF THE GLOBE, FROM NORTH TO SOUTH; SHOWING The Situation, Extent, Climate,
Productions, Animals, etc. of the different Kingdoms and States; Including all
the new Discoveries:

TOGETHER WITH The Genius, Manners, Customs, Trade, Religion, Forms of
Government, etc. of the Inhabitants, and every thing respecting them, that can
be either entertaining or informing to the Reader, collected from the earliest
and latest Accounts of Historians and Travelers of all Nations; With some that
have never been published in this Kingdom; And, nothing advanced but on the
best Authorities.

WITH A great Variety of MAPS and COPPER PLATES, engraved in a capital Style,
the Subjects of which are mostly new, and such as have never yet been given in
any English work.

BY THE REV. DR. JOHN TRUSLER.

VOL. X.

LONDON. Printed for the AUTHOR at the LITERARY-PRESS, No. 62, WARDOUR-STREET,
SOHO; and sold by all Booksellers.

M DCC XCI.

MAP of the CIRCLE of BAVARIA.
map of Bavaria

LOWER RHINE.
CHAP. XIII. Of the Circle of Bavaria.
BAVARIA not only contains the proper dominions of the dukedom of that name,
but also the territories of the Archbishop of Saltzburg, and the bishoprics of
Passau, Ratisbon, and Friesengen. It is divided into Upper and Lower Bavaria,
bounded by Franconia, Voitland and Bohemia, on the N. by Bohemia and Austria,
E. Carinthia, Brixen and Tyrol, to the S. and by Swabia on the W. extending
about 200 miles from N. to S. and 120 from E. to W.

The Elector of Bavaria and the Archbishop of Saltzburg, are the joint
summoning princes. Ratisbon or Wasserburg are the two places where the diet of
the circle is usually held, though sometimes it is convened at Landshut or
Muldorf. The Elector is hereditary commander in chief, and has the direction of
all military affairs. With respect to religion, this circle is one of the mixed.

Upper Bavaria is partly mountainous and woody, and partly marshy, abounding in
large and small lakes, and, having a good deal of level ground, is fitter for
pasturage than tillage. Lower Bavaria is more level and more fruitful. But
Bavaria in general abounds in grain, pastures, forests, and plenty of cattle,
game, and wild fowl. It produces also in different parts, salt, copper, silver,
lead, and marble, and here are medicinal springs and baths. The Danube, which
has its scource in Swabia, waters the electorate from east to west, receiving
other rivers in its course. Out of the Danube and two other rivers, a small
quantity of sand is collected. There are sixteen large inland lakes, and 160
small ones, all which afford a number of fish.

In all Bavaria are reckoned thirty-five cities, and ninety-five open and
enclosed market towns, 1000 castles and seats, or estates invested with lower
town jurisdiction over the vassals, and 11,704 villages, hamlets, and deserts,
which last alone are computed at 4000. In the Upper Palatinate are thirteen
cities and twenty-eight market towns. The computation of vassals or families in
the electorate, which estimates them at four millions, and those in Bavaria
alone at near 3,400,000, exceeds the truth, as this would make the number of
people 24,000,000, they do not amount to more than one million and a half, and
the income of the Duke is 1,000,000l. sterling.

In Bavaria no other religious doctrine is tolerated than the Roman-catholic.
The parishes in the electorate are about 1500, the vicarages and chapels near
2000, and the number of churches, it is said, amount to 28,709. The remarkable
convents are eighty-six, and the collegiate foundations twelve.

Solid knowledge and good learning must be owned, to the honor of this
electorate, to be on a better footing, and to receive more countenance here now
than ever. The Benedictines distinguish themselves in both, and Ingoldstadt
boasts a university.

Manufactures are also encouraged and improved here, particularly coarse
cloths, woollen stuffs, and stockings, silk stuffs, velvets, tapestry, good
clocks, watches, and other necessaries, though its chief exports consist of
cattle, grain, wood, salt, and iron. At Munich, from spring to June, is brewed
a kind of white beer, called ambock, very strong, and something like fine
English ale, but will not keep. The monopoly of this liquor brings in yearly above
a million of guilders.

Agriculture here is at a very low ebb; not more than half the country is in
tenure, or occupancy, and fallows are kept open three, four, or five years to
strengthen the soil, e're they sow the land for a crop.

The title of the Elector is, "By the grace of God, Duke of Upper and Lower
Bavaria, as also the Upper Palatinate, Pfalsgrave of the Rhine, Arch-steward of
the Holy Roman Empire, and Landgrave of Leuchtenberg." The arms are quarterly,
an escutcheon of pretense; in one, a topaz in a field ruby, in another, a lion
ruby, crowned topaz, and in the other two lozenges, sapphire and pearl.

There are five hereditary state-officers in this electorate; that of the
master of the household has been vested in the Barons Hasiangs, since 1618, and
they have been ambassadors at the court of London for many years. The knights
of the Bavarian order of St. George, must produce unquestionable proofs of
their nobility for eight generations back in both lines. Its ensign is a blue
enamelled cross with a St. George in the middle, worn pendant to a broad sky
blue ribband, with a black and white border, and a star on the breast. The
military force of the Elector consists of regulars and militia; the former, in
time of peace, amounts only to 12,000, in war to 30,000.

PLAN of the CITY of MUNICH.
1 Elector's Palace 2 Elector's Court Garden 3 Arsenal 4 Turnier's House 5
Th^ntiner Church 6 St. Mary's Church Yard 7 Convent upon the Stieger 8
Franciscan Convent 9 ^i^^^ick Convent 10 English Ladies 11 Gr^^^t 12 St.
Lawrence Church and Al^^^^ Court 13 Old Stable 14 Mint 15 Brown Brew House 16
White Brew House 17 Duke Ma^is^ Palace 18 Town House 19 St. Peter's Church 20
House of Correction 21 Duke Ferdinand's Chapel 22 The Fabric 23 St. Jacob's
Church and Clarisson Convent 24 (...) House for Orphans 25 Blue Duck's Tower 26
The Place 27 Handsome Tower 28 St. Mary's Church 29 Kin^^s 30 New Stables 31
Elector's Opera House 32 St. Rochu's Church 33 J^^^^^ Church and College 34
Holy Ghost Church 35 The Holy Trinity Church and Ladies Convent of the
Carmelites 36 Carmelites Church 37 Capuchins Convent 38 S^rri^ine Convent 39
Boarding House 40 Duke's Hospital 41 Joseph's Hospital 42 St. Ann's Church and
the (...) Convent 43 Brother House 44 The Elector's House for Orphans 45 S^'s
Gate 46 Ha^^^^^^r Gate 47 Capuchins Convent 48 S^^^^binger Gate 49 Kharl Gate
50 L^^r Gate 51 L^^r Bridge 52 Was^er Tower


map of Munich

Of the cities, we shall speak only of Munich, Saltsburg, Ratisbon, Passau, and
Ingoldstadt. Munich is a fortified city, seated on the Iser, and the capital
and residence of the Elector.

Ratisbon and Munich are the principal cities, but the latter is considered as
the capital. It is pleasantly situated on the river Isar, which, divided into
several channels, waters all parts of the town, so that little streams run
through many of the streets, confined in stone channels, which have a most
clean and agreeable effect. The streets, squares, and courts are spacious and
airy, which make all the buildings appear more magnificent than those in other
cities, which have been built with much more cost and expense. The streets in
particular are so straight, that many of them intersect each other at right
angles, and are very broad and extremely well built. The splendor and beauty
of its buildings, both public and private, especially the electoral palace, may
compare with any in Europe. The magnificence of the churches and convents are
such, that they are equal, if not superior to any in Germany.

The electoral palace is not so noble an edifice outwardly, as its internal
beauty demands. This vast structure being built at various periods by
successive princes, several fancies were indulged in the taste of it; and it
has many valuable paintings, and the Duke of Marlborough, after the battle of
Hochstet, brought away a great many to England.

It is seated at the extremity of the town, and contains 2060 windows, twenty
large halls, eleven courts, nine galleries, sixteen kitchens, and twelve
cellars. It is thought to be one of the most magnificent, large, and commodious
palaces in Europe, and of the four principal courts, one is adorned with
several brass statues; another, the Emperor's, is so constructed, that combats
of wild beasts may be exhibited in it. In the kitchen-court, which is the
^argest, at the nuptials of an elector, a very magnificent tournament was held.
The ascent from the Emperor's court to the hall, is a flight of wide and
beautiful red marble-steps. The hall is 118 feet long, and fifty-two wide. In
it stands a statue of Virtue made of one single piece of porphyry; here is also
a bath, consisting of a grotto, and three rooms, a museum, a chamber of
curiosities, and a noble library.

In the museum are some hundred statues and busts of the old Roman emperors,
with 500 other antiques, as lamps, inscriptions, basso relievos, etc. most of
which were brought from Italy. Among other things to exercise curiosity, is a
small statue of brass, weighing seventy odd pounds, and yet hardly to be lifted
by the strongest man, unless he places himself so as to give it a certain
equilibrium, but by advancing the left foot before the statue, it is so easily
managed, as to be lifted up, without any effect, by a single finger put into
the hole. In the Elector's treasury, shown by his first gentlemen of the
bedchamber, are a number of valuable articles, that have but few equals in all
Europe, as, 1. A hill with a castle on it, all of oriental pearls. 2. Several
vessels of green jasper. 3. A cabinet of many large pieces of crystal work;
among the rest, a ship, some spans long, the pilot, and all the tackling of the
purest gold. 4. A large lagule bowl. 5. Patterns of a gold service of the
finest gold, for three large tables, and in mortgage at Ausburg. 6. A ruby, as
large as a walnut. 7. St. George, on horseback, cut from a fine piece of red
agate, his armor of diamonds, set in gold. 8. A double brilliant diamond, the
size of a middling nut. 9. A larger, which cost 100,000 guilders. 10. A set of
buttons and loops of diamonds, with rubies set between. 11. A like set of
diamonds only, the buttons of exceeding beauty, and in size not inferior to
those which were worn by Lewis XIV. when he gave public audience to the Persian
Ambassador, and of a superior luster to the French, having been twenty years in
collecting, and at an incredible expense. 12. The images of the Bavarian
family, in blue chalcedony. 13. An ivory closet, of uncommon curious
workmanship, containing 1144 gold Roman medals.

Near a wall in one of the palace courts, is a large black stone, with the
following inscription on it, "In 1409, the illustrious Duke Christopher, the
renowned hero of Bavaria, lifted this large stone, weighing 340 lb. and threw
it to some distance." A Bavarian country girl some few years since raised this
stone a hand high from the ground. Near the same place are also three iron
nails driven into the wall, with this inscription: "Let every leaper behold
with wonder these three nails; the first of which is twelve feet from the
ground, and indicates a leap of the noble Duke Christopher; the second nail,
which is ten feet and a half, was reached by Zundritt; the third, though but
nine feet and a half, shows the activity of Philip Springer. He who can outdo
these leaps, let him try."

Count Preising, master of the horse, has built opposite to the palace, a
hotel, the four sides of which answer to so many streets, and is a great
ornament to the city. The pillars of his stable are red marble, and every horse
feeds out of a particular marble of twenty-five guilders value.

The cathedral church of our lady has two large towers, contains twenty-five
chapels, thirty altars, and twenty-four large columns. Not far from one of the
doors, is a stone, with a mark on it; and to him who stands there, the
multitude of pillars takes away the sight of every window of the church, of
course the church is rather dark. It has a large organ of box wood, and a
stately black marble monument of the Emperor Lewis, of Bavaria, with six large,
and several lesser statues of brass.

The palace and other electoral buildings, together with the brew-houses, 16
monasteries, churches, and other religious structures, take up near half of the
city; the precinct of the Augustines alone, consists of several streets, which
bring them in an annual rent of 3000 guilders.

The Elector's court is very numerous and splendid. The late elector had
thirty-six lords of the bedchamber, (I am speaking now from Keysler, who was
there about sixty years ago). The same elector kept 1200 or 1400 horses; his
successor was contented with 700, but sixty-five footmen are kept in constant
pay. At the court of Bavaria, from its numerous family and alliances with the
Imperial house, there are no less than thirty-three state festivals, and these
are increasing; but at the festival of Corpus Christi, there is a procession of
several thousand persons; deputies of all trades and handicrafts assist at it,
with costly flags carried before them; the same is done also by the religious
orders, every member of which joins the procession. All manner of religious
histories are exhibited on a great number of triumphal cars, by children,
richly dressed. At the head of their respective fraternities, ride St. George
and St. Maurice, in Roman habits. St. Maurice is represented by a young lady,
in the attire of a Roman vestal, leading after her a large dragon, in which two
men are enclosed, to give it the necessary movements. The four mendicant orders
precede the venerable host, carried under a splendid canopy. Immediately after
rides the Elector in person, and his consort on his left, both holding a
lighted taper. Next to the Electress comes her master of the household, followed
by some court ladies, and after these, the whole court, dressed after the
Spanish fashion. The streets are boarded, strewed with flowers and herbs, and
the procession lasts an hour and a half.

The late elector was immoderately fond of hunting, and the electress was so
fond of him, that she entered into the spirit of his amusement. She shot very
well, and at hunting, made nothing of trampling up to her knees in a morass.
Her dress was a green coat, and a little fair wig. She was extremely fond of
dogs, particularly the English greyhounds, they were always with her in her
best apartment, and surrounded her in bed and at table. At their hunting seat,
the electress's bedchamber was under the elector's, had a kennel in one
corner, and a much larger one in a fine closet adjoining. The complexion of the
court ladies visibly suffered from their attendance on her in all weathers.
There goes a story, that Lewis XIV. said, jesting, to Baron Freybzerg, the
Elector's great huntsman, which is a state officer in Bavaria, concerning a
bitch, which the Elector particularly valued; "I am told your bitch often loses
scent of the game," to which the Baron, piqued at a reflection on the flower of
his pack, warmly replied, "How! -- She Is as true as the gospel."

They have here a remedy for the bite of a mad dog, which the late elector
himself often made use of with success for his officers, and once for one of
the chief princesses of the court, viz. to make the patient eat the raw liver
of the dog that did the mischief.

The chapel of the Virgin Mary is finished with every species of riches, such
as gold, silver, and precious stones; nor does it want for its share of
relics, for the religious pretend to have a good part of the skirt of the
mohair gown which the Virgin Mary wore, when Christ was crucified! -- Be this
at it may, yet it is certain, the most profound veneration is paid to this
choice piece of an old garment.

In the largest marketplace stands a marble pillar, with a brass statue of the
Virgin Mary upon it, and two large fountains on each side; fronting of which is
the townhouse, a very elegant building, with a great number of hieroglific
paintings on the front.

This city is said to contain 40,000 inhabitants, most of which are
Roman-catholics; and although very polite in manners and address, yet very
superstitious, and are led into many errors, by the art of the Friars, who are
too numerous for the size of this place.

Of the general maxims or leading principles of the people of this court, we
can say but little. Immediate self-interest is apparently the pursuit of every
one; or if they do profess any principles, they are certainly the most pliant
and versatile in the world. Indeed, if we may judge by the way of thinking of
inferiors, many of the principal people have adopted the most execrable theory
in politics; for instance, that religion serves only for the purpose of keeping
the crowd of mankind slaves to them. That a courtier must put on the externals
of religion, but leave the practice to the vulgar. That men are by nature
wicked, seditious, turbulent, and only to be governed by being kept in
perpetual servitude, and not being permitted to use their faculties. Finally,
that too much knowledge is dangerous, and that the great hold their rights over
their people from God, and are no ways accountable for their conduct, nor under
any obligation to their subjects. Every thing here is venal.

A few years ago, a certain minister of this court would have sold half Bavaria
to the house of Austria, if the Prussian and Russian courts, and the minister
of the court of Deux-Ponts, had not prevented the purchase.

In every project proposed, a small part only is intended for any good purpose;
the greater part has the interest of the projector in view.

Every thing here is calculated for show* and as a specimen, the court keeps a
great admiral for two or three vessels on the Rhine. The army consists of
thirty regiments, although not above 15,000 strong, and the fourth of these are
officers, amongst which are several general field-marshals.

The titles and embroidered clothes of the inhabitants (says Reisbec) by no
means secure a stranger from their begging from him; the following anecdote,
from that author, we shall lay before our readers: -- "One day (says he) I went
to see the handsome jesuit church, where that I might not appear an idle
spectator, I knelt down by some people in a pew; immediately a man, whom, by
his dress, I supposed to be a person of consequence, moved nearer to me, and
presenting me with a pinch of snuff, and prefacing his intentions, with a few
remarks on the beauty of the building, then entered into a detail of his
necessities and requested charity! The same thing happened to me at another
church, where the beggar was a well dressed woman."

Here there are no pains taken to correct the people from their inclination to
theft and robbery, by good education, improved morals, and encouragement to
industry. Sumptuous places of public amusements, expensive collections of
curiosities, palaces, gardens, and innumerable swarms of glittering servants,
are the only fashionable errors to be acquired. Priests, and the frail
sisterhood, lead the higher classes into all the slavish shackles of vice,
folly, and excess. Or, in the words of Reisbec, "since the time that a
Capuchined demon has had sufficient influence in the direction of the Bavarian
politics, to mislead the government, little else than anarchy and confusion
have pervaded the political system of this state."

A picture of the Bavarian character and manners, by Hogarth, was he now
living, would be extremely interesting. Great singularity of character is often
to be met with in England; but what Bavaria offers, exceeds any thing to be
seen elsewhere.

The Bavarian men in general are stout bodied, muscular and fleshy. The women
extremely handsome, well shaped, and lively in conversation.

The characteristic, says Reisbec, of a Bavarian man, is a very thick round
head, a little peaked chin, a large belly, and a pale complexion. Many of them
look like caricatures of man, they have great fat bellies, short clubbed feet,
narrow shoulders, and short necks. They are heavy and awkward in their
carriage, and their small eyes betray a great deal of roguery. The women are
some of the most beautiful creatures in the world, rather gross, but their skin
surpasses all the carnation ever used by painters, the purest lily white is
softly tinged with purple, as if by the hands of the graces. Some of the
peasant girls have such clear complexions, as to appear quite transparent. They
are well shaped, and more lively and graceful in their gestures than the men.
The peasants wives, of Weild, eight leagues from Munich, wear broad felt hats
or bonnets, with a small knob behind, toward the neck, no bigger than a
walnut. On holidays, the maids of the principal inns and public-houses at
Munich, wear about their necks, a silver chain, of three rows, and their
breasts are also laced with two such other chains; a piece of finery, that
costs them fifty guilders.

In the capital, they dress in the French style, or, at least, they imagine
that they do so, for the men are still too fond of gold and mixed colors. The
country gentry, dress without any taste at all. The chief ornament of the men,
is a long, broad waistcoat, strangely embroidered, from which their breeches
hang very low and loose, probably to give free play to their bellies, which is
the chief part of a Bavarian. The women disguise themselves with a sort of
stays in the shape of a funnel, which cover the breast and shoulders, so as to
hide the whole neck. This stiff dress is covered with silver beads, and thickly
overlaid with silver chains. In many places the housewife has a bunch of keys
and a knife, appendant to a girdle, which reach almost to the ground.

As to the characters and manners of the Bavarians, the inhabitants of the
capital naturally differ very much from the country people. The manners of the
people of Munich are corrupt, as must be the case with 40,000 men, depending
entirely upon a court's growing generally idle at its expense.

Among the great nobles here met with, as well as elsewhere, there are some
very well-bred and polite persons, but the people in general, taking the words
in their full extent, are in a high degree destitute of every sense of honor,
without education, without any attachment to the constitution, or generous
feeling whatever. The fortunes of this place are from 1500 to three or four
thousand pounds a year, but the possessors know no other use for their money,
than to spend it in sensual gratifications. Many good houses have been ruined
by play. The fashionable game at court was formerly called zwicken, or perich,
but since Hambesch, the minister of Finance, has pinched their salaries so
much, they call it hambesch. Many of the court ladies know no other employ,
than playing with their parrots, their dogs, or their cats. One of the
principal ladies, whom I was acquainted with, says Baron Reisbec, kept a hall
full of cats, and two or three maids to attend them; she conversed half the day
long with them, often served them herself with coffee and sugar, and dressed
them, according to her fancy, differently every day.

The little noblesse and servants of the court, have such a passion for titles,
as is to be pitied. Before the present Elector came here, the place swarmed
with excellencies, honorable and right honorable. The Emperor made an order
to ascertain the different ranks of noblesse; all those whom it deprived of
titles, and, particularly the women, sunk into despair, and, for the first
time, complaints were made of tyranny, of which none before seemed to have any
conception.

The remainder of the inhabitants are immersed in the most scandalous debauch;
every night the streets re-echo with the noise of drunkards, issuing from the
numerous taverns, where they have open revelling and dancing. Whoever is at all
noble here, must keep his mistress, and the rest indulge in promiscuous love.
In this respect, things are not much better in the country; so that Bavaria
well deserves the character given of it, by an officer of Gascony, of being the
greatest brothel in the world.

The country people are extremely dirty; a few miles distant from the capital,
one would hardly take the hovels of the peasants for the habitations of men.
Many of them have large puddles before their doors, and are obliged to step
over planks into them. The thatched roofs of the country, in many parts of
France; have a much better appearance than the wretched huts of the Bavarian
peasants, the roofs of which are covered with stones, in order that the slates
may not be carried away by the wind. Mean as this looks; cheap as nails are
here, and often as half the roof are torn away by strong winds, yet cannot the
rich farmer be persuaded to nail his shingles properly together. In short, from
the court to the smallest cottage, indolence is the most predominant part of
the character of the Bavarian.

As I strolled, continues the same author, through the country, I shuddered at
the sight of the ravages which war had made. There is no town of any importance
throughout all Bavaria, but the capital. You would never imagine what pitiful
little holes Landsberg, Wasserberg, Landshut, and many other places are, which
make a great figure in the map. To al appearance, neither Ingoldstadt nor
Shaubingen, or any of the greater towns, except Munich, contains above 4000
people. Excepting the brewer, baker, and innkeeper, you may seek in vain for a
rich tradesman. There is not a vestige of industry either in town or country,
but every body seems to consider idleness and beggary as the happiest state of
man.

The country people and farmers are divided into four classes; into whole,
half, and quarter-farmers, and into those called hausler. The whole farmers
plough with eight horses, and are termed einliedler, that is, hermits, because
their farm-houses are at a distance from any cottage. Many of these farm-houses
command a territory of three miles in length and breadth, and the owners employ
from ten to fifteen horses in their tillage, reckoning two horses to every
plough. Of such farmers, there may be about 40,000. A half-farmer ploughs with
four, and a quarter-farmer, with two horses. The hausler are day laborers to
the rest, and till their bit of property with cattle belonging to others.
Having no idea of meadow land or stall-food for cattle, the farmers excuse
their ignorance and inattention to it, by pleading the want of manure. In a
word, both court and people seem blind to their own interest, and a slothful
indolence pervades the whole nation.

This great indolence is contrasted in an extraordinary manner, with a still
higher degree of bigotry, as was before observed, and a story of the facetious
baron will exemplify the appellation. "I happened (says he) to stroll into a
dark, filthy beer house, in the outlets of Munich, where, on my entrance, I
beheld a cloud of smoke, but as soon as the vapor was a little cleared, I
could discern a loud company of the lower order of the people headed by a
drunken priest. His black coat was bedaubed with grease and filth, having many
appertures in its fabric, and, in either hand, emblems of his devotion, that
is to say, cards in the one, and a jug of ale in the other. After the assembly
were tolerably plied with strong drink, the sunshine of conviviality gave way
to the storms of inebriety, and pots, bottles, and glasses flew thick at each
others heads. Presently the evening bell rang for prayers, when off went their
bonnets, and down fell the company on their knees, repeating Ave Maria, Pater
noster, etc. After prayers, they arose, with determined resolution, to end the
dispute by the aid of mugs and glasses, upon which I thought it high time to
decamp, as I foresaw there might be danger to be within reach of the things in
motion; and perceiving the priest took a lower seat, as he thrust in his
weighty carcass, under the table, for shelter, least one of the bottles should
come in contact with his noddle."

The same scenes occur in the inland towns among the citizens, officers,
clergymen, and students. They all salute each other with abusive language, all
vie in hard drinking, and close to every church, there is regularly a
brew house and a brothel. A student of the university of Ingoldstadt, must
carry a thick cudgel, and wear a neat cut hat, he must be able to drink from
eight to ten quarts of beer at a sitting, and be always ready to fight, right
or wrong, with the officers of the garrison. No pen, continues Reisbec, can
describe the ridiculous mixtures of debauchery and devotion, which every day
happen. The most notorious is that which took place in the church of St. Mary
Oettingen, a few years since, when a priest actually deflowered a girl whom he
had long pursued, and could only make a prize of there, before the altar of the
Virgin.

The country people join to their indolence and devotion a certain ferocity of
temper, which often gives rise to bloody scenes; when they mean to praise a
church holiday, or some public festival, which has lately been kept, they say.
-- It was a charming day, there were six or eight persons killed, and many
broken legs and arms. If no accident happened, they call it a fiddle-faddle
business, a mere nothing. In the beginning of this century, the Bavarian troops
maintained the first reputation among the German forces. At the battle of
Hochstadt, they kept their ground, and conceived themselves victors, till the
Elector, who ^ed them, was informed that the French had given way on the other
wing. Under Tilly and Mercy they did wonders, but since the time of those
generals, military discipline has so far relaxed amongst them, that they are no
longer soldiers. No people can show more abhorrence to every th^^^ that is
called discipline and order, than the Bav^^ians do: they might, however, still
be useful as fr^e booters, where robberies and disorders are more pa^^onable
than those of regular troops. There are band^ of robbers about, one thousand
men strong, and would, undoubtedly, make good scouting parties in time of war.
There have been instances of opposing the military, under bold leaders, to the
very last man. But the poorest peasants consider it as a hardship to be drafted
into the regular troops of his prince.

The inhabitants of the capital are very timid and subservient, but the
unadulterated Bavarian peasant is gross, fat, dirty, lazy, drunken and
undisciplined, economical and patriotic, yet he is brave, and such a slave to
his word, that when he has once given it, it is never to be broken. The
imitative zeal is singularly strong in these people, for whatever character the
Elector assumes, from the highest to the lowest, they are religiously devoted
to its observance.

It is the religious contagion only that unfits the natives of this circle,
from those proper exercises in life, that could tend to the advancement both of
their credit and fortune. Monks are the directors of temporal concerns as well
as spiritual discipline. They alone are to be thanked for that wildness of
manners usual among the Bavarians. Their cowls contain the essence of
christianity and all morality. They preach nothing but masses, which are
profitable to them, and the rosary, the scapulaire, and ridiculous
mortification of the body, are the means by which many blockheads have got the
name of saints.

Thus the deceived layman believes, that confession and a mass, which only
costs fifteen pence, will wipe away the foulest sins, and considers the telling
of his beads, as the most essential duty of this life.

The secular priests are as few in number, as the monks are many. These ought
naturally to form the manners of the country; but they are held in much less
veneration than the others, because their dress and appearance is not so
extraordinary. In Bavaria, however, they do not deserve more respect than the
monks, for though their parishes are four miles in compass, and producing from
four to 600l. a year, the greater part of them differ only from the peasants,
by wearing a black coat, keeping a more expensive table, and a handsomer and
better dressed housekeeper: In other things they are equally lazy, unlearned
and ignorant.

The air of this electorate is considered as very salubrious, for,
notwithstanding the inconsiderate mode of living pursued by the generality of
people here, few die of epidemical distempers; health and longevity being the
distinguished characteristics of this favored country.

Near Munich is a town called Reichen-hall, remarkable for its curious salt
spring, the water of which worked by a mill, has a wheel thirty-six feet in
diameter, which, by means of a chain-pump, raises the fluid into a reservoir,
and thence into pipes for the distance of fifteen English miles, over a lofty
mountain, to a salt-house, where fuel is convenient, and there it is boiled. On
the mountains over which it passes, there are little houses, at proper
distances, in order to throw the water higher; for the conveyance also of a
strong fresh spring used in turning the wheels and other engines, and likewise
for carrying off any superfluous salt water, there is a most astonishing and
durable aqueduct of square flints, three English miles in length, and five feet
broad, with an arched roof, being made upwards of 300 years, at a vast expense.
It is in many places overlaid with hard rosin. After running to a depth of
twelve fathoms under the town, and from thence under the gardens and fields, it
at last ejects the water in a strong torrent.

This aqueduct is in general between three and four feet in depth, and runs so
swiftly, that in a boat, with torches, one may sail from one end to the other
in about a quarter of an hour. In order to proceed on this subterraneous
voyage, there is a descent, by means of a sunk tower. There are five apertures
in the form of towers, through each of which a person may speak from the
ramparts of the tower with those who sail on the canal.

THE BISHOPRIC OF RATISBON
Has some territory round the city. It comprehends under two collegiate
churches, twenty-eight abbeys and prelacies, and twenty nine rural deaneries,
to which belong 1383 parishes, chapels of ease, and chaplaincies. It likewise
extends over the Bavarian districts of Holnberg in the Upper Palatinate, as
also over the Roman-catholic parishes, in the principality of Sulzbach, the
Landgravate of Leuthtenberg, and the county of Hernstein. The Bishop is a
prince of the empire, and Ratisbon is the capital of the bishopric.

Ratisbon is situated in forty-nine degrees. N. Lat. at the confluence of the
rivers Danube and Regen, about sixty miles N. of Munich, and the like distance
W. of Passau. It is the only free Imperial city within the limits of the
Elector's dominions; and is large, populous, and well fortified. There is here
a very antique bridge of freestone thrown over the Danube, begun in 1135, and
finished in eleven years, and fabulously said to have been built by the devil.
It has 15 arches supported by square pillars, and is 1091 feet in length, and
320 broad. It is commonly said of the three principal bridges in Germany, that
Dresden bridge is the most elegant, that of Prague the longest, and that of
Ratisbon the strongest.

The city is governed by its own magistrates, which are all Lutherans, and not
subject to the Elector. Here the diet of the empire meets, the city having the
rank of the first place among the Imperial towns. The council-house in which
they meet is a large Gothic structure, of no particular elegance.

The Bishop, although a prince of the empire, and taking his title from the
town, is only privileged by magistracy to say mass here.

The church of the abbey dedicated to St. Emmeran, is a very stately as well as
ancient building, erected A. D. 649. This building is said to contain many
adored relics, but the most material is, that of the whole body and limbs of
Dionysius, the Areopagite, except the middle finger of his right hand, which
the palace chapel of the Virgin Mary, at Munich, carefully retains, rolled up
in a piece of the Virgin Mary's mohair gown, already mentioned.

The authenticity of this relick has been confirmed by Pope Leo XI. but
notwithstanding this, the monks of St. Denis, near Paris, insist that the body
of this Saint is actually in their possession, and his head is shown in the
third shrine of their treasury. His head is also devoutly worshipped in the
cathedral of Bamberg, and at Prague another head is kept in the church of St.
Vitus in the castle. The monks of St. Emmeran say, this relick was purloined
from the abbey of St. Denis in France.

This free Imperial city contains five different states within its circuit,
namely, the cathedral of Ratisbon, the Imperial abbey of St. Emmeran, the Lower
Minster, the Upper Minster, and the city itself. The ladies in the Upper and
Lower Minster, live in a free manner, and are under little or no restraint in
these two abbeys. They go abroad when they please, receive visits from
gentlemen, appear at balls in the city, and generally stay till the last dance,
and that no liberty may be wanting to indulge their desires, they have always
the privilege of quitting the abbey by marrying. The abbesses avoid public
assemblies as if they were princesses, because the envoys ladies will not allow
them the honor of precedence.

There is a convent here in which Roman-catholics only are admitted, that are
natives of Scotland, and those of the greatest abilities are selected from the
rest, and sent as missionaries to their native country. There is also such a
seminary at Wurtsburg, and another at Erfurt. In the hospital of St. Catherine,
the protestants have a chapel, where a Lutheran minister preaches every Monday,
which is not tolerated in any other part of Bavaria. The persons received into
this hospital are half protestants and half Roman-catholics.

As Ratisbon is where the diet of the empire meets, one would suppose, that the
number of envoys from the different princes, who constantly reside here, would
give life to the place. No. -- Every thing is dull and dead. If it was not for
the Prince of Thurn, who is the Emperor's principal commissary, one would not
believe the town to be the seat of the diet; but this gentleman, whose income
is about 40,000l. a year, gives operas, comedies, wild beast bailings, balls,
and fireworks. The rest of the ambassadors, on account of the smallness of
their incomes, are obliged to live very economically, and many of them go about
in hackney coaches. As every thing for their use comes into the city duty free,
the people of the place make heavy complaints of their servants for carrying on
a large contraband trade. Indeed they conceive that what they lose by this, is
more than an equivalent for what they gain by the diet in other respects. The
fact is, that the ambassadors, from the greatest powers, who have large
incomes, and seem to be paid for holding great state, hold none; and as the
other ministers regulate themselves by their example, one may be several weeks
in town, without knowing that the diet is assembled.

The business of the diet is very tedious, owing to the prevalence of party on
all great occasions. The diet, as has been observed, consists of three
colleges, the electoral, the prince's, and the states. All assemble in a hall
to receive the Emperor's propositions, thence they retire to separate
apartments to discuss the business. The majority decides in each chamber, and
so does the majority of the three colleges, as to the determination of the
whole. When they are determined, it is laid before the Emperor, or his
principal commissary. The first college has nine voices; the second one
hundred; and that of the states fiftyone.

The Imperial court has great influence in all the three colleges. The three
ecclesiastical electors have been almost constantly creatures of the Emperor,
who spares neither gold threats nor promises to inspire the canons of Mentz,
Treves, and Cologne, in the choice of a new archbishop. The Emperor has the
same weight in the college of princes; almost all the ecclesiastical princes
are his true sons; besides, it has always been the maxim of the Imperial court
to raise the members of the hereditary dominion, who possessed the smallest
fief in the empire, to the dignity of princes, in order to give them a seat in
the diet. In the college of towns or states, he rules almost without control,
for as these are almost all encompassed by most powerful princes, they require
the particular protection of the court of Vienna, to prevent their being
totally crushed. But it being enacted, that the majority in the Imperial
colleges shall not be decisive either in religion or those matters, in which
the states could not be considered as one body, or where the catholics are of
one, and the protestants of another opinion; in such cases the colleges divide
into parties, and however small in number one party may be, its decree is held
equal to the other more numerous one. Thus the Emperor is sometimes opposed by
the protestants, and the Roman-catholics have found a benefit in it. Though
Saxony has the apparent government of the protestant party, the King of
Prussia's power is got to that pitch as to be at the head of the party, and he
often protests vehemently against things in which religion is not the least
concerned.

The principal Imperial commissioner who is at the head of the diet, by virtue
of his office, takes place of all the emperors, ambassadors, and others, except
only the envoy from the court of Rome, being here the representation of the
head of the German empire. He returns no visits, nor does he give the title of
Excellence to any of the envoys, not even to those of the electors. When an
envoy from an electoral prince pays him a visit, he orders him to be received
at his coach-door by four gentlemen, two pages and a harbinger, and meets him
at the door of the second antichamber, walking back, a little before, on the
right hand of the envoy. The same superiority he assumes in reconducting him.
His audience chair is under a canopy, on which is the Emperor's picture. His
annual income is 24,000 guilders, paid out of the Imperial treasury, and 12,000
out of the Emperor's privy purse, that is about 4200l. sterling.

The envoys of Ratisbon, as representatives of electors, etc. have very lofty
ideas of their office, and assume such state, that when the widow of Duke
Frederick Henry, of Saxe Zeitz, a princess of the House of Holstein Wiesenburg,
came to pay a visit to the Cardinal Saxe Zeitz, her brother-in-law; her
highness could appear but very seldom in public company, because the ladies of
the electoral envoys claimed the precedence of her. If sovereign German princes
attend the diet themselves, they sit above all the envoys of other princes,
except those of Austria, Burgundy, and Saltzburg, who have maintained the
precedence by prescription. It is on account of these disputes about
precedence, that the Holstein envoys never attend any of the sessions.

All the envoys receive presents of wine, fish, etc. from the city on their
first arrival, and the Imperial commissary, a much larger one. In the college
the envoys sit with their hats on, but uncover themselves when they speak.

I have already observed, that the envoys having every article for their
consumption, duty free, is a disadvantage to the city. These envoys are
numerous, and they each give a great number of protections. Some will have, in
general, forty or fifty persons in their retinue, none of whom either pay duty,
contributions, imports, or any of the common city-taxes, though some at the
same time will keep shops and carry on trade. Under this sanction, coachmen and
lacqueys set up public-houses, and draw yearly some hundreds of hogsheads of
beer, which, as they pretend, are all of his excellency's household. It is the
same with regard to wine, which these privileged publicans import clear of all
duty. So that they may easily undersell the fair trader. The quantity of
provisions brought over the bridge, on the Danube, in seven days, with permits
for the use of the envoys, frequently amounts to 1800 or 2000 guilders.

As the Danube directs its course from Ratisbon to Vienna, it gains this city
an advantageous opportunity of sending there, wheat, wood, and several kinds of
provisions. The distance between these two cities is about 200 miles, and yet
the common people pay no more for their passing down the river, than a creutz
or a farthing a mile, so that the whole fare, at this rate, does not exceed
four or five shillings. Keysler says two shillings and four-pence. This cheap
way of traveling induces great numbers of young artificers and handicraftsmen
to go and try their fortune at Vienna; but they do not find it so easy to
return home, as they generally spend what they earn by their trades, and are
often obliged to enlist for soldiers.

ARCHBISHOPRIC OF SALTZBURG.
On the east, this bishopric is bounded by Austria and Stiria; by Corinthia and
the Tyrol on the south; and by Bavaria on the west and on the north. Its extent
from east to west is about five and twenty German miles, and from north to
south, in some parts, sixteen, and in others, five and twenty.

The country is defended on all sides by mountains and narrow passes, or rather
consists entirely of mountains and valleys. No manner of grain being sown here,
it is supplied with all its corn from Bavaria; but every part of it produces
hay of a peculiar goodness, and this proves a fund for breeds of excellent
cattle. The horses in particular are esteemed for their beauty, hardiness and
vigor, being able to travel full speed up the highest mountains, and that
supported by no other food than hay and grass without any oats.

In this archbishopric are six cities and twenty-five towns. All the peasants
are allowed the use of firearms, and are from their earliest youth trained up
to shooting at a mark, and practicing military exercises. The nobility were
formerly very numerous, but the policy of the princes set so many springs at
work to oppress and exterminate them, that at present there is not one
remaining, and their estates are in the hands of the church. With respect to
the few nobles at court, or belonging to the cathedral, they are all
foreigners, some Austrians, some Bohemians, and others from Bavaria. Though the
Roman catholic worship is the only one tolerated, yet at the time of the
reformation, Lutheranism was embraced by great numbers. So late as the year
1732, permission was granted to the Lutheran Saltzburgers to leave the country,
and take their property with them; accordingly above 30,000 persons accepted
this indulgence, and dispersed themselves in the other protestant countries of
Germany, Prussia, and even in the English colonies in America. In all which
places they were received with that benevolence and encouragement which their
magnanimity deserved; and ever since that time, these emigrations have
continued.

His revenues are estimated by Keysler at 800,000 rix-dollars; Busching affirms
they are not less than between three and four millions of guilders. Reisbec on
the contrary says, they are not above 120,000l. which is less than Keysler
makes them; as eight hundred thousand rix-dollars, at three shillings and
sixpence each, makes above 200,000l. But according to Busching reckoning the
guilder at two shillings and four-pence, which is the average of the German
guilder, the income then would be near 400,000l.

The extent of the country is estimated at two hundred and forty German square
miles. There are only seven or eight towns, says Reisbec, some of which are not
to be compared with a Suabian village. The total number of inhabitants is
computed at two hundred and fifty thousand. There is only one manufacture in
the whole country, which is a small one at Hallein for cotton stockings and
night-caps.

The inhabitants live chiefly by breeding cattle. In many places you may find
very rich farmers, who own from sixty to fourscore head of great cattle. They
export some cheese and butter, but not so much as they might do, if the
inhabitants were as industrious, frugal, and disposed for trade as the Swiss.
Besides horned cattle, they also breed great numbers of horses, which are very
strong, and are exported to great distances for the purpose of heavy draught
and burden.

The salt-works at Hallein are without comparison the most considerable. The
internal parts of the mountain which is about four miles distant from this
place, consist of crystals of salt, mixed with a great deal of earth. In order
to clean it, they dig large, hollow chambers within side, and fill them with
water, which washes the salt, and lets the earth sink to the bottom. The water
thus impregnated, is conveyed into pens and boiled off. In course of time the
chambers fill, of themselves, with salt, and the treasure is inexhaustible. One
of these chambers, when lighted, makes the prettiest sight in the world.
Conceive to yourself a hall about a hundred feet square, the walls and ground
of which are composed of crystal of every earthly color, and which reflect the
light so wonderfully, that you would think yourself in some enchanted palace.
In order to carry on this work, the woods of the forests along the Saltza and
other rivers is floated down them.

From the unfavourable situation of this country, it cannot use the whole of
this treasure for itself, but is obliged to give the most part to foreigners.
All the country round about belongs either to Austria or to Bavaria. In Austria
they have salt sufficient for their own use, and have prohibited the
importation of foreign salt. Bavaria, on the other hand, has so productive a
salt work at Ratisbon, that it not only provides sufficient for that country,
but also can afford a considerable quantity to foreigners. The archbishop of
Bavaria have consequently found themselves obliged to enter into an agreement
with the Dukes of Bavaria, by virtue of which these take a certain quantity of
salt every year, at a very moderate price, with which they furnish Switzerland
and Suabia. By this means, the salt trade of Saltzburg is properly in the hands
of Bavaria, which gains full three times as much by it as the Princes of
Saltzburg. The value of the salt which Bavaria stipulates to take yearly,
amounts to about 20,000l. What is disposed of in the country itself, or carried
clandestinely into Austria, makes in the whole about 35,000l. of which two
thirds may be clear gain.

The gold and silver mines of this principality make a great figure in the
geography of Germany; but compared with the salt-works, are not worth
mentioning. The roads through this mountainous country are not in general very
good. Notwithstanding, the passage is now and then on wooden bridges hung by
chains over some dreadful abysses, the heaviest carriages have nothing to fear,
except, perhaps, the being overset by a violent blast of wind, or being covered
by a fall of snow in the spring.

About six miles from Saltzburg there is a long narrow valley bounded by high
mountains, which stretches itself some miles southward and then westward. At
the entrance of this valley is the pass of Lueg or Luhk, a word, which in
English means look, or watchtower. This pass is a deep narrow hollow between
naked, and perpendicular rocks of granate, which hang over the road, on each
side, to an amazing height, and between which the river Saltza runs like a
torrent. Above the river a path has been cut along the side of a rock, and
there is a gate with scarce room for a carriage to pass, which is protected by
a battery, so that a few people here could withstand a whole army. The other
approaches to this valley, which constitute the greatest part of the
principality of Saltzburg, are equally well guarded and defended.

The country about Saltzburg forms a striking contrast with the barren,
desolate wilds of Munich. For seventeen long miles, the distance between these
two cities, there is no place of note, but the dark Wasserburg, which stands on
one of the barren sand-hills, round which the river Inn winds. Near the
frontiers of Saltzburg, the prospects become varied, the habitations of the
peasants appear nearer, and the cultivation of the country improves.

Saltzburg is a fine city. The houses are high and built with stone. The roofs
are in the Italian taste, and you may walk out upon them. Before the palace is
a fountain, which passes for the finest in all Germany; the figures are all of
white marble. The reservoir is an hundred and seven feet in circumference, four
large horses spout the water out of their mouths and nostrils; the height of
the whole work exceeds fifty feet, and is surmounted by a column of water, some
inches in diameter, and eighteen feet high.

The palace is magnificent, abounding with fine pictures, tables of inlaid
marble, and superb stones of all colors, and ornamented with statues: the
furniture has nothing remarkable; and though the tapestries are valuable on
account of the gold and silver, yet age has deprived them of the greatest part
of their beauty. The meuse is in three very long and high arched divisions; the
horses, whose number amounts to a hundred and fifty, eat out of white marble
mangers; and twice a week a running water is turned in through both sides of
the stalls, and carries away any filth which may have gathered there; the
number of the Archbishop's horses in the city, and at his country palaces, are
said to be two hundred and fifty. Over this stable is the fencing school, and
before it a pond for watering the horses, ninety-three feet in length; within
it stands a very large horse, made of one piece of marble, with water gushing
out of his mouth.

The winter riding-school is very lofty, placed with seats on both sides of the
walls, between the windows, for the accommodation of spectators of distinction,
that the riders may not be incommoded in their exercises. The summer
riding-school, which also serves for baiting wild beasts, is in the open air;
it has three distinct galleries, one side of which are cut out of the rock.

In the cathedral all the altars are of beautiful marble of different kinds;
under the cupola are four altars with an organ over each; the fifth and finest
organ is over the chief entrance, and consists of three thousand two hundred
and sixty pipes, of which the longest is thirty-three feet; to this organ
belong four keys and forty-two registers, of which seventeen are of clock-work.
The roof of this church is covered with copper; the gallery between the
cathedral and the palace, is of white marble; and nothing of the kind can make
finer music, than the chimes of this cathedral.

In St. Sebastian's church lies the famous Switzer, Theophrastus Bompast,
surnamed Paracelsus, of the greatest puffers that ever lived, with the
following ostentatious epitaph:

Conditur hic Philippus Theophrastus, insignis medicinae doctor, qui dira illa
vulnera, lepram, podagram, hydropisin aliaque insanabilia corporis contagia
mirifica art sustulit, ac bona sua in pauperes distribuenda, collocandaque
honoravit. Anno MDXLI. die 24 Septembris, vitam cum morte mutavit.

"Here lies interred, Philip Theophrastus, a celebrated doctor of physic, who,
with wonderful skill, removed those dreadful plagues, the leprosy, gout, and
dropsy, with every other incurable malady; his wealth he liberally distributed,
and afterward bequeathed to the poor. On the 24th September, 1741, he departed
this life."

A little above the city, springs the Gastein bath, whose waters are very hot,
and have a very strong taste of different minerals. They are said to be a
remedy for the stone, the venereal disorder, and for the cholic, and this too
only by bathing in them, without drinking them.

The city of Saltzburg is remarked for having the best accommodations for
travelers of any city in Germany.

The inhabitants in general appear very social, open, and lively, and
uncommonly attached to strangers. Every thing in this city breathes the air of
pleasure and joy. They eat, drink, laugh, dance, sing, and gamble in the
extreme, nor is there any place when you can enjoy so many pleasures for a
little money. The people converse upon religion and politics, with a freedom
that does honor to the place, and with respect to books, all German
publications may be had without the least restraint.

The upper nobility of the place is made up chiefly of Austrian families, who
distinguish themselves by their affability, their knowledge of the world, and
their manners. On the other hand, the swarm of little court gentry render
themselves ridiculous by their pitiful lusts after titles and their pride. You
must visit about a hundred of there Gnadige herren, which title, in German,
means Gracious Sir, who live upon three or four hundred florins a year, which
they receive from court, but whom you cannot offend more than by calling them
plain Sir, and their wives plain Madam. A man who lives here must accustom
himself to put in Gnadige herren at every third word, unless he chooses to pass
for being ill-bred. Most of them have neither estates nor money; the court is
therefore compelled to make their appointments as slender as possible, to keep
them from starving; though above two-thirds of them are superfluous servants.
Many of them amuse themselves with French and German literature, particularly
with all that relates to the stage. The rage for the theater here is very
great, and they look for the coming of a company of strolling players, with as
much eagerness as the inhabitants of Siberia look for the return of the spring.
Give this class of people their right titles, and you will find them the best
kind of creatures living.

The country people are uncommonly lively and gay. The young women of these
sequestered vales, fresh as roses, and lively as a roe, understand the art of
coquetry as well as any Parisian lady, except that the allurements they display
are more natural; they know how to employ the ornamental part of dress to the
best advantage If they are disposed to make their lover happy, neither the
shame of an illegitimate birth, nor the fear of being obliged to maintain it,
is of any consideration. Custom sets them above the first, and the ease of
maintaining a child above the latter. Murder of infants here is extremely
uncommon, they all yield, without restraint or reserve, to the impulse of
nature. The young girls kiss and shake hands in the open church on Sundays,
with those they love. On a nightly visit, however, the lover is rather in a
hard situation, for let the weather be ever so unfriendly, he is not admitted,
until a certain watchword is given, which, in general, consists of long
rhimes, that in a mysterious manner express his sufferings and his smart. This
custom is very old, and in many of the remote parts of the mountains, sacred
and inviolable.

The inhabitants of these mountains are so contented, that they consider their
country as a kind of paradise. Those who lived in Dintner valley, a frightful
gap, between naked rocks, through which the river Dintner runs, have a saying,
"That when any one falls from heaven, he must fall into Dintner valley." Which
is as much to say, that this valley is a second heaven.

Many of the peasants still wear long beards, and go with their heads
uncovered, and their breasts open, at all seasons of the year. As they are
extremely hairy, and very much sunburned, this gives them a very formidable
look, but when you come near them, their friendly air and appearance of
integrity speak very strongly in their favor. They are courageous and strong,
and would, no doubt, make a brave defense in their own country; but out of it
they are said not to make good soldiers. Like all the inhabitants of mountains,
they cannot stand a change of climate. Besides the peculiarity of their diet,
and which they must renounce in the field, their not being able to bear
fatigue, makes them unfit for service. Man resembles his soil, unless education
and society change him. The peasant of this country bears the stamp of nature
upon him. His movements are quick, like the stream in the wood; he is
boisterous in his passions, like the atmosphere; he breathes strong as the oak
which shades him; and is faithful, firm, and true, as the rock which bears his
hut. The life and variety of the scenes which nature offers him here, render
his head richer in conceptions, and his heart warmer than it would be, if he
dwelt upon an uniform plain, and gave himself up to nature as he does here. His
distance from populous cities, and the scattered situation of the huts,
preserve his manners pure, and make him more attentive to his own concerns.

Mountainous situations have, unquestionably, in many respects, a preference
over the plains. The pulse of nature beats stronger; every thing discovers more
life and energy; every thing more loudly and emphatically speaks an Almighty
power at work. The stream which meanders through the plain, makes through the
mountains, and grows impetuous in its course; the motion of the clouds, the
revolutions of the sky, and the peals of thunder, are all more strongly
animated. The valleys in the fair season of the year, are filled with finer
perfumes of flowers and herbs, than those of the plains, whose soil is not so
fit to preserve their radical moisture, and where their exhalations are
dissipated more widely in the air. Nature here is more varied, and infinitely
more picturesque. Of her different shades, an inhabitant of the plain can form
no conception. Here at once nature presents the peculiarities of every season,
and the most distant climes. Whilst the summer lasts, in the bottom of the
valley is felt the heat of Africa; the middle of the mountain has the
temperature of spring, and the top reminds you of Siberia.

This country is singularly interesting to a botanist, or mineralogist; but
having the misfortune to be very little known, the discovery of its treasures
is reserved for futurity, till either some man of genius shall addict himself
to these pursuits, or the swarm of idle travelers, who hover, like
cock-chafers, about the Apennines, Alps, Aetna, and the Pyreneans, shall take
their flight to these parts, and excite some foreign genius to the task. The
Zillerthal is particularly rich in different sorts of variegated stones, and in
many parts of the hills you meet with very scarce European plants. In fine,
there is room for weaving many an hypothesis on the plants of the hills, on the
work and production of the waters in them, and on the revolutions of nature
that may still be expected in them.

It was with great pleasure, says Reisbec, I wandered over this romantic
country, and sometimes standing on some immense peak, I viewed under me the
clouds, towered on clouds, boundless plains, innumerable lakes, rivers and
brooks, valleys of tremendous depth, and the bare summits of huge granate
rocks, with sensations peculiar to their heavenly regions. Sometimes, says he,
I took my abode in the deep hanging brow of a mountain, in a shepherdess's hut,
who dwelt the whole summer through, with her flock in this subterestrial
region, and is visited only by her lover, who clambers up two or three miles of
the mountains to her, or by some wild-goat hunter, or strayed knight, like
myself; there I live a day, like an ancient patriarch, on milk and cheese,
count the flock which in the evening assembles round the hut, at the sound of a
flute, and which, for the moment I can think my own; sleep upon a heap of hay
far more tranquil than upon the most luxurious downbed, and enjoy the beauties
of the rising sun, with a luxury and delight, which at operas, comedies, balls,
and such like entertainments are looked for in vain.

The Saltzburg peasant clothes himself from head to foot; every family weaves a
sort of coarse, dark, gray cloth, from wool which they grow and prepare
themselves. They also make their own shoes and stockings. Their dress is by
these means clean, simple, and graceful. The face of the peasants of this
country is better than that in most others. The Saltzburger cannot content
himself with cheese and potatoes like the Swiss, but must always have his meat,
which, however, fat it may be, he constantly dips in hogs lard. He must
likewise have bread, beer, and brandy, good of the kind, and in plenty. If this
extravagance was not counterbalanced by their admirable economy in other
respects, they would be the poorest people in Europe.

The military force of this archbishopric consists only of one regiment of
foot, containing 1000 men. Every bailiwick has its rendezvous, to which, on
signals given, by means of cannon planted on the mountains, they repair
completely armed. The number of peasants who can hit a mark of an
hand's-breadth, are computed at 25,000.

The university is kept up by the congregation of Benedictines, who supply it
with professors. As the having studied here is a kind of requisite for
ecclesiastical preferment in the circle of Suabia, it is a place of some resort
for students from that quarter; but those excepted, and a few of the natives,
there are no others, though the chairs of the professors are filled with very
able men. The funds of the university are too small, they do not in the whole
exceed 500l. per annum.

The civil and military officers of Saltzburg have a very great advantage over
those of other countries, which is, that half their salaries are continued to
their widows during their life, or till they change their condition.

From the top of the Unterberge, a mountain near Saltzburg, there is a prospect
over all Bavaria. Nine lakes may be reckoned up in one view. The most charming
part of this prospect, however, is the principality of Berchtolsgaden, which
lies to the south of the mountain. It consists of a small narrow vale,
encompassed around with vast heights of the most picturesque granate, and
hardly contains 3000 inhabitants. The nature of this country being favorable
neither to agriculture nor pasture, the inhabitants have given themselves to
works of art, which fail mankind in no part of the earth, and are mighty and
powerful enough to turn the hardest stones into bread. It is in these remote
valleys that they make the greatest part of the toys with which Nuremberg and
Augsburg carry on so considerable a trade. The horses with spurs, little rasps,
cukows, wooden mannakins, rats and mice, and all the play-things for little
children; also the crucifixes, straw quadrille boxes, powder and pomatum boxes,
and all the play-things for great children, in a word, the greater part of the
articles which go amongst us, under the name of German toys. It is a pretty
sight to behold two or three families in a hut, and to see the great plump
hands of the farmers occupied in giving a finish to the smallest articles. Here
is occupation for the old as well as the young. The small price these
commodities sell for, makes it impossible for them to accumulate riches; but
they have enough, and are happy. These good people little think their
productions are dispersed all over Europe, and that the Spaniards drive a very
profitable trade with them in both Indies.

Hellbrunn is a palace of the Archbishop, near the city, the building of which
has nothing in it remarkable, but the gardens are very pleasant; they are laid
out in the manner of a wilderness, and abound with the finest waterworks,
reservoirs, ponds and basins, so clear that trouts and other fish may be seen
sporting in them, and nibbling the calves and ox livers with which they are
fed. By these waters all kinds of little figures of mills, scissar-grinders,
etc. are thrown about the garden; and in the grotto you are sure of being
sprinkled by the artificial playing of the water. Over one of the many springs
in this garden, is the statue of a monster, which might be taken for a savage
or wild-man, were it not for its cock's-comb and eagle's feet. Under it is this
inscription. Anno 1531.

"The original of this monstrous figure, called a forest devil, was caught a
hunting near Stavenburg; his skin was yellowish, he had all the marks of
savageness, and never looked at any one, but hid himself in corners; he had the
face of a man with a beard, eagle's feet with lion's claws, the tail of a dog,
and on his head grew a large cock's-comb; he soon died with hunger, as no
alurements nor violence could make him eat or drink."

THE BISHOPRIC OF PASSAU.
This city is situated sixty miles South-East of Ratisbon, at the confluence of
the three rivers, Danube, Inn, and Iltsz. It is divided into four parts, the
town of Passau, Innstadt, Iltszstadt, and the quarter in which the Bishop's
palace is seated. The first three are fortified, but the last, which is only a
suburb, has nothing but an old castle, in which the Bishop generally resides.
It was in this city that peace was concluded between Charles V. and the
protestant princes in 1552, by which the Lutherans were to enjoy the free
exercise of their religion. Passau is but a very miserable, ill-built town,
those parts excepted which lie near the Danube, and the prince's palace. It is
well situated for trade, but its chief subsistence comes from the court, the
income of which is about L.22,000 a year, and on the canons, whose benefices
are the richest in Germany. A stall here being supposed to be worth about 3000
florins a year, and what with the income of other benefices, there are few of
them who have not nearly double that income.

The inhabitants of these several holy cities are all much alike, as drinking
and intriguing constitute their principal occupation; and the poverty and good
humor which seldom forsake those who are thus addicted, render them affable,
obsequious and humble. The cathedral is a fine Gothic building which merits
well to be viewed. There are fine china manufactories and potteries in this
country; the produce of the former is carried as far as the Rhine.

Many attempts have been made to plant vines on the Iser and Danube below
Ratisbon, but hitherto they have produced grapes only for eating; this whole
tract of country being too full of wood and water for the vine to ripen in. But
what was Suabia in the times of Tacitus? Little did the Romans think the vine
would grow in Germany when they doubted whether even fruit would grow there.
And yet Suabia produces some noble vines now, which may rival the Falernian and
Roman wines for their excellence.

The reason to be assigned is, that the air of a country changes with its
cultivation. The drying up of marshes renders it warmer. The evaporation too
occasioned by numbers who live together may work upon the air. The slopes of
the hills on the left side of the Danube, between this place and Ratisbon,
promise a good place to plant vines in, as they are well guarded from the
noxious winds; and the wine made near Passau truly merits the name of wine.

This large vale of the Danube produces likewise the best kind of corn and
would very easily nourish twice the number of inhabitants it does at present.

Corn is often so cheap in Bavaria as hardly to pay the farmer for the trouble
of raising it: one hundred and seventy pounds of rye are frequently sold for
about two slorins.

Navigation is by no means so well understood in this country as it is upon the
Upper Rhine; they do not yet understand how to sail by the direction of the
river. Most of the vessels which come down the Danube from Ratisbon and Ulm are
without decks or masts; they are built only of fir-boards, and are sold again
either at Vienna or elsewhere. The Emperor has promised great encouragement to
those persons who will build their vessels like those on the Rhine; but in
this, as in every thing else, it is difficult to make the mechanical part of
the public tread the track, to which they have not been accustomed.

Though Bavaria is a rich, plentiful country and lies well situated for trade,
from the Danube and several other navigable rivers passing through it, yet the
inhabitants in general are not rich, which is supposed to proceed from the
Elector's monopolizing the most considerable articles of commerce, particularly
that of salt, which he prohibits his subjects either from importing or from
purchasing of any person except himself. A second monopoly is that of corn, the
farmer is obliged to sell all his corn to the Elector's agents who retail it
out again to the people. This prince, like the Czar of Muscovy, is
Premier-General for his dominions; none may brew or sell strong beer but the
Elector's factors. There is only an indifferent small beer which the peasants
and citizens are allowed to brew in their own houses. The Bishop of Passau,
whose territories lie within this circle, likewise imitates the Elector in this
tyranny. The chief subsistence of the peasants of this circle is their herds of
swine, which are fed in their woods; and the wild beasts and game which they
meet with there, though it is penal to meddle with the game: but in most parts
of Bavaria, corn, beer, and salt are so excessive dear that a peasant can
scarce afford to purchase them. After what has been remarked respecting these
monopolies, it is needless to observe that the Elector is absolute in his
dominions. There are some general laws in the empire that all princes and
states are governed by, but they are often disobeyed where there is not a force
to compel the observance of them. The Elector and the Archbishop of Saltzburg
are joint directors of the circle. The Elector of Bavaria styles himself Duke
of the Upper and Lower Bavaria, and of the Upper Palatinate, Duke and Count
Palatine of the Rhine; Elector and Vicar of the Empire, and Grand Master of the
Household.

In the lower part of Bavaria there are many more nobility who reside
constantly on their estates than in any parts of Germany: and to this may be
attributed the advantage of their superior cultivation; for as the nobles are
farmers, it is no wonder that estates are managed better under the master's eye
than in his absence. Though there are not many of them who are great
proficients in agriculture, yet a life passed in the midst of it, must yield a
greater insight into the means of its improvement than one spent in the parade
of a court. Besides, the nobles themselves will naturally treat their peasants
better than the race of bailiffs, agents, etc. who oppress and squeeze them for
their own emolument, and it is an indisputable fact that those landlords are
richest, and their estates best cultivated, where the peasants are allowed some
degree of liberty and property.

Though the peasants in this country are in a state of villenage, they are
treated in a kinder manner, and have more property and better houses than in
other parts of Germany; and many of them are also farmers, who, by industry and
frugality, have saved many. Much of this country is enclosed, than which there
cannot be any improvement of so great consequence. Sheep seems to be a
principal article in their husbandry. Every farm of any size has a large
sheep-house, with a roof, but open on one side to the south; in this house they
fold their sheep every night the year round, and depend on it principally for
manuring their lands: when they begin to fold, they spread over the floor
light, virgin soil, turf, sand, or peat-earth, and fold upon it, till it is
very moist and dirty, then they make a fresh layer and so go on; but to every
eighteen inches of depth they litter with straw, for they remove the heap but
once a year, and in extreme wet or snowy weather they do the same. This is an
excellent system for raising manure, but it might be imagined that the sheep
lying on a dunghill would be prejudicial to their health, this the Bavarians
deny, and on the contrary assert that not only the health of the animal is the
better for it, but likewise that the wool is much finer than if the sheep were
exposed to the weather.



MAP of the CIRCLE of SWABIA
map of Swabia

CHAP. XIV. Of the Circle of Swabia.
SWABIA is bounded by Franconia on the north, Bavaria on the east, Switzerland
on the south, and Alsace on the west. It contains the duchies of Wurtemberg,
the Margravate of Baden, the principality of Hohen-Zollern, that of Oetringen,
and that of Mindelheim; the bishoprics of Augsburg, Constance and Coire, with
several baronies, abbeys, and free towns. It derives its name from the Sueir
who were so called from their long hair, which Tacitus mentions as a
peculiarity belonging to them, by which a Swabian was known.

This country prides itself, not a little, in the source of that famous river
the Danube: its course is not less than four hundred German miles; it flows by
fifty large cities, and takes in twelve great rivers, besides above eighty
lesser streams, so that few rivers can be brought into competition with it, not
even the Nile itself. This celebrated river rises near Don-Eschingen, in the
territories of Fu^stemberg, and by the conflux of several rivers soon becomes
considerable. Keysler notices a singular circumstance which he observed at a
chapel built on an eminence near Burlatingen, a hunting seat of the prince of
Hohen-Zollern; its being situated so that the rain which fell on one side of
the chapel went into the Danube, and that which fell on the other, into the
Rhine. On the chapel is a very suitable inscription taken from the psalms.

Sit nomen domini laudabile ab orient ad occidentem. Blessed be the name of
the Lord from the rising to the setting of the sun, or from the east to the
west.

The Rhine, the principal source of which took its rise on one side of the
chapel, emptying itself in the German Ocean; and the Danube, running in a quite
contrary direction, and losing itself in the Black Sea.

In fertility of soil the territories of the circle of Swabia vary very much,
which is a constant source of complaint to the assemblies of the circle, from
districts, which imagine themselves aggrieved in their assessments. The highest
parts in Swabia are the Alps and the Schwarzwald or Black Forest; the former of
which are still somewhat higher than the latter. The Schwarzwald has probably
been so called from the thick forests of fir with which it is covered; and,
according to the description given us by Julius Caesar of the Sylva Hyrcinia,
this was the beginning of it. This wood is by much the largest in Germany,
being sixty days journey in length and nine in breadth. The inhabitants subsist
chiefly by graziery, wood, and pitch, which they trade in for exportation. In
many parts of it, there are two kinds of land, one like the common ploughed
fields, and the other rendered fertile by the following method. The peasants
lay billets of fir about six feet long at a proper distance, and between them
vine branches covered with sods pared off the same field. One of these heaps is
called a ross or horse; and the number of them is proportioned to the
dimensions of the field. These they kindle, leaving them to consume slowly, and
the ashes and earth are then scattered over the ground, to which they
communicate an extraordinary fertility; but this lasts only for three or four
years. It is then left for some years fallow, and yields good grass, till it
becomes again fit to undergo the above operation.

This circle contains 720 square German miles. Under the emperor Frederic III.
the circle of Swabia was divided into four quarters, which division still
continues and on many occasions has been found to be very beneficial. The duke
of Wurtemberg is head of the first, the Margrave of Baden the second, the
Bishop of Constance and the Abbot of Kempten heads of the third, and the Bishop
of Augusburg head of the fourth.

OF THE TERRITORIES OF THE DUKE OF WURTEMBURG.
The greatest part of this dukedom consists in an extensive valley, which is
bounded on the east by a chain of hills, called the Alps; on the west by the
Black Forest, on the north by a part of the mountain of Oden Wald, and an arm
of the Black Forest. On the whole it inclines to the northward, and is watered
in the middle by the river Neckar. Several smaller arms run off from the
surrounding chain of hills toward the center, cross each other in various
directions, and form little valleys, which are watered by an infinity of
rivers. The land is rendered exceedingly fruitful by these lesser hills, which
shelter the valleys from the cold hills, and collect the heat of the sun
between them.

The southern sides of these mountains and hills are planted with vines very
high up, and above them there is excellent dyers and brush-wood; and at the
bottom is a gray colored, light mould, which yields all kind of corn, but
particularly barley, in astonishing plenty. Upon the whole, this country
resembles the middle part of Lorrain; but the soil is much better, and there
are not so many stones in it. Excepting salt, which it is obliged to have
recourse to Bavaria for, it abounds in all the necessaries of life. What corn
is not consumed in the country is sent to Switzerland, and the wine goes as far
as England. The whole extent of the country does not contain more than two
hundred, German square miles. In this circuit there are about five hundred and
sixty thousand inhabitants, that is, about two thousand eight hundred to every
German square mile. Those parts of Germany excepted, which are in the
neighborhood of some capital cities, and some districts of Italy and the
Netherlands, there is certainly no country in Europe so populous in proportion
to its extent as this. It is however so fruitful as to be able to support as
many more inhabitants.

The income of the Duke amounts to about three hundred thousand pounds a year.
Some calculations make the sum smaller; but as there are few parts of Germany
in which the taxes are not estimated at five florins per head, and in some they
pay much more, why should it not be so in Wurtemberg, which is one of the
largest territories in Germany, and in which the subject is not more spared?

After the electors, the Duke is beyond comparison the greatest Prince in
Germany, though the landgrave of Hesse Cassel, who has not above two thirds of
the subjects or yearly income, is of more consequence in the Empire, on account
of his connection with England.

The government of this dukedom is not so simple and unmixed as that of the
territory of Baden. Here are swarms of counselors, secretaries, proctors, and
advocates, of which more than half might be spared; but the nature of the
government allows them to enjoy their appointments in idleness. Many of them,
it is true, belong to the state, whose duty it is to limit the authority of the
Prince; but notwithstanding the many reductions in the household itself, it is
still much too large for the Duke's circumstances.

In all the cities, towns, and large villages in this duchy, there are certain
officers, called private overseers, who inspect into the offenses and
misdemeanors of their fellow-citizens, and make a report of them to the
magistracy of the place, in order that they may be further enquired into, if
the magistrates shall think fit. These inquisitors are private, and swear to
the faithful execution of their office; instead of a salary, they are generally
rewarded with a counsellor's place, or some other office in the government. No
one knows his accuser, as Keysler observes, from whom this peculiar
circumstance in the police of Wurtemberg is taken, which may be an inlet to
many abuses, if their information alone passes for sufficient proofs, and they
are considered in any other light than as premonitions for the judge, or as
incentives to greater cautions for the future. This custom is similar to the
Denuncie secret at Venice, but is practiced in no other part of Germany.

Though the country throughout is protestant, and the Duke alone a catholic,
there still prevails a great deal of superstition and bigotry. The clergy are
members of the state, these have a jurisdiction of their own, and are very
wealthy.

After the repeal of the edict of Nantz, the Duke of Wurtemberg might have
reaped very considerable advantages by affording shelter and encouragement to
the French refugees, there being among them many rich people, and those
profitable manufactures would have been introduced here which enriched
Brandenburgh, and other countries; but a blind zeal for orthodoxy and the
clamours of the clergy, that it would be setting up altar against altar, and
that even Mahometanism was preferable to Calvinism, filled the assembly of the
states with such jealousies and apprehensions, that the court was disappointed
in its good intentions. An after-reflection opened peoples eyes, when it was
seen what a valuable opportunity they had rejected.

The Duke's army consisted formerly of fourteen thousand men, and if his debts
were paid, and his other expenses moderated, such an establishment might always
be supported; as the population and revenues of the country appear to allow it.
At the time of the change, however, they were reduced to about five thousand
men, and those seem to be none of the best troops. The late Duke of Wurtemberg,
some few years since, made himself the topic of conversation all over Europe
for his sumptuous feasts, his magnificent balls, the splendour of his
illuminations, in which immense forests were lighted up, his superb hunting
parties, and his brilliant operas, where all the first-rate dancers from Paris
were procured, with Noverre at their head, when his fame was at the highest;
together with all the principal Italian singers, at a most enormous expense.
The consequences were such as might naturally have been foreseen; debt,
oppressive taxes, resistance on the part of the states of the country, and
finally a commission of enquiry issued from the Imperial court. The debts, upon
examination, were found to amount to twelve hundred thousand pounds. The evil
counselors, as it may easily be imagined, were removed; but this would have
done but little, had not an alteration about this time taken place in most of
the lesser courts of the Empire, the princes of which, from being oppressive
and extravagant tyrants, suddenly contracted a taste for political economy, and
philosophical pursuits. The Duke of Wurtemberg is now quite a philosopher, he
founds schools, farms, cultivates arts and sciences, and establishes
manufactures; in short, he has endeavored, in every way possible to make up
for what has been wrong. This change has taken place ever since the year 1778;
the Prince took the opportunity of his birthday to publish a manifesto, of
which the following is the substance: "That being a man, and from the condition
of human nature, far removed from the standard of perfection, it could not but
fall out, that partly from human frailty, ever prone to err, and partly from
the want of sagacity, and from other causes many events had taken place which
had they not happened, things would have been very different from what they now
are, or are likely to be hereafter. This I acknowledge freely, and I assure my
loving subjects, that every successive year of my life, which it shall please
the divine Providence to bestow, shall be dedicated to the promotion of their
happiness. Henceforwards the prosperity of Wurtemberg shall be established on
the joint and firm basis of the sovereign's love for his people, and of the
people's confidence in the affection of their sovereign. And we trust, that
every man will, for the future, live in confidence, that he has a provident and
anxious father in his prince, and that the only contest that shall arise
hereafter, shall be which shall do most to make his native country happy and
flourishing."

The affection of the people toward their prince was very remarkable. Even
when the Duke seemed to have no other care than how he should load them with
new taxes, he did not forfeit their attachment. The curses of the people fell
on his servants, and the crew of projectors who led him astray. But as soon as
they were banished, he became the idol of his subjects; and very deservedly so.

All the princes of the House of Wurtemberg Stutgard are brave, and as it were
born for military achievements. Prince Maximilian especially gave the greatest
hopes of himself, when scarce fourteen years of age, he entered into the
service of Charles XII. of Sweden, and continued to attend that Prince in all
his campaigns. At the surprise of the town of Pultawa in 1703, though so young,
he attacked sword in hand an old Saxon trooper, who turning about in some
astonishment, said to him, "Thou little son of a whore, what art thou already
for cracking a stout fellow's skull?" And was going to dispatch the Prince, had
not Charles XII. came to his assistance. And afterward, in a dark night, the
Prince riding full speed before the King, suddenly stopped at a deep pit; the
King supposing it was from fear of the enemy, called out, forward, forward,
upon which the Prince, regardless of the danger, clapped spurs to his horse,
and fell into a pit; the King, being close behind, had the same fate, and, with
his horse, fell upon the Prince, who was half dead. This so endeared him to
Charles, that he set up a whole night with him. At the unfortunate battle of
Pultawa, he was taken prisoner. The Czar offering him a commission, his answer
was, "That whilst he had a drop of blood, it should be employed in the service
of his Swedish majesty as his benefactor." This so charmed the generous Czar,
that on certain conditions he gave him his liberty, and presented him with the
sword he then wore. Whether from a mistaken gratitude he drank too freely at
taking leave of the Russians, or whether his activity in the former, fatiguing
campaign had hurt his constitution, this heroic Prince, on his return to his
native country, was seized with a fever, which proved fatal to him, in the
twenty-first year of his age, dying in the bloom of his youth, and in the
certain hopes, that by his marriage with the King's sister Ulrica, he should
come one day to fit on the throne of Sweden.

Stutgard, the capital of the duchy, is not a large city, but contains two
well built suburbs, and has been the residence of the dukes since 1321, the new
ducal palace was built in 1746, in a delightful country, full of gardens and
vineyards, in the Misenbach (which at about one league distance, runs into the
Neckar), and contains about 20,000 inhabitants. They are a handsome people. The
women are tall and slender, with fair and ruddy complexions. The natural
riches, and the ease with which a maintenance is acquired, either in town or
country, cause them to live exceedingly well. The Stutgarder is so attached to
his home, that remove him but thirty miles from it, and he is seized with the
malady du pais. At present little notice is taken of the noble palace of
Stutgard, and this is more particularly felt in the pleasure-house, where
formerly the Ridottos were held. This edifice, were it only on account of its
hall, which has few equals in all Europe, very well deserves notice. It is two
hundred and twenty feet in length, eighty broad, and ninety high, without a
single pillar; its roof, which is arched, being fastened in a masterly manner,
with wooden screws. In the year 1707, Marshal Villars, coming into this hall,
mistook it for a place of worship, and said, with some admiration, voici un
beau temple! i. e. This is a fine church! On the roof are painted several
scriptural histories, but on the sides are views of all the forests of the
duchy of Wurtemberg, and some merry scenes, which happened, at different times,
in the hunting parties. Near it is the orangery, which is composed of very
large and high trees, but not well contrived; want of height occasioning many
of the trees to bend at the top. The new building, as it is called, is of fine
freestone, with a grand staircase of the same, and a spacious hall, whose
galleries rest on twelve pillars of a great height; on these are painted the
twelve months; the roof shows the most ancient transactions of the family of
Wurtemberg, and the sides are filled with masquerades and public entries.

In the museum are several portraits of the ducal family, with petrifactions,
mechanical and mathematical inventions, curious specimens of penmanship, gems,
costly vessels, mummies, old medals, etc. Among other curiosities, you see the
picture of a woman with a large beard, apparently in her twenty-fifth year, and
she is again painted in her old age. This seeming contradiction of a bearded
woman is accounted an error of nature, which commonly proceeds from an excess
of humidity. In this case it is possible for bearded women to enjoy a lasting
health, an instance of which we have in Margaret, formerly governess of the Low
Countries, whose great beard was a very singular ornament to her robust
strength. Few traits in history are more known than the bearded amazon, who
served as a grenadier in all the campaigns of Charles XII. of Sweden, and gave
more than masculine proofs of courage till she was taken prisoner in the battle
of Pultawa. She was brought from Siberia to Petersburg, and introduced to the
Czarina with a beard an ell and an half long. There is also the picture of a
Swiss country-woman, which is drawn with a very venerable beard, to be seen in
the Breflaw collection.

The ducal palace offers nothing interesting but the grand staircase which
ascends gradually without steps, so that any one may ride up and down it.

The palace of Ludwigsburg two leagues from Stutgard, was formerly but a
farm-house for breeding cattle, but is now acknowledged to be one of the finest
edifices in all Germany. The looking-glass and lackered closet are very
curious, and so is the great staircase for the ambassadors, with its
magnificent cieling and the gallery of pictures; among these are some admirable
night-pieces, and a great many pictures of horses and dogs, and likewise the
picture of a black wolf, which was kept for a long time at court, he was called
Melac, and followed the Duke wherever he went, and even slept at the foot of
his bed. The chapel belonging to the palace is very elegant, but something
rather too small: here is also a curious menagery of foreign fowl. The Duke's
band of music may be said to equal that of any court in Europe.

The green-house is one of the finest to be met with any where. The Duke
likewise employs considerable sums of money for his studs and his hunters. He
has at present three sets of horses of eight in each set, which one coachman
can manage without a postilion; so that, in traveling, they perform all the
paces and curvettings of the manage, and sometimes the Duke himself has been
the coachman.

In the beginning of this century an order of hunting was instituted in this
duchy. The ensign of this knighthood is a hunting-horn. One privilege of the
companions is that they are preferred in the nomination to commanderies, each
of which is worth five hundred guilders. The knights of this order may be
present at all the public entertainments, besides an unlimited number of
princes and persons of high birth; this order has also twelve ancient Imperial
counts, thirty knights and a secretary. The device of the order is a gold
Maltese cross, set with rubies; four golden eagles at its four angles, and
between the middle and lower point a hunting-horn; in the center is a round,
green enamelled shield, on one side of which is a golden W, with a ducal
coronet, and on the other three golden hunting-horns slung together. This cross
is fastened to a crimson, watered ribband of a hand's breadth, and is worn over
the left shoulder down to the right side. On the left breast of the coat is
also a silver star, with the device of the order, together with it is motto
Amicitiae virtutisque foedus, i. e. the band of virtue and friendship;
embroidered with gold in a green circle. All the knights are obliged to wear
these ensigns of the order; those only excepted who are of higher orders, and
have already a star in that place; these, nevertheless are observed to wear the
Wurtemberg star on their waistcoat, and a little cross of the order hanging on
a narrow, red ribband round their neck. Every knight is to put the cross and
collar of the order under the coat of arms of his family; this collar consists
of green, enamelled little shields, on which are alternately the golden W, with
the ducal coronet, and three golden hunting-horns; between each shield stands a
golden eagle with its wings extended, and its talons on each shield. The
festival for a general chapter of the order is held annually on St. Hubert's
day, at whatever place the Sovereign happens to be, when there is always a
great hunting match. The companions, who are prevented from making their
appearance, are obliged, if it be any ways possible, and they are not disabled
by sickness or prevented by affairs of very great concern, to celebrate the day
in honor of the order, wherever they are, with a hunt and other
entertainments. If a knight is seen in public without the cross of the order,
he forfeits a handsome pair of pistols to the informer, and twenty dollars to
the poor; but he who neglects to wear the order for a year and a day is
degraded.

The Duke of Wurtemburg has several hunting seats, which he visits alternately
in the deer or boar seasons, so that every five years he sees his principal
forests. The multitude of deer in this country may be estimated by considering
that above seven thousand of them perished in one single hard winter.

It is a custom over all the country of Wurtemburg to adorn chambers and
galleries with large branches of deer's horns. At Waldenburg, over most of the
remarkable branches is inscribed the name of the person who shot the deer; and
the dexterity of a late duke has filled some rooms with them. At the hunting
seat of Einsidel are two remarkable branches, which in rutting time, the deer
to whom they belonged thrust into each other, and twisted together with such
force, that they cannot be disengaged; and the creatures died on the spot. The
like is also shown in the royal chamber of curiosities at Copenhagen. At
Einsidel is also a large hawthorn, grown from a twig, which was brought above
two hundred years ago from the Holyland by Everhardus Barbatus on his hat, and
afterward planted here with his own hands. In Crusius's time this shrub had
spread to a circumference of fifty-two else, its branches were supported by
forty-three pillars, and no single person could grasp its stock.

In the year 1700 were found above sixty different frusta of large teeth,
shoulder-blades, ribs, and joints of back-bones, the most remarkable of which
are still kept in the museum at Stutgard; some of them appear to have belonged
to fishes of prey, others to bears, tigers, lions, horses, etc. and some,
particularly the largest teeth, to elephants. Near Boll in Wurtemberg, is found
an abundance of skeletons, which are petrified and changed to a perfect stone,
whose spine not being tubulous, and consequently without marrow, shows them to
have belonged to fishes. A specimen of these is in the hands of D. Mauchart of
Tubingen; but a larger piece may be seen in the gallery of natural curiosities
at Dresden, and for which an apothecary of Tubingen received fifty rixdollars.

Tubingen the second city in Wurtemberg, about twenty miles from Stutgard, is
of such antiquity that its era is unkown. This place was once the seat of the
emperor Caracalla, who entertained the Germans with public games in this city,
The high court of justice is held here, besides the university, which is in
great repute; there is a collegium illustre for the education of princes and
young noblemen. In the townhouse is a very curious clock, which deserves the
attention of travelers.

Keysler relates a very singular adventure which happened to a tame stork that
was kept some years ago in the collegio illustri. As an instance of rationality
in animals, this bird had lived very quietly in the Courtyard till Count
Gravenitz, a student, shot at a stork's nest near the college, and most
probably wounded the stork that was in it, as for some weeks after he was not
seen to stir from his nest. This happened in autumn, when the foreign storks
set out on their periodical emigration. The following spring a stork was
observed upon the roof of the college, and by its continual chattering, gave
the tame stork, which was walking in the college court to understand, that it
was desirous THE BATTLE OF THE STORKS.
of its company; but this being impracticable by reason of its wings being
clipped, the stranger with the greatest caution came down to the upper gallery,
the next day somewhat lower, and lastly, after abundance of ceremonies,
alighted in the court. The tame stork not conscious of any crime went and met
him with a soft cheerful note, a sincere indication of courtesy and friendship,
when, to his astonishment, the other fell furiously upon him. Some spectators
of this interview, for that time immediately put the foreign stork to flight;
yet was it so little discouraged, that the very next day, it returned to the
charge, and during the whole summer frequent skirmishes passed between these
birds; orders being given that the tame stork having only one antagonist should
not be assisted. Being thus put to its shifts, it began to stand better upon
its guard, and made such a vigorous resistance that at the end of the campaign
the stranger had little to boast of; but the spring ensuing, instead of a
single stork, came four, which, without any of the foregoing ceremonies,
lighted at once in the college-court, and made at the tame stork. This
peaceable fowl, in presence of many spectators from the galleries, performed
exploits, if the expression may be permitted, above the valor of man,
defending itself and assaulting its enemies with the most vigorous intrepidity,
till at length overpowered, and its strength being spent, it was falling under
the redoubled strokes of the enemy, when some very unexpected auxiliaries
appeared. All the turkey-cocks, ducks, geese, and the whole posse of fowls,
which were brought up in the court, and to whom this gallant stork had
unquestionably endeared itself, by its mild and friendly carriage, braving the
danger, formed as it were a rampart, by means of which it might make an
honorable retreat from so an unequal a fight; even a peacock, which before
would never be upon good terms with it, on this occasion sided with oppressed
innocence, and was, if not a staunch friend, at least a favorable judge on the
stork's side. This occasioned a stricter watch to be kept against all such
treacherous incursions, and a stop was put to any further bloodshed, till in
the beginning of the third spring, above twenty storks made a stoop into the
court, and before the poor stork's lifeguards could form themselves, or any
people come to its assistance, murdered it; however, under such disparity, it
exerted all its former heroism, and made the storks pay dear for their base
assassination. The rancour of these strangers against this innocent creature
could proceed only from the gun fired by Count Gravenitz, and falsely construed
by them to have been done at the instigation of the tame stork.

Whoever may be inclined to read a judicious abridgment of all that has been
advanced in favor of the souls and understanding of brutes, will be gratified
in Mr. Ribous's treatise De anima brutorum. In addition to this story of the
stork, I shall here offer to the readers consideration the adventure of D.
Gahrliep's tame fox, as a further instance of their combination and reflection.
Every evening D. Gahrliep had his tame fox carefully chained up, a confinement
which this beast, used to liberty, could not well digest; and it was not long
before he found by frequent trials, that he could slip his collar over his
head. In the night he was not wanting to take advantage of such a fine
opportunity, and made a terrible havoc among the neighboring fowls and geese,
but always took care to be at home before daybreak, and immediately slipped his
neck into the collar again, imagining he should thus avoid the suspicion of
being thought the author of these depredations. Amidst all the heavy complaints
of the neighbors, the innocence of the fox seemed the more certain, as
Gahrliep's poultry had enjoyed an uninterrupted repose. At last the spoiler
being caught in the fact by a vigilant neighbor, the doctor was condemned in
costs and damages, and he in revenge made a skeleton of the perpretator of this
mischief.

There is another celebrated town in this duchy called Hailbron, or the
fountain of health, from the virtues of the medicinal waters. It is a free
Imperial city under the Duke's protection, situated in a plain, twelve miles
south-east of Tubingen. This water at present is not used medicinally as
formerly, but continues in great repute for its extraordinary clearness and
salubrity. To the use of this spring, the emperor Charles V. attributed his
recovery from a dangerous fit of sickness, in 1547. Keysler gives a remarkable
instance of its numerous and fertile vineyards, by observing last year, (this
was in 1727,) that such plenty of wine was made in this country, and further up
the banks of the Neckar, that the inhabitants had not a sufficient number of
casks to put it in, and such wine of the growth of 1725 as could be spared, was
sold for half a creutzer, or a farthing a quart, when at the same time a quart
of Seltzer mineral water cost eighteen creutzers, or thirty-six times as much.

In the district of Urach is a curiosity worth notice. In an high and steep
mountain near the town of Urach is the famous wood-slider, which consists of
one thick iron pipe, about three feet broad, two high, and about nine hundred
long. This pipe begins at the top of the mountain and reaches almost down the
valley near the town of Urach and the river Erms. Into its upper opening the
wood, which has been felled on the mountain and cut into hillets is put, and
being carried down the pipe, is thrown into the river Erms, which forwards it
into the Neckar, and by this means furnishes Stutgard with fuel at a small
expense; notwithstanding the great impetuosity with which it must naturally
move in coming from an eminence above two hundred paces in the air, yet near an
hundred may be told before a billet reaches the other end of this extraordinay
conduit.

The description which Reisbec gives of the inhabitants in the Black Forest
forms a very different contrast to the rest of the Duke's subjects. The men,
says he, are clumsy, and the women yellow, ill shaped, and wrinkled at the age
of thirty. They distinguish themselves from their neighbors by a most
frightful taste in dress, and a shocking want of cleanliness. I am not able, he
adds, to account for the ugliness of this people. Need, labor, and little food
may contribute to it, but cannot be the only reason; for in the country of
Furstemberg, and particularly in the Austrian parts of this great chain of
hills, are very handsome people who do not seem to live better than the
Wirtembergers. Possibly the ugliness of the latter may be owing to the
situation and depth of the valleys, to the air and perhaps to the water. These
journies, says Reisbec, over the mountains had particular charms for me. I
fancied myself in a new world. One enchanting prospect succeeded another in
variety and beauty, mountains and chains of mountains of the most extraordinary
forms, cataracts, woods, small lakes in the deep hollows, precipices, in short
every thing I saw, was in so grand a style as to exceed all description. The
Duke of Wirtemberg enjoys one very great privilege that there lies no appeal
from his courts of judicature to the Aulic or any other foreign tribunal. He
sits and votes in the college of princes by virtue of the duchy of Wirtemberg
and has demanded the same privilege as duke of Teck. This is an old castle now
in ruins with a town adjoining. The first duke of Teck, known with any
certainty, lived toward the end of the twelfth century. The duke's title, is
duke of Wirtemberg and Teck, count of Mompelgard, lord of Heydenheim and
Justinjen. He is joint director of the circle of Swabia with the bishop of
Constance.

His office in the empire is to carry the Imperial standard; this office of
standard bearer of the Holy Roman empire, was conferred on the Counts of
Wirtemberg in 1336. The dukes of Wirtemberg are also grand huntsmen of the
empire; and in allusion to this honor, Duke Eberhard Lewis, in 1702, founded
the order of hunting, of which we have already treated, and in the year 1719,
renewed and increased its statutes, the reigning duke of Wirtemberg being
always grand-master.

The MARGRAVATE of BADEN.
Is about ninety miles in length, but not above twenty in breadth. It lies near
the banks of the Rhine, and extends from Bale almost to Philipsburg, and from
thence, through part of Alsace to the Moselle. It produces corn, hemp, flax,
turnips, pease, and other vegetables; and the villages along the Rhine abound
in hay, and breed great quantities of cattle, besides which they enjoy the
convenience of good fisheries in the Rhine. Venison and wild fowl are so
plentiful in the forests, that it is the ordinary food of the peasants; and
they have woods of chestnuts, where there are very excellent bacon-hogs. Here
are also quarries of marble of all colors, and freestone, with which materials
the inhabitants build magnificent houses at a trifling expense. They carry on a
large trade in cattle, wood and wine, which last is extremely good in the
environs of Bale. The mildness of the government secures to the people, the
quiet enjoyment of the rewards of their industry. There are not indeed
opportunities of making great fortunes, as the court is very economical, but
the same cause prevents the pressure of extreme poverty. The felicity of
exporting merchandise by the navigation on the Rhine, is a great incitement to
industry. The manufactures in consequence, increase every year, and some of
them, particularly that of earthen ware, at Durloch, are in high estimation.
They have likewise made some successful experiments in manufacturing of silk.

The Prince, in short, endeavors by every possible means to introduce
industry, and manufactories among his subjects. There are a considerable number
of English tradesmen here, says Moore, who make Birmingham work, and instruct
the inhabitants in that business. He has also engaged many watchmakers from
Geneva to settle here, by granting them encouragment, and privileges of every
kind, and allows no opportunity to slip, by which he can promote the comfort,
and happiness of his people: a prince of such a character is certainly a public
blessing, and the people are fortunate who are born under his government. But
far more fortunate they, who are born under a government, which can protect
them, independent of the virtues, and in spite of their Sovereign.

Baden, the capital of the marquisate, takes it name from the multitude of hot
baths about it, which are said to amount to near three hundred. The town is
situated in the midst of vineyards, upon a mountainous rocky ground, which
renders the streets very uneven. The baths are scalding hot, and as they issue
from rocks of salt, alum and brimstone, taste strongly of those minerals. One
of them boils and bubbles up, as if it stood over a hot furnace. Among other
distempers, these waters are famous for curing the cramp and gout, which brings
a great resort of company to this place, during the summer months. The only
public buildings, are the castle, built on an adjoining hill, and a palace
belonging to the Margrave, which, however, is uninhabited. The residence of the
court being principally at Carlsrube.

The town of Carlsrube is well built on a regular plan. It consists of one
principal street of about an English mile in length. This street is at a
considerable distance in front of the palace, and in a parallel direction with
it. All the other streets go off at different angles from the principal one, in
such a manner as, that which ever of them you enter, walking from it, the view
is terminated by the front of the palace. The length of their smaller streets
is ascertained, none of them being allowed to encroach on the spacious area,
which is kept clear before the palace.

The principal street may be extended to any length, and as many additional
streets as they please may be built from it, all of which will have, according
to this plan, the palace for termination.

The houses of this town are as uniform as the streets, being all of an equal
size and height; so as to give the appearance, that none of the inhabitants are
in any considerable degree richer or poorer than their neighbors. There are,
indeed, a few new houses more elegant than the rest, which belong to some of
the officers of the court, and are built on one side of the palace; but they
are not, properly speaking, in the town.

It stands in the middle of a large forest, the remnant of that, which in the
time of Tacitus, covered all Germany. Through this forest there are thirty-two
regular avenues, extending to a great distance; and the town which is built in
the shape of a fan, stands upon nine of these. The first stone of the palace
was laid in 1715, half of the right wing is wanting, the building having for
some years been discontinued. The first object of attention here, and for which
no expense has been thought too great, is the turret on the body of the
building, from whence we have not only a view of all the principal streets, but
also of five and twenty walks, some set with trees, and others cut through the
woods, which no other princes seat can rival, and still heightened by a
prospect of other variegated walks in the same woods. Some of these walks bear
the names of those ministers who served his highness at the time of these
improvements; and the streets in the town are called by the names of different
German princes. The garden, though small, is very elegant, and contains above
four thousand orange, lemon, bay, and other such kind of trees.

In some of the lower parts of the garden, are espaliers of young lemon trees;
here is also an aviary for three hundred canary-birds, which in summertime
used to fly about the gardens all day, and at night repair to their habitation.
Behind the palace is a decoy, where above two thousand wild fowl are daily fed.
The chief defect in Carlsrube is want of water. The neighboring country is a
sandy level, which in summer makes traveling very disagreeable. All the water
for the garden is conveyed by hand-pumps, but what is most singular, is, that
the whole town consists entirely of wooden buildings.

A traveller who passed through it, expressing his surprise one day to the
Margrave, to see a palace entirely of wood. 'True, Sir,' said the Prince, you
may think it ought, at least, to have been built of brick; but I could not have
been more magnificently lodged, without laying expensive taxes on my subjects,
and I wanted only a roof to lay my head under. This court has been much
reflected upon for its economy. The fact is, the debts of the family were
numerous and great. Those in the hereditary dominions have arisen from frequent
wars, and the necessary provision for the younger branches of the family; and
in the last administration, every thing had been suffered to go to ruin,
because the successor was a protestant. Under these circumstances, the Prince's
mother carried her economy so far, as to cause the flowers which grew in the
gardens of the palace to be sold, instead of permitting her daughters to wear
them in their bosoms. For this, though without the strictest economy, the
family must have been ruined, she was laughed at, perhaps in some degree, not
undeservedly.

From Carlsrube, it is two stages and a quarter to Radstadt; but it is worth
while to turn off a little on the left hand to the Favorita, built by the widow
of a late margrave of Baden-Baden, in the newest taste of architecture. Here is
a chamber of very beautiful porcelain, and a cabinet lined with looking-glass,
with many curiosities of art and nature, particularly, above forty very good
pictures of the said countess in different masquerade dresses, which in her
juvenile years, she had at various times appeared in. Amidst the gradual
alterations of the complexion and features in such a long succession of time,
the same look is every where discernable. 'I know not,' says Keysler, a better
set of portraits, they will even bear a comparison with the admirable
performances of Rubens in the Luxemburg gallery, where queen Mary of Medicis is
represented under a variety of changes!

The height of the lower hall reaches through all the stories, and its cupola,
round which is a balustrade, leading into the different apartments, is very
light, and the top beautifully painted. Some of the apartments are hung with a
Chinese manufacture of paper and silk, others with lace-work, and bed curtains
of the same. The cieling of one or two is enriched with gems, as agate, jasper,
cornelians, amethists, etc. imitating fishes, birds and flowers. The excellent
order of the kitchen, larder, hall, medicinal ware-room, wash-house, cannot but
please an economist, and the countess, used to take great pleasure to show her
guests these subterraneous offices. On the left, at the end of the little
orangery, is a pleasant garden, and on the right, a wild thicket, leading to
the hermitage. In the center of it stands the house, the outward walls of which
are covered with large pieces of bark. The door seems to rest upon the trunks
of old trees; and all that is to be seen within, are the coarse images of
Jesus, Joseph and Mary; a mean bed without curtains, an altar without
decorations; and at the angles of the narrow walks in the garden, stand wooden
images of old hermits, as big as life, some of them in an hairy habit: the
niches, like the door, are supported by old decayed trunks of trees.

A league from the Favorita, lies Radstadt, a place regularly built, with a
stately palace, from the center of which there is a view of all the streets,
the middle of which terminates in a long walk.

The reigning family, and the country in general, profess Lutheranism, but with
the toleration of Calvinists, Catholics, and Jews.

After the electors, and the houses of Wurtemburg, and Hesse Cassel, the
Margrave of Baden is one of the greatest potentates in Germany. His revenues
are about one hundred and twenty thousand pounds a year. 'I reckon,' says
Reisbec, the few days I spent at Carlsrube among the happiest of my life. I saw
a prince who truly lives only for his people, and seeks for his happiness in
theirs; one whose active and enlightened mind, pervades the whole country, and
by its influence, makes all those who have a share in the administration,
patriots like himself. Education, police, encouragement to industry, and
agriculture; every thing, in short, here, breathes a spirit of philosophy, and
the warm love of mankind. O that I could make, says he, many millions as happy,
as the Margrave of Baden makes two hundred thousand men. He adds, the Margrave
is as amiable in private life, as he is respectable in public, and the
margravine is possessed of every polite accomplishment; so that the court, to
which strangers easily get admission, is the best society in Carlsrube.

The German princes are minute observers of form. The same establishment for
their household, and the like number of officers in their palaces are to be
found among them, as in the court of the most powerful monarch of Europe. The
difference lies more in the salaries, than in the talents requisite for these
places; one paymaster of the forces in England, has greater emoluments, than a
grand marechal, a grand chamberlain, two secretaries of state, and half a dozen
more of the chief officers of a German court.

The Margrave of Baden, like every other sovereign prince in Germany, has
body-guards, who do duty in the palace; foot-guards, who parade before it, also
horse-guards and hussars, all of whom are perfectly well equipped, and exactly
disciplined; a piece of magnificence, which seems to be adopted by this prince,
merely in conformity with the custom long established in this country.

He keeps on foot no other troops besides the few which are necessary for this
duty at the palace, though his revenue is more considerable, and his finances
are in much better order than those of some princes in Germany, who have little
standing armies in constant pay. He has too just an understanding, not to
perceive, that the greatest army he could possibly maintain, could be no
defense to his dominions, situated as they are between the powerful states of
France and Austria; and probably his principles and disposition prevent him
from thinking of filling his coffers by letting out his subjects to foreign
powers.

If he was so inclined, there is no doubt that he might sell the persons of his
subjects as soldiers, or employ them in any other way he might think proper;
for he, as well as other sovereign princes in Germany, has an unlimited power
over his people. If you ask the question, in direct terms, of a German; he will
answer in the negative, and will talk of certain rights which the subjects
enjoy, and that they can appeal to the great council, or general diet of the
empire for relief. But after all his ingenuity and distinctions, you find that
the barriers which protect the peasant from the power of the prince, are so
very weak, that they are hardly worth keeping up; and that the only security
the peasant has for his person or property, must proceed from the moderation,
good sense, and justice of his sovereign.

Happy, adds Moore with Reisbec, would it be for mankind, if this unlimited
power were always placed in as equitable hands as those of the present Margrave
of Baden, who employs it entirely for the good of his subjects, by whom he is
adored!

Among his other establishments, a late margrave had the following singular
one: and this was a notorious seminary of young women, where, by an unnatural
whim of his, above thirty female creatures were maintained, some of whom were
always walking by his coach in the garb of hey dukes, and others at night,
keeping guard in the palace. The general provision for them on their discharge,
was to be married to some petty officer of the household.

Self-love has ever shown great address in reconciling licentious inclinations,
with religion, and in making a compact, as it were, with God, by which
favorite vices are retained, and all due homage paid to the Deity in other
respects. The voluptuous comfort themselves with the numerous concubines of
David and Solomon, and imagine God will not be so strict, but that a punctual
observance of many external duties, will compensate for giving way to some one
frailty; but this too, must be such as suits their natural disposition. If the
revealed truths of our holy religion were liable to such perversions, it is
visible how sensuality would prevail, under no other restraint than natural
religion. We readily believe what we wish, and in such a case under the most
flagitious profligacy, any weak palliatives would be embraced for quieting the
clamours of conscience. What evils would not this bring upon society!

The BISHOPRIC of CONSTANCE.
The lands and estates of the bishopric of Constance lie on both sides of the
lake. Meadow-grounds and ploughed-lands turn to very little account here; the
soil being clayey, sandy, or marshy, and subject to inundations. In the towns
and villages the only traffic carried on is in wine, but this amounts to
nothing considerable. This bishopric has ever been an immediate state of the
empire, and as such the Bishop votes in the Imperial Diet among the princes. He
belongs particularly to the third quarter; of which in conjunction with the
abbot of Kempton, he is the head. He is also a joint summoning prince of the
circle, but whether he be equal to the duke of Wurtemburg or that the latter
has some small preference is not decided. The jurisdiction of the cathedral
extends over great parts of Switzerland. The Bishop is suffragan to the
archbishop of Mentz.

The Bodensee, or lake of Constance, is in length about eighteen leagues. It is
divided into two parts, that part from Bregentz to Constance, being called the
upper lake, and that from Constance to Zell, the lower lake. The latter is
between twenty and thirty fathoms deep, and reckons along its banks near forty
cities, towns, and villages; yet the upper lake surpasses it, having no less
than fifty, and the depth of it in some places is said to be three hundred and
fifty fathoms; its greatest breadth, is between Buchorn and Rosback which lie
at the distance of five leagues from each other. This is by much the largest
lake in Germany. The Rhine which runs through this lake has so strong a
current, that it is said it does not mix with the waters of the lake. Near
Lindau and Brugentz, besides the fish usually caught in these parts, there is
also a kind of salmon-trouts which being taken and pickled, when full grown are
exported as a great rarity. They are generally an ell and an half or two else
long, weighing between thirty and forty pounds. As the fishermen cannot always
make a market of such large fish, they tie a bit of wood to a line, which
having passed through the fish's gills, or the hinder part of the head close up
to the wood, they fasten the other end of the line to a stake on the shore,
near their huts: thus, without any danger of losing it, they can allow the fish
a range of thirty or forty paces to swim in, and keep it alive and sound, till
they meet with a company of purchasers, or have an opportunity of selling it
for some marriage, or other great entertainment, where a fish of that size is
required.

The city of Constance is well built, populous, and finely situated, it lies on
the other side of the Rhine, over which there is a large wooden bridge, and
near it the river turns several mills. The fortification of the city are
sufficient to defend it well. Here are two markets every week, to which the
people of the towns and villages near the lake resort with their goods. The
town is not very large, but it has a tolerable trade, from the convenience of
water-carriage along the lake and the Rhine.

The emperor Sigismund called a council here in the year 1414 for preventing a
schism in the church, from three popes pretending to the holy see at the same
time, but they were all deposed, and Martin V. elected in his room. In the
eighth session of this council Dr. John Wickliffe of Oxford and his doctrines
were condemned as heretical, and his bones ordered to be dug up and burnt forty
years after his death. In the fifteenth session Huss was condemned and
delivered over to the secular power to be burnt, though he had the emperor's
letters of safe conduct. And the same sentence passed upon Jerome of Prague,
who was likewise burnt in this city and the natives still show the place to
strangers. This council lasted few years, during which time there were in the
city of Constance four patriarchs, twenty-nine cardinals, three hundred and
forty-six archbishops and bishops, five hundred and sixty four abbots and
doctors, ten thousand secular princes, and noblemen, four hundred and fifty
common whores, and three hundred and twenty fiddlers. The inhabitants are
protestants. Constance was formerly a free Imperial city but the religious
commotions, and the interim in 1551 brought it under the power of the house of
Austria; so that the Bishop has little or no authority there, and accordingly
resides at Merspurg on the other side of the lake of Constance. The pulpit of
the cathedral is supported by a statue of John Huss; making a representation of
him to serve as a pedestal to the pulpit, was intended as a mark of further
disgrace; though it more naturally admits of a very honorable construction.

In the Dominican convent is the famous Emanuel Chrysolara a knight of
Constantinople, descended from a noble family, among the Romans who had removed
thither with the emperor Constantine. He died at the time of the general
council of Constance, and in such reputation that all orders of men agreed in
judging him worthy of the highest ecclesiastical dignity. The ingenious
conclusion of a fine epitaph composed for him by Eneas Sylviaus deserves
particular notice. My extraction is from ancient Rome; to me Imperial
Constantinople gave birth; my remains lie at Constance. But what imports it
when we die, the fort of felicity and the place of torment being every where
equally distant? Reisbec, makes the number of inhabitants in Constance, to be
about six thousand, and the revenues of the bishop seven thousand pounds a
year. The Swiss side of this lake he adds is more pleasant than the opposite or
German side. The beautiful mixture of hills, planted with vines, the straggling
appearance of farm houses, with orchards round them, with the small and varied
patches of different kinds of agriculture make it more agreeable to the eye
than the Suabian villages, the houses of which stand together as in the towns,
and are often encompassed by a great corn field, or a wide meadow. Upon the
whole, both sides of the lake are equally well inhabited. The Swiss soil is
more stony and heavy than the German, and though the Thurzan is one of the best
ports of Switzerland, it is indebted to Suabia for a part of the prime
necessary of life, which it repays in wine and fruits.

It was on this stage that the celebrated Gesner began his career, who in a
short time expelled so many millions of devils, as is pretended, and cured so
many hundred bigots. An order of the bishop of Constance, having prohibited
such miracles in his diocese, found him taking refuge under the prelate of
Salmansweiler, who by the strength of hard gold, always purchases of the Pope,
an exemption from the bishop's power. In opposition to the bishop, the prelate
espoused the part of the refugee with much warmth; and his fortune was made by
the persecution he underwent. The prelate's steward, supplied him with barrels
of stinking oil, and other commodities, which he used for the purpose of his
cures, and in the furnishing of which the other found his account.

They little think in Holland, how much they owe to the lake of Constance. As
matters are at present, they can hardly guard against the sand, which being
washed down from the Alps by the Aar, and other rivers, threatens to stop up
the mouth of the Rhine, and already leaves room to conjecture some violent
revolution by the sand-banks it has raised. And if the reservoir we speak of,
did not interrupt by far the greatest quantity of sand, which the rapid stream
of the Rhine washes from the high Buntmerland; Holland must have been before
this time, buried under a new sand, and the course of the Rhine being altered,
would have totally changed the figure of that country. It is true, these
changes must necessarily happen; as however considerable the depth of this lake
be, it must at last be filled up, and the sooner, because the stream, as it
flows from Constance, through the upper parts of Germany, is always deepening
its bed, and the lake loses exactly as much water as it gains in sand. On the
other hand, if we reflect how much so great a basin as this lake may contain;
and calculate its contents, as de la Torre did those of Vesuvius, we shall
think the Dutch are secure for many generations.

Uberlingen, a city on the lake, ten miles northeast of Constance, situate on
the top of a rock, and surrounded with vineyards, was thought so pleasant by
the ancient dukes of Suabia, that they made it their usual residence. It has a
very good trade, and is famous for its mineral waters, which cure the stone,
and other distempers, and in twice or thrice washing, take away all warts. The
hospital in this town, is the best endowed in all Suabia; and the people so
rich, that they constitute as much to the general charges of the empire as many
of the princes.

Near Zell, is the Abbey of Reichnau, particularly famous for the large
emerald, presented to it by Charles the Great. It is about two inches thick,
something larger than a common folio, and weighs twenty eight pounds, three
quarters. Several jewellers have offered fifty thousand guilders a pound for
it; in the church of this abbey lies the abovementioned liberal emperor, once
so powerful and glorious, but afterward forsaken by every one, so that he died
in extreme indigence in the year 888.

The convent boasts, likewise, of being possessed of the body of St. Mark, the
Evangelist, but this is disputed with them by the Venetians.

In the cloisters of this abbey, is the picture of a nobleman, who died in
1675, in the 70th year of his age; with a beard reaching to his knees; this
puts me in mind, says Keysler, of a Flemish painter, named John Meyo, whose
beard was of such a length, that when he stooped, he could tread upon it, and
this peculiarity occasioned him to be nicknamed Johannes Barbatus.

In this neighborhood, is the forest of Bregentz, in the villages of which
there has been hitherto, says, Keysler, a strange custom, that the unmarried
sons, or servants of the peasants are allowed to intrigue with a girl till she
proves with child, and then indeed, but not before, are obliged under severe
penalties to marry her. This kind of gallantry they look upon as very innocent,
and are so strongly attached to it, that when, a few years ago, government was
for suppressing such a scandalous practice; it was nearly occasioning an
insurrection, and the dispute is not yet terminated.

Augsburg, is a free Imperial city, lies in a delightful country between the
rivers Lock and Wertach, which unite not far from this place. It is a large
populous well built city, esteemed the capital of Suabia, furnished with many
noble fountains, adorned with brazen statues of ancient heroes and emperors,
and likewise with some valuable monuments of antiquity. The burghers are
reckoned to be 6000; the council is mixed, and consists of an equal number of
reformed, and papists. The professors of both religions are easily
distinguishable by their dress. Augsburg, was formerly the most considerable
city in all Germany for commerce, but the declension of the trade of Venice was
a severe stroke to it.

The town house, is accounted the finest in all Germany, the entrance is of
polished red marble, supported by two pillars of white. The chambers contain
abundance of historical and political paintings, with well chosen apothegms,
exhorting the judges to impartial justice, to prudence, peace, and the fear of
God. The whole breadth of it is one hundred and forty seven feet; its length is
one hundred and ten; and its height one hundred and seventy five feet. It was
completed in 1620, after having been six years in building. Its principal
ornament, is considered to be a saloon of fine pictures, in the third story,
which is fifty two feet high, fifty eight broad, and one hundred and ten in
length, without any pillars to it, and surrounded on both sides by the four
princes rooms, as they are called, which are also exquisitely painted. Near the
town house, stands the lofty tower of Perlachthurm. This tower is three hundred
steps high, and the woman which stands above the weather cock is as big as
life. In an area adjoining to the tower, is a very fine fountain, with the four
seasons in brass, and in the center, the emperor Augustus, with apposite
inscriptions. The palaces of the count de Fugger, are very magnificent. The
Fuggery, as it is called, consists of 106 small houses, erected in 1519, by the
family of the Fuggers, lords of the adjacent country, for the reception of poor
burgers, who have annual pensions settled on them. On the fine, and well
contrived aqueducts for the conveyance of water here, from the Loch are several
corn, sawing, flatting and melting mills, but the waterworks in particular are
remarkable here, which from five towers convey the water in such a manner,
through the city, that not only five large, and beautiful fountains with other
public reservoirs, but also the greatest part of the houses are supplied by
means of these works, with that element in plenty. It is surrounded with very
fine pasture land, beautiful and fertile plains, and with large forests full of
all sorts of game. There are more Lutherans than Catholics in this city, who
live together in tolerable harmony; their poor are provided for in the same
hospital, and to avoid giving offense, the Lutherans stand with their hats off
when the host goes by. There is no place where the citizens have their dresses
so varied, which is so regulated by the magistrates, that every person of
quality and religion may be known by it.

In the bishop's palace, which is otherwise an insignificant building, is the
hall, in which the protestant princes presented their confession of faith to
the emperor Charles V. in the diet, held here anno. 1530, and from thence
called the Augsburg Confession, which occasioned a civil war in the empire that
lasted some years; but it was at last agreed, in a subsequent diet, held in the
year 1555, that the protestants should enjoy the free exercise of their
religion throughout the empire. The magistrates have since been composed of an
equal number of protestants and catholics, their senate consists of
twenty-three Roman catholics, and twenty-two Lutherans, and their common
council of an hundred and fifty of each; the executive power is in the senate,
and the legislative authority in both bodies.

The fortifications of this town are not very strong. The duke of Bavaria took
this city in 1704, after a siege of thirteen days; and after the loss of the
battle of Hochstadt, the same year, he withdrew his garrison, not thinking it
any longer tenable.

On the brass door of the cathedral, among other scriptural stones, is
represented the Virgin Mary, taking Eve out of Adam's hip. The revenues of this
see are so considerable, that it is generally filled by the younger princes of
the electoral house of Bavaria and Palatine. The canonries are worth from 1000
to 1700 guilders a year, according to the price of corn. Those of Ratisbon and
Euhitadt, are about the same value, those of Constance smaller, those of
Passau, better, and these again greatly surpassed by the canonries of
Saltzburg. The church of St. Maurice belongs to the catholics, and is a fine
building.

The monks of St. Ulrich dispose of a dust or powder, called St. Ulrich's
earth, recommending it by the name of that holy man, who is said to have
banished all the rats out of the city, and neighborhood into a hole, which is
to this day shown in the church, and dedicated to this saint. The dust is dug
up from the place where he was buried. If it were true that no rats were to be
found in Augsburg, and that any brought there alive, immediately die, it is a
wonder that physicians and naturalists have not examined whether such effect
proceeds from the soil, water, air, herbage or other natural cause, as in other
places and countries, where some species of animals cannot live. In the islands
of Malta and Candia, and in Macedonia, there are no venomous serpents or
vipers. The islands of Gorzo, Ivica, and Ireland, are immediately fatal to all
venomous creatures. At Einsidel, a hunting seat belonging to the duke of
Wirtemburg, not a rat is to be seen; and being brought there by way of
experiment, they soon die. That the bones of dead bodies are a real safeguard
against some species of vermin, is beyond dispute, and possibly the earth of a
churchyard, where a great number of bodies are mouldered away, may be
effectual against rats. This, however, I knew, says Keysler, that St. Ulrich's
earth, though so highly extolled, fails of its power over the rats in other
places.

The evangelical college, called Gymnasium Annaeum, has a library worth
visiting.

In Mr. Euno's museum in this city, is to be seen a collection of about twenty
sorts of bird's nests; there is a similar collection among the king of Poland's
curiosities at Dresden. Here is also a chain so small, that a flea may be
fastened to it; likewise, some ivory cups, with a ring round the middle, which
are so diminutive, that they must be viewed with microscopes, one hundred of
them being contained in a hollowed pepper-corn. Augsburg, like Nuremberg, has
always been famous for ingenious artists. An incredible quantity of Turkish, as
it is called, and other sorts of gold and silver paper is made here. The finest
silver work is imitated in pewter, but if in a hundred weight, there be but so
much as half an ounce of lead, the design fails. This incomparable pewter is,
at the same time, so solid and hard, that snips of common pewter may be melted
in it over the fire.

Among the public buildings, the einleass, i.e. admittance, as it is called, is
a very ingenious work; it saves the trouble and danger they had formerly of
opening the city gates at night for travelers or couriers, and may be made so,
that many persons can come into the city at once, either horse or foot. To this
end, a bridge goes up and down, and as often as a gate shuts, another opens
with a great noise, and nothing can be better contrived for security and
convenience.

Another curious thing is the engine, which by means of twenty-eight springs,
one of which is brass, the water is raised up to three towers. The city also is
not without its fine gardens. In the Gulman gardens are some waterworks, and
fine shady walks, which render it an agreeable retreat in the summer heats. But
in waterworks, it is surpassed by the Schaver gardens, which have also a
pretty aviary; its owner is famous for his excellent balsam, of which prince
Eugene used to order a large quantity against the opening of every campaign.

The Bishop is one of the ecclesiastical princes of the empire, but has no
share in the government of the town. His residence is at Dillingen.

Reisbec remarks, that Augsburg is one of the oldest towns in Germany, and one
of the most remarkable, as it is there and at Nuremberg, we meet with the
oldest marks of German art and industry. In the fourteenth and fifteenth
centuries, the commerce of this town was the most extensive of any part of
South Germany; and contributed much to the civilization of the country, by the
works of art and variety of necessaries to the comfort and convenience of life,
which it was the means of introducing. Many things originated in this town,
which have had great influence on the happiness of mankind. Not to mention the
many important diets of the empire held here. It was in this city, that in 952,
a council confirmed the order for the celibacy of priests; in 1530, as we have
already mentioned, was the confession of faith of the protestants, laid before
the emperor, and other states of Germany; in 1555, the famous treaty of peace
was signed, by which religious liberty was secured to Germany.

Many of the houses, according to Reisbec, are old and ugly, and are built with
so little attention to the rules of modern taste, that Winkleman renounced
living in Germany, after he had seen them. The houses in Augsburg must not be
considered as Roman and Greek temples, but as monuments of the architecture of
the times in which they were built. Whoever considers them in that light, and
compares them with the houses built at Lubec and Nuremberg, in the same
century, will see to how much greater magnificence Augsburg had arrived in
those early times. He will see too, a great deal of real beauty of proportion,
and correspondence of parts, etc. etc.

The looks of the inhabitants of Augsburg, have something very striking in
them. They are a compound of the Suabian and Bavarian features. The protestants
are most like the Suabians, and the catholics like the Bavarians. It is an
observation, which has been frequently made, and undoubtedly a true one, that
we may distinguish a protestant of Augsburg from a catholic, by his looks and
manner. Any person who goes into their respective churches, will see striking
characteristic differences in their countenance. As the catholics are more
rigid at Augsburg than elsewhere, and the followers of the different sects
seldom intermarrying, this difference may the more easily be accounted for.

The police of the place continues Reisbec is very good, and though the town
has no territory, it has no debts. The waterworks at Augsburg are more admired
than those of Marly, their mechanicism is much more simple, and the utility of
them, much more conspicuous.

Augsburg, however, is no longer what it was. It has no longer a Fugger and a
Welser to lend millions to the emperor. In this large and handsome town, though
formerly one of the greatest trading towns in Germany, there are no merchants
at present, whose capitals exceed 20,000l. The others, most of whom must have
their coaches, go creeping on with small capitals of 3 or 4000l. and do the
business of bankers and commissioners. Some houses, however, carry on a little
banking trade; and the way through Tyrol and Graubundten, occasions some little
exchange between this place and Germany.

After these brokers and doers of business by commission, the engravers,
statuaries, and painters, are the most respectable of the laboring part of the
city. Their productions, like the toys of Nuremberg, go every where. They have
always some people of genius amongst them; but the small demand for their
labors, affords them so little encouragement, that to prevent starving, they
are mostly confined to the small religious works, which are done elsewhere by
the capuchin monks. They furnish all Germany with little pictures for
prayer-books, and to hang in citizens houses. Indeed, the arts meet with little
support in this country. In other provinces of Germany, matters appear to be no
better ordered; Mengs, Winckelman, Gluck, Hasse, Handel, Haydon, and many
others, were obliged to acquire reputation abroad, before their merits were
acknowledged at home.

There is an academy of arts instituted here, under the protection of the
magistrates. It seems, however, like its patrons, to have no other aim, than to
produce good mechanics, and preserve the manufacturers of the city. The senate,
for some time past, has been deliberating on similar projects for the
encouragement of industry. As I take part in any improvement for social
happiness, I was extremely mortified, says Reisbec, to see that three good
intentions were thwarted by the very governors of the town themselves.

The grounds of this opposition arise chiefly from the form of government. The
patricians, who, with a very small addition of the mercantile part, govern the
town aristocratically, cannot bear to see the plebiean enabled, by his
industry, to carry his head above them. This despicable policy, takes its
origin in the general corruption of the country. Nine-tenths of the
inhabitants, are the most infamous rascals imaginable; fellows, who, on the
least signal, are ready to cut each others' throats, on account of religion;
who spend their weekly wages every Sunday in alehouses, and never reflect on
the greatness of their predecessors, but when the liquor is fermenting in their
heads. It is impossible to give any idea of all the ridiculous incidents
occasioned by religious disputes. Every day produces some occurrence, which
makes one both laugh and complain. They never brush a cobweb from a public
building without mingling religion in the business. The catholics, who are more
zealous than the protestants support a controversial preacher here, as they do
in all the towns where the religion is of a mixed kind. This man, at certain
times, sets one half of Augsburg a laughing, the other a raving. He who filled
this part when Reisbec was there, was an Ex-jesuit; who was one of the best
comedians of the kind he had seen. The excessive poverty and indolence of the
people, makes them regardless of their rights: the aristocracy would not be so
powerful, if the people had more attachment to their constitution. But liberty,
says Riesbec, is no dearer to them, than the chastity of their daughters whom
their canons, (whose incomes are about 200l. per annum) purchase every year by
dozens.

The other tenth of the inhabitants, consist of some patrician families, among
whom there are some very polite people, merchants, artists and clergy. The
town, which is 9 miles and half round, contains hardly 30,000 people, and their
collective capital, scarely exceeds 1,500,000l. so that their yearly decrease
becomes more apparent. Should some fortunate circumstances not arise, another
century will see them reduced to beggary. M. Nicolai makes the number of
habitants 34 or 35,000 and says, there are 28,000 houses.

The more modern part of this town is truly beautiful; we are led to believe.
that in proportion as the internal resources diminished, the magistracy became
more attentive to external decoration; but it is, as with the false bloom on a
courtezan's cheek, it may beguile the passing stranger, but whoever sees her at
her toilet, will soon be undeceived.

The city has its water for the table from the river Loch, which runs at some
distance from the town. The aqueducts conveying it, are much to be admired. As
the court of Bavaria has it in its power to cut off this indispensible
necessary of life; by threatening the town with so doing, it often lays it
under contribution. But having besides this, other means of keeping the
high-council in a state of dependence; to secure itself from this oppression,
it so seeks the Emperors protection, as to become wholly dependent on him, and
is there as it were banded about by both courts. The Emperor's minister to the
circle of Suabia, generally resides in this town, which secures to his court a
perpetual influence with the magistracy. There are Austrian and Prussian
recruiting parties quartered here, and the partiality of the government to the
former, is very remarkable. In the war of 1756, the citizens were divided into
equal parties for the two courts. The Catholics considered the emperor as their
god; and the protestants did the same by the king of Prussia. The flame of
religion consequently had very much kindled a civil war amongst them.

Ulm is the most considerable city in Suabia. It lies on an uneven spot of
ground, on the Danube, where that river unites with the Iler, and first becomes
navigable for vessels of considerable burden. This city is situated forty
miles west of Augsburg, but the road, for the most part, is so sandy, and the
second stage so tedious, by means of the sloughs, that it takes up nine hours
to perform the journey.

Compared to the neighboring cities, it is well fortified; they have here a
very particular custom, which is not to suffer strangers to go on the ramparts,
without paying a guilder. All the burgers are under the same restraint, the
privilege of walking free, being allowed only to the patricians and their
friends. This does not proceed so much from an apprehension of any clandestine
correspondence, as from avarice; for these patricians share the hay and fruit
growing on the ramparts among themselves, which makes them cautious against
whatever may occasion any diminution of their profit. That which engages the
attention of travelers, in this city, is the cathedral, not to be equalled by
any in Germany, that of Strasburg excepted. The steeple is four hundred and one
steps high; nothing can be finer than the prospects from the top of it, the
whole country round it being entirely level. In case of fire, especially from
lightning, sixty-three large copper kettles always filled with water are hung
up in different parts of the tower, and on the roof of the church, with a
machine for drawing up provisions for the watchmen in the tower. There is a
very handsome stone bridge here over the Danube, which greatly favors the
trade of the inhabitants in linen, fustians, hardware and wool. It is one of
the largest and best built places in Germany, and the townhouse is a very
handsome edifice. Large quantities of wine are brought here from the Rhine, the
Neckar, and from Constance, to be transported down the Danube. The Reformation
prevailed here about the year 1529, and the magistrates, as well as the
inhabitants are mostly Lutherans. The city of Ulm, says Keysler, is however
very far from being what it formerly was, when it used to be a common saying,
The lords of Ulm, the merchants of Nuremberg, and the burgers of Augsburg. And
this saying also, was equally current, The power of Venice, the ingenuity of
Nuremberg, and the firearms of Strasburg; let the world show the like. But
this declension is not the peculiar misfortune of Ulm: many other Imperial
free-towns, join in the like complaint.

Of all the circles of the Empire, Suabia is the most divided, it contains four
ecclesiastic, and thirteen lay-principalities, nineteen independent prelacies
and abbeys, twenty-six earldoms and lordships, and thirty-one free cities. The
prime directors of the circle are the bishop of Constance and the duke of
Wirtemberg, which last has the sole direction of all that relates to military
concerns.

The mixture of the various forms of government and religious sects; the
oppression exercised by the greater over the lesser; the game constantly played
by the Emperor, who possesses many pieces of detached country in Suabia, which
depend not on the circle, and can in consequence of his privileges as archduke
of Austria, extend his possessions in it by various ways, are circumstances
which give the cultivation of the country, and the character of the
inhabitants, a most extraordinary cast.

In several of the port-towns, the highest degree of cultivation may be seen in
the midst of the most savage wildness; a great degree of knowledge and polish
of manners, mixed with the grossest ignorance and superstition; traces of
liberty, under the deepest oppression; national pride, together with a contempt
and neglect of the native country; in short, all the social qualities in
striking contrast, and opposition to each other.

Those parts of Suabia which belong to the greater potentates, such as
Wirtemberg, Austria and Baden, are certainly the most improved. The whole of
Suabia may comprehend about 900 German square miles, and two millions of
people. More than half of these are subjects of the three abovementioned
houses, though they do not own, by a great deal, one half of the land.

If the small German lords would keep themselves within due bounds; if they
were not desirous to appear greater than they really are; if they were more
affectionate to their subjects; if they were not insensible to the softer
feelings of humanity; and so hostile to the Muses and the Graces, the very
smallness of these states, would essentially contribute to their happiness. For
although a small country must necessarily part with some money, to procure what
it wants from abroad, yet if the governor does not require many luxuries, a
prudent economy and management will keep them within due bounds. Besides, as
most of the sovereigns in this part of the world are Catholic, and the rich
foundations in the neighborhood lies open to their younger children, they are
not incumbered with the burden of making any other provision for them. Many of
them also belong to the church, and their preferments in that line, might
prevent their laying any burdens on their subjects. But the happiness of their
people, is never their study, from the want of family ties, they consider
themselves as unconnected with the country, and think their only business is,
to act like generals in an enemy's land, and plunder where they can. Were this
not the case, their exemption from supporting any military establishments, the
ease with which a small country may be governed, the distance from the
political distractions of greater states, the security that other powers of
Germany cannot play the great conqueror over them, and many other
circumstances, might be improved into blessings in these small societies.

The courts of Stutgard and Carlsrube are the only ones which seem to have any
sense of making the subject happy. The rest appear vain enough to suppose the
people created for them, and not they for the people. The treasurers of these
petty lords, with some of whom, says Reisbec, I was well acquainted, make a
very essential difference between the interests of the prince, and those of the
people; and though the subject is under no apprehension of gross tyranny; yet
he is by no means safe from having his pocket picked by the nicer operations of
the finance.

The education of these lords, is so thoroughly neglected, as hardly to admit
better hopes. It is almost universally in the hands of priests. Part of these
are monks, whose knowledge is in a manner wrapped up in their cowls, and part
are young abbes just come from school, and who only seek to make their fortune,
by the connections of their pupils. The monk teaches that a reverence to saint
Francis, Benedict, or Ignatius, a regular attendance on mass, telling beads,
and giving alms to monasteries, are objects which will make amends for many
transgressions of another kind.

My excursions, he adds, in the different states of the circle of Suabia, have
not produced the rich entertainment I promised myself. I visited a dozen, free
Imperial towns, in which, notwithstanding the republican form of government,
not a spark of liberty or patriotism was to be seen. The inhabitants have,
through the oppression of more powerful neighbors, long since, lost all sense
of the value of independence; but though ashamed to mention the name of their
native country out of their own walls, within them they mimick the forms of old
Rome, and after the manner of those governors of the world, inscribe their
public buildings of state with Senatus, Populusque, Hallensis, Bopsingensis,
Nordlingensis, etc.

In the fifteenth century, the Imperial cities of Suabia, acted a very
different part. They were then united in league, not only with each other, but
with the cities of Franconia and the Rhine. Even the emperor had cause
sometimes to be alarmed at their increasing power, which made Charles V.
disunite them. From the time of the association of the Hanse-towns, the gold
flowed from all the country into the cities. These were the exclusive seats of
industry, and their wealth drew into their dependence the neighboring princes,
who, at that time, lived by robberies. If the spirit of trade, which then
prevailed, had suffered them to place more value on the possession of landed
property, they would to this day have preserved somewhat of their former
splendor; as with their power they might have made many conquests, and with
their wealth, many purchases.

All hopes are now vanished of their ever again becoming conspicuous. As soon
as the prince, discovered the value of industry, and gave it free encouragement
in their dominions, it fled into their protection, and abandoned the dark walls
of cities, in which a system of monopolies, little policy, and narrowminded
envy of the successful, laid it under such manifold restraints. The consequence
of which is, the towns are so reduced, as to be obliged to sell the little
landed property they are possessed of, to discharge their debts. This has
lately been the case with Ulm; the largest town in Suabia next to Augsburg.

The great population which prevails in the circle is wonderful, when the
untoward circumstances of the country are considered. By untoward
circumstances; is meant the extortion of petty masters, who all keep their
mistresses, their stag-hounds, their French-cooks, and English horses; the
perpetual quarrels among neighbors, which arise from the various people and
governments of the empire; the small profits attendant on industry, within such
a confined spot; and lastly, the constant decrease of coin, owing to the sums
of money expended by the governors of the country, in search of foreign
luxuries.

There is, however, an integrity still adherent to the German character, and a
kind of jovial humor about it, that makes the princes of the country shudder
at any acts of wanton oppression and cruelty, which, with the same powers,
would no doubt be exercised in Spain, Italy, and even in France. Give a German
prince, but room for his dogs and horses, (for about the welfare of these, he
is uncommonly solicitous) and you have little to fear from him in other
respects.

There is one object, however, in which there is great need of reformation,
that is, in the administration of criminal justice. The torture is not yet
abolished in these countries, and they still behead, hang, break upon the wheel
and impale. It is not very long since they burned a woman for being a witch.
The civil law too, is not yet reduced to that perfect state which might be
desirable. Not that all forms should be abolished, and every thing left to the
wisdom of the judge, under the pretense that forms MAP of the CIRCLE of
WESTPHALIA.
map of Westphalia consume too much time and money. Give me a Socrates for a
judge, and I will be content to abide by his decisions; but whilst judges are
what they are, whilst philosophy comes out of the mouth, and expires on the
lips; it is better to trust to a mode of process, in which it affords little
scope for the unruly passions to range.

CHAP. IX. Of the CIRCLE of WESTPHALIA.
THIS circle is surrounded by the United Provinces, the Northern or German sea,
the Upper, and the Electoral Rhenish circles, and the circle of Burgundy. Its
extent amounts to 1250 square German miles. The air toward the north is cold,
and the soil almost one continued morass or barren sand. The horses are large,
and the hogs in high esteem, especially the hams, known by the name of
Westphalia hams. The southern part has a warmer atmosphere, and a much better
soil, which produces pastures and some corn.

The principal rivers are the Weser, the Ems, the Lip, and the Roer. It
contains several sovereignties, as the bishoprics of Osnaburg, Munster,
Paderborn and Liege; the abbeys of Corvey, Stablo, etc. the duchy of Cleve,
with the county of Mark, the duchies of Juliers and (...), Nassau-siegan, and
Nassau Dillenburg; the principalities of East Friesland, and Mors, with several
counties, seignories, and the Imperial cities of Cologne, Aix-la Chapelle and
Dortmund. It has no capital, but Munster is its most considerable town. This
circle reaches in length from north to south, about two hundred miles, and
nearly the same distance from east to west.

The summoning princes, and directors of the circle, are the bishop of Munster,
and with him alternately the electors of Brandenburgh and Palatine, as dukes of
Cleve and Juliers, both of whom, in this directory, enjoy together but one
voice. The diets of the circle are usually appointed at Cologne, but ever since
the year 1718, none have been held. The archives belonging to it, are kept at
Dusseldorf.

With respect to religion, this circle is one of the mixed.

The BISHOPRIC of PADERBORN,
Is bounded by the country of Lip toward the north; by the duchy of
Brunswick on the east; by the county of Waldeck on the south, and by the duchy
of Westphalia on the west. Its greatest extent from west to east, amounts to
eleven, and from north to south, to about nine German miles. It contains twenty
castles, sixteen monasteries, and ninety-five parish churches. The
Roman-catholic is the established religion. This country is remarkable for the
variety of its salt-springs and other fountains. In the Transactions of the
Royal Society, December 1665, mention is made of a spring in this country which
loses itself twice in twenty-four hours, and returns with a great noise, and
force sufficient to turn three mills not far from its source; the inhabitants
call it Bolder-born, or the Boistrous spring. And in the Transactions of
January following, there is an account of another remarkable fountain in this
diocese, called Metborn, which is a treble spring, two springs of which, though
not a foot and a half distant from each other, have very different qualities;
the one being limpid, bluish, and lukewarm; the other cold as ice, turbid and
whitish; of which water, all fowls that drink, die soon after in strong
convulsions; but giving them a little common salt, will keep them alive longer,
and vinegar will quite recover them. The third spring, which issues about
twenty paces from the others, is of a greenish color, very clear, tastes both
sour and sweet, but very pleasant; and from its weight supposed to be a mixture
of the other two.

It is probable, that it is the water from this spring, which is served up at
the tables of the principal Auberges in Paderborn; and perhaps all Germany does
not produce a lighter, or more pleasant water to drink. It mostly resembles the
Seltzer, but is even lighter and more pleasant to the taste. But to those who
drink freely of it, though with ever so small a portion of wine, it is apt to
occasion a slight fever on the brain; which however goes off soon, if the
quantity of water drank has not been immoderate. This water, like some of the
delicate wines in the south of France and in Italy, loses all its fine
qualities, and becomes insipid, if transported to any distance. If like the
Seltzer water it would bear carriage, the revenue it would produce, must be
immense.

The bishopric of Paderborn was founded by Charlemagne, and the cathedral
church consecrated by Pope Leo III. in 796.

Paderborn, the capital city, takes its name from the head of the river Pada,
which springs in a torrent near the cathedral of this city, and afterward runs
into the Lip. At this fountain, according to the Magdeburg chronicle, most of
the inhabitants of Saxony and Westphalia were baptized, about the year 780, by
order of Charlemagne, the natives being heathens before he conquered this
country. A great part of the adjacent country is very barren, and has little to
boast of besides hogs-flesh, deer, and other venison; in the middle of it,
however, are high mountains which contain iron mines.

The town formerly enjoyed the immunities of a city of the empire, and carried
on a great trade, but at present its commerce is inconsiderable, and the
inhabitants subsist chiefly by agriculture, and breeding of cattle. The emperor
Charlemagne, and several other emperors and German kings resided and held their
diets here formerly.

The BISPHOPRIC of MUNSTER,
Is bounded on the east by the bishopric of Osnaburg and Paderborn; on the
south by the county of Mark; on the west by the duchy of Cleve and Zutphen, and
on the north by the counties of Bentheim and Steinfurth. It is the largest of
all the Westphalian bishoprics, being an hundred miles in length, and eighty in
breadth.

This country is generally level. It has, however, some agreeable heights, but
no great or lofty mountains. The extensive heaths which are seen in it, serve
for breeding of cattle. There are also some fruitful plains, large woods, and
turf, together with good quarries of stone, and rivers abounding in fish. No
part of Westphalia produces better bacon, which is exported all over Europe,
and so much admired, that it produces double the price of any other.

At the time of the reformation, the Lutheran doctrine found many adherents in
this part of the world, but it was afterward suppressed. There are several
nobles here who are still of the protestant persuasion, but the established
religion of the country is catholic.

The bishop is a prince of the empire, and at the diet ranks with the bishop of
Liege, but in such a manner, that the bishop of Osnaburg, always sits between
both. In the circle of Westphalia, he is the first summoning prince and
director of the circle. The chapter consists of forty members, who are all
nobles, and must prove their nobility; and once a year the shield and helm of
the youngest canon are carried in procession, with beat of drum through the
city, that every one may enquire into his pedigree.

Munster, the capital of the bishopric, lies in a very fruitful and pleasant
spot, on the rivulet Aa, or Alpha. The city is large, rich, and populous. It is
defended by a strong citadel, built to keep the inhabitants in awe, after the
insurrection made by John of Leyden, in 1635, who, pretending divine
inspiration, drove the bishop and magistrates out of the city, caused himself
to be proclaimed king, and held out a fourteen months siege against them. He
made one of his concubines queen, but afterward cut off her head, because she
would not approve of all his mad projects. The bishop having got a
reinforcement of troops, at last seized the city by stratagem, and took the
anabaptist king prisoner, who having been carried in derision to most of the
countries in Germany, was the year following put to death with red-hot pincers,
and his bones hung up in an iron-cage, on the top of a steeple.

At Munster, in 1648, was concluded the treaty which established the protestant
religion, and put an end to the thirty years war. This treaty has been made the
basis of almost every subsequent treaty, especially as to religion. It is
sometimes called the treaty of Westphalia, at others, the treaty of Osnaburg,
because the protestant princes held their conferrences at Osnaburg, as the
catholic princes did theirs at Munster. The Swedes had been engaged eighteen
years in this war, and got possession of an hundred strong towns in the empire;
and by this treaty they secured the duchies of Bremen and Verden, western
Pomerania, the island of Rugen, and the city of Weismer, and might have made
still better terms, if they had not adhered to the part of the protestants.

The BISHOPRIC of LIEGE,
Lies in the Netherlands, and is bounded on the north by Brabant and
Guelderland: on the east by the duchies of Limburg and Juliers; on the south by
Luxemburgh and the Ardennes, and on the west by Brabant and the country of
Namur. It is in length from north to south, about twenty German miles, and
about half as much in breadth, but the breadth varies, being twice as much in
some places as it is in others. Some small districts lie within the
jurisdiction of the duchies of Brabant and Luxemburg.

The soil is fertile in corn and pasturage, and yields wine, which resembles
the middling wines of Burgundy and Champagne, together with very considerable
forests and mines of copper, lead, iron, and stonecoal; as also many good
stone-quarries, and among them, likewise some marble. This bishopric is also
celebrated for its mineral-waters; namely, those of Spa, and Chaude-fontaine.

The principal rivers by which it is watered, are the Meuse and Sambre, which
unite in the county of Namur.

The chief exports of this country, and particularly of the town of Liege,
consist of beer, firearms, nails, serge, leather and stone-coal; all which are
exported from hence in prodigious large quantities, more particularly
firearms, such as guns, pistols, and swords, with which in time of war they
serve almost all Europe. The low prices for which they will sell their guns and
swords, is almost incredible. No nation can come in incompetition with them, in
point of cheapness for these articles.

In the circle of Westphalia, this Bishop is third in rank. He is one of the
most considerable ecclesiastical princes in Germany. His annual revenue is
about three hundred thousand ducats. The chapter of Liege consists of sixty
major-canons, who are most of them of noble extraction, and have the power of
electing their bishop. There are twenty-four other canons, who have no share in
this election. It is computed there are in this diocese, or rather
principality, fifty-two baronies, eighteen walled towns, and four hundred
villages well peopled. The Bishop can lay no taxes on his subjects without the
consent of the clergy, nobility, and commons, who are called the three states
of the country.

Liege is supposed to derive its name from a little rivulet, which runs through
this country, and falls into the Meuse. It is a very large, and a very populous
city, of a triangular form. There are several hills and valleys within the
walls, and some islands made by the Meuse, which is here divided into three
branches, which, after having passed through the streets under several bridges,
unite again a little below the town. The town is seated in a vale between two
mountains, the highest of which lies to the north, and the other to the east.
In the valley between these mountains runs the river Meuse, and it is here very
broad.

This town has ten large suburbs, in which are a great number of religious
houses and churches; which last, with those in the city, make an hundred in
all. In the city and suburbs are likewise several public places or squares, as
also, a cathedral church dedicated to St. Lambert, in which there are many
relics. The Bishop's palace and the cathedral, are large and spacious
buildings, the latter is built with red stone, and has a quadrangle within.
This city is about four miles in circumference, and contains about an hundred
and fifty streets. According to the opinion of some travelers, no city in
Germany or France, can equal it in fine churches, convents, and other religious
foundations. The fortifications of the city are but mean, and being commanded
by hills which surround them, are incapable of resisting a large army; but the
citadel, which is situated on a very high hill, is a place of some strength;
yet it may be a question, whether it is not of more disservice than real
service; as it is by no means strong, and from its elevated situation, if the
enemy once got possession of it, they could demolish the town in a few hours.
The duke of Marlborough took this city in the year 1702.

Liege is styled an Imperial city, under the protection of its Bishop; but this
prelate is sovereign of the city and diocese, and the citizens have suffered
more than once very severely for disputing his authority. Most of the streets
are very narrow, but there are many of a good breadth. There are also some very
spacious and handsome private edifices; but in general, the buildings are mean
and shabby. On the banks of the river there are some very pleasant walks, which
are much resorted to in summer. The environs are so extremely pleasant, that it
has obtained the name of the paradise of ecclesiastics. It is a common saying,
likewise, that it is the hell of women, because they are obliged to live a very
laborious life, the women doing all the laborious offices both at home and
abroad; the purgatory of men, because they are almost all governed by their
wives; and the paradise of monks, on account of their rich benefices. The
English jesuits have a college here, delightfully situated on the summit of a
high hill, with a very fine garden. This college is now appropriated to the
education of youth in the catholic persuasion; of which there are in general
from sixty to seventy scholars, mostly the sons of our nobility and gentry. It
is wonderfully well fitted up for the purpose, and the discipline and care that
is taken of the young gentlemen, is equalled in no place. Great pains are taken
with their education. There is scarce an art, science, or language, which is
not taught in this seminary. The proficiency in classical learning therefore
cannot be expected to be very great. In short, the method of study generally
pursued in this college, resembles the plans of our most considerable modern
academies in the vicinity of the metropolis, which are certainly very different
from the mode of education in our great schools, such as Westminster, Eton,
Winchester, and one or two more.

At the opposite extremity of the city, is a convent of English nuns, whose
chief subsistence is obtained by the education of young ladies, of their own
religious persuasion. They have generally the same number of young persons
under their tuition, with the college of English jesuits, who are likewise
chiefly the daughters of our catholic nobility and gentry. The pension as it is
called, or the terms for board and education, are very moderate, about 25l. a
year, every thing included, and are kept in sickness and in health, they also
profess to teach a multiplicity of things. The nuns, as well as the jesuits,
are almost all, either from this country or from Ireland, and many of them
related to the most considerable catholic families in one or other of them.

In the convent, there is likewise a pension for such ladies as choose to come
and board there. This pension is kept in a building adjoining to the convent,
but not within the inner walls of the convent. It is upon a very frugal plan;
the pension is very reasonable, the dinners sumptuous, they all dine in one
eating-room, and have separate chambers to retire to, for tea and to sit in.
The only inconvenience is, that being within the outer gate of the convent,
they are obliged to dismiss their friends, and return home themselves by nine
in the evening. In other respects, this is a very agreeable and cheap place for
those persons to come to, who wish to live comfortably and agreeably on a
slender income. It may not be amiss to remark, that separate dinners are not
allowed, except in illness,

In the monastery of St. William, just without the walls, lie the remains of
that famous English traveller, Sir John Mandeville, who having visited almost
all the great cities of Europe, preferred Liege to any of them, and accordingly
passed the latter part of his days in this city. The university was so
considerable, that Meibonus relates, there were twenty-one kings sons resident
here in 1131. At present it is in no esteem. There is also a public library in
this city, belonging to the council-house, but it is by no means considerable,
and is not frequented. The environs of this city are highly picturesque and
beautiful, but the internal parts carry a very dingy hue, owing to the clouds
of smoke continually issuing from such an immense number of little forges, as
are to be found in its precincts.

About three English miles from Liege, at the extremity of a beautiful valley,
and on the banks of a very pleasing stream, which descends with considerable
rapidity from the mountains, stands the little village of Chau de-fontaine.
This village is famous for its baths, the waters of which are of a sulphurous
nature, and always hot. The inn where the baths are, is not much frequented.
The house is very old fashioned, but the accommodations, as to the wines and
diet, are far from bad, and the charges not extravagant. There are many
families who make this house their residence for weeks together, tempted to it
solely from the retiredness of the situation, the beauty of the scenery, and
the occasional luxury of the baths, which are made use of more for pleasure
than health. They are of a very agreeable temperature as to heat; and the
expenses attending the care of them, very inconsiderable.

Near Liege, in the road, however, from Spa to Aix-la-Chapelle, stands the town
of Verviers; a place formerly of not near so much import as at present. This
town owes all its consequence to its woollen manufactures, which are now
carried on to very great extent; and of late years, they have even rivalled us
very successfully, in several of the northern parts of Europe, in this branch
of commerce.

About seventeen miles south-east of Liege, is the village of Spa, which has
been long famous all over Europe for its mineral waters. It is seated in a
spacicious valley surrounded by hills, part of which are covered with woods,
and on the north-side, more particularly, with very steep and craggy mountains,
which immediately overlook the town.

The town of Spa, according to Thickness, is situated in a stony, mountainous
country, on the banks of which, in summer, is a murmuring stream, but which in
winter, is sometimes a rapid river; the air is good, and the environs in
general are pleasant, though rude and uncultivated, having much the appearance
of a part of the globe, which has been broken up by earthquakes, or some
violent convulsions of nature; so that all the luxuries of life are brought
daily on women's backs from Liege. In the winter, the place is deserted.

The account given by Pliny of the waters of this place, is that they tasted of
iron, were purgative, and a sovereign cure for tertian agues and the stone. The
three principal springs are the Pouhon, the Geronstere, and the Savoniere. The
Pouhon is in the middle of the town, or rather village; for Spa, strictly
speaking, is no more than a village, though, from the numerous and splendid
buildings erected within these few years, for the accommodation of strangers,
many of which are of the first distinction; it is more considerable than many
towns. It is from this spring that most of the water is supplied, which is sent
into foreign countries. Over the spring is a stone building, on which there is
an inscription recounting the virtues of these waters; that they remove
obstructions, dissolve hard swellings, dry up a superfluity of moisture, and
strengthen weak limbs, if drank in proper quantities, and under the direction
of the faculty.

Health is now become but a secondary object that attracts such a splendid
assembly of both sexes, which now resort to this delightful spot. Numbers
resort here for the sake of gaming high, and by their dexterity and address,
bid fair to amend or improve their shattered fortunes: a crowd of another sort
attend only as parasites, and dependant on such illustrious personages as keep
public tables, and make a splendid appearance. Others come there to make the
best market they can of the commodities they import. Some aim at procuring new
acquaintance and correspondents. Others resort here purely to enjoy themselves
and the wholesome air of the climate. Some again have diversion and amusement
principally in view, and spend their time here more for the sake of the good
and grand company that comes here, than out of any regard to the virtue of the
waters. In a word, this most delightful spot is the center and seat of all joy
and pleasure; which contribute toward the countless miracles that are wrought
here beyond the power of words to express.

He who takes into his consideration, only the numberless amusements of this
delicious spot, the various games, the balls, the plays, the walks, and other
entertainments that are carried on here, and succeed each other without
intermission, must doubtless imagine, that a life so led in the daily
gratification of every scene, is able to remove a variety of little
inconveniences, without the least aid or assistance from these salutary
springs. Such, for instance, as the yellow jaundice, which is principally owing
to some light and trivial obstruction, the hyp or vapors, which are often the
result only of an unpolite deportment, from a too peevish and morose husband,
and more particularly, that petty disorder called the green sickness, a
maiden-distemper for the immediate cure of which, the young lover is the
infallible physician.

There are three different ways of lodging, as well as living, at Spa.

Those persons who come there alone, or in small parties, with a slender
retinue, and little baggage, lodge in general at public inns.

In all these there is attendance sufficient, and a more plentiful larder than
is reasonably requisite; considering that their tables or ordinaries are
principally intended for the reception of such persons as are suppose to
frequent these houses, for the recovery of their health.

The second method of living at Spa, is by hiring furnished houses, as in Bath
or London. Of this sort there are abundance to be met with, of all sizes and
prices Princes, and persons of high rank, who propose keeping a public table
there, generally adopt this mode.

The third method is to hire furnished apartments. And this is more calculated
for small families, or single persons, who do not like the hurry and bustle of
an inn. These persons generally send for their provisions from the adjacent
inn, at so much per head. Or if single gentlemen, they will find it much the
cheapest method to dine at the public ordinaries, where they will meet with
very good company, pick up fresh acquaintance, and indulge themselves in a
variety of different conversations.

The custom of paying visits, except among persons of some rank, is now almost
wholly laid aside. The established etiquette, however, is that the inferior
pays the first visit, whether he arrives first or last, and the return is
conducted according to the rank and character they respectively bear. If the
disproportion is very great, no return at all is expected. Princes, however,
generally testify their regard for any person of distinction by a personal
visit. The counter-visits are, in general, little more than bare ceremony; they
are reduced to a formal tour in a chariot, or perhaps on foot, to leave a card
at some person's house, who never fails to be out of the way, or, at least,
denied.

Most people, however, pay no visits at all, but to such persons as are
manifestly their superiors: they content themselves with testifying their
respects to their bottle-companions, or such others as they are personally
acquainted with, who on the other hand frequently circumvent them, by waiting
on them first.

Those who delight in tranquillity and repose, may reside there in as retired
and solitary a manner as they please, and there are rural objects enough to
engage their attention.

Amongst the multitude of persons of both sexes, who resort to the Spa, there
are a variety of characters, and among them many very amiable ones; and besides
the friends usually to be met with there, it is impossible to fail of finding
some strangers, whose company and conversation prove exceedingly engaging:
these ties of friendship, thus suddenly contracted, and grounded on a sympathy
of tempers and conformity of characters, establish an openness of heart, which
is the life and soul of society, and renders it inexpressibly delightful.

Time, at the Spa, flies away with an amazing swiftness; though it must be
allowed, two parts in three of it, are spent in nothing but amusements; yet the
whole body of its visitors is in perpetual motion, all seemingly, at least, as
busy as bees; and not a drone to be met with in the whole hive. The amusements
follow so close at the heels of each other, in that most agreeable recess, that
there are some people who have been there for six weeks successively, and
sometimes longer, who have never dreamt of taking any survey of the country, or
in short, any of the parts adjacent.

The season for resorting to the Spa, does not properly commence till the end
of June, but appears in its utmost beauty and perfection about the latter end
of July, and the whole month of August.

Most of the company are at the Pouhon well, by five o'clock in the morning,
which gives the town the appearance of a fair at that hour, it being then
likewise crowded with a multiplicity of horses and carriages waiting to carry
the company to the Geronstere and Savoniere springs. This latter spring is
situated on an eminence, at the east side of Spa, and is much about half a
league from the town. The road, however, is rugged, and in some measure
troublesome and unpleasant, especially in the going there, it being upon an
ascent all the way, insomuch that though the distance is so inconsiderable,
most of its visitors go there in carriages or on horseback, lest the walk
should be apt to throw them into too great a perspiration, or put them out of
breath; in either of which cases, as the water is very cold, it might prove of
dangerous consequence, as is well known by too fatal experience.

This spring, or well, is contained in a very small basin, round which the
drinkers stand, in order to be served; and is covered with a dome or cupola,
composed of freestone, and the whole surrounded with a low wall.

At one of the springs there is a large building, with a fire in it when the
mornings are chilly, to which the company retire, after having drank a glass or
two of the waters. Here you meet with a mixed concourse of people of all ranks
and degrees, citizens, monks, nuns, lords and ladies, and sometimes kings or
princes, who divesting themselves of their high dignity, converse there with
the same familiarity, as if they were all upon a level.

There are horses and carriages to be let here, either for the morning only, or
for the whole day. The price of the horse, to go to either of the distant
wells, is about two schellings, each schelling sevenpence English. Those who
engage them for the whole day, in order to enjoy the pleasure of an evening's
ride, pay about three schellings. In the very height of the season, probably
something more. The carriages let out for hire, which are low phaetons, very
shabby, old fashioned and clumsy, are cheap in proportion.

With regard to the general expenses attending a residence at Spa, they are
not, even in the height of the season, more than those of the little
watering-place on the western coast of England, according to the style in which
a person lives. The wines and diet, on the other hand, are much more sumptuous
than they are to be met with in England on almost any terms. There are likewise
several circulating libraries in this place, tolerably well stocked, not only
with novels, but with all modern publications, even of works of literature.

This frequently induces strangers to make considerable purchases from these
libraries. And French books may be met with here on as reasonable terms, as in
any town of Europe, and in as great variety in point of assortment.

As the latter part of the forenoon, in the month of July and August, is
frequently too sultry to ride out in the morning, it is generally filled up
between these libraries, and the assembly rooms, where the pharo-bank is held,
and to which all strangers are admitted gratis. The principal assembly room is
seated on an eminence, about half a mile from the town, commanding a most
delightful view. It is called the Vauxhall. Here a great number of parties and
single gentlemen breakfast on their return from the wells, a band of music
playing the whole time. When this repast is over, the pharo-bank opens, and
continues dealing for about a couple of hours. The capital stock is about a
1000 louis d'ors. No person is allowed to punt less than a guinea, except the
ladies, who are indulged with the liberty of playing for silver. A hazard table
is then introduced for about half an hour, or a little more, just before
dinner, when the ladies, for the most part retire, and this closes the
morning's amusement in the public-rooms. There are card-tables for those who
choose to make parties of whist and piquet. The evening, till dusk, is generally
dedicated to excursions on horseback, or in carriages; the square being full of
carriages, and horses standing for hire about five o'clock every evening. There
are also two or three very fine public walks, where the company meet as the sun
gets nearer the horizon, and at which the band of music belonging to the rooms
occasionally play. The mountains overhanging Spa, present a number of very
agreeable walks, which have been cut through the woods at a great expense, in
zig-zag paths, all up the sides of them. The beautiful views that present
themselves in climbing up these mountains, the prospects of which vary every
instant, amply recompense the toil. No sooner does night close in, but all the
company repair instantly to the rooms. Of these there are two, both very
elegant and superb. The one in the town, and the other about half a mile
distant, called the Vauxhall, as has been already observed. At one or other of
these rooms, there are balls, three or four times a week. The intervening
nights, there are only card-parties, a promenade, and the pharo-bank. It is
this latter which seems to keep every thing alive in these regions of
dissipation. The large heaps of gold displayed on the cloth, which covers the
pharo-table; the number of people of fashion who are playing at it; the
attempts which are made by many of them to break the bank, by doubling the
stakes from time to time, is sufficient to interest the attention of a number
of spectators unconnected with the play. And it sometimes happens, that a
spirited player is successful enough to break it. A singular instance of which,
I will relate, from Thickness. Some years since, a stranger, of plain but
decent appearance, took his seat at the pharo-table at Aix-la-chapelle; the
bank was at that time rich, and the stranger, after having lost some money,
threw down his pocketbook, full of notes to a high amount, and declared he was
at the whole bank. The stranger won, the banker trembled, and the company
stared at the cool dispassionate manner in which the stranger received his good
fortune, who ordered a person, that stood near him to take the money, and
retired; but not before, a reduced halfpay captain, who had been looking on,
exclaimed aloud, Good God! if I had won but a twentieth-part of that sum, what
a happy man it would have made me! -- Would it, said the stranger? then you
shall be happy; and in a short time, a servant was sent, who put into the
officer's hands a purse, containing the twentieth part of the money won. A few
days afterward, it was known, that the king of Prussia had been incog. at
Aix-la-chapelle, and that he was the stranger, the gambler, and the generous
donor.

The prince Bishop of Liege, is supposed to receive several thousands a year
from the bankers belonging to this pharo-bank, for giving them his license to
hold it. At the end of the assembly-room in the town of Spa, is a very neat,
little French theater, where there are plays three times a week. The actors, in
general, are tolerable. The parterre of this theater, by being boarded over on
ball-nights, serves as an apartment for the pharo-bank. For persons of rank and
fashion, there is a club, where the members dine together every day. It was
instituted by the English. Every person must be balloted for, and one
black-ball is sufficient to exclude the candidate. Dress and suppers are never
thought of at Spa. Every one dresses a l'Angloise, and the heat of the weather,
the early rising, and late dinners, make people wholly unsolicitous about
eating or retiring from the rooms.

With respect to those who come there only for the waters, there are diverse
cases where they do not agree with the constitution of those invalids who drink
them; and it is certain, there will always be visitors who will never receive
the least benefit from them. Some drink them out of caprice, or else follow
such instructions as are whimsical and injudicious; some swallow down too large
a quantity; and others drink them too sparingly; sometimes without any proper
preparation, and sometimes by altering the qualities of the waters, with an
intermixture of drugs prescribed by physicians, unacquainted with the practice
peculiar to the wells, or incapable of foreseeing in what manner they will
operate. In short, there are abundance of errors committed by invalids, either
through the non-observance of a proper regimen, or the imprudent choice of a
spring unfit for their service, as well as a mistake in the quantity or manner
of drinking the waters, on which the cure of their particular disorder in a
great measure depends.

It is universally known, the Geronstere spring is most suitable in those cases
where there is a weakness of the fibers, or a contraction proceeding from a too
lively or quick sensibility: it is fit likewise for weak stomachs, and such as
have tender constitutions, whose fibers are too inactive; such as are in a
languishing condition, or are afflicted with catarrhs and other pectoral
disorders.

The impetuous rains and violent hurricanes that frequently happen in this
country, make the ground and stones shrink and give way so, that the roads are
almost impassible in winter, except on the new chausse from Spa to Liege; --
however, if the roads are somewhat rough, the mountains through which those
passages are cut, afford a very pleasing prospect.

These rough-hewn, unpolished rocks, intermixed with a great variety of stately
oaks and humble shrubs, strike the eye of every curious traveller, who has any
adequate idea of a beauteous landscape. For my own part, says the author of a
tour to Spa, the first time I traveled that road, I ordered my coachman to
halt at several places, that I might look about me, and make my observations on
the agreeable prospects which the narrow passages cut through the mountains,
presented themselves from time to time to my view. I was agreeably surprised,
says he, to find that an uncultivated spot of ground, with no other covering
than a worthless, pitiful stock of broom, or heath, should so delightfully
delude me, as to appear, a-far off, like a charming verdant grass-plat, the
enamel of which, and its odd fantastic knots or compartments, were amusing
beyond measure; and this variety of charming delusions occur frequently in
excursions round Spa.

The other two springs are at a small distance from the town.

The BISPOPRIC of OSNABERG,
Is bounded on the north by Lower Munster, on the south by Upper Munster, on
the east by the principality of Minden, and on the west, by Munster and Lingen.
It is about ten German miles in length, from north to south; and from east to
west, between four and six German miles.

This was the first bishopric founded by Charlemagne, who granted extraordinary
privileges to this see, exempting it from all manner of service and homage,
even to the Emperor himself. At the peace of Osnaberg, in 1648, it was settled,
that this bishopric should alternately have a Roman catholic and a Lutheran
bishop, and that the chapter might choose and select the former, either from
among themselves or elsewhere; but that the latter should always be a prince of
the house of Brunswick, and of that branch of the house of Brunswick from which
his present majesty is descended. When they have a popish bishop, he is
suffragan to the archbishop of Cologne, but the protestant bishop, who at
present is his majesty's second son, his royal highness the duke of York, has
no ecclesiastical jurisdiction over the catholics. The Bishop is a prince of
the empire, and sits at the diets of the empire in the council of princes,
between the bishops of Munster and Liege. Among the several states of the
circle of Westphalia, this bishopric is fourth in rank, and his principality
produces him yearly 180,000 Rhenish florins, which is 15,500l. a year; this,
according to Reisbec. But we have reason to believe, it produces twice the sum.

This country is partly Roman-catholic, and partly protestant,; neither the
protestant nor the Roman-catholic bishops have the right of reformation; but
every thing must remain as it stood in 1624. No Jews are tolerated in this
country.

The cathedral is in the hands of the Roman-catholics; the chapter consists of
twenty-five canons, not above four of which are protestant, and these have no
vote in the election of a popish bishop. Some of the other churches are
protestant. There are not above four towns in the whole country, and about
20,000 fire-places or hearths.

About one half of this bishopric consists of heathlands, which yield above ten
sorts of turf, as also pasturage. This country, likewise, produces as much rye
as supplies the inhabitants, and above five hundred stills. Considerable
quantities of corn are imported here from the principality of Minden. The breed
of cattle, likewise, is but small, and they are mostly supplied from Frizeland.

The inhabitants are diligent and laborious. The country people seldom sit by
stoves, as they do in other parts of Germany, but by fire-hearths, where they
perform their principal work, which is spinning. Above six thousand of them go
every year to Holland, where they now, till, cut turf, and do other work for
hire. The meanest of them, notwithstanding, carry home twenty, and the best
workmen full seventy florins; so that the ready money, which they by this means
bring into the country, may be reckoned at 200,000 florins.

The greatest and most beneficial occupation of the inhabitants consists in
spinning yarn, and manufacturing a coarse kind of linen; which is conveyed by
the English, Dutch, and Spaniards, to Guinea and America, and brings annually
into the country above a million of rixdollars.

Osnaberg, the capital, is situated in a fine plain, and beautified with
several, noble, public buildings. It derives its name from a bridge over the
river Haze. The manner of building here is antique, and the number of houses,
exclusive of the public and bye-buildings, amounts to 1200. The town is not
populous, not above five hundred children being baptized in a year. Its
magistracy is Lutheran, and rechosen annually. The Bishop's palace is fortified
like a castle. They are said to have the best bread and beer here, which is to
be met with in Westphalia, and they carry on a considerable traffic in linen,
cloth, and hams. Its principal subsistence depends on its linen trade
manufactured in the country, and in the foreign manufacturies, vended here in
retail. There are three well built hospitals here, exclusive of some smaller
ones. This city was also formerly, one of the Hanse towns. The episcopal palace
belongs to the electoral house of Luneburg, who usually resigns it to the
catholic bishop for his residence. This town is possessed of the right of
making copper, which it exercised for the first time in 1740. In the hall of
the council-house, where the celebrated peace of 1648 was concluded, are seen
pictures of the ambassadors who assisted at it.

The duchies of Oldenburg, and Delmenhurtst, which the king of Denmark, at the
desire of the Russian court, exchanged for a part of Holstein, with the prince
of Gottorp, now make a very good principality, containing 78,000 people, and
yielding every year about 40,000l. English. It is from this part of Germany,
many, but particularly from Friesland, that they procure the strong fine
coach-horses that trot so proudly over the pavement of many Italian cities, and
are sometimes, though more seldom, met with in France. The court of Petersburg
brought up many of these horses to mount its heavy cavalry, who look very
formidable on these terrible cattle. The Dutch cuirassiers are supplied from
Holstein, and in fact, the horses of that country are preferable to those of
Friesland and Oldenburgh for this service, and with the same strength they
connect more alacrity and life. -- The Dutch call them vast-trotters -- they
are too heavy to gallop, but will trot at an amazing pace, with a heavy drag
behind them, for a whole day together. They are coal-black, seventeen hands
high, and very nobly crested. The price of a pair of handsome ones, about
fifteen years ago, was 120 pounds English.

THE DUCHY OF CLEVE,
Lies on both sides the Rhine, and is bounded by part of Holland toward the
north; by Munster on the east; Juliers on the south, and Brabant toward the
west. It is sixteen German miles in length, and between four and five in
breadth.

The air is sound, and the weather moderate. This duchy has high lands and low
bottoms; the former of these are furnished as well with arable-lands, as with
bushes; the latter, particularly toward the Rhine, are, on both sides fenced
with stout dams, exclusive of which, there are also summer-dams, which screen
the rich meadows and pastures lying near the river against the summer-water, to
the heights of between eleven and sixteen feet. This country abounds also in
corn, fruits, and all manner of plants. The breed of horned cattle, and horses,
is considerable. In general, the country is well cultivated, and contains many
delightful spots, particularly near the town of Cleve. All kinds of game are in
great plenty here, in particular, on the west side of the Rhine. The river
divides the country into the eastern and western parts, and receives in its
course, the rivers Roer, Ems, and Lip. The Meuse also touches on a part of
the duchy. All these rivers abound in fish, and the salmon, pike and carp, of
the Rhine, are in great request.

In this duchy are twenty-four towns, and three immunities, or municipia. The
inhabitants are chiefly catholics, but all religions are tolerated in this
duchy. The country, in many parts, is mountainous and woody. The commerce of
this country is very much facilitated by the navigation on the Rhine, and on
the Meuse. The sovereignty belongs to the King of Prussia, as elector of
Brandenburgh, whose ancestors laid claim to it, in the beginning of the last
century; by virtue of a marriage, with one of the co-heiresses of the last
prince of the male line in this duchy. This claim was confirmed by the emperor
Leopold, in 1678.

The yearly revenues arising to the King of Prussia, from this duchy, are
estimated at 356,000 rix-dollars, and the sum which goes to the war-chest, at
340,000.

Cleves, the capital of the country, in Latin Clivia, derives its name from the
town and citadel, being built on the declivity of a hill, between the Rhine and
the Meuse. It is large and well built, but surrounded by cliffs and craggy
rocks, about twelve miles from Nimeguen. The town is well peopled, but neither
the city nor the citadel are of any great strength. A silk manufactory was
established here in 1755. The environs are pleasant, and in front of the gates
are some very fine walks. From this place there is a canal runs into the Rhine,
which is about three English miles distant. On the west side of the town, lies
the park of prince Maurice of Nassau, very much admired for its grottos,
canals, and fine waterworks; and over these on a high hill, called the
Sternberg, may be discovered, at the distance of fifty miles, the city of
Utrecht, with forty other cities and great towns, twelve of which, are seen
through vistos, and at the end of each appears a fine city.

The private houses in Cleves are very shabby, and the only public buildings of
any note are the great church, a monastery of Capuchins and another of
Franciscans. As the King of Prussia is sovereign of the country, the religion
countenanced by government is Calvinism; but most of the churches are in
possession of the catholics. In the great hall of the citadel is an inscription
by which it appears that Caius Julius Caesar, dictator in the year 698 from the
building of Rome, having first conquered the adjacent country founded the
citadel of Cleve.

The PRINCIPALITY OF EAST FRIEZLAND
Is bounded by the German ocean on the north; by Oldenburg on the east; by
Groningen on the west, and by Munster on the south. It is about ten German
miles from north to south, and as many from east to west.

This principality is situated in a moist and thick air, but much purified by
the sea-breezes. Spring and summer appear here somewhat later than in other
parts of Germany; hence also their corn-harvest happens later. The country is
throughout level and low; whence also it is secured by expensive dikes against
the inroads of sea-floods. Along the sea lies a marsh uncommonly fertile, which
has a clay bottom, and is more used for meadow and pasture-land than for
agriculture.

The remarkably rich pastures of this country yield an important breed of
cattle, producing horned cattle, horses and sheep in great numbers, and also of
an extraordinary size. In these parts one cow will yield near twenty-four cans
of milk, and from this very rich milk is made most excellent butter and cheese.
On the contrary, in the heart of the country, the bottom is for the most part
sandy, as also fenny and moorish, but yields turf for burning, which, in the
great scarcity of fuel here, is very advantageous and indispensably necessary
to the country. The greatest part of the produce of the earth, as also culinary
herbs grow to a large size, but are seldom so good as they are in other
countries. Fowl and venison are also to be had, and there are geese, whose
weight exceeds twenty-four pounds. In harvest, a great number of fieldfares and
snipes generally appear. The sea here yields all sorts of fish, as oysters,
muscles, sea-crabs, etc.

The principal river is the Ems, which comes from the bishopric of Munster, and
runs through the Dollart into the North Sea. The Dollart is a bay between East
Friezland and Groningen, which arose out of a considerable tract of country,
and was swallowed up by the sea. For, in the year 1277, the water first broke
into this tract of land with a violent flood, and no proper opposition being
made to to it, the present bay gradually arose, on whose circuit there stood
formerly above fifty great and small towns.

Trade and navigation are carried on here very briskly. The produce of the
country, and the commodities exported hence are large horses (numbers of which
are sent to Rome and sold by the pair, in proportion to their strength and
beauty for three or four hundred dollars and more, and used for coach horses)
horned cattle, butter, cheese, rape-seed, and fine cloth. On the other hand,
every thing the country is in want of, is conveyed hither by shipping.

The land-states consist of the nobility, and the states, as also of the
villagers. Between these and the reigning house certain articles of agreement
have been gradually entered into, ever since the time of count Edward the
second, which, with the peculiar imperial ordinances issued at the same time
are considered as provincial laws in the government of the country. East
Friezland has also many other privileges.

The ancient counts were created princes of the empire in 1554. This princely
house became extinct in 1744, upon which Frederic II. King of Prussia, in
consequence of an expectancy granted to the house of Brandenburg, by the
Emperor Leopold in 1604, took possession of East Friezland; a protest to which
was made by the house of Brunswic -- Luneburg, before the regency of East
Friezland and the aulic council of the empire, who claims this principality by
virtue of an alliance entered into in 1601 with Prince Christian Eberhard, a
former-prince of Friezland.

Aurich, the ancient residence of the prince, and which is even to this day the
seat of the provincial college, stands almost in the center of the country. The
ancient residentiary castle is surrounded with ramparts and ditches. In the
garrison church the Calvinists perform their religious worship. In the town
itself we see the Lutheran church, the provincial house, the Latin schools and
a public almshouse. So early as the year 1519, Aurich received the Lutheran
doctrine.

Emden, the chief city of the principality lies near the river Ems. It is a
strong seaport town, and a place of great trade. The houses are high and well
built, and the town hall is a magnificent structure. This place contains a
harbor, an old fort, and a citadel belonging to the prince and lying on the
Ems, to which the ships arrive by means of a broad canal drawn from that river,
called the Dolf. From this city there is a fine prospect of the German Ocean,
and likewise of the adjacent country.

The things principally worthy of notice here are the town hall and
council-house, the library and the great church. Most of the inhabitants are
protestants or Calvinists, and there are some Lutherans, catholics and Jews. In
1750, an Asiatic company was established here by the King of Prussia.

Emden, says Reisbec, is by no means so fine a city as Bremen. The King of
Prussia has taken an everlasting dislike to the inhabitants, who, to say the
truth, when taken in the lump, are not the most amiable people. They are very
remarkable for their laziness and insensibility. It was a great while before
the good endeavors of the King of Prussia, its sovereign, to turn this people
to commerce and ship-building were attended with any success. The East India
Company, which he had established at a great expense, was ruined within a few
years of its erection, and certain republican prejudices, which the burgers of
this city affected, rendered all the King's other efforts for a time
ineffectual. At length the activity and wisdom of the government, attended with
some fortunate circumstances, got the better of the impediments to that
extension of commerce, for which the city is particularly well situated. The
herring-fishery, which the King took every step, in his power, to encourage,
brings in large sums of money every year. The American war assisted the King's
designs very much, and the trade of the place now begins to be very
flourishing. Emden exports many Westphalian linens to the south countries, and
provides a part of Westphalia with spices and wines. They have also a
considerable trade in cheese.

The revenues arising from this principality are very considerable. They, many
years ago, greatly exceeded 100,000 rix-dollars, and since it came under the
Prussian regency, have been very considerably increased.

The principality consists at this time of three towns and nine prefecturates,
which were formerly lordships, but are now in like manner with the towns,
hereditary and proper estates of the sovereign prince, as also of lordships
which have their own hereditary lords, but are subject to the sovereign,
supreme jurisdiction of the prince.

PYRMONT.
This country lies between the bishopric of Paderborn, and the electorate of
Hanover. The lower part of it contains an uncommonly beautiful and pleasant
vale, which extends four miles in length, and as many in breadth. All around is
environed by lofty green mountains. In this vale are the celebrated
mineral-springs and steel-waters. This country is now subject to the Prince of
Waldeck. His annual revenues, as sovereign of this country, are estimated at
near 30,000 rix-dollars, to which the mineral springs contribute a very great
proportion.

These waters are often frequented by persons of the highest rank. The king of
Prussia has been known to drink them. They are exceedingly palatable, and come
nearest to the Seltzer-waters, in their taste and their qualities. Pyrmont is
about a day's journey from Hanover; to which place, there is a very fine road,
most part of the way with very large and well engraved stones, every quarter of
a German mile, mentioning the exact distance from Hanover; a circumstance very
unusual on the continent. After Spa, every place of this kind appears insipid.
Yet in the season, there is a great deal of very good company from Hanover, and
the other large cities in the north of Germany. A very magnificent hotel or
inn, for the accommodation of strangers, has been lately built, where the
apartments are fitted up in the most modern taste, and the charges not so
extravagant as the appearance of the outside of the building is magnificent.
This hotel is much superior to any even at Spa. There is, as in most inns of
Germany, an exceeding good table d'hote, of two or three courses -- with
variety of good wines for very moderate prices. Were not the approach to this
place on the side of Holland and France, so exceedingly disagreeable, owing to
the heavy sands of Westphalia, it would be much more frequented than it is at
present. They have their public rooms every night, and their assemblies, and
their pharo-banks, as in other watering-places, but every thing here is on a
small scale, to what it is at Aix-la-chappelle and at Spa. Neither is the
country round about it so diversified and picturesque. The country is more open
and more level; nor are the mountains so finely wooded. On the contrary, the
rooms, where the company meet, lie, as it were, in a hole, near the
springhead; and not only carry with them the appearance of great antiquity,
but they are also very gloomy, and seem situated, as it were, in a swamp,
surrounded with wood. For those, however, to whom the drinking of the waters is
any inducement for repairing hither, there are but few watering-places, where
they will meet with such excellent accommodations, more resources of amusement,
or a greater variety of good and respectable company.

AIX-LA-CHAPELLE,
Is a free Imperial city, and has its name probably from its warm-baths, which
have been celebrated from times of old. It is supposed to have taken its
ancient name from Serenius Granus, lieutenant general of Gallia Belgica, in the
reign of the emperor Adrian, who having discovered the hot-springs here about
the year 53, was the first person who erected some beautiful buildings over
them, after the manner of the Roman baths, and then built a palace for himself
in this city; in the confirmation of which, the inhabitants show a piece of
ancient architecture, which they call Turris Grani, and assert, that it is a
part of that general's palace. This town is situated in a fruitful valley,
encompassed with woods and mountains, and yet the air is esteemed exceeding
wholesome.

The emperor Charlemagne, was so delighted with the beauty of this place, that
he chose it for his residence. He is interred in the church of Notredame, where
they keep his sword, his belt, and the four evangelists, written in letters of
gold, which are used at the coronation of the emperors. Part of the jewels of
the empire are also kept in this city: all which are shown only once in seven
years; except at the request of some great personage, and then they are taken
out and put in again, in presence of the chief-magistrates, and such
ecclesiastics as are on the foundation. In this city, ought properly to be, the
coronation of a Roman king or emperor.

The stadthouse is a stately building, built in 1533, and adorned with the
statues of all the emperors since Charlemagne; in this hall are several fine
pieces of painting, particularly one of the resurrection, and another of
Charlemagne giving the charter to the city of Aix. In the middle of the
marketplace, is a noble fountain, admired for the largeness of its dimensions
and its curious workmanship. On the top of the fountain, is a large brass
statue of Charlemagne, in gilt armor, with his face toward Germany. On the
edge of the cistern, is an inscription, which mentions, that Granus, a Roman
prince, was the first person who discovered and built the hot-baths in this
city. On the inside of the cathedral, where Charlemagne was first interred,
hangs a very large crown made of silver and brass, gilt, surrounded with
forty-eight statues, a foot high, and thirty-two lesser ones, all of solid
silver. The emperor Frederic, removed the body of Charlemagne, buried part of
it in the choir, under the altar, in a silver coffin, and covered it with a
tombstone of white marble; with the bust of Proserpine upon it, supposed to
have covered Julius Caesar's tomb.

The principal relics which pilgrims resort hither to adore, are 1. The
Virgin Mary's gown, that she was dressed in at the incarnation, made of wool.
2. The cloth girt about our Savior, when he was crucified; 3. A piece of the
cord, with which he was bound when he was delivered to Pilate; 4. Some of the
blood of St. Stephen the martyr, enchased in gold and precious stones, on which
the emperors are sworn at their inauguration; 5. The picture of the Virgin Mary
with our Savior in her arms, said to be done by St. Luke; 6. A manuscript of
the gospels, by the patriarchs of Jerusalem and Constantinople. In the upper
part of the church is a throne of white marble, where the emperors used to sit,
and which is supposed to be the same which Charlemagne placed there nine
hundred years ago.

The territory of the city is called the kingdom of Aix-la Chapella, and lies
quite round it. In it are to the number of three thousand subjects. This city
is governed by a mayor, two burgomasters, fourteen aldermen, and 120
common council men. The mayor is appointed by the duke of Juliers, the rest of
the corporation by the city companies, of which there are fourteen or fifteen.

The hot-baths occasion it to be much resorted to, of which there are three
within the walls. One of them is the same in which Charlemagne used to bathe,
with his nobility and great officers of state. These baths rise so hot, that
they let them cool twelve hours before they are used. There is also a fountain
of warm-water, which is drank in summer, for many chronical disorders.

Those who have described the virtues of these waters, relate, that they are
good against all affections of the nerves; such as convulsions, palsies,
numbness, tremblings, gout, sciatica's, contractions, swellings, distempers of
the bowels, stomach and spleen, inveterate head-achs, vertigo's, barrenness,
abortion, and scabs of all sorts.

The city of Aix professed the protestant religion soon after the Reformation,
on which account the people were very much harrassed by the Imperialists during
the civil wars of Germany; till at last popery was established again, and is
now the only religion publicly professed by the inhabitants; but protestants
are permitted to reside here, and go to a church without the walls, under the
dominion of the Dutch.

The emperors were usually crowned in this city for five hundred years after
Charlemagne, and by the golden-bull, made in the reign of Charles IV. the
emperor was to receive his first crown here; but the custom of crowning him
with three crowns, as was formerly the way, has been long since discontinued;
and at every coronation, the magistrates, who have the custody of Charlemagne's
sword, shoulder-belt, and the gospel in golden letters, which are used in that
ceremony, deliver them to the elector of Mentz, and the emperor declares, that
his being crowned elsewhere, shall not prejudice the privileges of the city of
Aix.

Among other holy relics, the greatest curiosity, which that city has produced,
is the Latin Testament, abovementioned, really found in the sepulcher of
Charlemagne, and consequently it must be at least nine hundred years old; it is
written on fine thin paper, or vellum, something like gold-beaters skin,
twenty-times doubled; the characters are in large capitals, well preserved and
quite clean, except at the beginning of St. John's gospel; but there it is much
soiled, because all the emperors were sworn on this book at their coronation;
and there it was, said T --. they laid their dirty hands.

The degree of cultivation, and riches of Westphalia, says Reisbec, far
exceeded all ideas I had formed of them, and quite astonished me. All the
cities and villages abound in tradespeople. Muhlheim, Elberfeld, Solingen,
Sorst, Ham, Duisburg, Meurs, Wesel, Cleve, and some other cities have capital
manufactures in them. They make a great quantity of linen and woollen, and
supply almost all the country of the Upper Rhine, Suabia, and Franconia, with
white threads; they have besides manufactures of handkerchiefs, silks, and
cottons; they prepare steel and iron at Solingen, better than in any other part
of Europe, England alone excepted. Their commerce extends all over the
Netherlands, part of Franconia, and the whole empire.

This wonderful industry, united to the natural fertility of the country,
renders this one of the richest, and most remarkable parts of Germany; a gentle
administration, and a security against despotism, derived from the states of
the country, contribute not a little to the happiness of this circle. The
inhabitants are cheerful, hospitable, and well-mannered; they may be quoted, as
a new instance to be added to the numberless ones, already given of the little
influence which religion has over the civil condition of men, when not attended
with other local circumstances. Though the protestants in this circle are far
from being so enlightened, or so tolerant, as those of their persuasion in
other countries; and though they are much more addicted to sensual enjoyments,
than their brethren of other places, they are the most industrious people, and
the best subjects that can be found; nor does the bigotry of the Catholics hurt
the manufactures and agriculture of the country, their education only direcing
it to such objects as have no connection with manners or civil society. Every
thing, therefore, depends upon the habits amidst which men grow up. -- When
once industry is habitual to a people, the most object superstition will have
no influence on their temporal felicity; the priests themselves will render
their sermons conformable to the manners of the country, nor will the monkish
theorists be able to overturn them.

There are as many legends in this country, as in Cologne, nor are the people
less fond of procession and pilgrimage, and yet they are infinitely more
industrious, more frugal, and more wealthy than at Cologne. It is not therefore
the fault of the religion, or superstition, but of the government alone, that
the people of Cologne are so debauched, and that the priests of the place
openly recommend debauchery, a loose education having made their religion
prejudicial to them. The corporation-system, which with more activity and
cleverness would have been a blessing to the country, is become the curse of
it. In a word, police, government, and executive justice, are subject, under a
weak administration, to the same abuses as government; nor is it religion
itself, but the abuses of it, which make it prejudicial to the state.

The upper part of Westphalia, which lies at a greater distance from the Rhine,
is not so well cultivated, and by nature is much less productive, than the
lower part; it is occupied by many heaths and morasses, which, for the most
part, produce only turf, and, in the better places, dyer's-wood. Some parts of
the country, such as part of the duchy of Minden and marquisate of Tecklenburg,
are remarkably well peopled, but this is compensated by the striking
depopulation of some others; as for instance, of the bishoprics of Munster,
Osnaburg, and Paderborn, the marquisate of Bentheim, and some domains in the
electorate of Hanover.

This part of Westphalia, however, is the proper country for hemp and flax,
which are some of the richest products of this country. The greatest part of
the hemp and flax, manufactured in these parts of Westphalia, about the Rhine,
Holland, the Austrian Netherlands, and the French Netherlands, comes from this
part of the country. Besides, there is a great part exported raw to England,
Spain, Portugal, and America. Though these productions are found, in great
plenty, in other parts of Germany, particularly in the electorate of Hanover,
the circle of Lower Saxony, Hesse, Waldeck, and Fulde; it is a question,
whether all the flax and hemp of the other parts of Germany, taken together,
are equivalent to the quantity found here. According to a very accurate
estimate, the annual exports of raw and spun flax and hemp, out of the single
circle of Westphalia, amounts to five millions sterling, which, with what is
exported, worked up, amounts to 200,000l more.

To enter Holland, from the side of Westphalia, appears to be going out of a
pig-sty into a fine garden. The country round Nimeguen especially, is a
striking contrast to what is seen in Westphalia. The magnificence and
regularity of the Dutch cities, however, soon becomes tiresome in the extreme.
All the cities, villages, roads, and canals, are so similar, that they appear
copies of the self-same individual picture. A MAP comprehending the CIRCLE of
BURGUNDY or the AUSTRIAN POSSESSIONS in the NETHERLANDS etc. NB. the Circle of
Burgundy is enclosed by a Strong Dotted Line.
map of Burgundy With respect to real value, it is only a flogged out beggar,
parading about in a rich gown, which he has stolen. The Palatinate, which is
not more than one fifth of Holland, is of infinitely more natural value.

The inhabitants likewise, taken in general, are only well dressed beggars;
their riches do not belong to them, for they enjoy them not; they are only
guardians of their money. When you are invited to dinner by a man of middling
rank, the magnificence of the dishes, the cleanliness of the room you dine in,
and the expensiveness of the furniture, make you expect a princely meal; but
when the dishes are set on, you find no more, than you would have, at the table
of a good Westphalian peasant.

CHAP. X. Of the CIRCLE of BURGUNDY.
THIS circle is one of those that are wholly catholic. The greatest part of its
territories have been torn from it. France has gradually brought under her
dominion the duchy of Lorrain, which was reckoned in the circle of Burgundy,
and a part of the duchy of Luxemburg, with a part of the counties of Flanders,
Artois, Burgundy, Hennegau and Namur. The provinces of Gelderland, Holland,
Zealand, Utrecht, Friezland, Overyssel, and Groningen, have united and are
become independent; nay, they have even reduced under their subjection, a part
of the duchies of Brabant and Limburg, and part of the country of Flanders,
with the town of Maestricht and its territory.

Thus the circle of Burgundy consists now only of the principal part of the
duchies of Brabant, Limburg, Luxemburg, part of the counties of Flanders,
Hennegau, and Namur, and part of the upper quarter of Gelderland.

These territories now belong to one single lord; the archduke of Austria, who
represents the whole circle, and is sole-director, and circle-summoning prince
of it.

The people of this country have in them a natural spirit of revolt, like their
neighbors the French. They covet to be free, and indeed the unlimited power of
their sovereigns, and the oppression they have constantly labored under, from
an arbitrary government, in some measure, justifies their opposition. It was
the tyranny of the Duke of Alva, their governor in the reign of Philip II. of
Spain, who was then sovereign of Brabant, that occasioned their revolt in his
time; and it was their dislike to the emperor Joseph II. their late sovereign,
that brought on the last rebellion, quelled by the emperor Leopold. Indeed, so
powerful were the princes of the empire, in early ages, that they were lords of
life and death, and could take away life without trial, merely by their
mandate. In the history of Brabant we have the following interesting story.

Sifroi, Count Palatine, having married a beautiful young woman, but of no
great family or connexions, was called to the holy wars soon after his
marriage. The spirit of the times led him to this enterprise without much
reluctance, except that of leaving his young wife behind him, whom he feared
might be induced to dishonor him in his absence. He left her, however, in the
care of a friend, one of the principal officers of his establishment, and
desired he might be made acquainted, from time to time, with her conduct, and
the state of her health. The beauty of this lady attracted the love of her
guardian, and in his sovereign's absence, he endeavored to corrupt her
principles, and rob his lord of that fidelity she owed him. Finding her averse
to his solicitations, and unconquerable, his love was converted into hatred,
and when he next wrote to his sovereign, he traduced her character, and
represented her as having defiled his bed, with a menial servant of his
household, and thus dishonored his name. Sifroi, on the receipt of this
intelligence, was thunderstruck, and the more so, as no former letter had given
him the least intimation of her attempting to deviate from the line of virtue.
The possibility of a false report, and his love for his lady, operated in her
favor; but then his pride took the alarm, and, as of two passions in contest,
the evil one is generally predominant, so it was here. Without consideration,
in the impetuosity of temper, he returned an immediate answer to this false
friend, saying, if the proofs were glaring, he desired to be rid of her; but
the mode of putting her to death he left to this officer. On the arrival of
this mandate, he made a fresh attempt upon her virtue, armed with the power of
taking away her life on her noncompliance. Still she was firm and invincible,
and the consequence was, that her death was pronounced. Unwilling to bring her
to a public execution, lest his treachery should be discovered, he hired an
assassin to take her into a neighboring wood, and there dispatch and bury her.

This being settled, the man left her, cut her name upon a rock, and told his
savage employer, that he had executed his commission, and buried her in the
forest, near the place where her name was engraved.

It happened at this time that she was pregnant. She soon however found a
retreat in a cave, and here she took up her abode, nature in due time
performing her own office, and she was delivered of a fine girl, which the
story says, was suckled by a do, which Providence had sent to be its nurse;
for her distress, and anguish of mind had rendered her unable to perform that
endearing task herself. She lived seven years, with her infant, in this
solitary desert, feeding on wild herbs and roots, and associating with the
tamer animals of the forest. Her clothes were worn out, and she was obliged to
go naked, without any other covering than her long hair, which reached below
her waist.

The officer, who supposed her dead, being informed of the unexpected return of
his sovereign, fearing a discovery of his treachery, and not able to bear the
reproaches of his own mind, put an end to his existence; and when Sifroi came
back, and the whole matter was unravelled, he too soon, for his peace, learned
the innocence of his wife, and the treachery and end of him to whom he had
entrusted her; and would have given the world not to have sent his cruel
mandate, hastily dispatched in a moment of phrenzy; but it was then too late,
the deed, as he supposed, was done.

Hunting some time afterward in this forest, and straying from his party,
chance led him to the rock where her name was cut. Startled at the sight, he
became motionless upon his horse. In a moment or two his senses returned, but
returned with bitterness. Stung with remorse, and overpowered with distress, he
could only sigh and weep. Genevieve, whose fears were always awake for herself
and her little one, dreading a discovery that she was still in being, had been
wandering in search of food, and returning to her cave at the time Sifroi's
eyes were fixed upon the rock; little expecting to meet any thing in so
sequestered a part, fled to her abode, and screamed as she fled. Sifroi, at the
noise turned instantly round, and just obtained the glimpse of her as she
entered. Approaching the cave's mouth, he cried out, "What is that voice? Is it
a human voice?" "It is," she answered. "Then come forth," he cried. "Throw me
your coat," returned she, "and I will, for I am naked." He accordingly did so,
and to his great astonishment and joy, discovered both his wife and his child.
The inclemency of the weather, and her hard fare, throwing a brown hue over
her, had made some alteration in her features, but her beauty had not left her.
She became more amiable in his eyes from the calamity she had experienced;
though destitute of dress, she was clothed with innocence, and returned
unsullied to his arms.

The AUSTRIAN PART of the DUCHY of BRABANT,
The length of which is rated at twenty-two, and its breadth twenty German
miles, was formerly the first in rank of all the seventeen provinces in the
Netherlands. The air of this country is good, and its soil very fertile. Its
greatest riches consist in flax. Near Brussels a canal has been carried from
the river Senna, to the village of Willebroech, where it discharges itself into
the river Rapel, which unites itself with the Schelde, so that a person may
sail from Brussels to the north sea. This canal was begun in the year 1550, and
finished in 1561, at an expense of 800,000 florins.

In the Austrian part of Brabant are reckoned nineteen walled towns, and a
considerable number of immunities enjoying the rights of burghers and towns.

The whole country professes the Romish church. In the year 1559, an
archbishopric was erected at Mecklin, and to it was assigned the primacy of
Belgium. To this see belongs eleven collegiate churches, and 203 cloisters, a
number of the last of which are now suppressed within these three years.
Subject to the archbishopric are the bishops of Antwerp, Ghent, Boisleduc,
Bruges, Ypres, and Ruremond. The number and opulence of the ecclesiastics in
this country are very considerable.

For the promotion of learning, here are several schools and gymnasia, and
likewise the university of Louvain.

The duchy of Brabant belonged formerly to the Frankish monarchy. Afterward it
became part of the Lotharingian kingdom, and a fief of the German empire. In
course of time it descended to Philip II. of Spain.

The republic of the United Netherlands, in the 17th century, made itself
master of the northern part of the duchy of Brabant, which it retained at the
peace of Westphalia. The emperor Charles VI. in the year 1706, after the battle
of Ramilies, took possession of the present Austrian part of this duchy. That
part of the duchy of Brabant, which belongs to the house of Austria, contains
the cities of Louvain, Brussels, Antwerp, and Mecklin, of each of which we
shall speak.

Louvain is a very large and pleasant town, with an old castle, and a
celebrated university. The walls of this place are near seven miles in
circumference, but within them are a great many gardens and vineyards. The
public buildings are magnificent, and the university consists of a great number
of colleges. The town was formerly in a flourishing state, owing to the noble
manufactures of linen and woollen cloth established here, which in the
beginning of the 14th century, maintained upwards of 150,000 workmen, but the
cloth-weavers making an insurrection in 1382, and being punished on that
account, some of them withdrew to England, and with its manufactures the town
likewise decayed. The place at present is chiefly remarkable for its good beer,
with which it serves the neighboring towns. The fortifications are not very
strong, and yet it boasts of never having been taken, except by the French, in
1746. It is said, there are no fewer than forty one colleges belonging to this
university.

Brussels, is the finest and richest city of the Netherlands, the capital of
Brabant, and seat of the governor of the Austrian low countries, where the
court is held, and to whom the people pay almost the same honors, as to their
sovereign. The ducal palace, where the governor resides, the townhouse, and
the arsenal, are superb structures. The camblets, lace, and fine tapestry,
which are exported from this town, are famous. It was furiously bombarded by
the French for forty-six hours, in 1695, by which fourteen churches, and above
4000 houses were reduced to ashes, but in four years all were rebuilt again,
far more beautiful. In 1706, the allies made themselves masters of this place,
and in 1746, the French. It lies on the Senna, partly in the plain, and partly
on an eminence, being large, well built, populous and fortified. The public
buildings, the palaces and courts of the several princes, counts, and other
persons of condition here, together with the churches and cloisters, are some
of them considerable, and some magnificent. The magistracy is elected yearly
from seven patrician families.

Brussels, says Reisbec, is one of the most beautiful and most brilliant cities
in Europe. There is not to be seen any where, a finer place than the large
marketplace of this city; all the houses in it, are built in a style, and with
a degree of magnificence, that you scarcely see, any where out of Italy. We
meet here with excellent company, who, to a stranger, are not difficult of
access. There are several clubs after the manner of the English, where we find
the greatest freedom and good humor.

Brussels is far more beautiful, for the bombardment it suffered from marshal
Villeroy; for since that time, the mischief he did, has been entirely made good
by many new streets and public buildings, in a much better style than they were
before. Many of the streets are also well paved, some very spacious, and all
the new houses large and well built.

Among the churches of Brussels, there are some that well deserve notice. St.
Gudula is a very remarkable gothic pile, highly ornamented with monuments,
chapels, pictures, etc. The jesuits church has also several objects to attract
the attention of strangers. One whole side of the great market square, is taken
up with the townhouse, which is a most stupendous quadrangular building, with
a fine cupola, and a pretty gothic front; the apartment in which the states of
Brabant meet, is very magnificent; the history of Charles V. is worked in
tapestry, with a brilliancy of coloring, that is almost inconceivable, the
manufacture of the place, and covers one of the apartments. There are likewise
other apartments which contain many original paintings, by the greatest Flemish
masters. Another great advantage the marketplace enjoys, is being surrounded
with the corporation-halls of different trades, the fronts of which being
uniform, and adorned, make a fine circumference.

The archduke's palace, though an old irregular building, erected at different
times, should not be passed over unnoticed. It is a very large edifice, and the
apartments are extremely spacious and well furnished. Behind it, is a large
park well stocked with deer. There are also many very pleasant walks in it, and
a summer house built by the emperor Charles V.

Among other edifices usually viewed, are the palaces of Orange, De Ligne,
Epinoy, Rubengue, Egmont, Aremberg, Arschot, and Bournonville. In the gardens
of the latter, you have a fine view of Brussels and the adjacent country. The
only objects of much consideration in these palaces are the paintings, among
which, particularly in the palace of the duke of Aremberg, are many very
capital pieces, not only by Flemish, but also by Italian masters.

As to the diversions of Brussels, there is a very large opera-house and two
theaters, in which French comedies are played. The opera-house is very
spacious, but ill lighted. Instead of boxes, it has large closets like the
Italian theaters, which contain tables, chairs, a fire place, etc. so that
parties are formed for cards and conversation during the performance. But the
prices are too low to admit of any splendid entertainment; their performers are
but very moderate, and bad music, is an entertainment that will not be relished
by those who are in the least acquainted with the luxury of an English or an
Italian opera.

The court gives an air of liveliness to Brussels, which is not to be met with
in the other cities of Flanders. What with the officers about the person of the
governor-general; the residence of a considerable military force; the chief
courts of justice, with no slight portion of trade and manufacture, this place
is the most pleasing and cheerful residence in Flanders.

The English resident here, says Thickness, consist chiefly of persons of
small fortune, who come to Brussels, in order to give their children a good
education; of young men on traveling excursions, and of the unfortunate and
indigent.

Now and then a family of good fortune ventures upon a winter here; but I never
heard of one, says he, who did not quit the place with more than common
dissatisfaction.

There are few capitals in Europe, in which provisions, and almost all other
expenses incidental to a family are so reasonable as in this city. It is even
said, that a family may live here upon two hundred pounds a year, as well as
upon six hundred in England. But this we apprehend is rather exaggerated. There
are two articles of expense in this city which exceeds most other places,
house-rent and firing. There is no hiring a small decent house under thirty or
forty pounds a year; and in the article of firing, which is wood, where there
are no stoves, two or three shillings a day in cold weather, may be soon
expended without economy on a single fire. Provisions, particularly vegetables,
of which there are no finer any where, and all the articles of dress, and
likewise carriages, servants, and public diversions, are cheaper here than in
most places. The education of children likewise, which Thickness justly
observes, many people believe, to consist in French, dancing, and a tincture of
foreign manners, may be obtained upon much more moderate terms in Brussels,
than in any part of England.

The number of suspicious characters who resort hither from England, makes the
natives, as well as the English of any respectability, remarkably shy toward
strangers of our own country. These suspicious characters consist of two sorts,
either of such as have had some stigma affixed upon them in England, so that no
person, of any character could associate with them, without considering
himself, as reflected upon in so doing; or they are composed of persons, who
having nothing morally bad about them, yet confiding in their riches, which
they blazon forth, assuming a consequence to which neither their manners nor
their connections, give them the least pretensions.

These latter characters, Thickness has drawn in rather too glowing colors.
As for the women, says he, there are some of them who attend the winter balls
of the Brussels court, that never advanced farther at St. James's, than to see
beneath the arm-pit of a beef-eater, the Sunday procession of our royal family
to and from the chapel-royal. Some of these poor people are driven almost to
starvation, in order to furnish the necessary decorations of a court
appearance; though for the comfort of their purse, and the consolation of their
stomachs, it requires nothing more than the common dress of genteel life. Of
this number are instanced two antiquated ladies, whom he styles late of the
pump room at Bath, without a fortune to bear it, or a word of the language to
support it, were presented at this court. It was very bleak that day, and as
the weather is generally a subject for strangers to begin with, the archduchess
observed, it was very cold, and repeated the words bien froid, two or three
times, lest they might not understand her. At length, one of the ladies
believing the archduchess asked them to stay dinner, and that it was a nice fry
they were to participate of, curtsied, and replied, that whether it was fried
or broiled, so they had the honor of dining at court, it was equal to them. To
avoid such things happening in future, it is now the etiquette at the court of
Brussels, that no British subject shall be presented there by our minister, who
has not previously been presented at St. James's.

We take the liberty here to present to our readers, Thicknesses's hints to a
person of fashion, who proposes to make Brussels his winter-residence. If a
young man of fortune and rank is fond of play, there is no society so
respectable in any quarter of the globe, in which there are not some characters
who would take advantage of this foible to his utter ruin, and destruction, if
he was silly enough to suffer himself to be ensnared. Brussels therefore ought
not to be exempt from such characters, at the same time, we believe the
noblesse of that capital to be as highly reputable in general, as at any of our
own court.

Were you to make this city as you propose, your next winter's abode, you would
of course be presented to the little, but elegant court held here, the
consequence of which is a round of visits must be made to all the noblesse who
attend it, and who form that brilliant assembly. These visits will all be
punctually returned; for those strangers who are young and rich, will find a
prince, a duke, a count, or a baron, who will intimate to them, that by a
little address, they may be admitted into the GRAND SOCIETY. Professions of
regard due to strangers, good breeding, artful flattery, fine women, sumptuous
tables, are all thrown in the way of a young man of fortune, to cover the real
cause of so much attention: see him seated between a duchess and a countess,
both possessing the charms of beauty, graced with the most easy and captivating
French manners, a noble repast before him, and the most delicious wines at his
elbow, thus placed and being a stranger the attention of the whole table
appears to be employed to make him happy, and if in such a situation a young
man of fashion in a strange country, does not feel himself so, where is
happiness to be found, almost every passion of man is gratified, nor does he go
to sleep without flattering himself he is in a fair way of being admitted,
tete-a-tete, with one or more of the charming women with whom he enjoyed such a
happy evening. The next night, he meets the same agreeable society, and finds
himself as much at home and at his ease, as if he was at his own manor house.
In this situation the stranger who knows he is a very handsome young man, no
doubt forms some plan of further happiness, without suspecting that many of the
party who are not so rich as he is, would not dislike a draught on his banker
or even a mortgage on his estate, and as both sexes constantly play in this
country, it may be presumed both understand it very well: My Lord Anglois, of
course, is one of the party, and if he wins of a lady, it gives him an
opportunity of showing his good breeding; if of a prince, or a duke, why it is
honor enough to have such great personages his debtors; but if he loses, and
it is ten to one but he does, he must pay directly; for every body here knows
that an Englishman has so much money, that if it were not for continental
excursions, they could not tell what to do with it. Now, says Thickness, lest
it should be supposed this is an imaginary picture sketched out without an
original to copy from. I will come to a matter of fact. I found here a young
gentleman of Ireland, of genteel appearance, of good address, and of easy
fortune; a member of this grand society, and living in a degree of intimacy
with the first people. On his first arrival he lost, as most first comers do, a
considerable sum of money to a native of high birth, and of course paid it. At
some distance of time they played again, and the stranger became the winner of
a sum even greater than that which he lost a year or two before; but instead of
being paid he was informed by his antagonist, that he was not to receive his
fortune as a younger brother till he was thirty, and therefore desired to be
permitted to pay the debt by installments, and engaged the winner to give his
word he would not let his brother know what had passed. The pais-bas peer,
however, never made good his engagements; went to Paris, would neither answer
letter, nor pay drafts made upon him; and therefore having cancelled all former
obligations, the stranger determined to lay the matter open to his brother, but
what was the consequence? -- "He was asked if they did not know that they were
the first people of the country, and was told that his brother wore a sword.
But finding that such pais-bas hauteur would not do, and that the young
stranger wore a sword too, some mode of moderating matters was to be employed.
Another great man related to the former, then steps forward, censures the
conduct of the two brothers, opens his doors wider than ever to the stranger,
and softens him into more patience. It may now be imagined he is paid, no says
Thickness, nor ever will. Is it not enough to have the honor of dining with a
prince, supping with a duke, and dancing with a duchess, without being paid a
thousand pounds or two?"

The wine that is generally met with in Brussels is bad. The wine merchants it
is said have a method of brewing several sorts of wine, and particularly what
they call Burgundy, with pigeons dung, and an artificial sweet wine palatable
enough, in which a quantity of brimstone is infused, called Moselle. The wines
made from the hills adjacent to the Rhine, with which this country is
plentifully supplied, is, perhaps, of all fermented liquors the best; this
wine, in my opinion, says Thickness, and he was a judge, when procured
genuine, is superior to all others. It improves both in strength and flavor,
in proportion to a certain age. For it is a great mistake to imagine wine
cannot be too old. There is a time when wine as well as men arrive at maturity;
after which wines, as well as men, lose some part of their original vigor; for
though they give travelers wines to taste of an hundred years or more, it must
be observed, that as they sell great quantities every year from their large
reservoir tons, so they as constantly fill them up annually with new wines. If
therefore a person sends to Frankfort for the best Rhenish wine, not for hock,
he will in a few years have hock in his cellar at half price. It is
inconceivable what a variety of excellent wines this country and Hungary
produces, the latter very little known; all of which are superior to French or
Spanish wines, except, perhaps, Burgundy and Champagne of the first growth in
good wines.

It is a great mistake to imagine that the wines in Germany are apt to create
the gout; they may, it is true, be unfit for those who have the gout, or the
seeds of that disorder in their constitution; but in sound bodies, it is more
likely to prevent than to promote a gouty habit. In Champagne, where the wine
of the country is constantly drank, there are few or no gouty people; and real
Champagne is a very wholesome wine.

No part of the continent can long continue agreeable to an Englishman, who has
been accustomed to live even with that decency which the English of middling
fortunes live in their own country. For this reason it is that the English
nation alone are the least satisfied with the fare they meet with abroad. The
neatness of our houses, the cleanliness of our butchers, bakers, etc. render
the houses, shops, and manufacturers of what we eat and drink on the continent
highly disgustful. The servants and boys of the bakers in the Low Countries,
and in France, are the dirtiest miserable looking people on earth, no part of
their persons being clean but their legs and feet, for they are always visible;
and though the tables of all orders of people are covered with a variety of
dishes, which may catch the eye, or provoke the appetite, an Englishman, whose
stomach is not depraved, will soon wish to see a plain wholesome dish or two of
meat, a la mode d'Angleterre set before him.

Knaves of many nations, says Thickness, have fled to this city under the idea
they were beyond the reach of those they meant to defraud, not knowing that in
Brabant and in all the Low Countries a person may be arrested for debts
contracted in any other; and that not only men, but women and children are
subject to imprisonment for the debts of a fugitive husband or parent; the
marquis de Sanna, the count de Ribaderia, and duke of Brunswick were arrested
here by their distant creditors; but a stranger who takes a house, after a year
and a days residence in it, is not liable to personal confinement for debt,
until a tedious process has been carried on against him.

An English gentleman of fortune having chastised his servant too severely,
absconded, but his wife was hurried to the common gaol to be responsible for
his town-debts till he returned; and this business is done in so brutal a
manner, that our London bailiffs are quite polished, when compared to a pais
bas officer of justice.

I visited, says Thickness, their Maison de force or prison. The men and women
are separated; each prisoner has his bed and cabin, which must be made and
cleaned by an early hour, and a certain quantity of work done before they eat.
In this house, says he, I saw five or six hundred of the worst people on earth,
living in a cleaner and more orderly manner than the same number can live any
where at large. Neither relations nor friends are admitted to see the
offenders, no improper conversation is heard; prayers, work, and penitence are
the lot of all. Such houses being erected in every county in our kingdom, would
do more to prevent house-breaking, than all the county gallows's in England.

It seems to have been a mistaken notion in several courts of Europe, that the
house of Austria received so little benefit from these provinces, that they
were scarce worth the keeping, the expenses running away with all the profit.
But admitting that no money is received into the treasury of Vienna, still the
advantage of having a considerable body of troops paid and maintained, is of
itself very important. The provinces pay the troops in garrison and forces of
all kinds that are quartered here, which amount at different times from six to
twenty thousand men; besides the opportunity of advancing a number of subjects
to posts of honor and profit, is valuable to any court.

These provinces likewise are very populous, and are found highly serviceable
in recruiting regiments; and as they possess much trade and numerous thriving
manufacturies, they are a body of subjects of undoubted importance. However
these advantages are not all, for it is very well known that large remittances
are made to Vienna, notwithstanding the expense of keeping a court here.

The upper town, says Peckham, in his description of this city, is magnificent,
and has lately been much improved by new buildings, and by enclosing a piece of
water-ground, planting it and laying it out in walks.

It is well supplied with fountains, some of which are rather whimsical; for
instance, the three virgins from whose breasts slow continual streams of water;
and to show that the male sex is no less charitably inclined, there is the
statue of a boy who spouts out water with the most immodest assurances. It is
called in the Flemish tongue Mannykipis.

Nothing will strike the eye of an observing stranger with more surprise in
this city, than to see on a navigable river, more than a hundred miles from the
ocean, such a number of large high-masted vessels, of various constructions,
lying before the town: the navigable canals and rivers throughout all the Low
Countries, are indeed wonderful. Some progress of inland navigation, says
Thickness, has been successfully made in England; but yet the nation at large
does not seem to know the astonishing advantages which would arise to the
kingdom, if it were more general. M. de la Lands treatise sur le canaux de la
navigation, remarks, that a wagon with six horses and two drivers, carries
between two and three thousand pounds weight, whereas a single boat, navigated
by two men, will carry two hundred thousand pounds weight. This therefore, is a
saving of two hundred men, and six hundred horses, besides the extra number of
men and horses, which are required to repair the damages they do to the roads.

The public walks are elegant, the ramparts extremely pleasant, and the country
round Brussels is most delightful to the eye, and extremely profitable to the
possessors; for the land within ten miles of the city, sells at forty years
purchase, and lets in general for three pounds sterling an acre.

In the arsenal is some old armor, of neither curiosity or use; except an iron
shirt, which no sword can pierce; and a steel shield, so finely engraved, that
the figures seem reflected from the polish, not to be etched in the steel: the
nicest touch cannot perceive the least scratch; though the figures appear to be
strongly marked when the shield is held obliquely.

Just below the arsenal is the palace of the governor of the Austrian
Netherlands. The staircase is very magnificent, the steps are of marble, and
the balustrades of iron, gilt, adorned with compartments of birds and beasts,
nicely executed in polished steel, by Triefle; the cieling is painted in fresco.

The apartments of the princess are hung with Brussels tapestry. The floors are
all inlaid with mahogany and box. The princess's cabinet is much admired, being
covered throughout with the finest japan. The late prince was a great mechanic,
and had a cabinet of curiosities trifling enough, among which were two boxes,
containing all the common trades in miniature.

In the menagerie, there are some fowls, which are the produce of a very
unnatural amor, between a rabbit and a hen; they are of various sizes; their
breasts and bellies clothed with white fur, their wings and backs covered with
feathers, without the plume, which rise from the skin, and have the appearance
of wet feathers; they are all milk-white, as their parents; their shape in
every respect the same as other fowls. The rabbit, in an amorous mood, like
many other husbands, strips his wife of her clothing; by biting half the
feathers from her back.

Having been at Brussels myself more than once, I can take upon me to say, that
the city is by no means the fine place it is in general represented. The
streets are narrow, and not well paved, having no footway. The houses are built
in the gothic taste, with pediment tops, and the windows are chiefly casements.
Was it not from the fountains continually running, the place would be
exceedingly dirty, and there is no appearance of shops or trade. Part of the
town stands upon the top of a high hill, where there is a small park cut in
walks, the resort of genteel people on Sundays; from this park runs several new
streets, with elegant houses erected in the modern style of building,
commanding a fine prospect. The palace is small, but very grand and neat, and
stands just below the hill. Being the residence of the viceroy, and where the
court is held; it is the rendezvous of all the brilliant part of Brabant, and
living here is not very expensive. A man may make as genteel an appearance in
this country, for his hundred a year, as he can in London for three times the
sum.

The roads from city to city are continued pavements in a straight line, for
thirty or forty miles together, planted with trees on both sides, and the
country every where open and uninclosed, and there is a canal from Brussels to
Antwerp, on which a floating-barge, with good accommodation, passes to and from
it every day.

OF ANTWERP.
This town and district is called the Margravate of the holy Roman empire. Its
origin is somewhat obscure. Godfrey of Bouillon, enjoyed it under this title,
after which it descended to the dukes of Brabant; but yet it was reckoned one
of the Seventeen Provinces. At present it is strictly united with Brabant.

The approach to the city of Antwerp is noble, by a straight paved road,
bordered with oaks.

This city is seven miles in circumference, built in the form of a crescent,
and surrounded with a good wall, and many bastions, faced with stone. These
fortifications, however, are of no other consequence than to defend the town
against any sudden incursisions, but they look very beautiful, for the top of
the wall is an hundred feet broad, and planted with double rows of trees. Its
strength is in a large regular and very strong citadel, in form of a pentagon,
which the duke of Alva caused to be erected there in 1568. It stands close to
the river Scheld, on the south side of the city, and commands all the town and
the adjacent country, for some distance. There are five principal bastions to
it, which command each other, defended by two very deep ditches. Here stood the
statue which the duke of Alva had erected, representing himself in a military
attitude, and trampling the nobility and people under his feet, which so roused
the spirit of the populace, that they broke into the citadel on a holiday, and
entirely demolished the statue.

The river at Antwerp is twenty feet deep, and at high water rises twenty feet
more, which makes it an excellent harbor, so that large vessels may come up
from the sea, and unload their cargoes at the eight principal canals in the
town. These are the advantages which carried their trade to such a height; but
the Dutch building Fort Lillo, which commands the approach, and makes all the
ships that pass pay toll, was a fatal stroke to their trade, and drove the
chief of it to Amsterdam.

Antwerp has many remains of its former magnificence, particularly in the
length, breadth, and regularity of the principal streets, and many of the
public-buildings and churches. It has twenty-two squares, two hundred and
twelve streets, and seventy gates, from each of which runs a street terminating
at the cathedral-square. The street called La Mere, is the finest in the city,
it is very well paved, and is so wide, that twenty coaches may pass in it a
breast, with great ease; it is also very well built, and in general of free
stone: many of the other streets also, make a very good appearance, being
broad, straight and handsome. The better sort of houses, throughout the city,
are in general large, lofty, and contain good apartments. From the decay of
trade, several of them are let at very low rates; most of them have
court-yards, and gardens, which make them very agreeable to live in, and many
are in the ancient style of building, which does not make so graceful an
appearance.

The markets here are numerous, and most of them well supplied; that for fish
is near the river, and abounds with great plenty, and that for fruit and
garden-stuff, is well supplied by numerous country-carts, in which the peasants
bring the produce of their little farms. One square is called the Friday
marketplace, in which, on a market day, is to be seen many sales by auction of
furniture, and some of pictures, where are to be picked up sometimes valuable
pieces by Flemish masters.

Nothing can be more melancholy, than to view the house of the Hanse-towns,
built in 1468, (a time in which this city was so flourishing) for the use of
the merchants trading to the Baltic. It is a square edifice of 230 feet, and
all of stone: the upper floors were ample magazines for all sorts of dry
merchandise, with vast cellars for the wet goods, which are now converted into
stabling for troopers horses, and the magazines to hay-lofts; a sad spectacle
of the building, which once was the residence of wealth and industry, and
shows, how miserable a fall any place undergoes, that loses a once established
trade.

Antwerp contains now about seventy thousand souls, of which about ten thousand
are on the poorlist. The police of the city, with regard to the poor, is as bad
as it is singular. There is an ample fund for their maintenance, which is
distributed not among those persons, who are really indigent, but among the
families of such persons as happened to, be enrolled among the poor many
generations back, when it first became an object of general police, to provide
for those who were unable to provide for themselves.

Very near the street La Mere, is the exchange, said to be the first building
of the kind raised in Europe; and from which Sir Thomas Gresham is said to have
taken his idea of that in London. This building is now resorted to only by half
a dozen bankers, and as many brokers. Four streets meet there, and it has four
gates answerable to them; the parades are supported by above forty marble
pillars; the length of it is 180 feet, and the breadth 140. Beneath, are vaults
and magazines for goods; and over it are the apartments of an academy for
painting, sculpture and architecture. The expense of this building is said to
have amounted to 300,000 crowns, at a time when money was much dearer, than it
is at present.

This city was once the grand emporium of almost all the commerce in Europe,
which was owing to three principal causes. First, to the liberty which reigned
here; secondly, to the advantages of its situation and port; for above four
thousand sail of ships could lay in perfect safety in the canals at a time: and
thirdly, to the near neighborhood of the most flourishing manufactures then in
Europe, which were carried on in all the Flemish towns. Bruges possessed the
greatest share of trade before Antwerp rose to such a height; but the wars
which broke out in Flanders, in the beginning of the 16th century, drove most
of the merchants from the former place to the latter. They reckoned the trade
of this city at its height about the year 1568, when they computed the
inhabitants at 200,000: their harbor at that time, contained very often 2500
ships at a time, and 500 were commonly seen to go out or come in, in a day. The
annals of the city inform us, that in the year 1550, the trade amounted to one
hundred and thirty-three millions of gold, exclusive of the bank. The
Antwerpers, to this day, are fond of telling the story of John Daen, their
famous merchant, who lent the emperor Charles V. a million of gold, and
afterward entertained him most magnificently; made a fire of cinnamon-wood,
and in the emperor's presence, threw the bond into it.

But all their prosperity was no security against the tyranny of their
sovereign, Philip II; and his arbitrary agent the duke of Alva, presently drove
all trade from Antwerp, so that the fall of the city was much quicker than its
rise. After being twice sacked, there was much of it burnt down, in 1576, and
brought into sucha condition, as was utterly incompatible with trade; the
merchants therefore fled in whole troops, and the Dutch received them. Having
formed their infant republic, Amsterdam began to be a place of trade; they
removed thither, and carried with them their correspondence and industry.

Upon the loss of their trade, the inhabitants gave their attention principally
to banking, jewelling and painting. In the first they have always been
proficients, and carried it to a great extent, even in the present times:
during the duke of Marlborough's war, two brothers, the De Konnings, paid, one
of them the army of France, and the other, that of the allies. Some of their
painters were of note in the Flemish school, before the time of Rubens; but
that great master laid the principal foundation for their fame; he established
their school, and painting flourished here for a long while under the influence
of his genius; so that Antwerp has produced more good artists this way, than
any other town in the Netherlands. Antwerp has likewise been famous for
printing the Plantin editions, being much esteemed in the learned world.
Plantin's printing house remains, though imperfect at this time, and is said by
the Antwerps, to be the best in Europe, having been supplied with near an
hundred different sorts of founts of letters, two of which were Syriac,
forty-seven Roman, nine Greek, and ten Hebrew.

But Antwerp, though so much reduced from its ancient splendour, is yet a place
of consequence: here is some trade carried on, for which it is yet well
situated, and has numerous cities in Flanders, etc. to supply with foreign
commodities; they have also several flourishing manufactures, a considerable
lacetrade, and a share of the linen fabrics, etc. It is also an agreeable place
to reside in, from the number of nobility, and people of large fortune, who
live in it. Through their patronage, a theater has been rebuilt, and also an
apartment for the performance of concerts. The first is a very beautiful and
well contrived edifice, well furnished with scenery and machinery; it is richly
ornamented too with paintings. A company of French comedians exhibit here three
times a week in winter. Some good masters have ornamented the concert-room,
with their paintings, where a concert is performed once a week in winter.

In the churches there are numerous pictures of most capital merit, by the
first painters of the Flemish-school, such as Rubens, Vandyke, and others. The
great fault of the painters of the Flemish-school, says Marshall, is, that they
are entirely destitute of a chain of great ideas; an action, complex in its
nature, but rendered one by the genius of the artist, is sought for in vain, in
their works, good coloring, and a masterly imitation of still-life, are their
great excellencies; minute finishing is carried by them to the highest
perfection.

The cathedral of Antwerp is a vast building, and full of ornaments of
painting, statuary, and rich carving. The taking down from the cross by Rubens,
is one of the finest pictures of the kind to be met with in the whole world. It
is very large, with a number of figures, all executed in the highest style of
this painter, so that it cannot fail of being highly admired by all lovers of
painting. They are always kept masked or covered.

The fall of the angles by Floris, is supposed to rank, next in merit. On the
thigh of one of the fallen angels, is a large hornet, painted by Quintin
Matzys, the noted blacksmith of Antwerp, who fell in love with the daughter of
Floris, and demanded her in marriage; the painter refused him, because he was
not of his own profession. Matzys, therefore changed his hammer for the pallet,
and studied under the Italian masters for two years; on his return he painted
this hornet, unknown to Floris, who by mistake was going to brush it off,
thinking it alive; he was so pleased with the execution of it, that he
immediately gave him his daughter in marriage; Matzys was buried on the outside
of the western door of the church, where there is a plain stone with this
epitaph:

Conunbialis amor de Mulcibre fecit Apellum.
Love transformed Vulcan into an Apelles.
This building is very nobly ornamented, and its architecture in the Gothic
style, is not inferior to any edifice in the Low Countries. It is five hundred
feet long, and two hundred and forty feet broad. It was erected in the 13th
century. The first stone of the choir was laid by the emperor Charles V.
Nothing can well be finer than the view seen from the top of this fine steeple;
not only a vast tract of country for many miles round, but of several very
considerable cities, such as Malines, Brussels, Ghent, Liege, Louvain, etc.
Here is a musical-clock, which chimes every hour, half-hour, quarter, and
half-quarter, consisting of near eighty bells. The largest bell was erected in
1440, and weighs sixteen thousand pounds.

The abbey of St. Michael is the grandest in the city, the refectory is covered
with pictures by Quellin, most admirably executed. There is a deception of a
staircase, with a fish lying on one of the steps, which must attract every
eye. In the church is a grand piece by Rubens, the adoration of the Magi, which
he finished in thirteen days. The apartments of the abbot are well worthy of a
prince. Such a profusion of capital pictures by the best Flemish and Italian
masters, with paintings to imitate basso relievo, executed in a style, so as to
deceive an artist.

The Jesuits church is one of the most beautiful edifices to be seen in all
Flanders; the facade is enriched with statues and other ornaments of a great
master; the architecture has uncommon merit; the workmanship is very masterly,
and it is full of fine paintings; the finest marble, intermixed with jasper,
porphyry, and gold; nor can any thing be more magnificent than the chapel
adjoining.

In the library is seen a portrait of Rubens, drawn in pen and ink by himself,
and executed in the most inimitable manner; with a minute expression, so mixed
with freedom, that it is beyond the power of the graver to equal it.

The chapel of the Virgin is remarkably beautiful; it is composed entirely of
white marble, designed and executed by Scheemaeckers; and surrounded with
bass-reliefs. The altar is all of marble, with various decorations of silver,
and a statue of the Virgin in that metal, six feet and an half high. The door
of the chapel is likewise very neatly executed, and over it are three bronzes,
of very fine workmanship.

In the church of the friars of St. Augustine, are a holy family, a very large
picture by Rubens; one of his finest pieces. St. Augustine, in a transport of
devotion by Vandyke. He is lifting up his eyes to heaven, where he is supposed
to see Jesus Christ. This their catalogue says, is the very best performance of
that great painter; it has certainly a wonderful merit; their is a strength and
majesty of expression, with an elegance and freedom of design, that is seldom
seen; the colors are chaste and agreeable, etc. in a word, the whole piece is
strikingly fine. Here is also a crucifix, by Vandyke; this picture is likewise
most capitally fine. Upon painting the above mentioned fine picture of St.
Augustine, he demanded six-hundred florins as his price, but the monks
disputing with him, he insisted on his terms, but let them have this crucifix
very cheap. It could now be sold for thirteen thousand guineas. Such is the
fate of the most ingenious part of mankind! They can scarcely live by the sale
of their productions, but when they are dead and buried, the world begins to
find out their merit, and value single efforts of their genius, at ten times
more than their whole fortune.

In the first church, nothing is more worthy of attention than the monument of
the marquis Del Pico, one of the governors of the citadel. He is represented as
starting out of his sleep, and in amazement at the sight of two skeletons
standing before him. Over his head are two cherubs weeping, one of which holds
a shield, and the other a helmet. Between them stands Fame, with the arms of
the marquis in one hand, and her trumpet in the other; the whole decorated with
great number of military insignia. It is the work of Scheemaeckers, and one of
his best performances. In the year 1746, at the siege, a bomb damaged it
conconsiderably, but it is since repaired and very well. The altar, by the same
artist, is also a magnificent piece of sculpture.

In the church of St. Andre, there is also a curious monument erected by two
English ladies, to the memory of that unfortunate princess Mary, queen of
Scots, who fell a sacrifice, says Thickness, to the jealousy and hatred of our
queen Bess. This monument is of marble, with a bust of the Queen.

Rubens, who died in the year 1640, was buried in a little chapel, which still
belongs to his family in the great church. His monument is of marble, and well
executed; over the altar is a picture by his own hand, representing the infant
Jesus on the knee of the virgin, which is perhaps the best conceived, the best
executed, and the best preserved of all his works. St. George, and St. Jerome
attended by two fine women, are near the Virgin, and these are the portraits of
his two beautiful wives. This picture was engraved after his death by P.
Pontius, and Rubens's intimate friend Gervates composed his epitaph; which
however is too contemptible to copy, nor was it placed over his remains till
the year 1755.

At Brussels, says Thickness, all is French; at Antwerp, all is Dutch. Which
of the two is best with respect to the people, says he, I will not pretend to
determine, but with respect to the laws, Antwerp bears all the credit and
honor due to humanity. That barbarous and tyrannic custom, of secretly trying
criminals, destroying their bodies, and confiscating their property, in all the
other provinces of the Austrian Netherlands and France, does not prevail in
this city. Perhaps this is the reason why Antwerp he adds, has produced more
men of genius than any other city in this country. Here they had liberty to
think, and it appears a kind of perpetual motion, was first made at Antwerp,
and in 1530, Gemma Fusius, found out a method of determining the longitude at
sea, by means of clocks and watches, and this very soon after gave rise to the
invention of clock-work.

When a person is to be tried for any offense in this country, he is brought
face to face with his accuser in open court, in the presence of the
magistrates, and criminals are even allowed two council to plead for them. If
the question be put, the punishment must be in the presence of two echevins, or
aldermen; and if the prisoner be acquitted, he is instantly discharged: if
guilty; he is executed or punished the next day; but only a moiety of his
property is forfeited; the other goes to his wife and children, or nearest
relations. -- The best account I can give you, says Thickness, of what is
meant by the question being put to a prisoner, before it is known whether he be
innocent or guilty, is that the supposed offender is fixed on a frame, to which
there are certain stretchers applied to his limbs, to draw them gradually
beyond their natural extension, and at the same time, drops of water are let to
fall on the breast, or some particular part of the body, which by repetition
became almost intolerable.

The situation of Antwerp, remarks Reisbec, would have been much more
advantageous for the advancement of commerce, but the Dutch have locked up the
mouth of the Scheld. Their forts not only govern the mouth of the river, as
they should do according to treaty; it having been agreed by the peace
concluded at Munster, in 1648, between Spain and the United Provinces, that no
large ships should sail directly to Antwerp; that they should unload their
merchandise in Holland, which should be conveyed thence in smaller vessels; but
they have literally stopped up the mouth of it. Sunken ships filled with
stones, immense dykes of stone pallisadoes, and other things of the kind,
barely leave room enough for small boats to go by. Twenty millions of guilders
would not be sufficient in twenty years to remove the impediments which the
Dutch have laid in the way of the trade of Antwerp. On the contrary, other
writers aver, that the Scheld is navigable now for ships of the largest burden
up to Antwerp; did not two forts on opposite sides of that river, oppose the
passage of vessels above a limited burden, which is very small. A report
propagated by the cunning of the Dutch, that there are five large vessels sunk
in the Scheld, between their forts, has strangely gained credit, not only in
countries at a distance from the river, but in Brabant itself, and even in
Antwerp. It is amusing to reflect on the easy credulity of the world. How much
people are imposed on by vague reports, and the authority of universally
received opinions! We are well assured, by persons of the first rank and
character in Brabant, that there is not one vessel sunk in the Scheld, nor any
other obstruction, than the treaties and forts already mentioned to the passage
of a seventy-four gun ship up to the walls of Antwerp.

There is no want of gold in Brabant and Flanders. Antwerp, Brussels, Ghent,
and Bruges, are still filled with the treasures which were amassed when these
towns were what England and Holland are now. The burgesses of these cities have
a share in all the great undertakings and loans of the neighboring nations.
Their commerce of exchange is immense; probably insurance is not so safe among
the Dutch themselves as it is here. Antwerp is one of the most famous places in
the world for insurance. In the last Bavarian war, the court of Vienna, being
determined to raise a loan in these countries, was astonished at the quickness
with which the money was raised; but the inhabitants of Ghent and Antwerp gave
the regency to understand, that if there was occasion for three or four times
as much, it would be as easily procured.

The inhabitants are religious to excess, says Reisbec. They are also
remarkably gay in their dress and equipage. The women, who are of a small
stature, are delicate, neat and beautiful; but, being almost excluded from
society, and taught only the internal management of their houses and their
children, they are not so social as the ladies of France and England. They are
generally of a pale complexion, a circumstance which is perhaps owing to their
constant confinement in their houses, for they never walk abroad or take any
exercise, except upon Sunday evenings and public days, when they take the air
in their carriages upon the grand street called the Rue la mer, or in the
environs of the city.

Mechlin is a considerable city, very well situated for traffic with Antwerp,
Brussels and Louvain, by means of the rivers Dyle and Demer, which join before
they arrive at this place, and run through it; there are besides several
canals, and a great many bridges thrown over them. It is the capital of a
district of the same name, and a See of an Archbishop, whose title is Primate
of the low countries. The town is large and well built, and the streets broad,
clean and well paved. The marketplace is spacious, and the cathedral is a
superb structure, with a high steeple, and some very harmonious chimes. Mechlin
is famous for the manufacture of the lace that goes by its name. It is chiefly
made in the nunnery of the Beguines; a kind of nuns, without those vows, which
bend the common ones to a monastic life, being at liberty at any time to quit
the confinement and marry; there are generally seven or eight hundred young
women in it, employed on lace, which brings a good price all over Europe. They
are also famous in this place for foundries of bells and great guns, and, in an
inferior for brewing good beer, which they export in considerable quantities.
It is an agreeable place to reside at, from the diversions which are
continually going on in it, principally owing to the number of nobility who
make it their residence. This town was taken by the duke of Marlborough, in
1706, and retaken by the French in 1746.

At a village called Aigle, seated at the foot of a mountain, on the Moselle,
there is a remarkakle square solid pyramid, 74 feet high, and adorned with many
images. It is a heathenish tomb, which appears from the inscription to have
been founded by two brothers, named Secundini, in honor of their parents. In
all probability this mausoleum was created between the times of Dioclesian and
Constantine the Great. Part of the territory of Luxemburg likewise belongs to
the French.

AUSTRIAN Part of the County of FLANDERS.
Flanders, a province of the Netherlands, which may be divided into Dutch,
Austrian, and French Flanders, is bounded by the German ocean, and the United
Provinces on the north; by the province of Brabant on the east; by Hainault and
Artois on the south; and by another part of Artois and the German ocean on the
west. It is about twenty German miles from north to south, and nearly the same
distance from east to west.

This country enjoys a temperate and wholesome air, being partly level and
partly mountainous. Its soil is in general fertile and fit for agriculture, and
in some parts, particularly toward the sea, its fertility is very great. The
land here bears almost all kinds of corn and garden-stuff. Flax is the riches
of the country. The pasture grounds in many parts are so excellent, that there
are no better in all the Netherlands. For this reason the breeding of cattle is
an important article, and it yields also fine butter and cheese. Flanders also
produces fruits of various sorts, together with fowl and venison, such as deer,
wild-boars and hares; and likewise sea and river fish. In it also are forests
and woods. Its chief river is the Scheld. Some useful canals have also been dug
here, among which that between Bruges and Ghent is the, principal one.

In the whole country are computed 62 walled and open towns, many hundred
villages, and above 250 Seignories. The states here are the prelates, nobles,
and four members from the principal towns.

The Flemings may boast the invention of some important arts. They were the
first in Europe who began to support themselves by weaving, and learned to dye
cloths and stuffs. In this respect the towns of Ypres and Courtray have the
oldest and greatest reputation. In the latter was invented the art of weaving
all sorts of figures in linen. In the 14th century, Viervliet, found out the
method of curing herrings. John Van Eyck, in the 15th, invented oil colors.

At present the manufactures of Flanders are far from being in the flourishing
condition they were formerly; however, we have still from Lisle, brocades,
cottons, camlets, lace, and other wares; from Ghent, Menin, and Courtray,
linen; from Tournay, tapestries, curtains, bed coverlets, and other worked
stuffs; from Bruges, cotton and fine woolen stuffs, linen and laces. The chief
towns of Austrian Flanders, besides those described, are, Louvain, Ghent,
Bruges, and Ostend.

Louvain is a large and pleasant town, situated on the river Dyle; it is one of
the principal cities of the Netherlands, and the capital of one of the four
quarters, into which Brabant is usually divided. The country round it is very
fertile, and the distance from Brussels not more than twelve miles to the
north-east of that city. The air likewise is esteemed exceedingly healthful.
Its circumference within the walls is at least ten English miles; but it is a
place of no great strength, being of too large an extent to be easily defended.
The castle stands on the top of a hill, surrounded with vineyards, and fine
gardens, and has an extensive prospect over the neighboring country.

This city, before the cruel administration of the duke of Alva, was very
considerable for its manufactures; it being computed there were no less than
4,000 master-weavers in it at one time; and it has still a trade in fine linen,
but not comparable to what it was formerly. At present its only glory is its
university, which resembles those of England more than any other in Europe. It
consists of 43 colleges, and some make the number greater, of which there are
not more than four, for the education of youth, where strict discipline is
observed; the others are for those of riper years, who come and go when they
please. Many of these colleges are handsome buildings, and nobly endowed; but
in both these respects they bear no comparison with those of Oxford and
Cambridge. The students in divinity constantly wear gowns and caps, but the
rest only at public exercises. In every one of the four colleges
abovementioned, philosophy is taught by two professors, each of whom reads two
hours in a day, the young students writing after them. The governor of the
university is styled Rector, and is chosen every half year by the Senatus
Academicus, which consists of the superior graduates in the several faculties.
He has plenary jurisdiction over the scholars, and is attended by eight
beadles, who go before him with silver maces on holidays, and in solemn
processions. There is another officer called the Promoter, who by the authority
of the rector, inflicts punishment on the offenders, and sometimes passes
sentence of death, but generally lays a pecuniary mulct on them in proportion
to their crime. They have also a chancellor, whose only business it is to
confer degrees, and who in all public assemblies takes place next to the rector.

The townhouse of Louvain is a magnificent building of great antiquity,
adorned on the outside with statues, and very curious sculpture. As to the
churches of the city, they are many of them beautiful and stately buildings,
especially the cathedral church of St. Peter, which is governed by a provost, a
dean, a chanter, 18 honorary prebends, and ten canons, who are all professors
of the several sciences in the university. The Jesuit's church is also a very
handsome edifice, not unworthy of Rome itself; and its pulpit of oak is
reckoned the finest piece of carved work in Europe. Their library contains a
great number of valuable manuscripts, in which respect it is said to be the
best in the Austrian Netherlands.

In this place, says, Thickness, resided a few years since a man, no less
extraordinary in his way, than the famous mountain doctor in Switzerland, named
Bogen, and called the god of legs. He was an illiterate, under-bred man, who
had a nostrum to cure ulcers in the legs, and with so much success that
patients came to him from every part of the continent. But that which
established his fame and fortune too, beyond contradiction, was the
extraordinary cure he performed on the late Prince Charles of Lorraine's leg,
after he had tried all the surgeons of Paris and the low countries, without
benefit, and had been for many years a perfect cripple; though he had given in
pictures and snuff-boxes to various surgeons to the value of five thousand
pounds. Being sent for, and on examining the ulcer, he, in a very rough,
unpolished language, said to the Prince, "Zounds! what is this all? why, we
will walk tomorrow!" His rude manner and seeming ignorance had almost
determined the prince to have dismissed him instantly; for he thought it
impossible that a man, who had not set his foot to the ground for some years,
should be able to walk the next day; yet he did walk the next day, and in a
very short time after was perfectly cured, and enjoyed eighteen years of life
and health afterward. Mr. Bogen is now dead; but his son, whom the prince made
his valet-de-chambre, is still living, and is equally qualified to perform the
same, cures. Neither father nor son pretend to any chirurgical skill, farther
than rolling the bandage, which is done in a most excellent and extraordinary
manner. The whole secret, says Thickness, I have good reason to believe, is
nothing more than scraped carrot, or a poultice made from that root, as what he
applies is of a reddish color, and scraped carrot alone will perform wonders
in healing ulcers.

Ghent is one of the largest cities in Europe, being near fifteen miles in
circumference; some say twenty. It is built on a great number of little
islands, formed by four rivers and many canals, over which there are an hundred
bridges: but large and pompous as this account is, the reality bears no
proportion to the description; more than half the ground within the walls,
being occupied by gardens, and there are some fields. The fortifications are
contemptible, being little more than lines for an army to encamp within. Some
of the streets are large, well paved, and tolerably built. Among the public
buildings, there are none worthy of any attention but a few churches, except
the house in which Charles V. was born, which is still to be seen. This place
gave birth to that monarch in the year 1500. He was the son of Philip the
handsome, archduke of Austria, whose parents were the emperor Maximilian and
Mary, the only child of Charles the bold, the last prince of the house of
Burgundy. His mother was the daughter of Ferdinand and Isabella, king and queen
of Castile and Arragon.

The abbey of St. Pierre ranks far beyond any others in Ghent: it is situated
on a rising ground, at the extremity of the town, and consists of an abbot and
thirty-seven benedictine monks. The refectory is superb, and fitter for a
palace than a convent; it is paved with black and white marble, and painted
throughout in a masterly manner. The library is very magnificent, and the
number of books, such as they are, very considerable. From the windows you have
a most delightful, as well as an extensive view of the country. In the church
is some tapestry held in great estimation, which has been there upwards of two
centuries. It contains the histories of Sts. Peter and Paul in diverse
compartments, most admirably finished, and was the work of Croyer, of Brussels.

The horse, in the conversion of St. Paul, is the finest animal it is possible
to behold. Our Savior standing tiptoe on a wave is the true sublime, and is
most happily executed. Elymas struck with blindness, has much merit; and a
marble floor is as nicely imitated in the tapestry, as was ever seen in any
picture.

The abbot's house is most sumptuous; the governor of the low countries always
resides in it when at Ghent. The apartments are crowded with good pictures, but
three by Rubens are most excellent: the one is Joseph, with the infant Christ
in his arms; the two others are the heads of old men.

The cathedral is a noble old building, dedicated to St. Buvon, of whom there
is a good statue over the grand altar, standing on the clouds, which are
supported by angels. Against the pillars of the church are some tolerable
statues, and where there are vacancies they have painted figures in the
imitation of statues so happily, that it is difficult to find out the
deception. The pulpit is said to be the grandest of the kind; it is of marble,
enriched with statues, and has two angels to support the sounding board. There
is a capital picture of St. Buvon, by Rubens, in which he has introduced
himself, his wife and family.

The monument of Bishop Trieste, by Fiamingo, is most admirably executed; the
boys do not yield even to those of Cardinal Richlieu's monument at the
Sorbonne. Fiamingo's principal excellence was in boys and the delicate. In this
respect he was superior to Michael Angelo, who attained the antique only in
strong muscular figures, not in those of youth nor women, who under his bold
hand became amazons.

The Maison-de-Ville has two fronts, the one in the Gothic, the other in the
Grecian style, of three stories, adorned with Attic, Ionic, and Corinthian
columns.

There are some few pictures, as the Day of Judgment, by Rubens, and the
Coronation of Charles VI. in which picture are five hundred figures, most of
them taken from the life. But the most capital picture is Hercules between
Virtue and Pleasure, taken from the fable of Cebes.

Before I came into this country, says Thickness, I thought the discipline of
the British and French troops were tolerably strict; but as every, thing is by
comparison, so I was soon convinced that neither the British or French
discipline can bear that name, when put in competition with the discipline of
the German troops; and yet I am told I should find a still greater difference
between these troops and those of the king of Prussia. The soldier here wears
his white coat three years, and it must be always perfectly clean; at the
expiration of which time he has a new one, and his old one is made into a
waistcoat and breeches, and must serve three years more in that capacity; and
is then dyed black to make gaiters. The soldier is found in every article he
can want for dress, even to his hair-string and powder; but his net pay is only
twopence halfpenny a day! five farthings of which is put into the common mess
(eight men in each) and the other five farthings are for the luxuries of life.
Sheeps head broth, and horse-beans boiled in grease, are with them great
delicacies. It fares better with the officers, for a captain of foot in the
Imperial service has an hundred guineas a year, a servant allowed him, and his
livery furnished by the Emperor. But when an officer neglects his duty, and
repeats it two or three times, after the commandant has hinted to him to be
more attentive, he may be dismissed by the same authority. Having asked, says
Thickness, what punishments were used to maintain so strict a discipline, the
answer was, none! The punishments are so severe that no man risks the
experiment.

In the castle of Ghent there are clothing, arms, accoutrements, etc. for ten
thousand horse and foot, all in the most perfect order, and all of it made
within the castle walls by the hands of the soldiers. The German troops are in
general sturdy, well-looking men, but they are ill-limbed, and certainly have
not much more understanding among ten thousand of them, than may be found among
a flock of ten thousand sheep led about by a bell-wether.

They have very flourishing linen manufactures throughout all this country; but
these are not confined to Ghent, though there are many in that town; but all
the villages, and almost every farm, is a flax-manufactory. Flax is a principal
crop upon all the sundry parts of this country, and the farmers and laborers
do not only grow it, but also dress and weave it, and the women and children
spin it. Every little farmer has one or two looms; many of them five or six,
and some seven or eight, according to the number of hands in the family. This
makes the whole race of country people remarkably active and industrious; the
servants and the farmer and his sons will weave linen in the night, and in wet
days, when they have not employment in the farm; and in this manner greatly
contribute to earning a better maintenance for their families than in other
countries, where such time is appropriated to idleness.

The accommodations in the bark on the canal of Austrian Flanders, are
infinitely superior to those of the Trackskuits in Holland, being considerably
larger, with excellent apartments below, for three several classes of
passengers, and a shaded quarter deck with benches for them to fit on, when
they choose to take the air. There is a good dinner provided for each apartment;
and the company may be accommodated with wines of different kinds, tea, coffee,
and Flemish beer. The price of traveling, as well as the fare, is remarkably
cheap; and the best apartments are always filled with good company. In fine
weather nothing can be more delightful than an excursion from Ghent to Bruges
by the bark, which passes from place to place in one day, distance about 30
miles, price 2s. 6d. English, dinner included. The variety of fine prospects,
the charming verdure every where to be seen; the number of little chatteaus on
the banks of the canal; the enlivening company that is generally to be met
with, and the still pleasing manner in which die bark keeps moving forward,
without any molestation from the sun or dust in a hot sultry day all together
conspire to give very pleasing sensations to the mind. They tell you an English
gentleman was so delighted with the passage, the entertainment, and the company
he met, that he lived on board this bark for seven years, sleeping one night at
Ghent, the next at Bruges, and so on; and, that being a facetious man, the
better sort of people of these two towns, particularly the young ladies, would
frequently, for an excursion, go and dine, as they used to call it, with the
English gentleman.

There are a kind of stage-coaches that travel all through Brabant, heavy,
lumbering things, that on their paved roads almost shake a man to death. The
fare is cheaper than in England, and the accommodations passable; but four
persons may hire a coach and pair, which will travel as fast as the stage, and
cost no more than the stage price, and are far more easy to travel in. A person
may go from London to Spa, and travel 200 miles through all Austrian Brabant,
for four guineas, and live well upon the road; the passage in the packet from
Dover to Ostend included, which is one guinea of the money. Those who travel in
Flanders by the canals, pay as much for the carriage of a trunk as for
themselves; the natives of the country take a few necessary things, in a kind
of satchel made of carpeting called a sac du nuit, which they carry in their
hands when they are obliged to change boats, as is often the case, the canals
not joining each other; and by this they avoid the impositions of those who
attend the boats to remove the luggage. The price of traveling in these boats
or barks is not more then one halfpenny English, per mile. They set out at
stated hours as stage-coaches do, are drawn by horses at the rate of four or
five miles an hour, and will travel thirty or forty miles a day, stopping at
certain places to dine.

For fifteen-pence the treckschuyt, an elegant yatch, conducts the traveller
from Ostend to this city, which in the 13th century was the principal mart in
Europe, and where the merchants of all parts of the world had houses and
commerical connexions; but the frequent revolts of the inhabitants against
their sovereigns, the manufacturers against their masters, and the masters
against the magistrates, first drove the strangers to Antwerp, and the natives
to different parts of the world; the sad effects of which are still felt, and
still visible; for Antwerp was raised on the ruins of Bruges, as Amsterdam is
at this day on those of Antwerp. But since Ostend has become a free port,
Bruges begins to revive in her trade. It is said there are two hundred and
fifty streets in Bruges, and 40,000 inhabitants; but more than 10,000 of them
are supported by public charity.

The police is good, the magistrates being just, but severe, and there is no
part of the continent where strangers or natives can travel more securely. At
Bruges an advocate is paid twenty-eight pence an hour for attendance, but the
physician has only seven-pence for each visit. When a consultation is held,
each physician has twenty-six pence, and the surgeons half that sum.

In one of the churches at Ghent, there is a ring of bells, the largest of
which weighs 110 quintals, each quintal, a hundred pounds. There are two or
three fine open places in this city, and a good theater; but the houses, as at
Brussels and Bruges, are all old-fashioned and built in the Gothic style.

Bruges is an ancient and extensive city, walled in, the circumference being
near five miles. It has near three hundred streets in it, and a vast number of
canals and rivers; but notwithstanding all this spaciousness, it is not an
agreeable place. The houses are in general very old and extremely ugly, and the
whole place shows evident signs of decay, and a loss of that trade and
manufacture for which it was once famous. They reckon six squares, seven gates,
eight churches, and no less than sixty monasteries; a woeful sort of
population, instead of the industrious manufacturers, which once filled the
city: among the rest, there is a nunnery of English, which several Roman
Catholic families in England have contributed to fill.

The churches of Bruges have not any thing in them remarkable; the best is the
Jesuits, which is an elegant edifice. In the church of our Lady, there are two
fine monuments of Charles the Bold, Duke of Burgundy, and his daughter and
heiress, Mary of Burgundy; they are of brass, with much enamelling; the
workmanship good. Her dress is likewise shown, that she wore three hundred
years ago, and which is highly enriched with jewels.

What gives this place a very melancholy air, are the vast houses standing
empty in every part of the town, which once were the residence of wealth and
splendor. Among others they have seventeen palaces, which, in the times of
their prosperity, were formerly the residence of consuls from various kingdoms
and states in Europe. This town was famous for trade, before Antwerp arose,
being then the greatest mart in Europe; England made it the staple for her
wool; and its cloth manufactories were much more considerable, than those of
any other place or country. Bruges however at present is not without some
trade. The Ostend canal admits ships of from 2 to 300 tons burden, up to the
heart of the city, which excites more trade here than in any other town in
Flanders.

The merchandise imported by the shipping on this canal, is sent to many places
from Bruges, particularly by the Scheld to the city of Ghent, and from thence
by other canals to various cities; and that river with the Scarpe and the Lys,
reaches to Tournay, Menin, Lisle and Douay: they have likewise a communication
with Antwerp, Louvain, Mechlin, and Brussels. It is an episcopal town. In the
great square there is a house founded in 1411, where they provide for 130
orphans, and bring them up, some to learning, and others to trades, according
to their abilities. This city has often been taken and retaken in the late
wars, particularly in 1745, by the French.

Ostend is the only seaport of Austrian Flanders. It is small, but well built
and clean, nor does it exhibit so much decay of ancient greatness as Bruges. It
is situated in the midst of a salt-marsh, with ditches into which the sea is
let; this situation makes it strong, but the improvements in the modern art of
attacking places will not allow it the same of such another siege as that which
it stood against the Spaniards, which lasted three years, and in which above
100,000 men on both sides fell. The French, in 1745, took it in eight days. In
the furious siege abovementioned which lasted from 1601 to 1604, and in which
the Dutch lost 50,000 men, and the Spaniards 80,000, Isabella Eugenia,
governante of the Netherlands, made a vow she would not change her linen till
Ostend surrendered; but before the town was taken, the color of it was quite
changed. However the ladies of the court, to keep her in countenance, had
theirs dyed, so as to be in color like that of their mistress. By the late
Emperor's having made it a free port, the trade of it has been very much
increased. The establishment of an East India Company here, by the Emperor, has
also contributed not a little to render it famous. The maritime powers
endeavored to frighten him out of this establishment; and it is somewhat
extraordinary how these powers could have had the modesty to push this matter
in the manner they did; for why the Emperor should not have the liberty to form
what establishments he pleased in a seaport in his own dominions, is much more
than any of the English or Dutch memorials could give a satisfactory reply to.

It is estimated that the English smugglers alone bring to the amount of
600,000 livres monthly into this town; they bring too, ready money, and
therefore the Ostenders are content with small profits, for their brandy,
tobacco, tea, gauzes, laces, wine, etc.

This town is now inhabited by men of all nations, where as much English is
heard as French or Flemish; surrounded with the sea, they have no good water;
the harbor however is crowded with shipping, which shows it to be a place of
great trade.

THE COUNTY OF NAMUR,
Is nearly surrounded by the Bishopric of Liege and the Duchy of Brabant. Its
extent from north to south is about six German miles, and nearly as much from
east to west. This country is very mountainous and woody. Its principal riches
consists in iron, which is here prepared into steel and worked up in great
quantities. In the level country is a great deal of corn land. The Meuse, which
runs through the country, and receives into it the Sambre at Namur, tends much
to the fertility of the soil, and to the advantage of the country in general
from its navigation.

Namur, the capital of the country, is a large and rich town, seated between
two mountains, with a strong castle, several forts, and a bishop's see. This
city was besieged by King William in 1695, who took it in the sight of an army
of 100,000 French, though there was 60,000 men in garrison.

The Flemings, says Reisbec, are the most extraordinary compound of
slothfulness and industry, stupidity and acuteness, activity and cowardliness,
goodness of heart and treachery, that can be well conceived. An Englishman once
said of them, "They have the impudence of the French, without their pleasantry;
the pride and bigotry of the Spaniards, without their sense of honor; the
ferocity and harshness of the Dutch, without their punctuality; the debauchery
of the Germans, without their integrity; and as to their bodies, they are
blocks, from which the carver attempted to make Englishmen, but could not cut
them out." The picture is in general just, as these inhabitants of the
Netherlands are an assemblage of all these nations. But what they are most
conspicuous for, is want of honor. You must have agreements in writing in all
the common transactions of life. You are in danger of first being overcharged,
and then carried into a court of justice by every workman of whom you bespeak a
piece of work, if you do not put down your agreement in black and white.

With respect to their bodies, they and the Saxons are most like the Germans,
described by Tacitus: their bodies are of a very unwieldy make, and ad impetum
valida, what too Tacitus says of the old Germans, that they can bear neither
hunger nor thirst, nor heat, nor cold, nor yet any long work, is true of them.
In the Imperial armies they are accounted good partisans, but are never put to
regular service without extreme necessity. They have a great abhorrence of
discipline, and look upon it as a severe punishment to be subject to the rules
of service. If their robberies and maraudings are not overlooked, they will not
last out a campaign. In short, it is only in action that they show themselves
at all as soldiers.

Except Spain, Italy, and Portugal, there is no country so overloaded with
monks as the Austrian Netherlands: there are in many towns forty or fifty
convents; several prelatures are worth 200,000 guilders, (2000l.) ayear. If you
divide the income of the country into four parts, one will be found to belong
to the priesthood, one to the nobility, one to the sovereign, and one to the
people. The bigotry and intolerance of the inhabitants are beyond all
description, and is a mavelous contrast to the corruption of their manners.

Respecting their manufactures, they have not a single one comparable to what
they were formerly: that of lace is flourishing, but not near so considerable
as formerly; and the same observation is applicable to those of fine linen and
tapestry: indeed, the attention given to manufacturers in every country of
Europe, cannot but have drawn much from the old fabric long established; no
article of manufacture is found in Flanders which is not strongly rivalled by
some neighbor or other. This, with the internal mischiefs, resulting from
freedoms of corporate towns cramping the workmen, is very prejudicial to all
industry in these provinces.

Notwithstanding these impediments, the fabrics of Austrian provinces are by no
means inconsiderable; the towns are thick, and all of them have some
manufacture or other: their linens, laces, stockings, caps, cloth, druggets,
carpets, etc. are all considerable; employing great numbers of hands, and
bringing much money into the country.

The dress of the peasants of this country is like that of French Flanders; and
what we so often see in the pictures of Teniers. The women wear a kind of
French nightcap, with a plaited border, gold earrings, a gold cross hanging
from their neck, a jacket and petticoat, the petticoat short, the jacket laced
before, and slippers. Some wear a black bib and short black apron. They never
wear a hat, but when abroad throw over their heads about four yards of black
stuff like a veil. The better class of women wear camblet hoods abroad, and
long cloaks of the same.

The man's dress is better described by the plate -- where a young man has
conducted his sweetheart to the house of a village-doctor for a remedy, she
having complained of being ill. As this man looked into the cause of complaints
by the urine of his patients, she took a bottle of her urine with her, little
conceived that on examining it he would have discovered that she was with
child; and which she would never had her lover, the last man in the world, to
have been made acquainted with.

Having now gone through the different circles of Germany, and spoke of every
material place as fully as our reader, we trust, will think necessary, we will
proceed to a description of the United Provinces, first recapitulating and
making some general remarks on the whole of Germany together.

FLEMINGS.


CHAP. XI. Review of Germany.
THE Germans are in general tall, robust, and well made; of a fair complexion,
and regular features. Their women in particular are very handsome, and excel
those of most other countries. They never use paint, or foreign ornaments, to
embellish their persons. Their apparel is exceedingly modest, but very rich,
and they are said to be remarkably fond of jewels; they are more obsequious to
their husbands than those of other nations, many of them not even sitting at
table with them, and none of them taking the upper hand of them. They are also
for the most part well educated, and extremely fond of music; but not very
talkative.

The people of Germany have a degree of superstition among them, beyond that of
other nations, that will sometimes lead them into the most desperate acts. The
following from Chisul, is one of the many stories that could be brought to
evince this truth. He was at Vienna about forty years since, and had the
opportunity of seeing the decollation of a woman, whose head the executioner
struck off at one blow, as she sat in a chair, levelled against the back part
of her neck with a two-handed stroke and a broad two-edged sword. At these
executions there assist, as in Italy, about twenty persons of an order called
the Confraternity of the Dead, habited in black with masks, broad hemmed hats
and mourning staves. They are a fixed society, composed of citizens of the
middle rank, on whom their confession impose it as a piece of penance to assist
incognito on these occasions. But most remarkable was the fact and behavior of
the criminal, who was about twenty-six years old, and in the absence of her
husband, then three years imprisoned at Presburg, had admitted the embraces of
a young man whom she passionately loved, but at last discovered was going to be
married to another woman. After the most earnest, but fruitless endeavors to
dissuade him from his purpose, she invited him to walk with her one morning
beyond the Favorita, where, in a bye place, she enticed him to kiss her, and at
that moment took her opportunity, and shot him in the head. This done she
immediately resigned herself to justice, revealed the whole fact, and implored
her speedy dispatch, that so she might have his company in the other world,
without whom she could not live in this. She walked with a fresh and undaunted
countenance to the place of sentence, which, though before designed and
notified accordingly, is never formally pronounced till the time of execution.
From thence she returned to the place of her death, sat down in the chair, and
received the stroke without ever moving her body, changing her countenance, or
dreading the blow she was to feel. -- At these executions they often catch the
blood of the criminal, as good against the falling sickness. It is from similar
superstitions, that the people so frequently murder infants at Hamburg, in
order to procure a capital punishment, tired of their lives, and dreading the
idea of self-murder.

Though the Germans in general are of large stature, yet it has been observed
their spirit is not equal to their bulk. They are generally very good-natured,
and free from malice and subtlety. The peasants are laborious, sincere, honest,
and hospitable; as are likewise the merchants and tradesmen, who are withal
very complaisant.

Hospitality is a peculiar characteristic of the Germans; and it is a virtue
they derive from their ancestors; for Julius Caesar informs us, that in his
time their houses were open to all men; that they thought it an injustice to
affront a traveller, and even looked upon it as a piece of religion to protect
those who came under their roof. A single letter of recommendation is
sufficient to procure a person an agreeable reception among them, which can
hardly be said of the inhabitants of any other country. Their civility extends
so far as to introduce a stranger directly into their societies or assemblies.
They are remarkable also for their bravery, and love of military glory, in
which they rival, if not surpass, most other nations.

The Germans are frequently represented as dull and heavy; but those who
characterize them thus, have seldom any knowledge of them, but what they borrow
from the French, who hardly ever allow wit or sense in any other nation than
their own. To judge of their intellects by their improvements in mechanic arts,
we should never charge a people with heaviness and stupidity to whom we are
indebted for so many useful and valuable discoveries. They have not indeed the
same vivacity, but they surpass the French in application and judgment. Upon
the restoration of learning they distinguished themselves early in the
different branches of literature.

Their first reformers, Luther, Melanchthon, Camerarius, and others, were most
of them men of eminent erudition. Few other nations surpass either their men of
letters, or even their mechanics, in application. This made an Italian say, by
way of joke, expressive of their assiduity, "That the understanding of a German
was not in his brain, but in his back." Printing is encouraged here to a fault,
no person being admitted to any degree in their universities, who has not
published at least one disputation.

In regard to baths and mineral fountains, it is a question if there are so
many in all Europe as in Germany. They reckon above a thousand springs of acid
waters alone, some hot, some cold, and others that are both hot and cold at
different times.

Germany is likewise famous for that sort of earth called terra sigillata. It
is a kind of hard earth, with white, yellow, and red veins, and said to be an
antidote against all sorts of poisons.

Traveling is cheaper in Germany than in most parts of Europe, but the
accommodations on the roads between the great towns, are very indifferent, both
with respect to diet and lodging. In the houses we seldom see a fire, except in
their kitchens, their rooms being heated by stoves. One thing is very peculiar
in their bed-furniture, they use no blankets nor quilts; but lay one featherbed
cased in linen like a pillow, and another underneath covered with a sheet,
between these two, the Germans sleep. Traveling in many parts of Germany,
particularly where the roads are sandy, is very tedious, the postilions not
going above three English miles an hour. It is usual for those persons who
travel post through Germany, and have no carriage of their own, to purchase one
for that purpose, which may generally be met with in any of the frontier towns
on very easy terms; as the carriages at the post houses in Germany, and which
the post-masters are obliged to furnish, if required, have frequently no
covering to them. They are in every respect like an English wagon, built on a
small scale to hold about six persons. The covered carriages occasionally to be
found at the post-houses, and those purchased by common travelers, are like
our old-fashioned phaetons. The ordinary post-waggon, which answers to our
stage-coach, travels night and day for days together. It goes between forty and
fifty English miles in four-and-twenty hours, and is in appearance like an
English narrow-wheeled wagon, only something lighter. Formerly none of them
had coverings, at present most of them have, but not all.

Germany, including Silesia, is something larger than France. It contains about
twelve thousand square miles. The soil varies very much in different parts. A
great part of it however is very highly cultivated. The immense masses of rocks
in the southern parts of Austria and Bavaria, and the sands of the north, which
take in nearly the whole of Lower Saxony, with Brandenburg, Pomerania, and the
north of Westphalia, are not capable of such a high degree of cultivation as
the upper parts of Germany; but this would be a great advantage, if the
interests and welfare of the whole were common. The mountains in the south
contain metals of all kinds in prodigious quantities, and the sands in the
northern parts produce hemp, flax, and wool, with excellent timber in abundance
for the building of ships.

Bohemia, Moravia, Silesia, Austria, Bavaria, and the countries about the
Rhine, the Austrian Netherlands, and part of Upper Saxony, furnish corn,
cattle, wine, and all the prime necessaries of life, in such quantities as are
not only sufficient to supply Germany, but even for exportation. -- In short,
Germany is the only country that is independent of all the world, and supplied
with all the necessaries and convenience of life, which a large and flourishing
state requires, for its support, or stands in need of for its defense. France,
says Reisbec, is deficient of wood and cattle, particularly horses, the most
necessary metals and linen; and Russia is obliged to import wine, wood, horses,
and various other articles; but Germany has every thing which these two very
powerful countries produce, and a superfluity besides of what they stand in
need.

It is difficult to estimate the population of Germany. Some countries, as for
instance Upper Austria, have 2000 souls in every square mile, Magdeburg,
Minden, Brunswick, and many others, have 2500. On the contrary, the Hanoverian
dominions, Brandenburg, Pomerania, and Mecklenburg, with many others, have not
more than 1000 inhabitants on every square mile. Reckoning therefore 1700
inhabitants on an average for every square mile, will give twenty-five millions
for the whole country, which is nearly the number they are estimated by the
late King of Prussia in his Treatise of German Literature; and which, says
Reisbec, seems to come nearest the truth. The manifesto which the Empress of
Russia presented to the court of Vienna, on account of the last disturbances
about Bavaria, contains these remarkable words, "It is the interest of all the
powers of Europe to take care that the balance of Germany be not disturbed; for
if it should be, its internal strength and situation may enable it to destroy
the peace of Europe."

This extensive country has not as yet acquired the degree of cultivation of
which it is capable. It is not even so highly cultivated as France. The peace
of Hubertsburger is its era of cultivation. Since that period agriculture and
industry have been universal. It at once exerted all its strength to fill up
the gaps which had been made by the destructive war of thirty years. The very
partition of the country into so many different states, prejudicial as it is to
the exertion of power for the purpose of foreign conquests, has been of
advantage to its internal cultivation. At present the first princes in Germany
contend with each other who shall make the greatest improvements in the
administration of justice, in the system of education, and in their general
police for the promotion of agriculture and commerce, with as much eagerness as
they formerly contended for a rivalship in pomp and external magnificence. In
no country is there now so thorough a conviction of a value of men, and of
their different occupations, and how to improve them to the utmost advantage,
as in Germany.

With respect to legislation, and the true interest of a country, there has
been a benevolent light spread in most parts of this empire, which not only
points out their deficiencies, but encourages the princes and their servants to
fill them up. Without doubt Germany as well as the rest of Europe is much
indebted to the king of Prussia, the first practical philosopher in modern
times, who has been seen on a throne. It was this prince who began the glorious
revolution, which has made such changes in Germany during the last twenty
years; he taught his neighbors that the interests of princes and their
subjects were the same; he began to take off the veil which was thrown over
administration: finally, he subdued the tyrants among the nobility and priests,
who fattened on the substance of the citizen and peasant. Military as his
government may appear to superficial observers, it is to that alone Germany is
so indebted for a peace of five-and-twenty years, which she had not known for
many centuries before, and in the course of which she first began to feel what
she really was.

The peculiar turn of the Germans seems to be philosophy; they are
distinguished from all the nations of Europe for cool and just judgments,
united with extreme industry; they were the first who threw a light on
mathematics and general physics; they next darted through theology, history,
and finally legislation with the same philosophic spirit. The prize of wit they
will do well to leave to other nations, for which they will ever contend in
vain.

If Germany could make itself one great people; if it was united under one
governor, if the present interests of a single prince were not often in
opposition to the general welfare of the whole; if all the members of the
empire were so well compacted into one body, that the superfluous sap of the
one could circulate and invigorate all the rest, how much greater steps toward
cultivation might not the country then make! But Germany would then give laws
to all Europe. How powerful are the two houses of Austria and Brandenburg, even
as things now are? the greatness of whose strength consists in their German
possessions, and yet who do not possess half or even the best parts of this
country. Though the character of the Germans be not so brilliant as that of
other nations, still it is not destitute of its peculiar excellencies. The
German is a man of the world. He lives under every sky, and conquers every
natural obstacle to his happiness. His industry is inexhaustible. Poland,
Hungary, Russia, the English and Dutch colonies, are much indebted to German
emigrants. Even the first states in Europe owe great part of their knowledge to
Germany. Rectitude is also an almost universal characteristic of the people of
this country; neither are the manners of the inhabitants in the lesser cities,
by any means so corrupt as those of France and other countries: it is owing to
this circumstance, that the country is so well peopled, notwithstanding the
great emigrations. In short, frugality on the part of the Protestants and
frankness on that of the Catholics, are grand, brilliant and natural
characteristics.

THE SEVEN UNITED PROVINCES.
map of the Dutch Republic

A DESCRIPTION OF THE SEVEN UNITED PROVINCES OF THE LOW COUNTRIES. From Le
Febure, Marshal, Hanway, Busching, Sherlock, Peckham, Northey, Brown, Reisbec,
etc. etc.
CHAP. I. Of the Country in general.
THE United Netherlands are bounded by the German ocean on the north, by
Westphalia on the east, by Austrian Brabant on the south, and by the English
channel toward the west. These provinces are seven in number; Holland,
Zealand, Utrecht, Guelderland, Overyssel, Groningen, and Friezland. The name of
the Netherlands, which included the Dutch, Austrian, and French, in all
appearance takes its rise from the sittuation of these countries, as considered
with respect to Germany, and implies the Nether or Lower Germany. The whole of
the Seven United Provinces includes about 625 square geographical miles. The
air is moist and unhealthy. The winter sets in about October, and even in the
month of May there is often scarce any appearance of spring. In summer the
heats are often more excessive than in the south of France, or even in Italy.
Sometimes the extremes of heat and cold are even felt in the same day.

Here are all manner of tame fowl, as in England; and of the wild sort, the
stork about the bigness of a heron is the most remarkable. This bird builds his
nest on the top of their chimnies in most of the towns and villages, and
through a national superstition is never destroyed. They take their flight with
their young ones, about the middle of August, and as is conjectured retire into
Africa, or some other warm country, and return in February. There are
prodigious quantities of wild geese, herons, ducks, and other waterfowl, which
cover the marshes of the Low Countries every winter; they have likewise plenty
of partridges, snipes, quails, pigeons, hares and rabbits, but none of those
wild beasts which abound in the German forest, such as bears, wild boars, and
wolves; foxes they have in great numbers. Their seas, lakes, canals, and rivers
abound in fish of all kinds, except oysters, of which there are very few.

The whole country is full of morasses, which however are not without their
advantages, yielding good turf for fuel, and in some parts they are reckoned so
secure a defense for the state on the side of Germany, that the draining of
them is prohibited by law.

These morasses however joined with the low situation of the country near the
sea, occasion fogs and frequent rains, which are more particularly brought on
by the westerly winds that prevail in these parts with great violence. The
general distempers of the inhabitants are the gout and scurvy. Colds and
rheumatisms are also very common; and in the fenny parts near the sea, where
the mud during the ebb emits putrid effluvia, continual vomitings are very
frequent. It is the dampness of the climate that accustoms the inhabitants to
smoking; for both men and women of a certain age, are seldom seen without
their pipes and spitting pots.

The land is for the most part level, and in many places lies even lower than
the sea; for which reason it is not only fenced against its inundations by
dykes and dams at a prodigious expense; but likewise for draining the water
from the fenny parts, there have been innumerable ditches cut, from which the
water so drained is conveyed by windmills into canals, and from thence by means
of sluices into the rivers. These dykes and canals give the country a very
singular appearance, and being planted with rows of trees, willow and others,
interspersed with gardens and pleasant houses, make it very convenient as well
as delightful to travelers. The barks which are drawn by horses, set out every
day in summer at certain hours, to go from one place to another. As a great
part of the country consists of heath and sands, it does not afford a
sufficient subsistence for the inhabitants; nor can all the industry of
agriculture draw from it as much grain as is necessary for home consumption.
But this again is amply compensated by its resources of trade and navigation,
which enable the Dutch not only to brew good beer, and distill brandy from the
corn they import, but likewise to export great quantities afterward of both.
On the other hand, the rich meadows and pastures make grazing very profitable,
by which the inhabitants are supplied with milk, butter and cheese, and the
exports of the two latter amount to very large sums; the Texel cheeses being
famous all over the world. In Holland, too, the breeding of sheep is very
considerable, and admits of further improvements, as under proper regulations a
million of sheep might be fed in that province. The wool of these sheep is also
reckoned very fine. Several places likewise yield tobacco, and Zealand is
famous for its madder. Culinary plants these provinces have in abundance, and
in some parts of them there is great plenty of fruit. The principal fuel is
turf and pit-coal, the latter of which comes from England. Wood being very
scarce and dear, there is but little of it used. Every piece of timber worked
up in these countries, whether for building or for exportation, is brought from
abroad. In many places they boil salt from the sea water. The country of
Zutphen yields iron. In short, nature affords so little that is valuable here,
that the inhabitants owe both the necessaries and comforts of life to their
extensive commerce with foreign countries.

The principal rivers are the Rhine, the Meuse, and the Scheldt. The first of
these rises in Germany, and taking its course through the Duchy of Cleves,
enters the Netherlands at Fort Schenk; there it divides into two branches; the
most considerable of which, after passing by Nimeguen, runs into the Meuse; the
other branch, after again subdividing into smaller branches, loses itself in
the canals, and in one or two lesser rivers.

The Maese forms the boundary between Geulderland and Brabant. Opposite to Dort
this river divides into two branches; one branch runs by Rotterdam, and the
other takes a different course; they afterward meet again; and this river,
which is very wide at its mouth, then discharges itself in the ocean at Brill.
On this river, which rises in Burgundy, and runs through the principality of
Liege, there was formerly a very considerable traffic; but the several
sovereigns through whose dominions it takes its course, having laid heavy tolls
on all vessels as they passed through their territories, this trade is now very
much on the decline.

The fishery in the several streams, rivers and lakes, though very
considerable, serves only for home consumption; but that of the North-Sea is
very productive; it is divided into the greater and the lesser. By the former
is to be understood that carried on along the coasts, especially on the
Doggersand or Doggersbank, between England and Jutland, on which there are
caught cod, haddock, turbots, whitings, soles, and other sea fish. The cod
caught here is either carried fresh and alive to market, or else is salted up
at sea, and thus forms a branch both of foreign and domestic commerce. The
great fishery is that of herrings, from which the Dutch reap immense profits:
for if it may not as formerly be termed the golden mine of Holland, yet it
still yields a comfortable subsistence to at least 30,000 families. The season
for catching the herrings along the coast of England and Scotland, is from the
24th of June to the 25th of November. The vessels employed in this fishery, are
called busses, and carry from twenty-five to thirty lasts, each last is 80
bushels, which one with another sell for about one hundred and twenty guilders.
Some years back no less than fifteen hundred such vessels have been known to
sail from the ports of Holland; whereas at present the number seldom exceeds
two hundred. Though the estimates of the profits arising from the
herring-fishery differ, as the profits themselves do in different years, yet it
is computed in a good year, that the neat gain to the proprietors of the
busses, amounts to two millions of guilders, each guilder 20d. English. The
salting and curing of herrings, which the Dutch first learnt about the end of
the fourth century from a fisherman of Flanders, and in which no nation has
equalled them ever since, has made the Dutch herrings universally preferred
before all others. Further, the whale fishery at Greenland, Spitzbergen, Nova
Zembla, etc. employs annually about two hundred and fifty sail of Dutch ships.

The United Netherlands are well cultivated and extremely populous; they
contain no less than 113 cities and towns, with 1400 villages, some of which
are very considerable, and about two millions of inhabitants. But the most
populous and the best cultivated is the province of Holland, which has not its
equal in the universe; having six or more large cities within eight or ten
miles of each other. The neatness of the houses, and of the canals, which are
cut through the streets, and planted with trees, as also the cleanliness of the
streets, give the towns of this province a more agreeable appearance than is
usually to be met with in other countries; and for pretty villages, no part of
the globe can be put in competition with North Holland.

These countries, according to some writers, have been most of them gained from
the sea. Others, on the contrary, are of opinion, that a great part of them
have been lost by inundations, and both of them are in the right; for their
seas and rivers appear in many places to be above the land at high water, and
kept out only by prodigious banks; and there have been inundations even in the
memory of man which have laid great tracks of land under water. The tops of
steeples or other high buildings have been seen upon their coasts at low water.
Sir William Temple remarks, that from the Zuidersee never having been mentioned
by any Roman writers, it is reasonable to suppose, that it was formed by some
great inundation of the sea breaking in between the Texel and other islands;
and this is the more probable, from the great shallowness of that sea, and the
flatness of its sands over the whole extent of it. Other changes he supposes to
have happened in the face of these countries by the sands which have gathered
at the mouths of their great rivers abovementioned.

These sands are supposed to have been collected from the westerly winds, which
generally blow on these shores three parts of the year, and are more violent
than the easterly ones, which usually bring calm weather and frosts.

The Zuidersee is about seventy miles in length, and half as much in breadth,
but so very shallow as has been observed, that a passage over it is more
dangerous than a voyage in the Bay of Biscay. And such is the violence and rage
of the sea when the wind blows a storm at north-west, that if it happens to be
a spring tide, their strongest dykes sometimes give way. An inundation happened
in 1530, by which seventy-two villages were swallowed up, and 20,000 people
destroyed. The banks of these rivers are also sometimes broken down by shoals
of ice and land-floods. From the shallowness of the water at neap tides at the
mouth of this sea, they are obliged to unload their vessels before they come
in, and bring in their vessels in cradles.

Reisbec observes, that there is no solid earth in any part of Holland, and
that even on the borders of the Duchy of Cleves, there are evident marks of
this country's having been formed like the Egyptian Delta; with this
difference, that the soil on the banks of the Nile is more fruitful. Parts of
Brabant have likewise been formed by the Scheld, Maese, and other rivers. At a
great distance from the coast in Flanders, under the good earth may be seen dry
sand, and under this again, large layers of good earth; as if the rivers and
sea had by turns deposited their sand and their mud. The whole coast of Germany
is of the same kind, as far as the Elbe. Throughout all this district, says
Reisbec, there is no solid ground.

The sea forms boundaries to herself which she never passes, but in cases of
extreme necessity. Her playful waves have made the downs, which reach from
Calais to the Texel, and protect the land which is in some places lower than
the surface of the sea; but when a north or north-west wind puts her into a fit
of anger, she overthrows in an instant that which with the help of the
neighboring rivers, she has been building for many centuries. They tell you
with a degree of confidence, that a ship of 200 tons burden was blown over the
bank at high water, between Calais and Gravelines, on the shore; the bank
twenty feet higher than the surface of the water.

The sea of Haerlem grows wider every day, threatens to break the dykes between
Leyden and Haerlem, and make a perfect island of North Holland. This sea is
sixteen miles long, and nearly eight miles broad. In the last century, the sea
demolished a great part of the island in which Dordrecht is situated; and
60,000 people perished by this accident.

Dreadful as the sea is to the main land, she is still a more formidable enemy
to the islands which constitute the province of Zealand; but what she executes
on the continent, by violent storms, she undertakes here, by craft and cunning.
Most of these islands are lower than the surface of the sea; the inhabitants
have, in consequence, attempted to secure themselves, by very expensive dykes,
or banks.

The sea is perpetually undermining them, and washing away the earth by
degrees; in many places they are already quite naked. This compels the
inhabitants to build other walls behind their dams, which, expecting the same
fate, must in time leave the whole to the mercy of the enemy.

Nor are the inhabitants of the middle of the country in a better situation.
The territories about Nimeguen and Arnheim, the most beautiful and most
fruitful in all Holland, will in time be subdued by the Rhine. In many
districts about Betuve, the sand is already so high, that at every swell the
river is driven violently to the opposite shore; this will repeatedly happen,
till it has finally broke itself a new bed, and covered with water all that is
now ploughed land, or the site of villages and hamlets. The many canals which
have been made to receive part of the waters of these rivers, are by no means
sufficient to break their force.

These canals, and the continual digging of turf, entirely divest this country
of all security. In the direct line between Rotterdam and Amsterdam, there is
dyke upon dyke; all these hollows have been occasioned by digging away the
turf; most of them are so deep that it is impossible to draw the waters from
them into the canals, which are on a level with the surface of the sea. What a
ruin must then take place, if once the waters of the neighboring rivers break
in upon them, or endeavor to open a way through them!

In short, no Dutchman can promise his children a durable habitation, except
the inhabitants of Guelderland, which is nothing but sand; and those of
Overyssel and Drenthe -- countries which are almost nothing but morasses and
heaths, and the habitations of fevers, colds, and catarrhs.

Though this country is so famous for its trade, and its multitude of shipping,
yet there is scarce a good harbor on the coast. The best are, Flushing,
Helveotsluys, and Rotterdam. As for Amsterdam, there cannot be, any where, a
more incommodious haven; being seated in so shallow a water that very few ships
can get into it, except at high tide.

Every one knows that husbandry is not the great national object in Holland,
but trade and manufactures. Their territory is small in comparison with their
population; so that an application to trade is necessary to the existence of
the inhabitants. The quantity of land fit for tillage, was originally under
such peculiar circumstances, that the wealth which flowed in from trade and
manufactures, could alone render the practice of any husbandry advantageous.
The soil is of two sorts, very good or very bad; and so unhappily situated are
the Dutch, that the former is only to be preserved by those vast monuments of
their industry -- the banks, which preserve all the lower and best lands from
being overflowed; for the higher tracks of Friezland, Guelderland, etc. contain
in general, a very great proportion of waste, and poor, sandy soil. This
proportion is greater than is commonly imagined, and was so when the republic
was undoubtedly in a more flourishing situation than at present. Davenant tells
us, that in 1688, they had eight millions of English acres, which let, with
houses and tenements, at four millions sterling. Now, this being only ten
shillings an acre, in a country very full of cities, must very much reduce that
ten shillings per acre, probably to six shillings; which shows that this
country of immense wealth and trade, though they secured the soil by banks, yet
did but little in raising the value of land. Grass lands, indeed, let here at
very high prices.

Whatever receives most encouragement from the state, is sure most to prosper
trade being the great object in Holland; manufactures are very much attended
to, these have consequently prospered; but as to agriculture, and the landed
interest, they make it totally subservient to every other; for the importation
of corn, and other provisions, is ruinous to the farmer, but is not regarded
here, because it is an object of commerce.

This conduct, however, is suitable to the situation and interests of the
republic. Nature, and a fortune almost as ragged, has crammed them into a
neglected marsh, which nothing but an industry like theirs, could have made the
habitation of an independent nation. In such a state, trade, navigation,
fisheries, and manufactures, were their principal support, in their first naval
expeditions against the Spaniards; these, therefore, they wisely engaged in,
with their utmost ardour: But as to agriculture, of what benefit could it be to
a nation, that had not land enough to render themselves independent by it?

Necessity drove the Hollanders to trade; but, had a genius more extensive than
that of Lycurgus, or of Montesquieu, dictated to them a choice, it would have
been what necessity compelled. Industry will ever make the greatest figure in
those spots that deny every thing to idleness; a numerous people, in such
situations, must either be industrious or starve.

The great success of the Dutch in trade, has made other nations ambitious to
imitate them; but in this there appears too great a neglect of those essential
distinctions, which are often found between different countries. France,
England, Sweden, and Russia, have very considerable territories, consequently
they ought to pay a much greater attention to agriculture than this republic,
whose land is contemptible, compared A DUTCH MARKET
with theirs; but all these powers, particularly France and England, have
sacrificed agriculture to their commerce. This has been very bad policy; for
that conduct which may be very beneficial for a territory of eight millions of
acres, may be highly improper for one of twelve times the number.

In the agriculture of Holland, the richness of their pastures is to be
noticed, and the great attention they pay to the management of their cattle.
They are very fond of the culture of tobacco, and of madder; of madder, in
particular, they raise enough not only for their own consumption, which in
their linen and cotton manufactures is very great, but also for exportation.

CHAP II. Of the Province of Holland.
WE will now speak of the several provinces. The province of Holland, the most
considerable of the seven provinces, and in many respects equal to the other
six, is bounded by the Zuider sea on the north; by Utrecht on the east; by
Brabant on the south; and by the British ocean on the west; extending about
eighty miles in length; in some places forty in breadth, and in others not
above twenty. It contains an area of about 400,000 acres. This province is
usually divided into North and South Holland. South Holland contains all that
country between Zealand and Brabant, and that arm of the sea, which usually
goes by the name of the river Y, And North Holland reaches from this river to
the ocean.

It lies, in general, very low, and, in some parts, even lower than the sea,
from which it is secured by dykes, and intersected by innumerable ditches and
canals, through which, at the time of the ebb, the water is carried off. On the
coasts of the north seas, the sand-hills supply the place of dykes. The air is
foggy and unwholesome. The greatest part of the province consists of fine
pasture lands. The principal occupation of the country people is making butter
and cheese, and they accordingly keep a great number of milch cows. This
province stands in need of all the art in the world, to embellish and make it
habitable. The air, in winter, is almost one continued fog; nothing is to be
heard on the plains but the cries of sea gulls, plovers, swallows, crows,
ducks, geese and swans. Those birds, which take refuge in the woods, are seldom
known here. Of all the provinces, none is so much exposed to the fury of the
ocean; and the inundations which happen from time to time are terrible. The
first which history mentions, formed the gulf called the Zuider sea. Before
that time, Friezland was separated only by a small lake.

In several parts of the country, the rivers which run through this country,
are joined by navigable canals, which open a cheap communication between the
several towns and villages of this populous province; as, by means of the
trechscuyts, a passenger goes from place to place on these canals, at fixed
hours, and at very cheap rates. Goods are likewise sent by the same conveyance,
which is an unspeakable convenience to the inland trade.

This province abounds in the noblest improvements, and is populous beyond
comparison with any of the other provinces; containing 37 towns, eight
boroughs, and 400 villages; and the number of its inhabitants, on a careful
estimate, is computed at above a million of inhabitants, which is one half of
the population of the whole country. The houses in the towns are mostly built
of bricks; and for cleanliness in them, no country in the world comes up to
Holland: in North Holland, in particular, neatness and ornament are carried to
an astonishing pitch. In that province there are villages in which the rooms
and furniture of the houses are clean and bright beyond imagination: the houses
themselves, as also the floors, and every wooden utensil, both within and
without, even to the very gates near the roads, and the posts in the pastures,
against which the cows rub themselves, as also the trunks of the trees, being
painted over. The chimnies likewise, with the cow-stalls, both on the floor and
on the sides, are kept in the greatest neatness. In these elegant cow-stalls,
families themselves reside, in order to spare their dining rooms. The streets,
too, are paved with brick, and very carefully washed and strewed with a fine,
white sand.

It is in this province, more than in any other, that the diversion of skaiting
is followed, from the multiplicity of canals which intersect it. The Dutch, who
in other respects are an indolent set of people, are passionately fond of this
exercise, and are the best skaiters in Europe. Some of them will skait fifteen
miles in an hour. The ladies are drawn along in traineaux, a gentleman sitting
behind them, and guiding the horse. There is no year, however, in which some
accident does not happen from these aquatic amusements.

The Dutch have carried their ingenuity so far as to contrive boats with sails,
fixed on skaits or sledges, to glide along on the ice: but these carriages are
more for curiosity than real use, as being by no means safe. They move after
the rate of fifteen leagues an hour; and, without reckoning up the other
inconveniences to their being put in practice, the resistance of the air alone
would be sufficient to take any one's breath away, in traveling with such
expedition. It is asserted, that people have gone in this manner from Amsterdam
to Sardam in seven minutes -- a distance of seven miles.

Plan of the CITY of AMSTERDAM
A The S^^^^e House B The Post Office C The Exchange D The Theater E East India
House F DoWarehouses G DoWharf H DoDock I West India House K Artillery House L
Amstel Church M West Church N New Church O Old Church P North Church Q Englis^
(...) R Timber Wharf


map of Amsterdam

The principal cities of the province of Holland are Amsterdam, Rotterdam,
Leyden, Haerlem, Delft, Dort, and the Hague; of these we shall speak in their
turns.

Amsterdam is the capital of this province, and of the United Netherlands. It
is situated on the little river Amstel, which runs through the city, and falls
into that arm of the sea called the Y, that lies on the north side of the town,
and which forms a large harbor. Amsterdam is the greatest trading city of
Europe, and though, by reason of the shallowness of the passage which leads up
to it, from the Zuider sea, it might be thought but badly situated for a
seaport, as ships of burden must be lightened to pass through it, and
afterward wait for an easterly or north-west wind to go into the north sea;
yet it is advantageous in this respect, that goods can be easily carried
backwards and forwards from all the other towns of this province, and with a
fair wind it is but a few hours passage to or from all the ports of
North-Holland, Friesland, Overyssel and Guelderland.

The ground is naturally marshy, consequently the buildings at Amsterdam are
founded on oaken piles, which made the facetious Erasmus say, that in his
country vast multitudes of people lived on the tops of trees. The middle of the
town is intersected by a great number of navigable canals, which, while they
conduce to the pleasantness and cleanliness of the place, are at the same time
a great convenience to trade; but in hot weather they emit foetid effluviae,
which would be still worse, were not the water kept continually in motion by
two large water-mills and a horse-mill. In dark evenings, these canals used to
cost many people their lives, till these dangers were happily remedied by
illuminating the streets and sides of the canals: compared however with the
streets of London, they are at present but miserably lighted up. These canals
divide the town into a multitude of islands, which are joined with each other
by means of stone and wooden bridges. This town itself forms a semicircle on
the Y, being fortified on the land-side with ramparts and regular bastions.
This side of the town may likewise be laid under water. On this river is a most
delightful walk commanding a fine prospect.

Amsterdam, says Marshall, appears to no great advantage to a stranger on his
first coming to it, except he enters the city through the Heeregraft, or the
Keysergraft streets: that of Haerlem is very long, but the sluices in the canal
hurt the effect of it; the two former have also canals in the middle of them,
and are very noble streets; but like most in Holland are planted with trees.
Some of the canals are very broad, and make a fine appearance; but the houses
in general are not erected in a grand style; on the contrary, very many of them
disgrace the areas before them. This, though an evil, is an evil to be found in
all the cities of Europe, and especially in London. In squares this great city
appears to be very deficient; they are few in number, and have nothing in them
striking: that called the Dam is the principal, but it is very irregular. The
houses, like all those in Flanders, are in the old Gothic style, with pediment
roofs, and being generally out of the perpendicular, are prevented from falling
by iron cramps in the form of the capital S. To a passenger in the street, by
hanging over on both sides, they seem to threaten his life.

Though Amsterdam cannot boast many fine squares, like several other capital
cities, yet it contains some public buildings, that strike the spectator with
astonishment at their magnificence.

The building which is incomparably beyond all others, is the stadthouse: the
dimensions of the front, as given by several authors, is 282 feet, the depth
232, and the height 116 feet, besides a small cupola. It was begun in 1648. It
is built upon wooden piles like masts of ships, rammed down as thick as they
can stand. There are no less than 14,000 of them, which are said to have cost
100,000l.; there being a great quantity of iron-work employed in the
foundation, to keep the piles together. The superstructure is said to have cost
twice as much. The expense of this edifice, however, has been variously
computed, with such an amazing difference, as from 300,000l. to 3,000,000l.;
the latter must certainly be computed according to the different value of money
then and now; but even so, it must very much exceed the truth: the former is,
in all probability, much nearer the reality. The front of this building has
nothing of taste or elegance; it is a heavy pile, which strikes the spectator
with that idea which is raised by the grandeur of its magnitude. The inside is
finished in a very noble style, considering the purpose to which it is applied;
such as, a prison, a bank, the seat of the courts of justice, the
sessions-rooms, guard-rooms, etc. The three statues of brass, representing
Justice, Fortitude and Plenty, at the entrance, and the woman in marble, in
relievo, supporting the city arms, are most exquisite pieces: the tower above,
with the clock and its admirable chimes; the Atlas, with the globe on his
shoulders, as also all the other beauties and ornaments of sculpture and
painting, are scarce to be equalled in Europe. The floors, walls, and pillars
are, in general, of marble, and the roofs finely carved, painted, and gilt; and
many of the apartments are adorned with very fine paintings, by the best
Flemish masters. In the second story is a great magazine of arms; and over
that, great reservoirs of water, with tubes to conduct it into every apartment;
and another precaution, which has been taken against fire, is, lining the
chimnies with copper. The top of the cupola gives a view of the city, and
neighboring country, in great perfection, commanding the whole circumference;
which, with the canals, and the immense number of ships continually going in
and coming out of the harbor, altogether form a very noble prospect.

The entrance to this building is through seven small doors, but the want of a
large door suitable to the grandeur of the building, is a designed omission;
the seven doors in number and uniformity, representing the seven United
Provinces.

The bank of Amsterdam, which is the lower apartment, is famous all over the
world. The great treasure said to be locked up in the vaults of this house, are
the sums received in purchase, not of bank stock, but of bank-transfer. This is
not like that of London, a bank that circulates notes in return for cash; on
the contrary, it is a bank of deposit; whoever pays money here has it entered
in the bank-books, but can never again demand it. When he wants to raise money,
he offers his bank credit for sale, which is transferred in a moment, and any
sums of money may always be raised upon it.

The treasure in the bank in Amsterdam is an entire secret to all but those who
have the management of it; the value has been computed, or rather guessed at;
and supposed to be from 20 to 40 millions sterling; but to name any particular
sum must at the best be but guessing at random. It is however a very
astonishing system of accumulation; for it is a well-known fact, that money
once paid into the bank-books can never be demanded; and further, that money is
perpetualy paid in. Here, therefore, there seems to be a constant ingress, but
no egress; consequently a treasure which seems perpetually increasing.

Marshal says, that though by the regulations of the bank, no money can be paid
to any person that demands it, in consequence of his credit on the bank; yet it
is certain the bank lends both money and credit to the brokers, who make it
their business to buy bank credit, and give cash for it. These people attend
every morning between eleven and twelve, before the Stadthouse, either to buy
or sell bank-credit, as occasion may offer.

Hanway, who gives the best account of this bank, does it in the following
words: As the bank of Amsterdam receives only the best and purest coin, or
bullion, the bank-money bears a commission of 4 or 5 per cent. If a person is
desirous to raelise his bank-credit, he disposes of it with greater facility
than we sell bank-stock. Here they make payments after the manner of the bank
of Venice, viz. by transferring in the books of the bank, from the credit of
one to the credit of another: these transfers are made by the personal
appearance of the transferror, by his order, for which there are printed forms;
or by virtue of his power of attorney. Though no money can be claimed again,
when once paid into the bank, yet in cases of deposits, the same identical gold
and silver may be reclaimed by him who delivered it in; for which purpose he
has a permit renewable every six months, otherwise to become invalid. In which
latter case, the cash so delivered, is blended with the common stock, and
transferable only in the manner already mentioned. Though this bank pays no
interest, yet it receives interest for the same loan, to the East and
West India Companies; the large sums of money lent to the Dutch Government, are
entirely independent of this bank; the revenues of each respective province
being engaged as a security for such sum.

The great hall is a noble room indeed, adorned on all sides with the finest
marble pillars of the Corinthian order; but the floor of marble is the most
surprising of all, which is so laid as to represent without the addition of any
other lines than the veins of the marble, both the celestial and the
terrestrial globes. Each of these marble maps, as they are styled, being
twenty-two feet in diameter.

Below stairs are the prisons both for debtors and criminals, with a
guard-chamber, where the keys of the city are locked up every night. The
sovereign power of this city is lodged in 36 senators, who continue members for
life; and when any of them die, the remaining senators elect others in their
room, the people having no share in the nomination or choice: the senate
likewise elect the deputies to be sent to the states of Holland, and appoints
the chief magistrates of the city, who are said to resemble the Lord Mayor and
Aldermen of London. The Burgomasters are four in number, three of which are
chosen annually.

The police of this city seems worthy of imitation. Notwithstanding its being
the first trading city in the world, and a conflux of all sorts of people, it
seldom happens that there are above one or two executions here in the course of
the year. What is more singular, no person can be put to death without
previously signing his own condemnation, acknowledging his guilt and the
justice of his sentence, which is done with great form and ceremony, in a room
of the Stadthouse, exposed to the open air at two different times. The number
of debtors too is very inconsiderable; every creditor here, as in most parts of
the continent, is obliged to allow a maintenance to the person he imprisons,
proportionate to his station in life.

The exchange is a large building, and well adapted to the purpose, but it is
unornamented, and not equal in architecture to that of London; the contrivance
of numbering the pillars, in order to find a merchant the more readily, is very
convenient. It was very imprudently built on a canal; this circumstance set
some wicked persons about sixty or seventy years since, to endeavor to blow it
up, while the merchants were assembled; for this purpose they procured a large
quantity of powder and other combustibles, which they placed under the bridge
that goes over it; a child however blew out the match which prevented the fatal
effects that would otherwise have ensued. As an acknowledgement for the
preservation of such a number of the inhabitants, all the children in Amsterdam
have the privilege of coming and playing in the exchange the first three days
of the fair in the afternoon, and of making as much noise as they please.

The admiralty, says Marshal, is the next public edifice that demands
attention; the size of it, with its environs, is very considerable. It consists
of three sides of a square; the front being 220 feet long, and the wings the
same; in the midst is the yard for building. The arms and stores belonging to
the ships are kept here in very great order. The ground-floor is filled with
cannon balls; and the second contains the arms and cordage; the third their
sails, public flags, etc. Besides these, here are many other curiosities of the
naval kind, which are worth viewing. The dock is 508 feet long; and contiguous
to it, are the houses for lodging the carpenters, etc. The order in which every
thing is kept cannot fail of striking every one. This building with its
contents has been lately destroyed by fire.

The East India house and Arsenal are great buildings, which much deserve
viewing. In the former, the company hold their meetings, and have very
considerable magazines of all sorts of India goods. The arsenal is 2,000 feet
square every way; it contains docks for building the ships, and warehouses and
stores for completely rigging them, all in excellent order. They have magazines
of all sorts of naval stores; in one they have many pieces of heavy artillery,
and in another more than 600 large anchors ready for use. The two rope-walks
are 18,000 feet long.

These are the principal public buildings in this city; but there are others
which will attract the attention of travelers; such as, the works going
forward in the harbors, the sluices, the bastions, with each a windmill, the
bridges, etc. As to hospitals, there are a great number of them, but the
architecture of the edifices is nothing; it is however highly worthy of
observation, that all the poor of Amsterdam, and indeed of all the provinces,
are maintained by charity, there being no poor-tax in any country in Europe,
except England; the same fund supports all the hospitals, in which there are
above twenty thousand people.

At all the public inns and taverns, and at those houses in which any public
business is transacted, there are poor-boxes, into which, it is usual to put
contributions from all sales, auctions, etc. Certain persons are also appointed
to go and collect alms from time to time, and at all the public festivals,
which are applied to the same use: the theaters, and places of amusement of
every kind, pay a third or a half of their gains for the like purpose; and if
this is not sufficient, government makes good the remainder. Every person
entering the gates of Amsterdam, after dark, pays a penny to the poor; but
after a certain hour of the night, (eleven or twelve,) none can enter the city
till the next morning.

In all the towns of Holland, they take excellent precaution to force the idle
to work. They have a house of correction, called a rasp-house, in which they
shut up the idle poor and vagrants, that can work and maintain themselves, but
will not. The employment they give them is to saw and rasp Brazil wood; in
which if they are not expeditious, they are severely beaten; and for those who
are lazy, they have an admirable contrivance, which is a cellar with a pump,
into which they let water, so proportioned to the strength of the person, that
he shall be able, with infinite labor in pumping it out, to save himself from
being drowned; which fate those who are put there are, by law, doomed to
suffer, if they do not escape it by hard working; and for such as are
incorrigibly idle, this labor is admirably adapted. In these prisons they also
put young men whose debauchery or extravagance threatens the ruin of their
health and fortune; and this is done at any time on the request of their
parents or guardians: women are likewise sometimes permitted to confine their
husbands in these prisons, on a complaint of their being extravagant. It does
not however appear that this is effected by virtue of any written law, but
through custom and ancient usage.

It is observed of the hospitals in this country, as well as of those in
England, that they resemble the palaces of princes more than the habitations of
poor people. There are houses also where a person may have his diet and lodging
as long as he lives, on the payment of a small sum of money in advance.

As to churches, the only one worthy of being mentioned is the new one,
dedicated to St. Catharine; the ornamental parts of which are finished in a
most capital manner. The pulpit is carved in the richest style; the chancel is
parted off by a railing of Corinthian brass; the windows are likewise finely
painted, and the organ is the best in the low countries, except that at
Haerlem; and they say at Amsterdam, the best in the whole world: it has a row
of pipes, designed to counterfeit a chorus of voices, which it performs very
badly; there are fifty-two whole stops besides the half ones, with two rows of
keys for the feet, and three for the hands. Here is to be seen a most
magnificent tomb of the brave Admiral de Ruyter; his effigy lying at large,
with all sorts of trophies in marble, sculpture and relievo, with large
inscriptions. In one of the aisles of this church is another sumptuous
monument, erected to the memory of John Van Galen, another of their admirals,
with a very fine inscription.

This church, however, is not yet finished, though it has been begun more than
an hundred years ago; the steeple was designed to have been much higher: more
than 6,000 piles have already been driven into the ground in an area of one
hundred feet square, as a foundation for it; but still they thought the
bogginess of the ground not sufficiently remedied for supporting so great a
weight, as this steeple would be, if it were finished.

The number of churches, of the established religion in this great city, does
not exceed thirteen; but several of them have two galleries one over the other,
and contain a prodigious number of people. There are, however, upwards of
fourscore Roman-catholic chapels, besides a great number of others, belonging
to different sects of the protestants: none of these, however, are permitted to
marry, according to their respective rites, without the marriages being first
solemnized before a magistrate; nor any persons admitted to offices in the
state, but those of the presbyterian or established religion.

It is observed, that the Jews of Amsterdam live in more splendor than in any
part of the world. They reside in a peculiar quarter of the city, resembling a
little town, and have two synagogues; one not inferior to the best church in
London, and the other though not near so sumptuous, exceeds any they have at
Rome or Venice; besides which, they have schools in which they educate their
youth in their own religion and language. I went once, says some writer, into
their synagogue, where were about 2,000 men and boys with white silk hoods over
their shoulders, listening to two others, who had but little resemblance to
priests, and who were explaining the laws at the lower end of the church: at
every period they were repeating their great Ala, or Allalujah, to which the
rest did not seem very attentive.

The manufactures carried on in this city, are more numerous and considerable
than at any other place in the seven provinces; they weave all sorts of cloths,
woollens, stuffs, and silk, gold and silver silks, ribbons, tapestry, linen in
large quantities, etc. All sorts of fabrics in leather, with many in ivory and
metals, are likewise carried on here: they have also a great variety of mills
for sawing, polishing, etc. Their sail-cloth and paper-manufactories are
likewise very considerable; and the printing of books should not be forgotten;
they print in all languages. Here are great numbers of booksellers, who it is
thought employ twice the quantity of presses that work at London: these books
are exported to England, and some to the southern parts of Europe; but vast
numbers to all parts of Germany, Denmark and the North.

Amsterdam can boast of no great antiquity; it owes its origin to a few fishing
villages, and was first walled in about 1482. Its present number of inhabitants
is computed by Marshal at 300,000. Busching makes the number only 200,000. The
foreigners resorting hither from time to time likewise form a very considerable
number.

The air of this city, says Marshal, is so bad and foggy, that I can hardly
believe the assertion of those who affirm it to be healthy. It is surrounded
entirely by the sea and by marshes; the canals are very numerous, and not
always free from noxious exhalations. The cleanliness, indeed, of the
inhabitants is carried to as great a height as possible, but this by no means
remedies the evil; for that eternal washing must add to the damps, which are
otherwise so unwholesome in this country. The best part of their cleanliness,
is that exerted in keeping their canals clean; but I must remark, says he, I
saw no small neglect of this most essential object.

The most useful of the four elements, water, with which the Dutch are
surrounded, is not to be procured here fit for drinking, without great
difficulty. What is generally used for this purpose, is that which is had from
the clouds; they have likewise water which they procure from a small river, the
Vecht, some miles distant; but even this is not very good.

The Dutch were formerly very attentive to have all their carriages placed on
sledges, and drawn only by one horse; this was certainly a wise precaution,
considering that the whole city is on a foundation purely artificial, on piles;
but this regulation is now but little attended to; for there are at present a
great number of coaches on wheels: it is true they pay a very considerable tax,
which, as the number of carriages increased, has already been raised once or
twice, and amounts now to about seven pounds ayear, but still as luxury
increases, coaches on wheels increase; and the higher they are taxed, some
sensible people are of opinion, the more they would increase.

With respect to the sledges, as it may be easily conceived, if the body of a
coach was conveyed through the streets of London on a sledge, that the least
irregularity in the surface of the pavement, would render it liable to be
overset. It will not appear surprising that the man who guides the horse,
should walk by the side of the vehicle, to prevent any such accident: and if,
from the pavement not being level, the carriage should incline toward him, he
keeps it up with his shoulders; if, on the other hand, it inclines the contrary
side, there is a rope fastened to the edge of the top of the coach, which he
pulls toward him with all his might, to prevent the carriage from oversetting
on the other side. This carriage is drawn with ropes by one horse; the driver
has a bucket of water fastened to the sledge, and a mop with which he is
continually wetting it; but as, Marshal observes, these carriages are getting
very much into disuse. They are however, the only public vehicles to be met
with in that city, which are to be hired by the hour. It may be supposed the
prices of such carriages cannot be very extravagant. There are carriages on
wheels to be hired, but their prices are extravagant; and the permission of the
burgomasters must be previously obtained.

The government of this city is vested in about ninety persons, who are elected
from amongst the burghers. Of these, thirty-six compose the council, who
represent the whole body of the people, and are invested with supreme power.

Respecting trade, this is the grand emporium, not only of the United
Provinces, but the center of all the commerce of Europe. For a general
correspondence, it much exceeds London; but the gross amount of the trade of
London, far exceeds that of Amsterdam. Two thousand sail of ships annually
enter this port, which must form a vast commerce; the different branches of
which shall be treated of hereafter.

There are some very good collections of natural history, drawings, paintings,
and medals, in this city; which those who are amateurs generally go to view,
and which the possessors are always prepared to show. There is, in particular,
a very fine collection of pictures, by the celebrated Mr. Hope, of Amsterdam,
which all strangers of any rank never fail of going to see; this gentleman is
of Scotch extraction, a descendant of the Hopeton family, and supposed to be
one of the richest and most extensive merchants in the whole world. The
compliment paid to him on the change at Amsterdam, is so great, that it is
never supposed to begin till he comes.

The price of living in Amsterdam, for a stranger at a middling auberge, is
nearly as follows: a florin or guilder a day, that is 20d. for the chamber;
breakfast with tea as in England, costs ten stivers or ten-pence; the dinner,
with a pint of wine, thirty stivers or half a crown; supper the same.

The beds consist of four or five mattresses, with a very broad down-bolster,
instead of pillow, generally fitted into the side of a room, like the cabin-bed
of a ship, with a rope hanging down from the top to catch hold of, in order to
lift one's self up, when we wish to rise. Comfort and convenience seem here to
be studied; but on account of a number of the mattresses, they are four or five
feet high from the floor; and a young couple, on their wedding night, unless
their blood is truly Dutch, would run the hazard of breaking their necks; in
truth, they are fit only for the most sober sleepers. Some have side-boards to
prevent the clothes falling off, and the sleeper falling out.

Marshal gives a very different account of the expenses incident to a stranger
at Amsterdam for his diet and lodging; but then it should be recollected that
he was an Englishman, and the writer from whom the above extract was made, a
Frenchman. I was very fortunate in my quarters at Amsterdam, says Marshal,
being recommended to a private family in trade, for lodgings. I dined for some
days either at an ordinary, where I paid to the amount of ten shillings for my
dinner, or at some merchants houses to whom I was recommended: but afterward I
boarded with the family, who lived much better than I should have supposed any
people would do, who let lodgings. Their dinners were excellent, and dressed in
the French style: but I paid, says he, twenty florins a-week for my lodgings,
and seventeen more for my board, servant included. This would be thought very
dear in London, he adds; but owing to the difference of custom in the two
cities, board and handsome lodgings is not to be had in Amsterdam for any price.

Coffee-houses are to be met with in this city, the same as in London; but
their internal appearance is very shabby. Different foreign papers are to be
met with in them, but not upon that extensive scale as in London. In most of
them smoking is permitted, which renders the smell of them at all times rather
offensive; they are much frequented by the middling class of Germans, and
Frenchmen, who are everlastingly discussing the politics of Europe, with a
self-sufficiency and volubility of speech, that is almost incredible.

The spill-houses must not be omitted, which are a very singular establishment
of the kind, and not to be met with in any other town in Europe. These are
public-houses licensed by the state, for the reception of girls of the town:
both the girls who enter these houses, and the persons who are the owners, pay
a tax to the state. To these places people of character resort openly, without
fear or shame. There is as little scandal in being seen in one of them, as
being seen at a playhouse, or any other place of amusement; the entertainments
of these houses are music and dancing: the nymphs of this place, who are not
engaged in dancing with their paramours, are seated round the room; and every
stranger goes and talks to them if they are not previously engaged, as long as
be thinks proper; and generally offers them wine and other refreshments, as he
would to persons he mixed with at an assembly. They dance minuets and
mattelots; and every man who takes out a girl to dance, pays sixpence to the
music. If any one chooses to retire with them, there are small rooms adjoining,
furnished with a bed and other conveniences; and if a man withdraws with his
mistress, he returns with her into the room; and no more notice is taken of
him, than if he had only gone out to speak to a friend. Though the
establishment of these houses was well meant, they are seldom frequented but by
sailors and the lower class of men and women; the girls are generally dirty,
painted and patched. The States are of opinion, that if they did not indulge
the people in this particular, they should never be able to keep their wives
and daughters chaste; and therefore of two evils they choose the least.

The houses in general are old fashioned, and built, as we have observed, with
pediment tops; and those streets through which there is no canal, are narrow.
One very singular circumstance has been remarked by travelers in these narrow
streets, that most of the houses stand out of the perpendicular, and incline
forward; and this happens not only with many of the houses, but even with the
churches; several of the steeples of which may be observed far from upright.
There are people in Holland who will engage under a heavy penalty, on being
well compensated, to set the steeples as erect, as when they were first built.
The method they take is very simple; it is merely to dig under the foundation
of the opposite side of the building, which never fails to restore it to its
perpendicular.

From Amsterdam to Utrecht is a fine broad canal; and for the distance of 12
miles from the former city, the banks are covered with country-houses, where
the merchants of Amsterdam regale themselves every Sunday. Each house has a
summer house built on the canal, that will hold ten or a dozen people; and in
fine weather, they are generally full of people smoking and drinking: each
person distinguishes his country-seat by some motto either in Latin or Dutch,
allusive to the happiness of a retired life, painted on the outer gate. Their
gardens are pretty, but in the old taste; parterres of flowers, long narrow
alleys, some covered with vines, etc. with statues at the end. Their houses are
covered with fruit trees; but from a care not to injure the building, a wooden
frame is fixed against the house, and the trees nailed against such frames.
There being no gravel in the country, their walks are merely earth, kept free
from weeds. Most of the houses are painted white, and window-frames and doors
green; PLAN of the CITY of ROTTERDAM
map of Rotterdam and this contrast is picturesque and pleasing. They are
generally built close on the bank, a sandy road only passing between the river
and the canal.

Rotterdam next to Amsterdam, is the most considerable town in Holland for
largeness, beauty of its buildings, trade, and riches; it is situated at the
confluence of the rivers Rotter and Maese. It has its name from the former of
these rivers which runs into it on the north-west side, and dam, signifying in
Dutch, a fence against the waters. This city, says Marshal, is second to
Amsterdam alone, and comes nearer to that famous emporium of trade, than any
port in England does to London. The Maese here is a very noble river, and
canals are cut from it through every part of the city, which are so deep and
broad, that ships of above 300 tons, load and unload directly into the quays
and warehouses on the banks, as smaller vessels do at Amsterdam. The sides of
many of the canals are planted with tall trees, which united with the masts and
flags of the shipping, and the houses, form a very pleasing spectacle.

Rotterdam has greatly the advantage of Amsterdam, for convenience of commerce.
Ships of large burden cannot go up to Amsterdam without unloading; but they
may here come close to the merchants houses. In winter both the Maese and the
Texel are frozen up; but in the Maese the passage is open much sooner, which is
a great advantage in trade; insomuch, that 300 sail of British ships have been
seen sailing out of this harbor at once, when not a ship in the Texel has been
able to move. Add to this, that the country about Rotterdam is far more
pleasant, the air more healthy, and the water better; but the other being the
seat of government, counterbalances all these advantages, and gives it
infinitely a greater trade.

Nine-tenths of the British trade with the United Provinces center at this
place, which is owing to the advantage of its situation; many ship-loads of
goods consigned for Amsterdam, are sent hither, and go by canals to that city:
several hundred sail of British vessels are sometimes in this harbor at a
time. There is also a considerable share of the East India trade carried on
here, with very great magazines of their goods; and a glass manufactory, which
works only for the East India ships. I saw in it, says Marshal, a vast quantity
of toys done in enamel, bowls, cups, saucers, plates, figures, etc. many of
which were in a grotesque style, and well executed: these, they told me, met
with a ready sale in the islands depending on the Dutch empire in those regions.

Several of the streets are very spacious and well built; Heeren street is the
finest; the houses are built of hewn stones, but the Boompies is more
agreeable, lying along the Maese, the length more than half a mile; it seems
like a vast quay; on one side is a row of lofty elms, skirted by the river,
which is sometimes full of ships, and on the other, the street is bounded by
very large and well built houses. The best company in the city come here to
walk in an evening. There are only four churches in this city of the
established religion, and none of them worth notice; but there is a large
English chapel, where the service of the church of England is performed by an
English clergyman, presented to it by the bishop of London. The income about
100l. a year. The Exchange is a very large and massive building, which gives a
good idea of the place.

In the houses belonging to the merchants, both of this city as well as of
Amsterdam, all the best apartments are on the second floor; the ground floors
are used for offices. On the first-floors the families live; on the second
story are the best rooms, and the garrets or upper stories serve for
warehouses; and as there are goods perpetually craning up into some or other of
the warehouses, it is not a little dangerous to walk along the streets of
either of these cities. In general they do not crane their goods up as in
England by a wheel fixed in the warehouse; but draw them by a horse, whose
harness is fixed to a rope wnich runs through the pulley of the crane; and thus
running a considerable length along the street, draws up the goods.

Some of the merchants houses are very magnificent both here and at Amsterdam;
for 6000l. sterling is no price for a good house; and they pride themselves in
old-fashioned furniture. The rooms are lined with oil-cloth, some painted
similar to our paper hangings, and some with ordinary landscapes; a glass
luster generally hangs in their best room, and Turkey carpets cover them, often
of such dimensions as to be worth from thirty to a hundred pounds. The rooms
dado high, are lined with wainscot, and some with white marble; this with the
oil-skin hangings renders them easy to be washed; the maids are cleaning these
and the windows of the house every day of the week; the curtains and
bed-furniture are always taken down and washed, when the least soiled; and of
course though a Dutch house may be damp, it is remarkably clean and well kept.

This city is very famous for having given birth to Erosmus. Little as the
Dutch affect to admire literature, they one and all show the house in which he
was born, with a kind of ostentation. On the great bridge is a tolerable statue
of him in brass; he is represented with a flowing gown, a cap on his head, and
a large folio book in his hand, wide open; the pedestal is of marble enclosed
with iron rails; the expression, says Marshal, is nothing remarkable; and in
that particular we perfectly agree with him. Among Dutchmen, Erasmus might be a
very learned man; but among learned men, we apprehend him to have been, at the
best but a second-rate genius. There is nothing elevated or sublime in his
writings, and those compositions of his which are in most request, are
eminently characteristic of the genius of the country-buffoonery and low humor.

All sorts of provisions are very dear at this place, where fish is far from
cheap; the Dutch are amazingly industrious, and the lower class very frugal;
was that not the case, it would be impossible for them to live. Were the poor
at Rotterdam to squander away as much money in drink, as they do in the great
trading towns of England, they would starve: this may be easily conceived, says
Marshal, when I inform my readers, that during my stay here, bread was never
less than twopence halfpenny a pound, and that I could not live decently with
one servant at the inn, for less than twenty florins a day, which is one pound
thirteen shillings and four-pence; this, says he, is certainly as dear as in
England. Wine, he adds, is cheaper than in England, but they have a great deal
that is very bad. The red wine that is generally met with on the continent out
of France, particularly in Flanders, Germany, and Holland is a thick, muddy
kind of claret, and considerably stronger; perhaps from a mixture of brandy
with it, than genuine claret. This wine is to be had on the continent for about
two shillings a bottle, and has a roughness like port. There is only one
spill-house in this town.

In the year 1732, the number of taxed houses were estimated at between six and
seven thousand, and the inhabitants at between fifty and sixty thousand. The
regency is composed of twenty-four counselors, and a court of justice,
consisting of a chief judge, four burgomasters and seven aldermen.

Dort is an inconsiderable town compared with Amsterdam and Rotterdam, yet its
deputies rank first in the assembly of deputies, from the different towns in
Holland; whereas the Hague being considered only as a village, sends no
deputies to the states of Holland. However, the Hague, from its being the
residence of the Court, the place where the States General assemble, and the
center of attraction to all foreigners; we shall proceed to treat of it, after
having premised one or two particulars respecting the town of Dort, which is
the most ancient in the province of Holland, as well as the first in dignity.
This is the only town in the province where they have the privilege of coining
money. In the year 1619 a famous synod was held in this city for examining the
opinion of the Arminians and Calvinists.

In one of the upper rooms of the gunner's doel are the benches where this
famous synod sat, which has given rise to so many divisions in this country
THE ESCAPE OF GROTIUS
between the Arminians and the Anti-arminians, Remonstrants and
Anti-remonstrants, predestinarians, latitudinarians, etc. who all pretend to
give a true interpretation of the articles established in this synod. Some
Arminians suffered death for the cause, and the celebrated Grotius was
imprisoned, and would have probably shared the same fate, had he not escaped by
artifice, and fled to Paris, where he was highly caressed by the French king,
and allowed a pension of a thousand crowns a year. His escape was effected by
means of his wife, in the following manner. He had obtained leave for a great
trunk of books to be brought him, which he sent backwards and forwards several
times for near a twelvemonth; it was at first diligently searched by the
guards, but finding nothing but books and linen, they did not trouble
themselves to look into it, as it passed; on which his wife persuaded him to
lock himself into the trunk, and endeavor to make his escape, and he was
accordingly carried off without any suspicion. His lady who was left behind in
the apartment, lay upon the bed, in her husband's nightgown and cap,
pretending to be ill; whereby prevented any enquiry after him for several days.
For this meditated scheme, she was in danger of being condemned to perpetual
imprisonment, but was at length by a majority of her judges formally
discharged, and followed her husband to France, where many other Arminians met
with a kind reception, and were allowed liberty of conscience.

This town likewise gave birth to the famous De Wit. It carries on a
considerable commerce in timber and Rhenish wine, by means of the Rhine, which
flows by its walls; though not so much as formally. There are at present in it
about 18,000 inhabitants. Its situation is naturally so strong, that though it
has no fortifications, it was never yet taken. It is an island which was formed
in 1421, by a terrible inundation, which destroyed seventy-two villages, in
which, says Busching, there perished not less than 100,000 persons. It is
curious to see the floating rafters come down the Rhine to this place from
Cologne, on which there are upwards of three hundred persons.

Brill is about six miles distant from Helvoet, which is the town where
passengers always land, who go over in the packet to Holland from Harwich. In
this city may be observed the same neatness as is to be met with in all the
other cities of Holland. This town and Helvoet-sluys both stand in an island.
Marshal calls it a poor fishing place. The fortifications give it the repute of
being strong; but the finest object is the river Maese at high water, which is
near two miles over, and the fight of which, though beautiful to view, has not
proved very pleasing to many an English traveller, who perhaps fondly imagined
that when he had once got on terra firma in Holland, he should no more be
obliged to trust himself on that element which brought him there, except along
their canals; till he returned back to his native country.

The houses are in general uniform, built of brick, with sharp roofs and
pointed fronts. What renders this city very famous in Holland is, that the
Count de la Marc seized upon it with his gueuses or beggars in 1572, and by his
brave example drew the other towns of the Netherlands into a general revolt.

Hague is a most beautiful place, says Busching, situated in a very delightful
country, without either gates or walls. It is surrounded however by a moat
which is passed over at the entrance of the town by draw-bridges.

Its environs are exceedingly pleasant, from being bounded on the east by
verdant meadows; on the south by splendid seats; on the west by the sand-hills
along the North Sea, on which side there is a straight avenue paved with
clinkers, and a two-foot walk for passengers, planted with several rows of
trees, leading to the village of Scheveling, about two miles distant; and
northward is a delightful wood, in which the Stadtholder has a country seat.
This village, the first of its kind in Europe, is the residence of the
States General of the states of Holland, of the courts of justice, and of the
foreign ministers. The number of inhabitants are computed at 40,000.

The Hague, says Marshal, is a considerable city, though called a village, from
the ridiculous reason of its not being walled. It has more of the rus in urbe,
he adds, than any place he had ever seen. The streets are broad and regular,
but few of them without trees; the squares, like ancient Athens, are surrounded
with groves; and the numerous gardens, with the surrounding meadows, hardly
ever broken in upon by those receptacles of filth, and brick-kilns, which
surround London, render it quite rural, and make it delightful to those who
admire such views in the midst of a city. Some writers make the number of
gardens in this place and its environs to amount to upwards of 4,000, a number
one would think scarce credible.

Every city of the United Provinces has a house here for its respective
deputies. The old palace of the counts of Holland, at present, belongs to the
Stadtholder; and though it was built 500 years ago, the wood work is still
sound. In the center of the area between the buildings of this palace, is the
great hall, where the trophies of the republic in their many victories are hung
up; but in other respects it has nothing to recommend it. In this palace the
states of the United Provinces assemble, and here the foreign ministers have
their audience. On the west it opens to a large plain, surrounded with
magnificent houses, regularly planted with trees, which have made some
travelers draw a comparison between this spot and St. James's park. It is
indeed like the Mall in St. James's park, but not a third so long.

The streets of the Hague are extremely well paved with clinkers, that wear an
appearance of bricks; the joints are so well closed, that they admit of washing
like a house; and the inhabitants seem to vie with each other in this public
cleanliness; those of each house keeping that spot clean which is before it,
which makes walking in them exceeding pleasant. This spirit of neatness maybe
observed at Rotterdam and most other towns in Holland; but the pavements not
being so good, the effects are not so very visible as they are here. This great
attention in the Dutch however to the keeping of their houses clean, seems
rather on the decline: there being many houses in England kept to the full as
clean as any in Holland. But this extends only to the better ranks of people.
For among the lower class, there is no comparison between the two nations. A
Dutch cottage, or the house of an inferior tradesman, is kept as clean as
possible, though there be ever so many children in it; but in England such
habitations are too often the residence of filth and nastiness. We have a
female character, says Marshal, amongst us who is called a daudle, but such a
being is not known in Holland.

There is one article which is found great fault with by strangers at the
Hague, and that is the expense of fuel. A fire of wood will cost as much as
seven fires in London; and I saw no coal, says Marshal; turf is the only
firing. This I do not dislike, he adds; its making no smoke, which from
sea-coal is offensive to the smell, and from wood prejudicial to the eyes, an
advantage much in its favor; besides the most asthmatic person will find no
inconvenience to his breath from turf. But as to stoves so much used in this
and other northern countries, they are extremely disagreeable: custom might
reconcile them; but an English fire far exceeds all these contrivances.

This place appears very different from any other of the Dutch towns; business
and making money is all that is going forward at Rotterdam, but at the Hague
there is nothing of the kind: to make amends for which, there is as much good
company as in any city of Europe. It is the court of the Prince of Orange,
consequently all the foreign ministers make it their place of residence; and
the meetings of the States General are ever held in this place: the number of
elegant equipages is great, the expensive dresses, the quantity of servants,
and the general air of luxury and pleasure, carry a very different appearance
from any thing to be met with elsewhere. But though there, are such a number of
idle people here who spend very great incomes, yet still the Hague is very
badly off for public diversions. The chief place of public amusement here is a
French theater, and this is chiefly supported by the subscriptions of foreign
ministers. Operas are indeed occasionally performed when singers are to be had;
but where comedies are badly performed, no very sanguine expectations will be
entertained of any great degree of excellence in their operas. Concerts they
have very often, but the best are at private houses.

The public buildings at the Hague make no figure; the houses; the form of the
streets and squares, are in general infinitely superior; some of these indeed
appear very magnificent. The palace, as they call it, has several courts, but
it is a very antiquated building. Nor is that which belonged to prince Maurice
of Nassau, and where the council of war now assemble, in the least remarkable.
Notwithstanding this place is so extremely populous, there are but two churches
in it. One of them is of a circular figure without pillars, a mode of building
which the Dutch seem to admire.

The Voohout is the Dutch Mall, and is about as broad as that of St. James's.
It was planted by the Emperor Charles V.; there are three alleys for carriages,
and the buildings opposite to it make a good appearance; but what is very
singular, instead of gravel, they have laid it with cockle-shells, which are
very unpleasant to walk upon. This, says Marshal, is very strange, as gravel
might be had from us at no great expense. Sand is the general substitute in
Holland, which takes off very much from the beauty of their gardens and public
walks. This Mall is however as much deserted as our Ring.

The Prince Graft is a very noble street, near half a mile long, of a a fine
breadth, and as straight as an arrow; a spacious canal, planted on both sides,
runs along the middle of it, with several stone bridges having iron
ballustrades, over it; the houses, especially those on one side, make a very
grand appearance, and the whole in short is very ornamental to the Hague. But
this street is a strong proof that planting of trees has not an effect equal to
a fine range of buildings unaccompanied by them. A canal cut through a very
wide street, and faced with stone, agrees extremely well with the regularity of
the houses, and is an additional beauty to them, but trees are no ornament here.

When, we said there was no commerce carried on in this place, we should have
excepted one article, and that the most liberal of all other articles of
commerce, namely the commerce of books. This is the great mart for literature,
particularly French, of all Holland, if not of all Europe. Great quantities of
books in quires are exported from hence all over Germany, as well as to England
and France. The Dutch editions of French books are in general in more esteem
than the French, as being printed better, and on a better paper, and what is
more material than all, more carefully revised, and therefore freer from the
errors of the press than the same works printed in other countries. What is it
that stamps such a value on the Elzevir editions at this present time,
particularly the editions of the classics, but that they are not only very
neatly but also very correctly printed; so that scarce a single error of the
press is to be found by the most discerning eye, throughout any of their works?

This town, considerable as it is, never had a voice among the six in the
senate, nor among the twelve that have been added since, though Purmerend and
Schiedam, two inconsiderable places, have votes, for which no other reason can
be assigned than that the Hague was always considered as a village, though the
most beautiful and largest in the world. Tacitus mentions some groves here in
which Claudius Civilis assembled the people, and made an harangue to them.
Guicciardini has likewise taken notice of some ancient sculptures and other
things relating to Adrian, Antoninus, Septimus Severus, and other Roman
emperors. Whilst Holland was under the Spanish jurisdiction, the treasury and
other public offices were here kept. The air of this place is said to be very
wholesome. Sir William Temple attributes longer life to the inhabitants of this
village, than to those of any other place in Holland.

Near the Hague are two or three other places which attract the attention of
strangers; the first is Scheveling, the road to which through the sand-banks is
curious. This is a pleasant little village about two miles from the Hague, on
the sea-cost. The road to it is paved, as we have already observed, and shaded
with double rows of lime trees and benches at different distances to sit down
upon. To this place people go to eat fish, fresh caught, and admire the beauty
of the prospect, as people in London occasionally make parties of pleasure to
Greenwich and Blackwall to eat while-bait. This coast is likewise very well
worth seeing, to remark the attention of the Dutch in keeping up their banks,
to prevent the depredations of the sea upon their country.

On this beach, which is very flat and regular, the famous sailing chariot of
Stevinus was made trial of, furnished both with wheels and sails, which carried
eight and twenty persons the astonishing distance of forty-two miles in two
hours; and once, by an error of the person who had hold of the rudder, was very
near sailing into the sea with a full cargo, which was rather more than they
had bargained for.

The great success of this sailing machine has produced many imitators in
different parts of Europe; and a hundred schemes for conducting not only
carriages but carts and wagons, and even ploughs by the wind have been
attempted. Something useful, says Marshal, might probably be invented, but
mathematicians wanting money for these experiments, none of their visionary
schemes have hitherto been carried in practice.

In summer, people come down here to bathe; but what is most singular is, that
the daughters of the fishermen take care of their clothes while they are
bathing, and furnish them with clothes, help to wipe them dry when they come
out of the water, without its being thought any scandal on either side; such is
the power of custom. Scheveling has already suffered so much from the
encroachments of the sea that the church which was once situated in the center
of the village, is now almost by the seaside.

At the small distance of a pleasant walk from the Hague, is the house in the
wood belonging to the Prince of Orange, which in Holland is an object of
curiosity; but there is nothing in it that will strike an Englishman accustomed
to English gardens. In the palace there is a fine saloon with a cupola, and it
is richly ornamented with some very capital paintings by Rubens, Vanderveldt,
Varelst, and Schuyr.

The family of the Bentincks have also some very fine gardens in the Dutch
taste near this place, known by the name of the Portland gardens, which they
keep open at all times for the accommodation of strangers, and of the public at
large; and these are almost the only gardens which are thus publicly open. The
eye here is agreeably amused by a diversity of objects to take off from the
tediousness of the long alleys in the Dutch gardens, (which are here, as in
other places, covered with sand, carried on in a straight line, and intersected
every instant by other similar straight walks) for there is a fine orangery, a
grotto, a jet d'eau, a grove, terraces, mounts, parterres, a lake, and a
menagery.

Ryswich is another village near the Hague, which most strangers visit, not
only to view the palace of the Prince of Orange, but as remarkable from its
being the spot in which a treaty of peace was concluded in 1697 between
England, Germany, Holland, France, and Spain. The palace is the only building
of free stone in the Seven United Provinces: it is strongly envelloped in wood,
which darkens every room; this passion of crouding all their houses with trees
and wood is unaccountable in the Dutch. In a hilly bleak country, where wind
and plenty of air were evils, one would naturally look for this taste; but in a
dead flat, where the air is apt to stagnate, as well as the water, it is
preposterous. There is nothing in the palace worthy of observation, but a few
good pictures. In the state chamber, is an echo which repeats distinctly at one
end of room whatever is said in a whisper at the other, without those who are
in the middle being able to comprehend a syllable that is said.

At Honslaerdyck there is another palace belonging to the Prince, about a mile
from the sea, in which there is a gallery of fine pictures, by the first
masters in the Flemish school, among which are a Charles the first, by Vandyke,
a Madona by him, with a Venus, by Rubens. This house is considered to be
superior to some of the famous palaces in Italy. From the back part there is a
delightful prospect through a pleasant grove, and some regular plantations of
ever-greens, which form a square of half a mile from each angle to the center:
beyond this place is an aviary for exotic birds, and a menagery for wild
beasts. The lower rooms of this place have no peculiar ornament, except being
neatly paved with marble, after the Dutch fashion; but the room up stairs are
magnificent, and the two galleries very curious. The princess's closet is
ornamented all round with exquisite japan-work.

To give some idea, before we entirely quit the Hague, of what may be the
expenses to a man of fashion, during a short stay in this seat of Dutch gaiety
and splendour, we shall extract what Marshal says on that subject. With respect
to an ordinary traveller, they may be brought within a compass nearly similar
to what we stated as the usual routine of expenses for strangers unincumbered
with carriages and servants at Amsterdam.

I was, says he, at the Parliament d'Angleterre, which was the hotel that all
persons of any rank went to. I found it fully answerable to the character I had
received of it; for although I was moderate in my bill of fare, yet I could not
come off for less than two regular courses, and several sorts of excellent
wines; indeed, it was to little purpose to be explicit in giving orders about
my meals, for I was served with a variety whether I chose it or not. The
expenses upon an average were about two guineas aday; but I entertained, says
he, some persons of character to whom I had letters of recommendation. There is
no satisfaction, he adds, in traveling expensively, especially in eating and
drinking, and such money is better expended in purchasing the rarities or
peculiar productions of the country, than in squandering away large sums at
inns. These circumstances he mentions as a hint to other travelers, that may
consider and lay their plan beforehand: for, by not taking private lodgings,
and by making a longer stay than he intended, his expenses were very heavy.

Those who make the tour of Holland from the Hague, proceed thither by the way
of Delft or Rotterdam, the latter of which cities we have noticed; or else take
their route by Leyden, Haerlem, Amsterdam and Utrecht, and so take Rotterdam on
their return. These are the principal and most populous cities in Holland, or
rather in the Dutch Netherlands; -- Utrecht not being in the province of
Holland, though all the rest are.

Delft lies in the road between the Hague and Rotterdam, about six miles from
the Hague. This is an agreeable place, pleasantly situated among the meadows;
the streets are spacious, and canals running through them planted with trees.
It is about half the size of Norwich. The principal object in it is the
manufactory of earthen ware, and hence called Delft. Their porcelain employs at
present about 4,000 people, men, women and children; the manufacture was once
so flourishing as to employ more than 7,000, but the setting up of a fabric of
white stone-ware in England was very prejudicial to it; though not near so much
as the Staffordshire cream-coloured ware; this has rivalled the Delft
manufactory, not only in the British consumption, but even in their own city,
to such a degree, as to have induced the principal manufacturers to make
application more than once for a prohibition of it: this has not yet been
granted; but very high duties have been laid on it; and the use of it still
continuing, they are attempting to rival us in the same manufacture, but
hitherto without success.

Brewing is also a trade in which the people of Delft are very much engaged,
and which succeeds very well: there was formerly a very considerable
cloth-manufactory here, but rival manufactories in France establisted in the
time of Louis XIV. have brought it to a low ebb.

There are but two churches in this city, in one of which is the tomb of Prince
William I. of Orange, the founder of the republic, who was treacherously shot
in his palace here by an assassin in 1584. The place and hole in the wainscot
through which the balls passed are still shown. A most noble mausoleum has been
erected here to his memory, at the expense of the states general. There are two
statues of him, one of marble, reposing on his tomb, which is supported by
twenty-two pillars of black marble, and another of brass standing near it. On
the top is Fame sounding her trumpet, with this motto Te vindice, tuta
libertas. Under your auspices shall freedom flourish. At his feet lies his
little dog, which is said to have pined away, and died with grief for the loss
of his master, (see the plate.) -- This church is now the burial place of the
Princes of Orange. The ashes of the celebrated Grotius are likewise reposed
here. Surely this man merited a statue of brass in the great square of
Rotterdam, much more than Erasmus. Possibly his works containing more sound and
deep learning, with less buffoonry than those of the other, were above the
comprehension of Dutchmen. In the other church is a stately marble monument to
the famous admiral Van Tromp. This city is likewise said to have given birth to
the celebrated Heinsius. In the hotel-de-ville, a fine gothic building, is a
machine in the form of a clog, which used to be put about the neck of persons
convicted of adultery.

The commerce of this place, as has been already remarked, is not so
considerable as formerly, and it is now the retreat of wealthy merchants; who
have probably been induced to come here from its centrical situation, the
salubrity of the air, its vicinity to the sea, the continued verdure with which
it is on every side surrounded, and its being a large, clean and quiet town,
unaccompanied with noise and bustle.

About as far to the south of the Hague as Delft is to the north, or something
more, lies the city of Leyden, esteemed the largest and finest town in Holland,
next to Amsterdam. It is seated in a country full of gardens and meadows, and
surrounded with a great number of ditches and canals, near the ancient bed of
the Rhine, which now looks like a canal. It is about four miles in
circumference, and its ditches are bordered with rows of trees. This town is
unquestionably one of the neatest and pleasantest in the Low Countries; and
though it may be going too far to say, it is the largest town in Holland next
to Amsterdam; yet Rotterdam is the only town besides, that comes in competition
with it. The buildings are beautiful and magnificent, the streets spacious and
very clean, with canals in the middle of many of them, the sides of which are
planted with rows of trees. The Rapenburg street is a very noble one; and, as
the inhabitants suppose, the finest in Europe. The great church is a vast
building, but most remarkable for being the burial place of the great
Boerhaave. The inscription on his monument is simple and noble. Salutifero
Boerhaavii genio sacrum. "Sacred to the health-restoring genius of Boerhaave."
Had not the family of this illustrious Hollander been rich enough to pay this
tribute to his memory, there would be nothing here to show that this town had
the greatest physician that ever lived since Hippocrates. If a naval officer
distinguishes himself ever so little, he is honored with a public funeral; but
those who contribute to enlighten the human mind by deep researches, go
unnoticed. In the church of St. Mary there is a monument of Joseph Scaliger,
and another of Elusius the herbalist. -- The stadthouse presents nothing worthy
of observation, but a picture by Luke of Leyden, of the last judgment. It is
said, this is the first painter who had any idea of perspective. He died in
1533.

But what has rendered this city famous all over Europe, is its university. It
undoubtedly has produced many great and very able men, But this, like their
commerce, appears on the deline. Whoever expects to see magnificent colleges,
or pompous heads of houses, will here be miserably disappointed.

They have only two colleges, in the nature of hospitals, for the support of
poor scholars, the rest of the students living at their own expense; they wear
no gowns or caps, but walk about the streets with their swords on, and appear
in the schools and perform their exercises with them on, and their heads
uncovered. Those who wish to be members of the university apply to the Rector
Magnificus, corresponding with our vice chancellor, who enters their name in
the university book; for which half-a-crown or five shillings is paid, which
entitles the student to a certain quantity of wine and beer without paying
excise.

Besides the public lecture, the professors allot certain hours for reading
private ones; these last about three months, for which the scholars pay forty
or fifty guilders, though they seldom are much superior to the lectures of our
private tutors. They commonly dictate in Latin, which is oftentimes not less
obscure than the subject of the lecture.

Degrees are not regulated here either by time or merit; if the student can
make a thesis, and pay his fees, he may be admitted. His thesis he is, pro
forma, obliged to maintain in the school against any opponent. The degrees of
doctor and masters of arts are the only ones in use among them; that of
bachelor being not known here. The graduates give public entertainments, and
publish their theses.

The professors of the several faculties publish their series lectionum,
containing the times when, and the subjects upon which they are to read in
public. Some of them have two hundred, others three hundred per annum.

The schools consist of a large pile of brick buildings, in the uppermost rooms
of which the famous Elzevir had his printing office. They have a library said
to contain some curious manuscripts; but neither their library, their
physic-garden, nor their collection of natural history, presents any thing very
interesting to the generality of travelers, of all which they seem to make
great boast in Holland. It was a remark of the late Doctor Johnson, that some
judgment might be formed of the state of literature in any town, from the
booksellers shops. If this criterion holds good with respect to Leyden,
literature will appear at a very low ebb there; the collection of books to be
met with in that city being in general but very indifferent, and mostly
confined to medical subjects. This university is the oldest in the United
Netherlands; and was founded by William I. Prince of Orange.

As this city seems to be on the decline in its literature, so it is in its
woollen manufactures (the staple commodity of this city,) and which were
formerly much more considerable than at present. The workmen consist of several
nations, particularly French. Their fabrics employ at present several thousand
men, women and children; chiesly making broad and narrow cloths, serges and
camlets; but they are inferior, says Marshal, to the finest cloths of the same
kind in England. Their camlets and rattines, however, are greatly superior to
those made at Brussels, which always have been held in high estimation; and
there are two colors to which they are supposed to give a superior dye, to any
other country whatever -- black, and particularly blue. The French are supposed
to equal them in their black, but the Leyden blue stands as yet unrivalled
every where. Their cloths they export to Spain, Turkey, and the East Indies; in
which countries they have the preference over ours; not from their being better
in quality, but from their being cheaper. Among other reasons assigned for
their trade being on the decline, one is, that the princes in Germany, who
formerly clothed their armies entirely with Dutch cloth, have lately supplied
themselves from manufactures of their own, which they had established.

A great trade is carried on here in garden-stuff, which is in such esteem as
to be carried as far as Amsterdam, to supply the markets there. Their gardens
are said to produce four or five crops every year; and it is further said, that
an acre of garden ground is worth two hundred and fifty pounds, purchase-money;
and arable, two hundred pounds, and an acre of meadow land, an hundred and
forty pounds.

This city likewise is famous for being the birthplace of John of Leyden, who
in 1534, set up to be a king; his followers were a kind of anabaptists, who
committed many outrages; but the following year they were punished for their
rashness and rebellion; and John himself was broken upon the wheel. This John
of Leyden was a tailor, and in the hall where the tailors meet, is shown the
board, which he used to cut out his cloth.

Not far from this place, at the village called Cathwich, near the sea, are the
ruins of an ancient fortress, known by the name of Arx Britannica, which being
built by Cabjala, and afterward destroyed by the Normans, was at last
overwhelmed by the sea; yet not so much, but that at certain times when the sea
is very low, its ruins are plainly to be seen; and some antiquities have been
found with this inscription, Ex. Ger. Inf. Ex Germania Inferiori. From Lower
Germany.

The only remaining city to be noticed in this province, is Haerlem, fifteen
miles distant from Leyden, and nine from Amsterdam; with which two cities it
enjoys a communication, by means of two spacious canals. The views of the
country between Leyden and Haerlem, are by no means unpleasant, though there is
a range of vast turf pits, and the lake of Haerlem on one side; but the other
is much diversified with meadows, fed principally with black, cattle. The lake
is twelve miles long, and three broad, lying between Amsterdam, Leyden, and
Haerlem; there is a very considerable commerce on it, so that it is finely
spread with sails. This lake yields great quantities of fish. It is surprising
that little jealousies between the three great cities near this river, should
prevent their agreeing, in a work so very advantageous to the country, as
draining and converting this lake into a rich meadow would be. The water is in
no places more than eight feet deep, and all of it could be conveyed away at a
small expense, and the whole space kept perfectly dry. The Dutch all agree that
it is practicable; but three cities abovementioned, cannot agree together
about doing it.

Haerlem, like other Dutch cities, has a show of fortifications, but there are
none that could hold out any siege. The streets are wide and straight, but the
houses have nothing in them to attract notice. There are many canals here: as
to the number of inhabitants, they are reckoned at fifty thousand. The
principal church is a very fine structure; it has three organs, one of which is
so celebrated, that it is usual for persons of fashion and fond of music, to
pay a ducat, the established fee, to hear a few airs played upon it. And they
show in this church some cannon balls, that are now sticking in the walls,
which were shot into it by the Spaniards during the time of divine service, in
the famous siege of 1572. In the roof are hung up the models of two vessels
with saws to their keel, which were sent by the people of Haerlem, to the siege
of Damiette, on the confines of Egypt, to cut the chain which stopped the
navigation up the Nile; by effecting which they delivered one of their counts
of Holland, who was kept prisoner there, under the reign of Barbarossa.

In memory of this extraordinary action, the young men of this town celebrate
the first of January, and carry little boats about, shaped like the ships in
the church; they boast that Barbarossa, in consideration of the signal services
done by the people of Haerlem in the holy war, added the sword to the arms of
this city, and the Partriarch of Jerusalem bestowed the cross upon it.

Haerlem likewise boasts the invention of printing by one Laurence Coster, who,
as Guicciardini says, walking one day in one of the groves, of which they have
several about this place, cut some letters from the bark he had peeled from the
trees, and stamping them, inverted on a piece of paper; he found them to come
right; then rubbing them over with ink, it produced something like a letter,
though somewhat blotted; however being encouraged by this rough draught, he cut
regular letters on better materials, which being dipped into a more glutinous
ink, by repeated improvements, he brought it at last to perfection. They say,
one of his servants robbed him of all his instruments, and went with them to
Mayence, or Mentz, which is the reason that city disputes this invention with
Haerlem. His picture with the letter A in his hand, and drawn with a furred
gown, is to be seen in the Prince's garden. They likewise show a piece of
Coster's first printing, the impressions only on one side, as they used to
print their first originals.

The gardens of this city merit much being seen: they are all almost in the
Fauxbourgs. It is the hyacinths which are now the prevailing flowers; formerly
the preference was given to the tulip. Though the price of the roots is very
much diminished, some at present will sell for a hundred florins a root;
formerly five hundred pounds have been given for a single root of yellow
hyacinth, but this was before they were general, fancy alone constituting the
great distinction between them. Next to the hyacinth, they value most the
tulip: next, the anemony, then the narcissus, and then the auricula: other
choice flowers, which some nations pride themselves in, are here in no esteem.
The bulbous flowers are exported all over Europe.

The objects most worthy of notice in this neighborhood, are the manufactures
of the bleach-ground; the principal trade is bleaching linen; large quantities
that have been made in other provinces, in Flanders, and in Silesia, are
brought to Haerlem, to be bleached: whole ship-loads have even been brought
here, from Scotland and Ireland, for the same purpose. It is the quality of the
water alone, which bleaches the linen in this place, so much better than in any
other. Repeated trials have been made in Scotland and Ireland, where Dutch
bleachers have been employed, without their having the same success. Let it be
remembered, however, that the whiter any cloth is made, so much the less time
it will wear; this extraordinary fine bleaching should therefore be confined to
such cloths, as are intended for the use of the rich. The charge of freight to
and from Scotland, with the price of bleaching, amounts to about tenpence a
yard, which would be a very great addition in the price of any but very fine
linens.

Besides this branch of trade, there are several considerable manufactures,
particularly of velvet, damasks, satins, silk stuffs of various sorts; thread,
tape, etc. In all which a great number of hands are employed; and I was here
told, says Marshal, that their fabrics had been increasing for some years, but
that their bleaching trade was on the decline.

Weavers, upon an average, will earn here, near half-a-guinea a week. From
different accounts of the number of hands employed in all the manufactures, it
appears there are from thirty, to upwards of forty thousand; but there are many
of them employed by some very considerable breweries, which work for
exportation.

In all this part of the province of Holland, scarce any arable land is to be
seen: their meadow land is very rich, and will let from forty shillings, to six
pounds an English acre. This land is principally applied to the feeding of
cows, which are of a very large breed; in the management of them, the peasants
are remarkably attentive; they keep them clothed all the winter, and as clean
as an English gentleman would a stable of hunters. This is not effected by the
means of litter, for they use none. A trench of stone or brick, is made in the
floor of the cow-room, in such a manner that the dung may fall directly into
it, and which being swept away with the dirt of the rest of the house, forms a
good compost; and a saving of straw in a part of the country where there is no
arable land, is an object of no small importance. They besides, dress and rub
down their cows, as we do our horses, which they think will make them give the
more milk; they likewise keep their cow-houses as warm as possible, and stop
every crevice, till the breath of the beasts makes the whole place perfectly
warm. This is a strange custom, and appears contrary to nature; but they carry
this notion so far of keeping their cows warm, that they even put cloths over
their loins, whilst they are feeding in the fields in summer.

These pastures are likewise fed by large herds of black cattle, which the
Dutch drivers purchase in Holstein and Denmark, for forty or fifty shillings
ahead, and sell to the farmers here for three or four pounds; and it is
observable that their meadows are so rich, that some of the beasts will be
fattened in six weeks time. The butchers buy them fat from five to nine pounds
ahead: and as an English acre will fatten three, the farmer makes from three
to six pounds an acre, for only part of the year.

It is asserted the flesh of their oxen is not so firm, nor their hides so
capable of making good leather, as those of English cattle: this is owing to
the luxuriance of the food, puffing them up in so short a time, rather than
giving them that solid fat, which six or eight months effect in England; it is
accordingly observed, that though some of these beasts are as large as the
English ones, yet they will not equal them in weight.

As the Dutch eat very little fresh beef, the greatest part is salted for the
shipping, or dried and smoaked in a peculiar manner for hung beef, which they
send all over Europe.

Land in the neighborhood of Leyden, sells dearer than in any other part of
Europe, when applied to cultivation, and not to building on. Arable land, as
has been observed before, will fetch 200l. an acre: and garden ground from 250
to even 300; the products they yield being highly valued by the Gourmands at
Amsterdam.

The gardeners are very skilful in cropping their lands continually, on the
plan now pursued in the gardens round London; where this art is carried to as
high perfection as in any quarter of the globe.

The general fertility the country is owing to the soil, and to its being so
well watered; for from the general flatness of the whole country, its vicinity
to the sea, and its numerous rivers, this country is evidently a drained marsh
or bog; it being all either a fat marly loam, mud, or a turf bog: these are
rich soils, and with the advantage of cattle, and having always water to have
recourse to, which the Dutch boors esteem a matter of great consequence both to
fattening cattle, and making them give large quantities of milk; they produce
the wonders that are seen in this country. Much therefore is owing to the
number of canals and rivers that intersect the meadows; and probably to their
overflowing large tracks of land in winter, and leaving behind advantages, it
may be presumed parallel to those which are left by the Nile.

Among the rivers it is very well known, that the Rhine is very inconsiderable.
At Leyden an insignificant canal is shown which is the real Rhine. The glory of
other rivers increases proportionably to the length of their course; but this
dwindles to nothing, and is utterly lost before it comes to its harbor.

The cause of the Rhine's fate was an earthquake, which shook the Downs in the
ninth century, and filling the mouth of this river, forced it to return and
seek a new passage. The river Seck was then scarce worth notice; but the waters
of the Rhine which were driven back and overflowed the country; swelled and
deepened the Leek's channel, and the entrance of the sea has been ever since
shut up, against the ancient course of the Rhine.

Thus, this poor river which runs such hazards in the lake of Constance, and
throws itself down a precipice near Schaff hausen, loses at length its
reputation, and waters, at the village of Caturik.

Before we quit the neighborhood of the Hague, and Leyden, which are reckoned
the politest places in all the provinces, and the most learned; one being the
seat of government, and residence of the foreign ministers, and the other an
university and the seat of sciences, and literature; we will beg leave to offer
some few remarks on the character of the people in this part of the United
Netherlands.

Among the lower classes of people, there is a very great national resemblance
throughout all the provinces; but among the better sort, who support themselves
without trade, and who have traveled, these are all more or less French. They
speak that language only, they dress in the French taste, eat in like manner,
and give themselves (particularly young men of any fashion in Holland) the same
airs, as if they aped French liveliness and vivacity. People of this
description are not uncommon at the Hague; this place not being supported by
trade, but rather the residence of idleness than industry; and being full of
foreigners, it may account for this motley appearance of characters, which we
find in the inhabitants of that city. It is likewise worth remarking, that
there is something of the character of a Frenchified Dutchman to be observed at
Leyden, though not so much as at the Hague, But at Rotterdam there is a visible
difference. This plainly shows that the characters and manners of the people
are very much formed, by their close adhering to or neglecting business. A
Dutch Burgomaster, or principal freeman, dresses in a formal suit of black, and
his lady in a hoop every way shaped like a bell, with a laced coif, worth 100l.
whilst the daughter shall be tricked out in every French fashion.

At Leyden the University draws a great number of persons who have no views of
trade, and who therefore affect the appearance and manners of the inhabitants;
but at Rotterdam every individual is deeply engaged in commerce, and therefore
exhibits the true Dutch character much more to the life.

An unshaken industry seems to be the strong characteristic features of this
city; no application wearies them, no accidents divert them; their whole
attention is directed to the raising of wealth; and it is not a little
surprising to see the numbers who have attained large fortunes, and yet
continue the same anxiety and eagerness after more, without thinking to enjoy
what they have already acquired. Their constitutions are cold and phlegmatic to
an amazing degree; a sober regular, parsimonious way of life, is habitual to
them, and no passion seems to lurk in their bosom that can ruffle them. This,
however, cannot be attributed to their love of trade, so much as to their
climate.

A Dutchman is as amphibious as a frog, says Marshal; half their country is
water, and half their time is spent upon it. The vapors which arise from the
quantity of water with which they are surrounded, and from a soil which is low,
moist, and boggy, must necessarily affect the mind of its inhabitants. What an
astonishing contrast between love in Spain or Italy, and love in Holland! Would
it not be amazing to tell a Neapolitan inamorato, that the height of his fine
phrenzy was mere climate; and that if he lived in Holland, he would look upon
his mistress with the coldest friendship!

But these characteristics are not general; there are and must be many
exceptions. Many of the merchants and manufacturers live genteelly; and though
not all in the French style, yet in much ease, plenty, and affluence, while
they attend to trade as closely as if no such external marks of riches were to
be seen among them. They are fond of indulging in the luxuries of the table, in
expensive furniture, and handsome equipages; but as for dress, amusements, and
a variety of servants, they are totally indifferent about them.

The true national character, unmixed, must be sought for among the lower
class; in them are to be found the same coldness of constitution, with no
invigoration than what beer, gin and tobacco give, which they take in great
quantities. In them is likewise to be seen a rough boorishness, which is not to
be met with in other countries. The very lowest of the people will not pay the
least mark of personal respect to the greatest merchant: this is the effect of
that equality which flows through a republic, and not mere liberty; for they
are governed with three times the severity in this country, that the lower
people in England are.

The following anecdote will illustrate this. After the elector Palatine, King
of Bohemia, who married the daughter of James I. and from whom the kings on the
British throne are descended -- after this king had been routed at the battle
of Prague, he fled to Holland. This was in the year 1520, about forty years
after the Dutch had thrown off the Spanish yoke, and when a spirit of equality
had taken hold of the people in general; the king with some few attendants was
out a coursing, and riding incautiously over a field that had just been sowed,
the farmer and DUTCH LIBERTY.
one of his peasants who had been threshing in the barn, seeing the king riding
on the land, quitted their work, and ran out to him with the utmost anger.
"Hollo!" cried the farmer, who knew the person of the king, "Hollo! you King of
Bohemia, -- what do you mean by riding over my land?" -- The king more
surprised than afraid, stopped his horse, made an apology, and returned.

The lower sort of Dutch have been reproached with being passionate, that they
draw their knives on each other, and in their insurrections are very barbarous;
but this scarce ever happens but when they are too free in their use of gin. --
We will now proceed to North Holland.

CHAP III. North Holland, or West Friesland.
THIS forms a peninsula; it being almost surrounded by the north and Zuyder
seas, and is connected only by an isthmus with South Holland. -- They are both
under one regency, called the States of Holland and West-Friesland, though the
appellation of West-Friesland belongs more properly to the northern part of
this country.

There are a great many very high dykes or sandhills in this part of Holland,
but the other parts of the country lie very low. It was formerly overrun with
washes or marshes, but the persevering inhabitants have drained them, and they
are now very fine meadow grounds; though it is necessary to keep up a great
number of wind-mills to carry off the waters occasionally, which is attended
with considerable expense.

Sardam, the town much visited by strangers, near Amsterdam, though a village,
in neatness has not its equal in all Europe, and for the considerable trade
that it carries on.

It is the principal place for ship-building in all the provinces; and when the
Dutch navy was at the height of its prosperity, was noted for a saying, That if
you gave the people six months notice, they could launch a man of war every day
in the year.

Here are at present large magazines of timber, masts, yards, cordage, sails,
anchors, cannon, and every thing necessary to build, rig and fit out, all sorts
of vessels: but this place is not only noted for ship-building; there are a
great many manufactures carried on here, particularly of aper; this being the
most considerable paper manufactory in all the Netherlands, and employing above
six hundred men, besides women and children; the men earn about seven shillings
per week, on an average, but some of them get much more. These wages seem to be
about equal to those given by the same manufactures in England, but living here
is much dearer, which is compensated by the superior frugality and sobriety of
the Dutch.

The number of wind-mills at this place is astonishing. Busching makes them to
be no fewer than twenty-three hundred.

Those for sawing timber to build their ships with, are admirable contrivances;
they facilitate the work so much, that it is greatly to be regretted, that they
are not imitated in England. Such a saw-mill indeed was erected some years
since at Limehouse, but the sawyers who dreaded a loss of employ, arose in a
body, and pulled it down.

The Dutch have had them above 140 years, and yet in England they continue
using the hand-saw, which is forty times the expense; the reason alleged is,
if mills were generally introduced, a great number of sawyers would at once be
out of employ; but it is absurd to suppose that such stout and able men as
fawyers could remain without work; and the cheapness of the manufactures using
mills, would make the consumption so much the greater, that all the hands
dependent on them would be increased. This was found to be the case in Holland,
and particularly in Sardam; where the erecting saw-mills increased, as appears
by authentic registers, the number of ship-wrights, in the proportion of twenty
to one.

There are also many mills for grinding wood and colors, such as the dyers
use; and likewise a great number of powder-mills, of which there is a large
manufactory carried on: all these mills make Sardam a very considerable place,
and their structure is so exceedingly curious, that a stranger will find no
greater entertainment any where in Holland, or stronger incitements to
reflection on the industry of the Dutch, and the great national benefit arising
from their frugality, and their ingenious contrivances for lowering the prices
of their manufactures, than in this village. This was the place in which the
great Czar Peter worked as a common ship-wright, and the tools he used to work
with, are still shown. It is about seven miles from Amsterdam.

Near Eidam is a track of country, of more than twenty miles in circumference,
called Purmerend, the name of a lake which was here formerly, but which is now
entirely drained, and covered with rich meadows. The soil is a rich, black
loam, composed, to all appearance, of sand and clay, but more like a slime
settled; the grass is admirably rich, but full of weeds, the Dutch having no
notion of meadows well-laid out; the luxuriance of the herbage is all that they
attend to, in order to have (what is called in England) a great swarth of hay.
Yet these meadows let from 40s. to 5l. an acre English.

This fertility shows what is to be expected from drained lakes. There is no
instance of this in England; yet the moors in Huntingdon and Cambridgeshire,
and the lakes in Scotland, says Marshal, would surely admit of this culture.
Larger cows and sheep than are to be met with here, are no where to be seen;
these cows will give four or five gallons of milk, English measure, in a day;
and the cheese and butter made from one of them, amounts to about eight pounds
sterling a year.

This track of land is, on the whole, one of the greatest curosities in the
United Provinces. It was drained in the year 1612, and the whole completely
finished in four years. The lake contained 10,000 acres, of which 7,000 are now
made profitable as meadows, orchards, or gardens; the remaining 3,000 compose
villages, roads, dykes, canals, drains, etc. The appearance is as beautiful as
that of a dead flat can be; the verdure is fine; the fences perfectly neat, the
rows of trees, the orc^ards and the gardens numerous and thriving; in short, a
richer spot is hardly to be seen. The rents are very high, but the fertility of
the soil merits it; for here are many meadows that will more than feed a large
cow, per acre, and support her all the summer with great plenty.

A Dutch boor, with fifty or sixty acres, will contrive to live as well or
better than an English farmer with two hundred acres; this is entirely owing to
their spirit of frugality and neatness. It is not only visible in their houses
and furniture, but in all their farming offices. Their tools and implements are
kept in the most exact order; their scythes, spades, shovels and forks appear
like household instruments: their wagons are constantly kept as clean as our
coaches, and this spirit of cleanliness runs through every thing. Though this
certainly takes up time, it answers to them very well in the end; for there is
a great difference in the wear and tare of any tools or instruments of
husbandry, whether they are kept clean and under cover, or dirty and exposed to
the weather: from which I conclude, says Marshal, that no time is better spent
than that which is employed in keeping all the implements, and every thing
relative to husbandry, neat and clean.

This is particularly observable in Holland, not only in their implements of
husbandry, but in their cattle, their fences, the banks of their ditches, their
dykes, their walls, poles, hedges, etc. whatever the fence is, one is sure to
find it in good order; and this is equally conspicuous in all their public
works; the canals, bridges, dykes, etc. are all in admirable repair.

So great is the economy of the Dutch, and so much do they live within their
income, that they never know the want of money; being thus rich, they will
contribute as freely to the erection or repair of a public building, as to the
fences in their own gardens.

Next to Sardam, the village of Broek is one of the most curious in Holland, as
well as the most considerable. The extreme neatness which reigns there, is
unexampled even in the rest of the provinces. The inhabitants are very rich,
and some of them can give their daughters several tons of gold for their
portion. The houses here are all built of timber, and seldom exceed one story
high. They are so frequently painted, that they always look as if they were
just built. The windows are in general sashed and decorated with beautiful
curtains. The inside also of their houses is neat, and embellished beyond
conception. Those who have ever so small a portion of ground before their
house, never fail to convert it into an agreeable garden diversified with
gravel walks, shell-work, images, and little hegdes or painted rails. The
village itself is watered by a number of canals, the banks of which are kept up
with the greatest neatness; and all the streets are paved with bricks, which
are kept frequently washed and strewed with white sand; in some places the
bricks are dispersed in the form of flowers. That these ornaments may not be
defaced, or the streets made dirty, no carriages or horses are permitted to
pass through them. There is but one public house at the entrance of the
village, and which is the only one that strangers are admitted to see, if they
have no acquaintance among the inhabitants. When any strangers come there, they
are so jealous at the sight of them, that those who have daughters, who are in
general very handsome, make them keep out of sight.

Not only the wooden furniture in the houses are painted to the very
broom-sticks, but likewise the gates and rails in the meadows, and even the
very posts in the meadows, the latter of which are further ornamented with
carved work.

At Alamaar, which is the chief town in North Holland, there is a very singular
charity. A considerable estate has been left for the support of old maids and
widows, no matter of what religion, provided they will take an oath never to
marry. This city is surrounded by a great number of gardens, orchards and rich
meadows; and very near it there is a grove, which would make a figure in the
best regular garden in England, it is so beautiful. The streets of this city
are regular and well built, and the large canals kept so clean, that they give
the town an elegant appearance. In 1732 it was found to contain 2,581 houses.
Both within and without the town are several pleasant walks, particularly on
the ramparts. It was once one of the fortresses of Holland. The country round
about it once consisted of lakes, which have been all drained, and now make an
excellent appearance, being all cut into rich meadows, and hardly an acre lost.
All the canals and dykes are planted with rows of trees; the villages are thick
and well peopled, and all of them possessing an air of neatness and regularity,
which alone would make traveling in Holland extremely delightful.

The road from this place to Bemster, in summer is very pleasant. At the end of
the town begins a straight vista, which continues for three miles. In the
middle of this vista there is a wide canal, and on each side a road perfectly
level and smooth, with a row of trees, and a ditch running along the outside;
both of which are bordered with the finest meadows, interspersed with seats and
gardens. Every cottage has a garden which the boors cultivate extremely well.
The women and children are principally employed in making nets for the herring
fishery, which employs a great number of hands in this country.

It is astonishing that the number of people whom this fishery maintains,
should not have made us, on whose coasts they come to fish, more attentive to
advantages which nature has laid at our doors. Our poor are starving for want
of employment, while our more industrious and meritorious neighbors maintain
themselves on our fish, and come 200 leagues to catch that which we might have
in our own harbors. Such an instance of supineness is not to be met with in
the whole circle of European politics. The infinite advantages which would
attend the establishment of a great herring fishery, in some of the western
isles of Scotland, ought to engage our government to act with more vigor in
this affair. The only possible way of succeeding, would be, to build a town in
the western Islands, and make it the seat of the whole undertaking: the company
should, above all, be careful to provide an immediate market for all the fish
caught, salted, and barrelled, under their inspection. When once the fishermen
found a market for their fish, their profession would increase very much; new
towns would rise up, and a general alacrity spread itself through all the
coasts. This would form new markets for all the productions of the neighboring
estates, which would animate their culture, and greatly increase the value of
land; all this is in the power not only of the King and Parliament, but of any
nobleman of considerable property in the islands: a private capital of 20,000l.
would go further than five times that sum in the hands of a public company.

In Holland, what with pay, allowance, and herrings, the men who go in the
busses gain about twelve shillings a-week.

On the coast of this province are several islands, which formerly made part of
the continent, and have been separated from it by the violence of the sea. The
inhabitants of these islands make excellent mariners, whether considered with
respect to their courage, or their skill.

One great occupation among them is breeding of sheep, with which their fields
are covered. They accordingly export a great deal of wool; and with the milk of
these animals they make a green cheese, which is eagerly bought up under the
name of Texel cheese.

The most considerable of these islands is the Texel, which most probably
received its name from the multitude of eggs, which the sea-gulls lay on its
shores: it is the largest of all the islands in this track.

On the eastern coast there is a commodious road, styled the Mosco Road, which
is the rendezvous of all the outward bound East India ships, who lie here under
the cannon of a fort, close erected by the Scheld. At this place they are also
mustered while they wait for an easterly wind, to carry them out of the
Marsdiep, during which time they are usually said to be lying in the Texel.

This is the principal passage for ships that come from Amsterdam, or the
Zuydersea into the ocean. It is however a very dangerous one, on account of two
sand-banks which lie at the entrance, particularly in bad weather or with a
contrary wind.

On the 13th of July 1672, the English fleet under the Duke of York, came off
this island, as with an intent to make a descent; but the ebb which used to
last only six hours, continuing in a very extraordinary manner for twelve, and
being succeeded by a storm, the English were under the necessity of putting out
to sea, after losing two of their ships. In 1653, and 1673, there were two
naval engagements here, in the first of which the celebrated Dutch Admiral Van
Trump was killed.

At the entrance of the water, going up to Amsterdam, there are two other sand
banks, where it is so very shallow, that the ships are obliged to be carried
over them in cradles or camels, which are a kind of large boxes, 160 feet in
length, filled with water, and fastened with ropes under the side of the ships;
the water is then drawn out of these machines, which as they rise toward the
surface, lift the ships up four, five or six feet, according to the more or
less water they draw.

END OF THE TENTH VOLUME.
DIRECTIONS for PLACING the PLATES OF VOL. VI. VII. VIII. and IX.
VOL. VI.
A Chinese Villa, to face PAGE 7 Chinese PAGE 19 Map of Thibet PAGE 23 Chinese
Sepulcher PAGE 92 Chinese Captain of the guard, presented to the Emperor PAGE
141 Chinese army on the march PAGE 145 Chinese music PAGE 198 Tonquinese, with
the tree whose branches dip into the earth, and spring again PAGE 222
Inhabitants of Nootka Sound, and a sea otter PAGE 270 Snug-corner Cove, where
Captain Cook anchored PAGE 299 Swedes in the court dress PAGE 329 Plan of the
city of Stockholm PAGE 333 View of the city of Upsal, with two Lapland girls,
and reindeer, from the life PAGE 342 Fin peasants PAGE 346
VOL. VII.
Map of Denmark PAGE 45 Plan of the city of Copenhagen PAGE 72 Hamlet in his
mother's chamber PAGE 81 Danish hunting assizes PAGE 91 Map of Canada PAGE 116
View of the city of Quebec, from Point Levy PAGE 128 Hurons PAGE 155 A Buffalo
pound, or the method of taking them PAGE 202 A Californian Marriage PAGE 284 Map
of Persia PAGE 305
VOL. VIII.
Persians, with pyramids of human heads PAGE 24 Nadar Shah crowning himself
PAGE 87 Map of Poland PAGE 133 Poles, with the Parus Pendulinus, and its nest
PAGE 149 Katchinzky, and the king of Poland in the wood PAGE 186* Frederick II.
king of Prussia, and Voltaire, from nature PAGE 185 Map of Hungary and Bohemia
PAGE 223 Bohemians, with the skeleton of a mountain PAGE 238 Hungarians at
Ovid's tomb PAGE 277 View of Belgrade PAGE 317
VOL. IX.
A Bohemian Gipsey PAGE 5 Map of Germany PAGE 29 Map of the circle of Austria
PAGE 81 Plan of the city of Vienna PAGE 87 Traineaus at Vienna PAGE 126
Dissolution of the monasteries PAGE 131 Joseph II. emperor of Germany, from
life PAGE 140 Map of the circle of Upper Saxony PAGE 149 Map of the country
round the Baltic PAGE 199 A Holstein priest reading his sermons PAGE 202 Priest
and Burgomaster of Hamburgh PAGE 223 Plan of the city of Hanover PAGE 240 Map
of the circles of the Upper and Lower Rhine PAGE 260 A vineyard festival PAGE
304 Burgomaster and peasant of Nuremburg PAGE 347
ERRATUM respecting the PLATES.
Vol. IX. page 296 line 10. for 296 read 126.

In the account of the plates, at the end of volume V. it was omitted to point
out, that the Baskirian bee-hives should be placed, so as to face page 47 in
vol. III.


