MAP of TURKEY IN ASIA From D'Anville.
map of Turkey

THE Habitable World DESCRIBED.

Inscribed by Permission to His Royal Highness Frederick: DUKE OF YORK, etc.
etc.

blazon or coat of arms

LONDON: Published as the Act directs, by the Author, Sold at the Literary
Press. No. 62. Wardour Street, Soho.

1790.

THE HABITABLE WORLD DESCRIBED, OR THE PRESENT STATE OF THE PEOPLE IN ALL PARTS
OF THE GLOBE, FROM NORTH TO SOUTH; SHOWING The Situation, Extent, Climate,
Productions, Animals, etc. etc. of the different Kingdoms and States; Including
all the new Discoveries: TOGETHER WITH The Genius, Manners, Customs, Trade,
Religion, Forms of Government, etc. of the Inhabitants, and every thing
respecting them, that can be either entertaining or informing to the Reader,
collected from the earliest and latest Accounts of Historians and Travelers of
all Nations; With some that have never been published in this Kingdom; And
nothing advanced but on the best Authorities.

WITH A great Variety of MAPS and COPPER PLATES, engraved in a capital Style,
the Subjects of which are mostly new, and such as have never yet been given in
any English work.

BY THE REV. DR. JOHN TRUSLER.

VOL. XIV.

LONDON: Printed for the AUTHOR, at the LITERARY-PRESS, No. 62, WARDOUR STREET,
SOHO; and sold by all Booksellers.

M DCC XCIII.

TURKEY IN ASIA.
CHAP. I. General Division of the Country; Mountains, Rivers, etc.
HAVING spoken of the Turkish provinces in Europe, we shall now treat of those
in Asia; which are situated between the twenty-seventh and forty-fifth degrees
of longitude, and the thirtieth and forty-sixth degrees of N. latitude. They
are bounded by Tartary and the Black Sea, on the North; by Persia, on the East;
by Arabia and the Levant, on the South; and by the Hellespont and the
Archipelago, on the West.

The principal mountains in Asiatic Turkey, are, Olympus, Ida, Taurus,
Anti-Taurus, and those of Caramania or Cilicia; all of them situated in
Natolia, or Lesser Asia; Mount Caucasus, now called the mountains of Dagistan;
the mountains of Armenia, among which is Mount Ararat; the mountains of
Curdistan, or Assyria, which lie between Persia and Turkey; and the mountains
of Palestine, particularly Hermon and Lebanon.

The seas bordering on this country, are, the Euxine, or Black Sea; the
Bosphorus of Constantinople; the Propontis, or sea of Marmora; the Hellespont,
and the Aegean sea, or Archipelago, which divide Asia from Europe; and the
Levant, or White Sea, as the Turks call it, being the East end of the
Mediterranean; to which may be added, the gulf of Persia, or Bassora: these
seas, and the Red Sea, which divides Asia from Africa, make part of the grand
Signior's titles; who styles himself Lord of the Black, White, and Red Seas.
Never was a country more advantageously situated for navigation, and foreign
traffic; all the merchandise of China and India, being brought up the Red Sea,
and the gulf of Persia, and, by the other seas, distributed to all the
countries in this quarter of the globe.

The chief rivers are, the Euphrates, Tigris, Orontes, Maeander, Sarabat,
Halys, Kara, and Jordan. The Euphrates and Tigris rise in the North, and,
taking their course South-east, enclose that fine plain in Mesopotamia, now
called Diarbeck; which, by some, is supposed to have been the seat of Paradise.
Certain it is, that the city of Babylon, the largest and most beautiful city
that ever stood upon the earth, was situated in this province, on both banks of
the Euphrates; the river running through the midst of it. The Euphrates and
Tigris unite their streams below Babylon; and then, dividing again, fall into
the Persian gulf, by several channels below Bassora; from whence that sea is
often called the gulf of Bassora. The city of Nineveh, little inferior to
Babylon, stood upon the Tigris; which, from its rapid stream, obtained that
name.

The river Orontes rises in Mount Hermon; and, running North-west, falls into
the Levant sea, a little below Antioch, which city stands upon it. The river
Maeander, now Madre, rises in Mount Taurus; and, running to the west, in a
winding course, falls into the Archipelago, near Ephesus. From this river, all
serpentine, or winding streams, are called Maeanders. The river Sarabat rises
in Natolia; and, running South-west, falls into the Archipelago, North of
Smyrna. As to the little river Granicus, where Alexander obtained his first
victory over the Persians, it is so small a stream, that we seldom see it on
any map; but, from the concurrent relation of most writers, it falls into the
Hellespont to the Eastward of Alydos, or the Dardanells. The river Kara rises
in Natolia Proper; and, running almost due East, falls into the Euphrates. The
Jordan, which is so named from two little streams, Jor and Dan, rising at the
foot of Anti-Lebanus, and, after a course of about twenty miles, uniting in
one, is not a river of any great length, depth, or breadth, equal to its fame;
its whole course not being above 150 miles; its breadth not above twenty yards,
and its depth not sufficient for navigation. In its passage into the Dead Sea,
where it empties itself, it makes two lakes; the first called Meron, of small
extent, and dry in summer; the second, called the sea of Gallilee, or the lake
of Tiberias, or lake of Genezareth, one hundred furlongs in length, and forty
in breadth.

The Dead Sea, as it is called, from a false opinion, that it killed even the
birds that flew over it, is, by experience, known not to deserve such a
terrible name; it is, indeed, extremely salt, and the water so strong, that it
will hardly admit a human body to sink, and has a bituminous stench; it is said
that no fish, or other living creatures, can exist in this sea; but, as
fish-shells are found on its shore, there is reason to doubt the truth of this
assertion. Its extent, from North to South, is seventy miles, and sixteen from
East to West; it was formerly a plain, on which stood the cities of Sodom and
Gomorrah, and two others, destroyed by fire from heaven.

MAP of ASIA MINOR etc.
map of Asia Minor

The principal provinces in Asiatic Turkey, are Asia-Minor, or Natolia;
Turcomania, or Armenia-Major; Georgia; Curdistan, or Assyria; Diarbeck, or
Mesopotamia; Chaldaea; Syria; Palestine; Arabia Petraea, and Arabia Deserta; of
each of which we shall speak in their turns.

CHAP. II. Asia-Minor.
WE shall begin with Asia-Minor, which lies opposite to Constantinople. This
province is bounded by the Bosphorus of Thrace, and the Black Sea, to the
North; by Georgia, and the river Euphrates, which divide it to the East, from
Turcomania; on the South it is bounded by the Mediterranean, and by the
Archipelago on the West.

Asia-Minor is again sub-divided into four parts; Natolia Proper, (the whole
circle of Asia-Minor, being sometimes called Natolia) which contains the
Western part; Amasia, the Northern; Aladulia, the Eastern; and Caramania, the
Southern part.

Natolia Proper, which comprises much the largest sub-division of Asia-Minor,
has in it many fine provinces. This portion of Asia-Minor has been subdivided,
by ancient and modern geographers, into ten provinces. Pontus Paphalagoniae,
Galatia, Phrygia Major, Lydia or Maenia, Doris, Caria, Ionia, Eolis, Mysia,
comprehending Phrygia Minor and Bithynia.

The principal cities in these provinces, of which we propose to treat, ancient
as well as modern, are Smyrna, Ephesus, Prusa or Bursa, Pergamus, Troy, Nice
and Nicomedia; besides some others in this, and the rest of the provinces of
Asia; which, though now in ruins, have been memorable in times past, either for
their splendour, or as having been the birthplace of some great man of
antiquity; or, for some other particular worthy of being recorded. We shall
begin first with Smyrna.

Smyrna is situated in 38 degrees of North latitude, at the extremity of a
large bay in the Aegean sea, opposite to the island of Scio, and about eight
days journey by land from Constantinople. It is related of Alexander the Great,
that, after hunting, he fell asleep on Mount Pagus, beneath a plane-tree, which
grew by a fountain near a temple of the Nemeses; and that the goddess directed
him in a vision, to found there a city for the Smyrneans; a people of Ephesus
then living in villages. The work was begun by Antigonus, and finished by
Lysimachus.

The site, selected by Alexander for this people, was such as the ancient
founders commonly preferred. Their cities, in general, were seated by some
hill, or mountain; which, as this did, supplied them with marble, and was
commodious, as well for defense, as ornament. The side or slope, afforded a
secure situation for the seats of the stadium and theaters, which rose from its
quarry to advantage; and rendered the view as captivating as it was noble. The
Greeks were, of old, accounted happy in choosing their situations. They were
studious to unite beauty with strength, and good ports with a fertile soil. The
Romans, on the contrary, were attentive to articles neglected by them, to the
paving of ways, to aqueducts, and common shores.

Smyrna flourished as Apollo had foretold; and, under the Romans, was esteemed
the most beautiful of the Ionian cities. The streets were as strait as the site
would admit, and excellently disposed. The ways were paved. Both above and
below were large quadrangular porticoes. There was also a library; and, besides
the other requisites of a noble city, a port which shut up; but, from an
omission of the architects, the want of sewers occasioned a great nuisance. It
was much frequented by the sophists; and, with Ephesus, became renowned as a
school of oratory and science. It has been exalted with high encomiums, and
styled the lovely, the crown of Ionia, the ornament of Asia.

The devastations committed in Asia-Minor, and the changes effected by the
rivers on the seacoast, have rendered Smyrna the only considerable mart by the
seaside; and, in consequence, the principal center of the traffic of the
country. One lucrative branch of its commerce failed, during the troubles in
Persia, when the throne was usurped by Nadir Shah. The accustomed communication
by caravans was then interrupted; and trade, meeting with obstructions in the
old course, which it had held for ages, turned away into new channels. But,
with this loss, Smyrna continues a large and flourishing city. The bay, besides
numerous small craft, is daily frequented by ships of burden, from the chief
ports in Europe; and the factors, who are a respectable body, live in
affluence, and acquire fortunes.

The conflux at Smyrna, of people of various nations, differing in dress, in
manners, in language, and in religion, is very considerable. The Turks occupy
by far, the greater part of the towns. The other tribes live in separate
quarters.

The Protestants, and Roman Catholics, have their chapels; the Jews, a
synagogue or two; the Armenians, a large and handsome church with a burying
ground by it. The Greeks, before the fire, had two churches. They applied, by
their bishop at Constantinople, for leave to rebuild that which was destroyed;
but the sum demanded, was too exorbitant to be given.

The factors, and other Europeans settled at Smyrna, generally inter-marry with
the Greeks, or with natives of the same religion. Their ladies wear the
oriental dress, consisting of large trowsers, or breeches, which reach to the
ancle; long vests of rich silk, or of velvet, lined in winter with costly furs;
and round their waists, an embroidered zone, with clasps of silver or gold.
Their hair is plaited, and descends down the back, often in great profusion.
The girls have, sometimes, above twenty thick tresses, besides two or three
encircling the head as a coronet, and set off with flowers and diamonds. They
commonly stain it of a chestnut color, which is the most admired. Their apparel
and carriage are antique. It is remarkable, that the trowsers are mentioned in
a fragment of Sappho. The habit is light, loose, and cool, adapted to the
climate. When they visit each other, they put over the head a thin transparent
veil of muslin, with a border of gold tissue. A janissary walks before, and
two, or more, handmaids follow them through the streets. When assembled, they
are seen reclined in various attitudes, or sitting cross-legged on a sofa.
Girls of inferior rank from the islands, especially Tino, abound; and are many
of them as beautiful in person, as picturesque in appearance. They excel in a
glow of color, which seems the effect of a warm sun, ripening the human body,
as it were, into uncommon perfection.

The principal buildings in Smyrna are the mosques, the public baths, the
bezesten, and the khans, or inns. The khans have, in general, a quadrangle or
square area, and sometimes a fountain in the middle. The upper story consists
of an open gallery, with a range of apartments, and often a small mosque. Below
are the camels with their burdens, and the mules, or horses. A servant dusts
the floor of a vacant chamber when a traveller arrives; and, spreading a mat,
which is all the furniture, leaves him in possession. The streets of Smyrna, a
few excepted, are very narrow, and exceeding intricate.

The lofty mountains which shelter Smyrna, and leaves it only open to the sea,
concenter the rays of the sun, as it were, into a focus. The intense heat
commences in June, and continues without intermission to the end of August, or
the middle of September. During this period, if the inbat fail, the inhabitants
are distressed, and even pant for breath. The ground is then burnt up, and has
large chasms and fissures, which, as some have imagined, give vent to
bituminous vapors. These, if confined, are supposed to occasion earthquakes by
their explosion. A year seldom passes without a shock or two, but generally
slight, and less hurtful than alarming. They happen chiefly in spring and
autumn, when the weather is calm; and it has been remarked at those times, that
the sea commonly withdraws from the beach, and the water is unusually low.
Besides this calamity, Smyrna is visited almost annually by the plague. If the
distemper rages, the consuls and factors either retire into the country, or, as
the phrase is, shut up; not admitting even the market-man to enter their gates.
Many of the people abandon their dwellings, and live abroad in tents. The
islanders return home, and the streets of the Frank's quarter, which is
exceedingly populous, almost cease to be trodden.

The Turks chiefly bury without the town, where the enclosures are very
extensive; it being their custom not to open the grounds filled with bodies,
till a long term of years has elapsed. In their cemetaries, and in those of the
Christians and Jews, are found many marble slabs, and fragments of
architecture. The English ground, which is at a distance from the Frank
quarter, at the opposite end of the town, is walled in; and contains some
monuments worthy notice, for the beauty of their sculpture. These were brought
from Italy. Mr. Bouverie, the friend and companion of Mr. Dawkins, and Mr.
Wood, is interred there and has over him a plain marble, with a long Latin
inscription. He died at Magnesia, by the Maeander.

Smyrna is well supplied with provisions. The sheep have broad tails, hanging
down like an apron; some weighing eight, ten, or more pounds. These are eaten
as a delicacy; and the fat, before they are full grown, accounted as delicious
as marrow. The flesh of wild hogs is common, and in esteem among the Europeans
and Greeks, who purchase the animal, when killed by the Turks. Fine fish is
taken in the bay. Hares, with game and fowl, are cheap. The partridges are
bigger than those of the English, of a different color and species, with red
legs.

The olive-groves furnish doves, field-fares, thrushes, quails, snipes, and the
like, in abundance. A variety of excellent wines are produced in the country,
or imported from the islands. The fruits are of an exquisite flavor. Among
those of the gourd kind, the water-melon, which grows to a great size, is not
only highly palatable, but so innocent as to be allowed to the sick in fevers.
The figs are deservedly famous. The rich clusters of grapes are as wholesome as
beautiful. Many on the stalk, are found converted by the sun into raisins.
Large and heavy bunches are hung on strings, and preserved in the shops for
sale in winter. Lemons and oranges, with citrons, are in great plenty. The
sherbets made with the juice of the two former, newly gathered, in water
sweetened with white honey, are as cooling as grateful to the taste. Coffee is
brought from Arabia. We partook, says Chandler, from whom is extracted this
account, almost daily, of eatables unknown to us before; and, in a short time,
were reconciled to the custom of sleeping after dinner, which is recommended as
conducing, and even necessary, to health in that climate.

Our situation was not, however, without grievances. We were much infected by a
minute fly, which irritates by its puncture; and, settling on the white wall,
eludes the angry pursuer with surprising activity. But this species, and the
other insects which annoyed us, were petty offenders, compared with the
mosquitoes, or large gnats, which tormented us most exceedingly by their loud
noise, and by repeated attacks upon our skin, when it was naked, and lightly
clothed; perforating it with their acute proboscis, and sucking our blood till
they were full. A small fiery tumor then ensues, which will not soon subside,
unless the patient has been here naturalized, as it were by residence; but the
pain is much allayed by lemon-juice. At night, they raged furiously about our
beds, assaulting the gauze veil, our defense; which, thin as it was, augmented
the violent heat to a degree almost intolerable. Their fondness for foreign
food, is generally but too visible in the swollen and distorted features of
persons newly arrived.

Smyrna has on the South-east, a fine plain, in which are villages, and the
houses of the principal factors, who reside in the country in summer. At the
extremity of this plain, are the mountains. In these, wild animals abound, and
especially jackalls, which are nightly howling on the hills, or in the plain.
When one begins, the rest join, as it were, in full cry. Cameleons and lizards
are commonly seen, about the rubbish of old buildings, basking in the sun; and
several kinds of snakes are found, some of great length, which are frequently
discovered by their musty smell.

The river Meles, was the ancient boast of the Smyrneans. This most beautiful
water, as it has been styled, flowed by the city, and had its source not
remote. The stream is clear, and in summer shallow, scarce covering the rocky
bed; and, winding in the deep valley behind the castle, murmuring among the
ever-greens. In winter, after heavy rains on the mountains, or the melting of
the snow, it swells into a torrent rapid and deep, often not fordable, or with
danger.

The gulf of Smyrna, which has been computed about ten leagues long, is
sheltered by hills, and affords secure anchorage. The mouth of the river
Hermus, is within two leagues of the city. This river, with the Meander, was
anciently famous for a fish called Glanis, and for mullet; which came up from
the sea in great numbers, particularly in spring.

The fertility of the soil by the river, has occasioned the settling of
numerous villages, on that side of the gulf. Menimen, which is the principal,
supplies Smyrna with fruits, fish, and provisions; boats passing to and fro
without intermission. The hills are enlivened by flocks of sheep and goats, and
resound with the rude music of the lyre and pipe; the former, a stringed
instrument, resembling a guittar, and held much in the same manner, but usually
played with a bow.

The port of Smyrna, is one of the finest in the Levant, and capable of
containing the largest fleet. There are seldom fewer than an hundred vessels,
of nations, at anchor in it. The circumference of the present city, is about
four miles; it is nearly in the form of a triangle. The houses have very little
beauty in them, being built very low, and in general with clay walls. The
public buildings, however, have an air of great magnificence. Though the houses
are low, the streets are spacious, and look like one continued fair, where all
kinds of merchandise of Europe and Asia, is exposed to view, with all sorts of
provisions in great profusion. The houses of the English, Dutch, and French
consuls, stand near the shore, and are very handsome buildings.

A castle stands at the entrance of the port, which commands all shipping going
in, and coming out. There is also a ruinous castle in the upper part of the
city, near a mile in circumference, built, according to tradition, by the
Empress Helen; and near it, the remains of a palace, in which the Greek council
was held; when Smyrna was the metropolis of Lower Asia.

The walks about the town are exceedingly pleasant, especially on the West side
of the Frank-street, where are several little groves of lemon and orange trees;
which, being at all times clothed with blossoms and fruits, have a most
beautiful appearance. Through these gardens runs the river Melos, on whose
banks the Smyrneans have a tradition that Homer was born; though this honor is
contended by Rhodes, Scio, Athens, and other places.

The vines, which cover the little hills round Smyrna, afford a delightful
prospect, and a great quantity of grapes; of which some excellent wine is made.

Hunting and fishing, are two diversions which are very much followed by the
inhabitants. It is very frequent for them to go out to fish in large parties;
and after having caught a sufficient quantity, and amused themselves as long as
they think proper, to land near some wood, into which they enter; and, after
spreading a cloth, make their dinner of the fish they have caught, and whatever
collation they have brought with them. In these parties, are sometimes from
twenty to thirty people. While they are at dinner, trumpets, French-horns, and
other instruments of music, are continually playing; after which, is generally
some sea-dance, or other diversion performed by the mariners.

The merchants continually form such parties as these, either on the water, or
to go a few miles in the country, which, the cheapness of provisions, makes it
very reasonable. In short, at Smyrna, there may be said to be every thing that
can gratify the senses, and make life pleasant.

The trade of this city is very considerable. It is chiefly carried on by the
English and Dutch. The chief articles, which the inhabitants wear, are cotton,
camels' skins, and stuffs made of the same, such as water-camlets, of a very
glossy shining color. These are sold for sixty crowns a piece, and sometimes
more.

There is also a commerce carried on with Persia, by the caravans, which arrive
in February, July, and October. The journey from Persia to Smyrna, says Le
Brun, takes up about seven months.

The reports of the population of this city vary very much. Some writers make
it to consist of eighty thousand inhabitants, others not so much.

Forty miles South of Smyrna, stands the remains of the ancient and celebrated
city of Ephesus. These two cities have been termed the eyes of Asia-Minor. It
is very pleasantly situated upon a fine haven, near the mouth of the river
Cayster. Under the Romans, it was the metropolis of Asia. Here stood the
celebrated temple of Diana, esteemed one of the wonders of the world, and which
Erostratus burnt to perpetuate his memory, the night that Alexander was born.
Many grand ruins still remain; some of which, are merely conjectured, by
writers, to be the remains of the second temple of Diana, there having been a
second temple erected to the honor of that goddess, and built in a style of
magnificence more glorious than that of the former.

Near the aqueduct, says Chandler, we met with a curious memorial of the great
respect paid to the goddess of the Ephesians. It was one of their decrees
inscribed on a slab of white marble, purporting, that an entire month should be
held sacred, and set apart to the goddess; and that, during this whole month,
nothing should be attended to by the Ephesians, but festivals and public games.

There are also very visible remains of an aqueduct, a circus, and a theater;
that theater, in which the preaching of St. Paul produced such a tumult, that
the people rushed in and shouted, 'Great is Diana of the Ephesians.'

The curious reader, says Chandler, will ask what is become of the renowned
temple of Diana? Can a wonder of the world be vanished like a phantom, without
leaving a trace behind? We would give a satisfactory answer to such queries;
but, to our great regret, we searched for the site of this fabric, to as little
purpose as the travelers who have preceded us.

The destruction of so illustrious an edifice, deserved to have been carefully
recorded by cotemporary historians. We may conjecture, it followed the triumph
of christianity. The Ephesian reformers, when authorized by the Imperial
edicts, rejoiced in the opportunity of insulting Diana, and deemed it piety to
demolish the very ruin of her habitation. Hence, perhaps, while the columns of
a Corinthian temple have owed their preservation to their bulk, those of this
fabric, with the vast architraves, and all the massive materials have perished,
and are consumed. Though its stones were far more ponderous, and the heap
larger beyond comparison, the whole is gone, we know not how, or whither. An
ancient author has described it, as standing at the head of the port, and
shining as a meteor. We may add, that as such too it has since disappeared.

This temple, was reckoned the first in Ionia, for magnitude and riches. The
architect employed, was the famous projector, who proposed the forming of Mount
Athos, when he had finished, into a statue of Alexander the Great. It was 420
feet long, and 220 broad. Of the columns, which were sixty feet high, 127 were
donations from kings. The order was Ionic, and it had eight columns in front.
The folding doors, or gates, had been continued four years in glue, and were
made of cypress-wood, which had been treasured up for four generations, highly
polished. The ceiling was of cedar. The whole altar was, in a manner, full of
the works of Praxiteles. The offerings were inestimable, and among them was a
picture by Apelles, representing Alexander armed with thunder, for which he was
paid twenty talents of gold, or near forty thousand pounds. The structure was
so wonderfully great in its composition, and so magnificently adorned, that it
appeared the work of beings more than human. The sun, it is affirmed, beheld in
his course, no object of superior excellence, or worthier of admiration.

A writer, who lived toward the end of the second century, has cited a sybil,
as foretelling, that the earth opening and quaking, the temple of Diana would
be swallowed, like a ship in a storm, into the abyss; and Ephesus lamenting and
weeping by the river-banks would enquire for it, then inhabited no more. If the
authenticity of the oracle were undisputed, and the sibyl acknowledged a
genuine prophetess, we might infer from the visible condition of the place, the
full accomplishment of the whole prediction. We seek in vain for the temple;
the city is prostrate; and the goddess gone.

The present inhabitants of this once magnificent city, are only a few Greek
peasants, living in extreme wretchedness, dependence, and insensibility: the
representations of an illustrious people, and inhabiting the wreck of their
greatness; some, beneath the vaults of the stadium; and some by the abrupt
precipice, in the sepulchers, which received the ashes of the dead.

Such are the present citizens of Ephesus, and such is the condition to which
that renowned city has been gradually reduced. It was a ruinous place, when the
emperor Justinian, filled Constantinople with its statues, and raised his
church of St. Sophia on its columns. Since then, it has been almost quite
exhausted. Its streets are obscured and overgrown. A herd of goats was driven
to it for shelter, from the sun at noon; and a noisy flight of crows from the
quarries, seemed to insult its silence. The glorious pomp of its heathen
worship is no longer remembered; and christianity, which was there nursed by
the apostles, and fostered by general councils, until it increased to fullness
of stature, barely lingers on, in an existence hardly visible.

Bursa is one of the largest and finest towns of Turkey in Asia, the capital of
the ancient Bithynia, and extends itself from East to West, at the foot of
Mount Olympus, and on the edge of a fine extensive plain, full of mulberry and
other fruit trees. So many springs proceed from Mount Olympus, that every house
has its own fountain. The mosques are very elegant and numerous, they are
covered with lead, and adorned with domes; as are also the caravansara's, which
are very handsome and commodious. The Begestein, is a large structure full of
warehouses and shops, containing all the commodities of the East, besides their
own manufactures in silk. Here are the best workmen in all Turkey; they are
excellent imitators of the tapestry of Italy and France. This place is, in
general, very pleasant; and the quarter of the Bazars, is well paved and neat.
It contains above forty thousand Turks; four hundred families of Jews; five
hundred of Armenians, and three hundred of Greeks. None but Mussulmen are
permitted to dwell in the city; but the suburbs, which are much more beautiful,
and better peopled, are filled with Jews, Armenians, and Greeks. The Jews came
hither from Granada, and speak good Spanish to this day. The inhabitants have
excellent wine, and other provisions in great plenty. It was the seat of the
Turkish emperors, before they passed into Europe. The palace of the grand
signior is still remaining, though in a ruinous state, and stands on a high
road encircled by a double wall. The sepulchers of the first Turkish emperors,
and their sultanas, are also still to be seen in small chapels covered with
domes.

The celebrated baths of Calipso, are little more than a mile from the city.
These baths are in such fame, for the cures they have effected, that many
people resort to them from very remote provinces. The water in some of them is
so hot, that it must be mixed with a considerable quantity of cold to be
supportable. The construction of these baths, is nearly similar to those we
have already described, and the manner of bathing in them the same.

In this province are several other towns, now reduced to villages, which were
formerly flourishing and important cities. Among others, Chalcedon, near
Scutari, is now a miserable village; though, in former times, it was a great
city, and the residence of the fourth general council.

Nicomedia, a little to the South of Chalcedon, was once the capital of
Bithynia, and is still a town of some commerce, delightfully situated in a
fertile country. Most of the Turkish navy are built here. It received its name
from Nicomedes, king of Bithynia, who added considerably to its improvement.
The ruins of this city, says Motraye, show, that it once covered more ground,
than either Constantinople, or even London.

Nice, to the South-east of the above city, is also very large and populous,
and carrying the remains of still greater extent. Here Constantine assembled
the first general council; and, in this city the Greek Emperors resided, after
Constantinople was taken from them by the Latins.

Lybussa is memorable for the death of Hannibal, who chose to put a period to
his existence, rather than deliver himself up to his mortal enemy, the king of
Nicomedia. It lies between this latter city and Chalcedon.

The province of Phrygia-Minor, adjoining to Bithynia, contains the ruins of
several once celebrated cities; particularly Lampsacus, Troy, Troas,
Alexandria, and Pergamos.

Of Lampsacus, now a small town at the entrance of the Dardanells, it is
related, that Alexander having devoted it to destruction, and being informed,
the inhabitants were coming to implore his mercy, that he would spare their
city, swore, that he would reject their petition, with which the inhabitants
being made acquainted, addressed him to destroy their city; and it was saved by
this stratagem; this great hero, thinking that his oath ought not to be
dispensed with.

Of Troy, rendered memorable by Homer, Virgil, and other poets, for the ten
years siege it sustained, against the united power of the Greeks, according to
several writers, some magnificent ruins remain; but, we suspect, that these
ruins are those of Troas Alexandria, one of the eighteen cities erected by
Alexander the Great. Chandler observes, that several travelers have imagined
this was the site of Ilium, or Troy. The siege of Troy, is supposed to have
happened about the year of the world 2816; before Christ 1184 years. At
Sigaeum, built on its ruins, are two barrows standing, each in a vineyard. One,
says Chandler, was that of Achilles and Patroclus; the other was that of
Antilochus, son of Nestor. We had likewise in view, the barrow of Ajax Telamon;
and at a distance from it, that of Aesytes, mentioned in Homer; but of the
ruins of Troy he makes no mention.

Alexandria Troas, (we take our description from Chandler) was begun by
Antigonus, and from him first called Antigonia; but Lysimachus, to whom, as a
successor of Alexander, it devolved, changed its name in honor of the deceased
king.

Alexander the Great, instead of making his progress by devastations, wisely
provided more lasting and honorable monuments of his passage through the
countries which he subdued; causing cities and temples to be erected, and
forming plans for their future prosperity. As his stay was commonly short, the
execution of his noble designs was committed to the governors, whom he
appointed; men of grand ideas, fitted to serve so magnificent a master.

In the war with Antiochus, Alexandria Troas was eminent for its fidelity to
the Romans. Under Augustus, it received a Roman colony, and increased. It was
then the only considerable place between Sigaeum, and Lectos, and was inferior
to no city of its name, but Alexandria in Egypt.

The christian religion was planted early at Troas. In the beginning of the
fifth century, the bishop Silvanus, was required to deliver a vessel from a
demon, which was believed to detain it, as it could not be launched. It was
intended for transporting some large columns, and was of great size. Going down
to the beach, the bishop prayed; and taking hold of a rope, called to the
multitude to assist him, when the ship readily obeyed him, and hurried into the
sea. Of the ruins of this city, there are some very considerable remains.

Pergamos, situated in the same province, between Troas and Smyrna, was once
the capital of a large kingdom, of which Attalus was the last king; who, by his
will, transferred his kingdom to the Romans, which gave that people an
opportunity of interesting themselves in the affairs of the Asiatic princes.
Here Galen, the celebrated physician, was born. Parchment and tapestry, it is
said, were first made here; but it is more famous for a library collected by
its kings, containing 20,000 volumes, written on parchment. It was one of the
seven churches threatened by St. John.

In the province of Galatia, is Ancyra, situated on the river Melus; near this
city, which is at present one of the most considerable in Natolia, Pompey
obtained a great victory over Mithridates; and, nearly on the same spot,
Bajazet was afterward defeated by Tamerlane. The streets are full of old
marble pillars, some of which are of red porphyry, grained with white, and
others of red and white jasper. The houses are, for the most part, built of
clay; yet noble pieces of marble are frequently found to have been employed in
these buildings, as also in the walls and towers of the city. The castle has a
triple wall, composed of large pieces of white marble and stone, much
resembling porphyry. There are a great number of inscriptions in different
parts of the town.

It is computed there are in Ancyra, 40,000 Turks, besides a great number of
Greeks and Armenians. This city lies about five days journey South of the Black
Sea.

In the country about Ancyra, there is said to be the finest breed of goats in
the known world. They are milk-white, and their hair, which is as fine as silk,
is curled, and eight or nine inches long. The fine stuffs and camblots, made
from their hair, is the principal manufacture of the country. But these goats
are not to be met with above four or five days journey from this city; if they
are carried further, they degenerate.

The two cities of Gordium and Coloss, in Phrygia-Major, are reputed, the first
to have been the seat of Gordius, king of Phrygia, who tied the famous knot in
the temple of Apollo; which he predicted, that whoever could unloosen, would be
sovereign of the whole world; and which Alexander, in vain attempting, cut with
his sword. Coloss, situated on the South side of the Maeander, is the city to
which S. Paul addressed one of his epistles.

Lydia is the province of which that rich and powerful monarch Croesus, was
king. The capital city is Sardes, situated on the river Pactolus, seventy miles
East of Smyrna: it has now little remarkable, but very extensive ruins, though
it was once the finest city in Lesser Asia, and one of the seven churches
mentioned in scripture.

Lydia, says Chandler, was celebrated for its city Sardes, which was of great
antiquity, though posterior to the war of Troy. It was enriched by the
fertility of the soil, and the Acropolis was remarkable for its strength. This
was on a lofty hill; the back part, or that toward Tmolus, a perpendicular
precipice. One of the kings, an ancestor of Croesus, it is related, believed
that, by leading a lion about the wall, he should render the fortress
impregnable, and neglected that portion of it as totally inaccessible.

Croesus, who was a tyrant, or king of all nations, within the river Halys,
engaging Cyrus, who had followed him into Lydia, was defeated in the plain
before the city; the Lydian horses not enduring the smell of the camels. Cyrus
then besieged him, and offered a reward for the person who should first mount
the wall. One of his soldiers had seen a Lydian descend for his helmet, which
had rolled down the back of the Acropolis. He tried to ascend there, where not
even a sentinel was placed, and succeeded. Afterward the Persian Satrapas, or
commandant, resided at Sardas, as the emperor did at Susa.

The city and acropolis, surrendered on the approach of Alexander, after the
battle of the Granicus. Under the Romans, Sardes was a large city, and not
inferior to any of its neighbors, until the terrible earthquake, which
happened in the time of Tiberius Coesar. Magnesia, Philadelphia, Laodicea,
Ephesus, and several more cities partook largely in that calamity; but this
place suffered prodigiously, and was much pitied.

The principal towns that we see any account of, in the province of Caria, are
Miletus, and Halicarnassus.

Miletus, situated near the sea, on the North side of the Maeander, was once a
town of great fame, but at present is only a village.

Miletus, says Chandler, is now a very mean place, but still called Palate, or
Palatia, the palaces. The principal relic, of its former magnificence, is a
ruined theater, which is visible afar off, and was a most capacious edifice,
measuring 457 feet long. The external face of this vast fabric is marble. On
the side of the theater next to the river, is an inscription in mean
characters, rudely cut, in which, "The city Miletus" is mentioned seven times.
This is a monument of heretical Christianity. One Basilides, who lived in the
second century, was the founder of an absurd sect, called Basilidians and
Gnostics, the original proprietors of the many gems, with strange devices and
inscriptions, intended to be worn as amulets, or charms; with which the
cabinets of the curious now abound. One of their idle tenets was, that the
appellative "Jehovah," possessed singular virtue and efficacy. They expressed
it by the seven Greek vowels, which they transported into a variety of
combinations. The superstition appears to have prevailed, in no small degree,
at Miletus. In this remain the mysterious name is frequently repeated, and the
deity six times invoked, "Holy Jehovah, preserve the town of the Milesians, and
all the inhabitants." The archangels also are summoned to be their guardians,
and the whole city is made the author of these supplications; from which, thus
engraved, it was expected, as may be presumed, to derive lasting prosperity,
and a kind of talismanical protection.

The whole site of the town, to a great extent, is spread with rubbish, and
overrun with thickets. The vestiges of the heathen city, are pieces of wall,
broken arches, and a few scattered pedestals and inscriptions; a square marble
urn, and many wells. One of the pedestals has belonged to a statue of the
emperor Hadrian, who was a friend to the Milesians; as appears from the title
of savior and benefactor bestowed on him. Another has supported the emperor
Severus, and has a long inscription, with this curious preamble. "The senate
and people of the city of the Milesians, the first settled in Ionia, and the
mother of many and great cities, both in Pontus and Egypt, and in various other
parts of the world." Some fragments of ordinary churches are interspersed among
the ruins; and traces remain of an old fortress erected upon the theater;
beneath which, is a square enclosure, designed, it seems, as a station for an
armed party to dispute, or defend the passage of the river.

From the number of forsaken mosques, it is evident, that Mahometanism had
flourished in its turn, at Miletus. All these have been mean buildings, and
mere patch work; but one, a noble and beautiful structure of marble, is in use;
and the dome, with a tall palmtree or two, towers amid the ruins of some low
flatroofed cottages, inhabited by a very few Turkish families, the present
citizens of Miletus.

The history of this place, after the declension of the Greek empire, is very
imperfect. The whole region has undergone frequent ravages from the Turks. One
sultan, in 1175, sent 20,000 men, with orders to lay waste the Roman provinces,
and bring him seawater, sand, and an oar. All the cities on the Maeander, and
on the coast, were then ruined. Miletus was again destroyed toward the end of
the thirteenth century, by the conquering Othman.

This city was once exceedingly powerful and illustrious. Its early
investigators extended its commerce to remote regions. The whole Euxine sea,
the Propontis, Egypt, and other countries, were frequented by its ships, and
settled by its colonies. It boasted a venerable band of memorable men; among
the rest, Hecatoeus, an early historian; and Thales, the father of philosophy.
It withstood Darius, and refused to admit Alexander. It has been styled the
metropolis, and head of Ionia; the bulwark of Asia; chief in war and peace;
mighty by sea; the fertile mother, which had poured forth her sons to every
quarter, counting not fewer than seventy-five cities descended from her. It
afterward fell so low, as to furnish a proverbial saying, "The Milesians were
once great;" but, if we compare its ancient glory, and its subsequent
humiliation with its present state, we may justly exclaim, "Miletus, how much
lower art thou now fallen!"

At Ura, twenty-two miles from Miletus, and about two miles and a half from the
shore, are the ruins of a famous temple, dedicated to Apollo Didymeus. It is
approached by a gentle ascent, and seen afar off; the land toward the sea
lying flat and level. The memory of the pleasure which this spot afforded me,
says Chandler, will not be soon, or easily, erased. The columns, yet entire,
are so exquisitely fine; the marble mass so vast and noble, that it is
impossible, perhaps, to conceive greater beauty and majesty of ruin.

Of Halicarnassus nothing is extant but the ruins. No part of the tomb, erected
by queen Artimesia, for her husband Mausolus, is now remaining; though formerly
esteemed one of the finest structures in the world. In this city Herodotus and
Dionysius were born.

Amasia, another district in Asia-Minor, containing several provinces, and
bounded by the Euxine sea on the North, and by Armenia and Georgia on the East,
has few places of any celebrity.

Amasia, a town of the same name, situated near the banks of the river Iris, is
the residence of the Turkish viceroy; and was anciently that of the kings of
Cappadocia. It is pleasantly situated on an eminence, from whence there is a
prospect over an extensive plain. The buildings are mean, nor is it a place of
much commerce; but there are some magnificent ruins, where the palaces of the
ancient princes stood. The Greeks have an archbishop. The best wines, and best
fruits in Natolia, are to be met with here. It is also celebrated in having
been the birthplace of Strabo.

Tocat, a very populous city, is situated about a hundred miles South of the
Black Sea. There is a considerable manufacture carried on here, of yellow
Turkey leather. The Armenians, who inhabit this city, are mostly mechanics,
being employed in copper, and other hardware. The Christians make excellent
wine here, and the adjacent country abounds in different kinds of fruits.
Saffron is produced here in considerable quantity. It is also the grand
thoroughfare for the caravans, which come from Turkey, and are bound for
Persia, Arabia, and India. The Amazons, if ever there were such a people, is
supposed to have resided in this part of Asia.

According to other writers, who give a more particular description of this
city; it contains near 30,000 inhabitants. The houses are well built, and two
stories in height. The city is in the form of an amphitheatre, which gives it a
singular appearance. The streets are well paved, a circumstance very unusual in
Asiatic cities. The streams are so abundant, that each house here, has also its
fountain. Besides the silk of this country, they manufacture eight or ten loads
of that of Persia, and make it into sewing silk. Their chief trade is in copper
vessels, such as kettles, drinking cups, lanthorns and candlesticks. This city
may be looked upon as the center of trade in Natolia.

Trebisond is a large, populous, and strong town, situated on the shore of the
Euxine sea. Within the walls are groves and gardens, intermixed with houses. It
is seated at the foot of a very steep hill, and the walls are square and high
with battlements. They are built with the ruins of ancient structures, on which
there are inscriptions, but not legible. It had a strong castle built on a rock
for its defense, but now much decayed; the harbor, which lies at the East end
of the city, was formerly esteemed a very good one; but is, at present, so
blocked up, that ships cannot enter it.

The suburbs, which are larger than the city, are inhabited by Greeks and
Armenians. The country is not fruitful, and the trade is much on the decline.
It was subject to the Roman and Greek emperors; but in 1209, the sovereignty of
it was usurped by David Commenus, a Frenchman, who took upon himself the title
of Duke. His successor, John Commenus, assumed that of emperor; and his
descendants remained sovereigns of the city, and the adjacent country, till the
year 1460, when Mahomet II. took it, and put to death David Commenus, the last
emperor; and the Turks still continue in possession of it.

Of the provinces, in the two other districts of Asia-Minor, Aladulia, and
Caramania, we can collect nothing worthy of notice.

CHAP. III. Turcomania, Curdistan, and Diarbeck.
THE province of Turcomania, the ancient Armenia, is situated North of Diarbeck
and Curdistan; having Media on the East, and Natolia on the West. The chief
cities arc Erzerom and Cars.

The city of Erzerom, the capital, is situated at the foot of a mountain, in
forty-one degrees of longitude, and forty of latitude. It is about two miles in
circumference, and surrounded by a double wall. The inhabitants consist of
twenty thousand Turks, and six thousand Armenians. Most of the Turks, though
ordinary tradesmen, are called Janissaries, from having given a sum of money to
the Aga, to be enrolled as such.

The Greeks and Armenians have each their bishop. They are, for the most part,
artificers, and employed in the leather and copper manufactures; the mountains
near the city, being rich in copper, together with some silver ore. These
mountains, are generally covered with snow till midsummer; the air in winter is
exceedingly cold; and the valleys in summer are as much too hot; the weather,
hereabouts, frequently changing from violent heat to the opposite extreme,
which is the more insupportable, as there is scarco any fuel in the country;
there is neither tree nor bush to be seen for many miles; their firing,
therefore, is cow dung, and other stinking materials which taint the air, and
spoil the food dressed with it. Their commerce is chiefly in furs, and they
have a brisk foreign trade; the caravans passing through this city, in their
way to Constantinople, in order to avoid the Arabs, whom they are in danger of
encountering, when they proceed in a direct line to Aleppo. In this city is
collected the custom-house dues, on all merchandise that passes through the
country. They seldom enter into particulars, but charge them by the lump,
according to their weight. For instance, twenty pounds are demanded for every
camel-load, which is generally about eight hundred weight. Sometimes five per
cent. is demanded for all merchandise exported; and five crowns for each
traveller.

Kars, or Cars, lies on a river of the same name, about one hundred miles East
of Trebisond. It is two miles in circumference, and but thinly inhabited. The
town is defended by a castle, situated on an inaccessible rock; and, as it is a
frontier town adjoining to Persia, it has a numerous garrison, commanded by a
bashaw. The merchants complain much of the extortions practiced on them, when
they pass through this city. The houses are very mean in their appearance, and
look more like dens than the habitations of human beings.

The province of Curdistan, or Assyria Proper, is divided between the Persians
and the Turks. The Western part belonging to Turkey, is the least, and lies
between Persia on the East, and Diarbeck, or Mesopotamia, on the West. This is
a very mountainous country; but the hills are covered with good timber and
herbage to their very summit, and the soil in the valleys is well watered and
fertile; but being a frontier province, it is not so well cultivated as it
might be. The people are chiefly shepherds, who live in tents, and ramble from
place to place, covering the country with their flocks and herds. They are a
sort of christians, but are said to be very brutish, and much given to
pilsering those who pass through their country, like the Arabs. But this is not
to be wondered at, on the frontiers of two powerful kingdoms at enmity with
each other; and where people will take greater liberties than in other places.

There are scarce any towns or villages in Curdistan. The houses lie dispersed
at the distance of a musketshot from each other; and, though they make no wine,
there is scarce a house without its vineyard.

In this country stood the ancient city of Nineveh, on the eastern bank of the
river Tigris. This city, according to Jonas, was sixty miles in circumference.
The walls of it are said to have been one hundred feet high, and the towers two
hundred feet; of these it is recorded, there were eleven hundred and fifty. The
houses did not stand contiguous, but were surrounded with large gardens and
court-yards. It is said to have been built by Nimrod; but, according to some
writers, by Ninus; from whom it is conjectured to have received its name. It
held out a siege of three years, against Arbaces, when the river overflowed
twenty furlongs of the wall; on which Sardanapalus the king, retired into his
palace, and having collected all his wealth, amounting to twenty thousand
millions of pounds, he set fire to the whole, and threw himself into the
flames. This city was afterward entirely destroyed by Astyages, and nothing is
now to be seen, but heaps of rubbish along the river Tigris, where it formerly
stood, and which is imagined to be the remains of this great city.

About two miles from the Tigris, on a small eminence, stands a mosque; on the
spot, where, according to tradition, Jonas was buried. The Turks have such a
veneration for this mosque, that they will scarce permit any Christian to enter
it.

The principal city in Curdistan, is Sherasoul, which lies to the East of
Nineveh, in the 36th degree of Latitude. It is the seat of the viceroy. The
town is not large, but built in a singular manner; the houses being hewn out of
a rock, or the side of a hill.

Arbela, to the East of Sherasoul, lies adjoining to a plain of fifteen leagues
in extent. It was on this plain that Alexander defeated Darius. In the middle
of the plain is a considerable eminence, covered with fine oaks; and on the
summit a castle, into which it is said, Darius went to view the engagement.

Betlis, in the northern part of this province, is a city whose prince is
independent, both of the Port, and of Persia; the country here being very
mountainous, and almost inaccessible. The road up to the city is cut through a
rock, being not more than just wide enough to admit a camel to pass. It is
built round the hill in shape of a cone, and stands at an equal distance from
two other mountains. On the top is a plain where the Castle stands; and here
the bey, or prince, has his palace. It is said he can raise five and twenty
thousand horse, and a large body of foot, from among the shepherds in this
province.

The province of Diarbeck, or Mesopotamia, lies between the Tigris and
Euphrates; from which situation it is said to have obtained its name. It is
bounded by Turcomania on the North, and Chaldaea on the South.

This province is, for the most part, as fertile as any in the Turkish empire.
It abounds, particularly in the North part, with corn, wine, cattle, wild fowl,
and every kind of provisions. There is a pleasing variety of hills and vales,
throughout the province; and it is almost entirely encircled by the Tigris and
Euphrates, besides being watered by several lesser streams.

The two principal cities in this province, are Orfa and Diarbeck. Orfa is said
to be the capital. This city is supposed to be the ancient Edissa; it lies in
36 degrees of North latitude. It is also said to have been the place where
Abraham dwelt. The first thing shown to strangers, is a large fountain, whose
springs rise under the principal mosque. The Christians have a tradition, that
it was on this spot that Abraham prayed, before he went to offer up his son
Isaac, and that two springs of water arose from the place where he knelt.

The walls of this city are built of freestone, with towers at different
distances; but the town is meanly built, and many parts of it unoccupied. There
are some pleasant gardens in the suburbs, watered by artificial canals, and the
soil produces good corn and wine; but what Orfa is most remarkable for, is the
manufacture of yellow Turkey leather, as it is called; the red being made at
Diarbeck, and the blue at Tocat.

Diarbeck is situated in 42 degrees of East longitude, and 47 of North
latitude, on the river Tigris, and not far from its source. It is built on an
eminence, and the descent to the river is very steep. The town is surrounded by
a double wall; on the outward wall, are sixty ancient towers, and three gates;
on every one of which is an inscription in Greek, not intelligible at present,
but repeating the name of Constantine several times. In this city is a
magnificent mosque, and several handsome squares. It contains 20,000 Christian
inhabitants, two thirds of which are Armenians* besides a great number of
Mahometans. About a league from the city, is a canal cut from the Tygris, which
supplies the town with water* and it is in this water that all the red Turkey
leather, made at Diarbeck, is washed, and which so much excels all others in
color. This manufacture employs, at least, one-fourth of the inhabitants. The
soil in the environs of this city, is very good, and abounds in corn and wine.
This city stands so near the source of the Tigris, that it is fordable here.

CHAP. IV. Irac-Arabi, and Georgia.
THE province of Irac-Arabi, anciently called Chaldaea, lies on both sides the
river Euphrates and Tigris; having Persia on the East, and Arabia Deserta on
the West. In this province, according to some writers, was the seat of
Paradise; and here stood the tower of Babel, where language was first
confounded.

The principal towns in this province are, Bagdad, Bassora, and the ruins of
Babylon and Selqucia.

Bagdat, the capital, is situated in 43 degrees of East longitude, and 33 of
North latitude, on the river Tygris. It was built by Mahomet II. caliph of the
Saracens, on the Western side of the river; and about the year 1100, another
town was built on the East side, and both united by a bridge of boats;
according to Hanway, the only communication the river will admit of, as it is
broad and deep, and in its ordinary course very rapid. At certain seasons, it
swells to a prodigious height; and, overflowing the country, occasions many
morasses on the side opposite to the city.

The fortifications of this city are composed of lofty thick walls, of brick,
covered with earth; strengthened by great towers in form of bastions, placed at
certain distances, and protected by a deep ditch, which can be filled at any
time by the waters of the Tigris. The citadel is on the North side, and
commands the river. The whole fortification is furnished with near two hundred
pieces of cannon. The garrison generally consists of a body of two thousand
men; and in time of war, more than twice that number; besides the ordinary
militia, which is twelve thousand men. The principal buildings are the palace
of the viceroy, the mosques of which are five; and the cloisters which surround
the bazars, or marketplaces; and their bagnios, all built by the Persians,
when in possession of Bagdat. The cadi, who is principal ecclesiastic, and
consequently the chief judge, has great authority in this province. The
Tefterdar, or treasurer, who collects the public revenue, has also considerable
influence in the council; and the Reis Effendi, or secretary, who is sometimes
styled chancellor, is likewise an officer of great consequence, and they are
all of the viceroy's council; and a check on his administration, over whom he
has no authority; they being only accountable to the Divan at Constantinople.

Bossora, or Bassora, is situated in 47 degrees of East longitude, and 30 of
North latitude, about three miles from the united stream of the Euphrates, and
the Tigris, with which it has a communication by a deep canal, the tide flowing
between forty and fifty miles higher than the town, which is a great advantage
to their navigation and foreign traffic. The walls of this town are twelve
miles in circumference; within which, are many void spaces, fields and gardens.
The situation of Bassora, is not only extremely pleasant, being surrounded with
fruitful fields and gardens; but it is, or at least was, the best situated for
trade of any city in the world; and is the most ancient port-town, that history
takes notice of, in that part of the world. The merchants of Bassora, and those
of Tire, were probably cotemporaries; or rather the cities of Tire and Sidon,
the chief Phenician ports, received the spices, and other merchandise of the
East, from Bassora, to which port they were first brought by land, on the backs
of camels; and afterward by sea up the gulf of Persia; and from that gulf, up
the river Euphrates, to the end of the canal, which preserves the communication
between that river and the town. Four months in the year, the Indian merchants
resort hither, viz. between the first of July, and the end of October, when the
Monsoon sets fair to bring them up the gulf; and, at this time, arrive the
merchants from the West. In this season of the year, the town is crowded with
traders from almost every part of the world.

It is not only the foreign trade that renders this town so considerable, but
its lying in the road from Persia to Mecca; through which, numerous caravans of
pilgrims annually pass; who not only lay out considerable sums for provisions,
before they enter the desert, but make a sort of trading voyage, bartering the
produce of their own country, for that of the countries they pass through; and
their nobles, who are above this kind of traffic, by carrying a great train of
officers and servants with them, spend a great deal of money, which the Arabs
find so beneficial, that when the Persians began to take another route to
Mecca, on account of some fresh duties extorted be the Arabs, they invited them
to proceed in their ancient tract, and agreed to remit even most of those they
used formerly to demand.

The greatest prejudice to Bassora, is the Samiel, or hot wind, that blows over
this country annually, about Midsummer; at which time, many of the inhabitants,
as well as foreigners, lose their lives. Thevenot, a traveller of credit,
relates, that he knew four thousand people destroyed by it in one season; but,
as this is the time of their fair, when multitudes of foreigners flock here,
possibly many of them might die of other diseases. There is another distemper
which reigns here, about this time, occasioning swellings in the groin, neck,
and other parts of the body. This is not so dangerous as the other; but were it
much more so, it is observable, that where merchants have a prospect of great
gain, nothing will deter them from visiting such places; as for example, their
trading to Bencoolen, in the East Indies; and Porto-Bello, in the West Indies.

This hot wind reigns from India, as far as the junction of the Tigris and
Euphrates; and seems to be more fatal here than either in India or Persia;
those who breathe this air, frequently dying in an instant, as if struck with
lightning. Thevenot is of opinion, this is the wind mentioned by Job, it
blowing always from the East; it seems very evident, this hot wind is
occasioned from its blowing over a tract of burning sand; as it is never felt
upon the sea, contiguous to those countries, where it is so fatal on the land.

The environs of this city are beautiful. There are no finer pasture grounds to
be met with in all Asia; but the country, since it has been under the dominion
of the Turks, is not so well cultivated as it was in former times.

Georgia, of which we have said something before, is divided between the
Persians and the Turks. Much the greater part is under the dominion of Persia.
This is a very mountainous country, especially the North part; the mountains,
however, in general, are covered with forest-trees, fruit trees, and herbage;
and the soil produces good corn, where it is cultivated; but the inhabitants
are for the most part shepherds, living in tents, and ploughing no more than is
sufficient for their subsistence.

There are some of these mountains, however, very high, and covered with snow
great part of the year, which makes the air of this province very cold in
winter; except in the valleys, and those are, for the most part, warm enough,
and in summer excessive hot.

In Turkish Georgia may be comprehended Mongrelia, Imeretta, and the South part
of Circassia; which countries are situated between 41 and 46 degrees of Eastern
longitude, and between 40 and 45 degrees of North latitude; lying in the form
of a crescent, about the East end of the Euxine sea. The chief towns are,
Amarchia and Gonie. Of these towns we find nothing worthy of notice. The
Georgians appear to lead a particular life, being dispersed about the
mountains, or in the valleys, and on the banks of rivers, in scattered
habitations.

The country is reputed to be very healthy, and the natives are of a good
stature, and their features and complexion, as well as their parts and genius,
more admired than any people in the East. From hence, as we have before
observed, in our account of Constantinople, are transmitted most of the
beautiful women, which adorn the seraglios of the Grand Signior.

It has not only been the custom of late years, for the Turks and Persians to
furnish themselves with slaves from this province; but, during the reign of
their caliphs, the Egyptians formed their guards from the natives of this
country; who, in time, became so numerous, that they at last deposed the
caliphs, usurping the dominion of Egypt themselves, under the name of
Mamalukes, and even maintained themselves on that throne, for several
generations, not by hereditary succession; but, when a sultan or caliph died,
another popular slave was elected sovereign from among them. It has been
suggested, that the Egyptians also purchased female slaves, as well as males,
from the Georgians. The Egyptian women have been so celebrated for their beauty
and wit, that we have many remarkable instances in history, particularly in
Solomon, who adored his Egyptian wife, as well as her gods. Cleopatra made a
conquest, both of Coesar and Anthony; and Mahomet was fonder of his Egyptian
mistress, than of any of his wives or concubines. The reason generally
assigned, that the Turks are such comely and personable men, and their
daughters so fair, is their cohabiting with Georgian and Circassian beauties;
and the like may be conjectured of the Egyptians.

All that we can learn of the present government of Georgia is, that the
Southern provinces are subject either to the Persians or the Turks; but, as to
the Northern provinces, they are, in some measure, independent of either of
these powers. They will, to serve their turn, acknowledge themselves subject,
sometimes to Turkey, and at others to Russia; but no dependence is to be placed
upon them. By retiring to their mountains, they are, in a manner, out of their
reach; and as it would be impracticable entirely to subdue them, so it would be
impolitic to attempt it; because, if they found themselves oppressed by one of
these powers, they would infallibly join the other. With respect to their
internal government, the country seems divided into but two ranks, or orders,
that of lords and slaves. The common people have no property in the lands, or
goods they possess; and even their wives and children are the property of their
respective lords, and may be sold by them at pleasure. The lords themselves, in
their several subdivisions, have a chief, whom they acknowledge to be their
sovereign, and possibly may be a check upon his administration, if he attempts
to tyrannize, or oppress them.

With regard to the religion of the inhabitants of Georgia, there are a number
of Mahometans; but much the greater part are Christians, of the Greek and
Armenian persuasion; and it is these who are made slaves; the Turks giving free
liberty to all those who subscribe to their religious tenets.

CHAP. V. Syria, Country, Climate, Winds, Rivers, Mountains, Productions.
SYRIA lies to the Westward of Diarbeck, or Mesopotamia, from which it is
separated from the Euphrates; having Natolia and Turcomania on the North,
Arabia on the South, and the Mediterranean toward the West, in which limits
are included, Phoenicia and Palestine.

This name of Syria, is an abridgment of Assyria, first adopted by the Ionians,
who frequented those coasts, after the Assyrians of Nineveh had reduced that
country to be a province of their empire; that is, about 750 years before
Christ. The name of Syria, then comprehended neither Phoenicia, nor Palestine.
The present inhabitants, who, according to the constant practice of the Arabs,
have not adopted the Greek names, call it Barrel-Sham, or country to the left.
This country is, in some measure, only a chain of mountains, distributing
themselves in various directions MAP of JUDEA, SYRIA etc.
map of Judea from one leading branch. These mountains, as they vary their
levels and situations, are also greatly changed in their form and appearance.

It is an opinion generally received, that Syria is a very hot country; but it
will be necessary to make several distinctions: first, on account of the
difference of latitude, which, from one extremity to the the other, is not less
than six degrees: secondly, from the natural division of the country, into low
and flat, and high and mountainous, which division occasions a still more
sensible difference; for, while Reaumeur's thermometer stands at 25 and 26
degrees upon the coast, it hardly rises to 20 or 21 among the mountains. In
winter, therefore, the whole chain of mountains is covered with snow; while the
lower country is always free from it, or at least, it lies only for an instant.
We must, therefore, establish two general climates, the one very hot, which is
that of the coast, and the interior plains, such as those of Balbech, Antioch,
Tripoli, Acre, Gaza, etc. the other temperate, and almost like our own, which
is the climate of the mountains, at least at a certain height.

In the mountains, the order of seasons is nearly the same as in the middle
provinces of France; the winter, which lasts from November to March, is sharp
and vigorous. Not a year passes without snow, and the earth is frequently
covered several feet deep with it for months together; the spring and autumn
are mild, but the summer heat is absolutely insupportable. In the plains, on
the contrary; as soon as the sun returns to the equator, the transition is
rapid to oppressive heats, which continue to the end of October. But then the
winter is so moderate, that the orange, date, banana, and other delicate trees,
flourish in the open air; and it appears equally extraordinary and picturesque,
to an European at Tripoli, to behold under his windows in the month of January,
orange trees loaded with flowers and fruit, while the lofty head of Lebanon is
covered with ice and snow.

Syria, therefore, unites different climates under the same sky; and collects
within a narrow compass, pleasures and productions, which nature has elsewhere
dispersed at greater distances from time and place. In Europe, seasons are
separated by months; here they are only separated by hours. If in Said, or
Tripoli, the inhabitants are incommoded by the heats of July, in six hours they
are in the neighboring mountains, and in the temperature of March; or, on the
other hand, if chilled by the frosts of December, in the mountains, a days
journey brings them to the coast amid the flowers of May. The Arabian poets
have therefore said, that the Sannen, (or peak of Lebanon) bears winter on his
head, spring upon his shoulders, and autumn in his bosom, while summer lies
sleeping at his feet.

The winds in Syria, as in Egypt, are, in some degree, periodical, and governed
by the seasons. About the autumnal equinox, the North-west wind begins to flow
more frequently and stronger. It renders the air dry, clear, and sharp; and it
is remarkable, that on the seacoast it causes the headache; but never in the
mountains. This wind continues to prevail about fifty days, and is followed by
the North-west, West, and South-west, which prevail from November to February.
The two latter winds are, to use the expression of the Arabs, the fathers of
the rains. In March arise the pernicious winds from the Southern quarter, with
the same circumstances as in Egypt. Their duration, at each return, is usually
three days. The easterly winds which follow, continue till June, when a North
wind succeeds. At the season, the wind varies through all the points every day,
passing with the sun from the East to the South; and from the South to the
West, to return by the North, and re-commence the circuit. At this time also, a
local wind called the land-breeze, prevails along the coast during the night;
it springs up after sunset, lasts till sunrising, and reaches only two or
three leagues out at sea.

The causes of all these phenomenon, are problems well deserving the attention
of natural philosophers. No country is better adapted to observations of this
kind, than Syria. It seems as if nature had there prepared whatever is
necessary, to the study of her operations. We, says Volney, in our foggy
climates, in the depth of vast continents, are unable to pursue the great
changes which happen in the atmosphere: the confined horizon, which bounds our
view, circumscribes also our ideas. The field of our observation is very
limited; and a thousand circumstances combine to vary the effects of natural
causes. There, on the contrary, an immense scene opens before us; and the great
agents of nature are collected in a space, which renders it easy to watch their
various operations. To the West, is the vast liquid plain of the Mediterranean;
to the East, the plain of the Desert, no less vast, but absolutely dry; in the
midst of these two level surfaces, rise the mountains, whose summits are so
many observatories, from whence the sight may discern full thirty leagues. Four
observers might command the whole extent of Syria; and, from the tops of
Casiers, Lebanon and Tabor, let nothing escape them within that boundless
horizon. They might observe, how the region of the sea, at first unclouded,
veils itself with vapors; in what manner these vapors form into groups, and
separate; and, by a constant mechanism, ascend and rise above the mountains;
while, on the other hand, the desert invariably clear, never produces clouds,
and has only those it has received from the sea. They might reply to the
question proposed by M. Michaelis, to the traveller for the king of Denmark,
"Whether the desert produces dews?" that the desert, containing no water,
except in winter, after the rains, can only furnish vapors at that period. On
viewing the valley of Balbeck, burnt up with heat, whilst the head of Lebanon
is hoary with ice and snow, they would be sensible of the truth of a maxim,
which ought no longer to be disputed, that the heat is greater in proportion as
we approach the surface of the earth; so that it seems to proceed only from the
action of the rays of the sun upon the earth. In short, they might successfully
attempt the solution of the greatest part of meteorological problems.

The exaggerated, or in other terms, the grand ideas which history and
travelers usually give to distant objects, have accustomed us to speak of the
waters of Syria, with a respect, which amuses our imagination. We are fond of
saying, the river Jordan, the river Orontes, the river Adonis. If, however, we
wish to preserve to words their proper signification, we shall hardly find in
this country, says Volney, any other rivulets. The channels of the Orontes and
the Jordan, the two most considerable, are scarcely sixty paces wide at their
mouths; the others, do not merit to be mentioned. If the rains and melted snow
give them some importance in the winter, their course is only to be discovered,
during the remainder of the year, by the round stones, and fragments of rocks
with which their beds are filled. They are nothing but torrents and cascades;
and it may be conceived, that from the proximity of the mountains, to the sea,
among which they rise, their waters have not time to collect in long valleys,
so as to form rivers.

The Jordan, says Mariti, may, in general, be about thirty-five cubits in
breadth; but when the snow is thawed, or during the rainy season, its increase
overflows its banks, extends to the distance of more than four miles, and is
sometimes divided into two or three channels.

It is so rapid at all times, that the strongest swimmer cannot cross it; and
it would be even dangerous to cross it in a boat, unless one had the mantling
Elisha mentioned in the second chapter of the second book of Kings. Its waters
are always muddy; but when taken from the river, and put into any kind of
vessel, they immediately clarify, leaving a black sediment mixed with
bituminous particles. These waters, however are sweet, will not soon corrupt,
and abound with fish. Both sides of the Jordan are bordered by a forest of
tufted trees, which grow so closely in some places, that they are impenetrable
to the rays of the sun. This forest is the retreat of tigers, which sometimes
carry desolation to the surrounding country. It is peopled also, with, birds of
every kind, and particularly nightingales.

These waters are said to purify both the soul and the body. The Greeks even
imagine, that people are not properly baptized, until they have plunged three
times into the river Jordan. Men, women, and children, therefore, may be seen
throwing themselves into the water together, with an eagerness almost bordering
on madness, without thinking that they offend both against modesty and decency.

The custom of bathing in this river, is as ancient as the age of Elisha. "Go,"
said that prophet to Naaman, who was afflicted with the leprosy, "wash in the
Jordan seven times, and thy flesh shall come again unto thee, and thou shall be
clean." Naaman obeyed; and, as a reward for his faith, his blood was purified,
and his flesh became as sound as that of an infant.

The obstacles opposed by the mountains of the abovementioned rivers, at the
issue, have formed considerable lakes, in several places; such as those of
Antioch, Aleppo, Damascus, Houla, Tabaria, and that which is honored with the
name of the Dead Sea, or Lake Asphaltites. All these lakes, except the last,
are of fresh water, and contain several species of fish, different from those
we are acquainted with.

Lake Asphaltites alone, contains neither animal nor vegetable life. We see no
verdure on its banks, nor are fish to be found within its waters; but it is not
true, that its exhalations are pestiferous, so as to destroy birds flying over
it. It is very common to see swallows skimming its surface, and dipping for the
water necessary to build their nests. The real cause which deprives it of
vegetables and animals, is the extreme saltness of the water, which is
infinitely stronger than that of the sea. The soil around it, equally
impregnated with this salt, produces no plants; and the air itself, which
becomes loaded with evaporation, and which receives also the sulphurous and
bituminous vapors, cannot be favorable to vegetation; hence, the deadly
aspect which reigns around this lake. In other respects, the ground about it is
not marshy; and its waters are limpid and incorruptible, as must be the case
with a dissolution of salt. The origin of this mineral, is easy to be
discovered; for on the South-west shore, are mines of fossil salt; which, for
time immemorial, have supplied the neighboring Arabs, and even the city of
Jerusalem. We find also on this shore, fragments of sulphur and bitumen; as
also hot fountains, and deep crevices; which are discovered at a distance by
little pyramids, built on the brink of them. At intervals, we also meet with
unshapen blocks, which prejudiced eyes mistake for mutilated statues, and which
pass with ignorant and superstitious pilgrims, for monuments, of the adventure
of Lot's wife, though it is no where said she was metamorphosed into stone,
like Niobe; but into salt, which must have melted the ensuing winter.

Some naturalists have been greatly embarrassed, to find a discharge for the
water, which the Jordan is continually pouring into the lake, and have,
therefore, been inclined to suspect it had a communication with the
Mediterranean; but, besides that; we know of no gulf to corroborate this
supposition; it has been demonstrated, by accurate calculations, that the
evaporation is more than sufficient to carry off the waters brought by the
river. It is, in fact, very considerable, and frequently becomes sensible to
the eye, by the fogs with which the lake is covered, at the rising of the sun,
and which are afterward dispersed by the heat.

A view of the country will convince us, that the most elevated point of all
Syria, is Lebanon, on the South-east of Tripoli. Scarcely do we depart from
Larnic, in Cyprus, which is thirty leagues distant, before we discover its
summit, capped with clouds. This is also distinctly perceivable on the map,
from the course of the rivers. Next to Lebanon, the most elevated part of the
country, is Mount Akkar, which becomes visible as soon as we leave Marra, in
the desert. It appears, like an enormous flattened cone, and is constantly in
view for two days together.

Lebanon, which gives its name to the whole extensive chain of the Kesraouan,
and the country of the Druses, presents us every where with majestic mountains.
At every step we meet with scenes, in which nature displays either beauty or
grandeur. When we land on the coast, the lostiness and steep ascent of this
mountainous ridge, which seems to enclose the country, inspires astonishment
and respect. Should the curious traveller climb these summits, which bound his
view, the immensity of space which he discovers becomes a fresh subject of
admiration; but, completely to enjoy this majestic scene, he must ascend the
very point of Lebanon, or the Sannin. There, on every side, he will view an
horizon without bounds; while, in clear weather, the fight is lost over the
desert, which extends to the Persian gulf, and over the sea which bathes the
coasts of Europe. He seems to command the whole world, which the wandering eye,
now surveying the successive chain of mountains, transports the imagination in
an instant, from Antioch to Jerusalem; and, now approaching the surrounding
objects, more minutely examines the rocks, woods, torrents, hill-sides,
villages, and towns: and the mind secretly exults at the diminution of things,
which before appeared great. The spectator contemplates the valley, obscured by
stormy clouds, with a novel delight, and smiles at hearing the thunder, which
had so often burnt over his head, growling under his feet; while the
threatening summits of the mountains are diminished, till they appear only like
the furrows of a ploughed field, or the steps of an amphitheatre; and the mind
is flattered by an elevation above so many great objects, on which pride makes
it look down with a secret satisfaction.

When the traveller visits the interior of these mountains, the ruggedness of
the roads, the steepness of the descents, the height of the precipices, strike
him at first with terror; but the sagacity of his mule soon relieves him, and
he examines at his ease, those picturesque scenes which succeed each other to
entertain him. There, as in the Alps, he travels whole days, to reach a place
which is in sight at his departure; he winds, he descends, he skirts the hills,
he climbs; and in this perpetual change of position, it seems as if some magic
power varied for him at every step, the decorations of the scenery. Sometimes
he sees villages ready to glide, from the rapid declivities on which they are
built; and so disposed, that the terraces of one row of houses, serve as a
street to the row above them. I have reckoned, says Volney, from a hundred, to
a hundred and twenty of these gradations, on the same declivity, from the
bottom of the valley to the top of the eminence.

The South of Syria, that is the hollow through which the Jordan flows, is a
country of volcanos; the bituminous and sulphurous sources of the lake
Asphaltites, the lava, the pumice stones thrown upon its banks, and the hot
bath of Tabaria, demonstrate, that this valley has been the seat of a
subterraneous fire, which is not yet extinguished. Clouds of smoke are often
observed to issue from the lake, and new crevices to be formed upon its banks.
If conjecture in such cases were not too liable to error, we might suspect that
the whole valley has been formed only by a violent sinking of a country, which
formerly poured the Jordan into the Mediterranean. It appears certain, at
least, that the catastrophe of five cities, destroyed by fire, must have been
occasioned by the eruption of a volcano, then burning. Strabo says, expressly,
"that the tradition of the inhabitants of the country (that is of the Jews
themselves) was, that formerly the valley of the lake, had been peopled by
thirteen flourishing cities, and that they were swallowed up by a volcano."

This account seems confirmed by the quantities of ruins, still found by
travelers, on the Western border. These eruptions have ceased long since; but
earthquakes, which usually succeed them, still continue to be felt, at
intervals, in this country. The coast, in general, is subject to them; and
history gives us many examples of earthquakes, which have changed the face of
Antioch, Laodicea, Tripoli, Tire, Sidon, etc. In our time, in the year 1759,
there happened one, which caused the greatest ravages. It is said to have
destroyed, in the valley of Balbeck, upwards of twenty thousand persons; a loss
which has never been repaired. It is remarked in Syria, that earthquakes seldom
happen but in winter, after the autumnal rains; and this observation,
conformable to that made by Dr. Shaw, in Barbary, seems to prove, that the
action of water on the dried earth, has some share in these convulsive motions.

The variety of productions which this province affords, is astonishing.
Besides wheat, rye, barley, beans, and the cotton plant, which is cultivated
every where, we find a multitude of useful and agreeable productions,
appropriated to different situations. Maize thrives in the light soil of
Balbeck; and even rice is cultivated with success, in the low grounds. They
have lately begun to plant sugarcanes, in the gardens of Said. Indigo grows
without cultivating. The hill sides of Latahia produce tobacco. As for trees,
the olive tree of Provence grows at Antioch, and at Ramla, to the height of the
beech. The white mulberry tree constitutes the wealth of the whole country of
the Druses, by the beautiful silks which are produced on it; while the vine,
supported on poles, or winding round the oaks, supplies grapes, which afford
red and white wines, that might rival those of Bourdeaux. Gaza produces dates,
like Mecca, and pomegranates like Algiers; Tripoli affords oranges, equal to
those of Malta; Bairont, figs, like those of Marseilles; and bananas, not
inferior to those of St. Domingo; Aleppo enjoys the exclusive advantage of
producing pistachios; and Damascus justly boasts of possessing all the fruits
known in Europe. Twenty sorts of apricots are reckoned there; the stone of one
of which, contains a kernel highly valued through all Turkey. In short, the
cochineal plant, which grows on all that coast, contains, perhaps, that
precious insect, in as high perfection as it is found in Mexico and St.
Domingo. It was long imagined, that the cochineal was peculiar to Mexico; and
the Spaniards, to secure the exclusive possession of it, have prohibited the
exportation of the living cochineal, under pain of death.

With these numerous advantages of climate and of soil, it is not astonishing,
that Syria should always have been esteemed a most delicious country; and that
the Greeks and Romans ranked it among the most beautiful of their provinces,
and even thought it not inferior to Egypt. In more moderate times, a Pacha,
acquainted with both these provinces, being asked to which he gave the
preference, replied, "Egypt, without doubt, is a most beautiful farm, but Syria
is a charming country house."

To complete the natural history of Syria, it is proper to add, that it
produces all domestic animals; and, besides these, the buffalo and the camel,
whose utility is so well known. We also find antelopes in the plains, which
supply the place of our roebucks; and in the mountains are numbers of wild
boars. The stag and the deer are unknown there; the wolf, and the real fox, are
very rare; but there is a prodigious quantity of the middle species, named
jackall; which, in Syria, is called wauwee, in imitation of its howl. These
jackalls go in droves, and frequent the environs of the towns, where they feed
on what carrion they can find. They never attack any one, but are always ready
to save themselves by flight. Every evening they seem to give each other the
watchword, and begin howling; and their cries, which are very doleful, last
sometimes for a quarter of an hour. In unfrequented places, there are also
hyenas. But, in return, the country is exempt from lions and bears. Waterfowl
are very plentiful; land game is not so abundant. A species of the
humming-bird, still exists in the territory of Said. This and the pelican, are
the only remarkable birds in Syria.

Syria, as well as Egypt, Persia, and almost all the South of Asia, is subject
to another calamity, no less dreadful than the earthquakes; those clouds of
locusts so often mentioned by travelers. The quantity of these insects is
incredible, to all who have not witnessed their astonishing numbers; the whole
earth is covered with them, for the space of several leagues. The noise they
make in browzing on the trees and herbage, may be heard at a great distance;
and resembles that of an army foraging in secret. The Tartars themselves, are a
less destructive enemy than these little animals; one would imagine, that fire
had followed their progress. Wherever these myriads spread, the verdure of the
country disappears; and causes the dreary image of winter to succeed in an
instant, to the rich scenery of spring. When these clouds of locusts take their
flight, to surmount any obstacle, or to traverse more rapidly a defart soil,
the heavens, may literally be said, to be obscured by them. Happily this
calamity is not frequently repeated; for it is the inevitable forerunner of
famine, and the maladies it occasions. The inhabitants of Syria have remarked,
that locusts are always bred by too mild winters; and that they constantly come
from the desert of Arabia. From this observation, it is easy to conceive, that
the cold not having been rigorous enough to destroy their eggs, they multiply
suddenly; and, the herbage failing them in the immense plains of the desert,
innumerable legions issue forth. When they make their first appearance on the
cultivated country, the inhabitants strive to drive them off, by raising large
clouds of smoke, but frequently their herbs and wet straw fail them; they then
dig trenches, where numbers of them are buried; but the two most efficacious
destroyers of these insects are, the South, and South-easterly winds, and the
bird called the samamar. These birds, which greatly resemble the wood-pecker,
follow them in numerous flocks, like starlings, and not only greedily devour
them, but kill as many as they can; accordingly they are respected by the
peasants, and no one is ever allowed to shoot them. As for the Southerly and
South-easterly winds, they drive with violence these clouds of locusts, over
the Mediterranean, where such quantities of them are drowned, that, when their
carcases are thrown on the shore, they infect the air for several days, even to
a great distance.

In so extensive a country as Syria, we may reasonably presume the quality of
the soil is not every where the same. The land of the mountains is, in general,
rude; and that of the plains, fat and loamy; and exhibiting every sign of the
greatest fecundity. In the territory of Aleppo, toward Antioch, it resembles
very fine brick-dust, or Spanish dust. The waters of the Orontes, traversing
this district, are tinged with white, which proceeds from the nature of the
lands toward its source. Almost every where else the earth is brown, and like
fine garden mould. In the plains, it is often difficult to find a pebble.

Having now given an account of the climate, face of the country, and the
productions of this province, we shall proceed to treat of the different
cities, and conclude with a general view of the inhabitants, who are divided
into distinct nations, differing from each other in their customs, manners, and
religious ceremonies; and, in a great measure, independent of the government of
the Port, though within the district of Syria. The mountains, the plains, and
the deserts, are inhabited by people of a different denomination from those in
the cities, and bearing scarce any resemblance even to each other.

CHAP. VI. Pachalie of Aleppo. Division of the Country and Cities.
AFTER sultan Selim I. had taken Smyrna from the Mamalukes, he subjected the
province to the government of viceroys, or pachas, invested with unlimited
power. The more effectually to secure his authority, he divided the country
into five governments, or pachalies, which division still remains. These
pachalies, are those of Aleppo, Tripoli, and Said, lately removed to Acre;
that of Damascus, and lastly, that of Palestine, the seat of which, is
sometimes at Gaza, and sometimes at Jerusalem. Since the time of Selim, the
limits of these pachalies have often varied, but their general extent has been
always the same.

Following this division of the country, we shall proceed to give a description
of the most remarkable places in each pachalie. We will begin with the most
Northerly, that of Aleppo. This pachalie extends from the Euphrates, to the
Mediterranean, between two lines, one drawn from Scandaroon to Beer; the other
from the Beles to the sea, by Mara, and the bridge of Shoger. This space
principally consists of two plains, that of Antioch to the West, and that of
Aleppo to the East.

The places which merit most attention in this pachalie are, first, the city of
Aleppo, called by the Arabs Halab, and, by ancient geographers Chalybon. This
city is the capital of the government, and the ordinary residence of the pacha.
It is situated in the vast plain extending from the Orontes to the Euphrates;
and which, toward the South, terminates in the desert. The situation of
Aleppo, besides the advantage of a rich and fruitful soil, possesses also that
of a stream of fresh water, which never becomes dry. This river, which is about
as large as that of the new river near London, terminates six leagues below
Aleppo, in a morafs, sull of wild boars and pelicans. Near Aleppo, its banks
are covered with a fertile earth, and laid out in gardens, or rather orchards;
which, in a hot country, and especially in Turkey, cannot but be delightful.
The city is in itself, one of the most agreeable in Syria; and is, perhaps, the
cleanest and best built of any in Turkey. On whatever side it is approached,
its numerous minarets and domes, present an agreeable prospect to the eye,
fatigued with the continued sameness of the brown and parched plains. In the
center is an artificial fountain, surrounded by a dry ditch, on which is a
ruinous fortress. From hence we have a fine prospect of the whole city; and to
the North, discover the snowy tops of the mountains of Bailan; and on the West,
those which separate the Orontes from the sea; while to the South and East, the
eye can discern as far as the Euphrates. In the time of Omar, this castle
stopped the progress of the Arabs, for several months, and was at last taken by
treachery; but, at present, would not be able to resist the feeblest assault.
Its slight walls, low and without a buttress, are in ruins; its little old
towers, are in no better condition; and it has not four cannon fit for service.

Aleppo, says Tott, celebrated for the number of its inhabitants, the beauty of
its edifices, the extent of its commerce, and the riches which that produce, is
situated in a hollow valley, close to a small river. This water, which supplies
the inhabitants of Aleppo, appears as extraordinary in the country through
which it runs, as the city itself, in the desert in which it stands.

The houses, which are all built with terraces on their tops, are so equal in
height, that there are seldom any steps to ascend, in going from one house to
another; while several large vaulted streets increase the facility of
communication, by affording a passage to every part of the city, free from the
embarrassment of open streets. They are carefully paved, have gutters, and a
foot pavement on each side, and the middle of the street is laid with brick,
the small end upwards, for the convenience of the horses.

In this city we find a cleanliness, unknown to other cities in Turkey, even to
the capital itself. This regulation is not attended with the same trouble as in
Europe; there are ass-drivers, who go about the city and take up the rubbish
and dirt, which every inhabitant is obliged to sweep together.

Though Aleppo cannot be esteemed a place of importance in war, as a commercial
city it has a different appearance. It is the emporium of Armenia, and the
Diarbekar; sends caravans to Bagdad, and into Persia; and communicates with the
Persian gulf and India, by Bassora; with Egypt and Mecca, by Damascus; and with
Europe, by Scandaroon (Alexandretta) and Latahia. The chief commodities are,
raw or spun cottons, coarse cloths, goats hair, gall and pistachio nuts, and
shawls; the wool of which, is so fine and silky, that the whole handkerchief
may be contained in the two hands closed. The most beautiful comes from
Cashmire; their value is from six guineas to fifty pounds.

The French have a consul in this city, and seven counting-houses; the English
and the Venetian two; and the merchants of Leghorn one. The late emperor
Joseph, appointed one in 1784, in the person of a rich Jew, who shaved his
beard to assume the uniform and the sword.

This city is not exceeded in extent, by any in Turkey, except Constantinople
and Cairo, and perhaps Smyrna. The number of inhabitants has been computed at
two hundred thousand. The people of Aleppo, are justly esteemed the most
civilized in all Turkey; and the European merchants no where enjoy so much
liberty, or are treated with so much respect.

The air of Aleppo is very dry and piercing; but, at the same time, very
salubrious, for all who are not troubled with asthmatic complaints. The city,
however, and the environs, are subject to a singular endemial disorder, which
is called the ring-worm, or pimple of Aleppo; it is, in fact, a pimple, which
is at first inflammatory, and at length becomes an ulcer of the size of the
nail. The usual duration of this ulcer is one year, it commonly fixes on the
face, and leaves a scar, which disfigures almost all the inhabitants. It is
alleged, that every stranger who resides there three months, is attacked with
it; experience has taught, that the best mode of treatment is to use no remedy.
No reason is assigned for this malady; but it is suspected to proceed from the
quality of the water, as it is likewise frequent in the neighboring villages,
in some parts of the Diarbekar; and even in certain districts near Damascus,
where the soil and the water have the same appearances.

For a long time, says Mariti, this disease was attributed to the subtility of
the air of Aleppo; but those persons, who have never drank water till it has
been boiled, remaining free from this distemper, makes it rather supposed to
arise from the water. There have been persons, who staid in this city only a
few days, who have been attacked by this disease even a year after. The method
of cure is very simple; nothing more is necessary, than to lay an ivy leaf,
with a little cerate spread upon it, over the tumor, and this brings it to a
suppuration in the course of a year. No particular regimen is required; and,
when a cure is effected, the body generally enjoys good health for a long while
after.

Every one has heard of the pigeons of Aleppo, which serve as couriers at
Alexandretta and Bagdad. This use of them, which is not fabulous, has been laid
aside for the last thirty of forty years, because the curd robbers killed the
pigeons. The manner of sending advice by them was this: they took pairs, which
had young ones, and carried them on horseback to the place from whence they
wished them to return, taking care to let them have a full view. When the news
arrived, the correspondent tied a billet to the pigeon's foot, and let her
loose. The bird, impatient to see its young, flew off like lightning, and
arrived at Aleppo in ten hours from Alexandretta, and in two days from Bagdad.
This pigeon has nothing peculiar in its form, except its nostrils, which,
instead of being smooth and even, are swelled and rough.

The open situation of Aleppo, brings a great number of sea-birds there, and
affords the curious a singular amusement: if a person goes after dinner, on the
terrace of the houses, and makes a motion as if throwing bread, numerous flocks
of birds will instantly fly round him, though at first he cannot discover one;
but they are floating aloft in the air, and descend in a moment to seize in
their flight, the morsels of bread, which the inhabitants frequently amuse
themselves with throwing them.

Next to Aleppo, Antioch, called by the Arabs Antahia, claims our attention.
This city, anciently renowned for the luxury of its inhabitants, is now no more
than a ruinous town; whose houses, built with mud and straw, and narrow and
miry streets, exhibit every appearance of misery and wretchedness. These houses
are situated on the Southern bank of the Orontes, at the extremity of an old
decayed bridge: they are covered to the South by a mountain, upon the slope of
which is wall, built by the Crusaders.

Notwithstanding the unpolished manners of its inhabitants, Antioch was better
calculated than Aleppo, to be the emporium of the Europeans. By clearing the
mouth of the Orontes, which is six leagues lower down, boats might have been
towed up that river; though, according to Volney, they could not have sailed
up, as Pococke affirms; the current being extremely rapid. We no longer hear at
Antioch, either of the grove of Daphne, or of the voluptuous scenes, of which
it was the theater. The plain of Antioch, though the soil of it is excellent,
is uncultivated and abandoned to the Turcomen; but the hills on the side of the
Orontes, abound in plantations of figs and olives, vines and mulberry-trees,
which are planted in quincunx, and exhibit a landscape worthy our finest
provinces.

The gulf toward the North-east, is remarkable for nothing, but the town of
Alexandretta, or Scandaroon, of which it bears the name. This town, situated on
the seashore, is, properly speaking, nothing but a village without walls; in
which, the tombs are more numerous than the houses, and entirely owing its
existence to the road it commands. This is the only road in all Syria, where
vessels anchor on a solid bottom, without their cables being liable to chafe;
but, in other respects, it has so many serious inconveniences, that necessity
alone prevents the merchants from abandoning it.

First, it is infested during winter, by a wind peculiar to this place, which,
rushing from the snowy summits of the mountains, frequently forces ships to
drag their anchors several leagues. Secondly, when the snow begins to cover the
mountains, which surround the gulf, tempestuous winds arise, which prevent
vessels from entering it, for three or four months. Thirdly, the road from
Alexandretta to Aleppo, by the plain, is infested by curd robbers, who conceal
themselves in the neighboring rocks, and frequently attack and plunder the
strongest caravans. Another reason more forcible than all these is, the
unwholesomeness of the air of Alexandretta. It may be affirmed, that it every
year carries off one-third of the crews of vessels, which remain there during
the summer; nay, ships frequently lose all their men in a couple of months. The
season for this epidemic disorder, is principally from May, to the end of
September; it is an intermittent fever of the most malignant kind, and
accompanied with obstructions of the liver, which terminate in a dropsy. The
cities of Tripoli, Acre, and Larneca, in Cyprus, are subject to the same
disorder, though in a less degree. In all these places, the same local
circumstances seem to have given birth to the contagion; the cause of it is to
be ascribed to the adjoining morasses, and standing waters; which, in
consequence, produce vapors, and mephitic exhalations; a convincing proof of
this is, that the disorder does not prevail in seasons, when no rain has
fallen. But, unfortunately, Alexandretta is condemned, from its situation,
never to be wholly exempt from it; for the plain on which the town is built, is
so low and flat, that the rivulets finding no declivity, can never reach the
sea. This plain is about a league in breadth, and lies at the foot of the
mountains, and has been formed from earth brought down by the torrents. When
they are swelled by the winter rains, the sea, swelled likewise by tempests,
hinders their discharging themselves into it; hence, these waters, forced to
spread themselves, form lakes in the plain. On the approach of summer, the
waters become corrupted by the heat, and exhale vapors equally corrupt, which
cannot disperse, being confined by the mountains that encircle the gulf. The
entrance of the bay, besides, lies to the West, which, in those countries is
the most unhealthy exposure, when it corresponds with the sea. The labor
necessary to remedy this, would be immense; and, under a government like that
of the Turks, impossible. A few years ago, the merchants of Aleppo, disgusted
with the numerous inconveniences of Alexandretta, wished to abandon that post,
and carry the trade to Latakia. They proposed to the pacha of Tripoli, to
repair the harbor at their own expense, provided he would grant them an
exemption of all duties for ten years. To induce him to comply with their
request, the agent they employed, talked much of the advantage which would, in
time, result to the whole country. "But what signifies to me what may happen in
time, replied the pacha? I was yesterday at Marach, tomorrow, perhaps, I shall
be at Djedda; why should I deprive myself of present advantages, which are
certain, for future benefits I cannot hope to partake?" The European factors
were obliged, therefore, to remain at Scandaroon. There are three of these
factors; two for the French, and one for the English and Venetians. The only
curiosity which they have to amuse strangers with, consists in six or seven
marble monuments, sent from England, on which are written, Here lies such a
one, carried off in the flower of his age, by the fatal effects of a contagious
air. The fight of these is the more distressing, as the languid air, yellow
complexion, livid eyes, and dropsical bellies of those who show them, make it
but too probable, they cannot long escape the same fate. It is true, they have
some resource in the village of Bailen; the pure air, and excellent waters of
which, surprisingly restore the sick. This village, situated among the
mountains, three leagues from Alexandretta, presents the most picturesque
appearance. It is built among precipices, in a narrow and deep valley, from
whence the gulf of Scandaroon is seen, as through a tube. The houses, leaning
against the steep declivities of the two mountains, are so disposed, that the
terraces of the lower serve as streets and courts to those above. In winter,
cascades pour down on every side, which stun the inhabitants with their noise;
and, in their fall, sometimes rend off large pieces of the rocks, and even
throw down the houses. The cold is very severe there, during that season, but
the summer delightful; the inhabitants, who speak only Turkish, live on their
goats and buffaloes, and the produce of a few gardens which they cultivate.

On the road from Alexandretta to Aleppo, is the village of Martawan,
celebrated among the Turks and Europeans, on account of an extraordinary
practice of the inhabitants, who let out their wives and daughters for a
trifling sum. This prostitution, held in abhorrence by the Arabs, seems to have
originated in some religious custom, which ought, perhaps, to be sought for in
the ancient worship of the goddess Venus, or be attributed to the community of
women, permitted by the Ansarians, to which tribe the inhabitants of Mortawan
belong. The Franks pretend that the women are pretty. But it is probable, that
long abstinence at sea, and the variety of intrigue, constitute all their
merit; for their exterior announces nothing but the disgusting uncleanliness of
misery.

Two days journey to the North-east of Aleppo, is the town of Mambedj; so
celebrated in ancient times, under the names of Bambyce, and Hierapolis. No
traces remain of the temple of that great goddess, with whose worship Lucian
has made us acquainted. The only remarkable monument is a subterraneous canal,
which conducts the water from the mountains of the North, to the distance of
four leagues. All this country, was formerly full of such aqueducts: the
Assyrians, Medes, and Persians, esteemed it a religious duty to convey the
water to the desert, in order to multiply, according to the precepts of
Zoroaster, the principles of life and abundance: we, therefore, at every step,
meet with astonishing proofs of ancient population. Along the whole road from
Aleppo to Hama, may be seen the ruins of ancient villages, cisterns fallen in,
and the remains of fortresses; nay, even of temples.

CHAP. VII. Pachalie of Tripoli.
THE pachalie of Tripoli, comprehends the country, which stretches along the
Mediterranean, from Latahia to the Nark-el-Kelb, and is bounded on the West by
that torrent, and the chain of mountains which overlook the Orontes. The
principal part of this government is hilly; the seacoast alone, between
Tripoli and Latahia, is a level country. This pachalie, contains several
different tribes and religions. Among its remarkable cities, we must first
mention Tripoli. It is situated on the river Kadisha, at the distance of a
quarter of a league from its mouth, and precisely at the foot of Lebanon, which
overlooks and surrounds it with its branches, to the East, the South, and even
a little to the North-west. It is separated from the sea, by a small triangular
plain, called La Marine, half a league in breadth; at the point of which is the
village where the vessels land their goods.

All the environs of Tripoli, are laid out in orchards, where the nopal grows
spontaneously, and the white mulberry is cultivated for the silkworm; and, the
pomegranate, the orange, and the lemon-tree, for their fruit; which is of the
greatest beauty. But these places, though delightful to the eye, are unhealthy.
Every year, from July to September, epidemic fevers, like those of Scandaroon
and Cyprus, rage here: these are owing to the artificial inundations, with
which the mulberry-trees are watered, in order that they may throw out their
second leaves. Besides, as the city is open only to the West, the air does not
circulate, and the spirits are in a constant state of oppression, which makes
health at best but a kind of convalescence. The air, though more humid, is more
salubrious at La Marine, doubtless from its having greater freedom of
circulation. It is worthy of observation also, that the Southern shore of this
plain, is full of the ruins of habitations, and columns broken and buried in
the earth, or in the sea sands. The Franks have employed a great number of
them, in the building of their walls; in the remains of which, they are still
to be seen laid cross-ways.

The commerce of Tripoli, consists almost wholly in indifferent coarse silks,
which are made use of for laces. It is observed, they are every day losing
their quality. The reason assigned is, the decay of the mulberry-trees; of
which, scarcely any thing now remains but some hollow trunks. A stranger
instantly asks, why not plant new ones? This is an European observation. Here
they never plant; because, were they to build or plant, the pacha would say,
this man has money. He would send for him, and demand it of him: should he say
he had none, he would receive the bastinado; should he confess, he would still
receive it, in order to extort from him the acknowledgment that he had more.
This commerce is in the hands of the French alone. They have a consul here, and
three commercial houses. Their exports are silk and spunges, fished up in the
road; these they exchange for cloths, cochineal, sugar, and West India coffee;
but this factory, both with respect to imports and exports, is inferior to its
subordinate town Latakia.

The town of Latahia, founded by Seleucus Nicator, under the name of Laodicea,
is situated at the base, and on the Southern side of a small peninsula, which
projects half a league into the sea. Its port is a sort of basin, environed by
a mole, the entrance of which is very narrow. It might contain five and twenty,
or thirty vessels; but the Turks have suffered it so to be choked up, as
scarcely to admit four. Notwithstanding this, Latahia carries on a very great
commerce, consisting chiefly in tobacco; of which, upwards of twenty cargoes
are annually sent to Damietta. In the time of Strabo, the exports consisted in
its famous wines, the produce of the hill sides. Even then, Egypt was the
market by the way of Alexandria. Neither Latahia, nor Tripoli, can be mentioned
as places of strength. They have neither cannon nor soldiers; a single
privateer would make a conquest of them both. They are each supposed to contain
from four, to five thousand inhabitants.

On the coasts between these towns, we meet with several inhabited villages,
which were formerly large cities; but we find still more places, which have
only the half destroyed, remains of ancient habitations. Among the latter, is
the rock or island of Roud, formerly a powerful city and republic, known by the
name of Aradus. Not a single wall is remaining of all that multitude of houses;
which, according to Strabo, were built with more stories than even those of
Rome. The liberty enjoyed by the inhabitants, had rendered it very popular, and
it subsisted by naval commerce, manufactures, and arts. At present, the island
is deserted; nor has tradition even retained the memory of a spring of fresh
water in its environs, which the people of Aradus discovered at the bottom of
the sea, and from which they drew water, in time of war, by means of a leaden
bell, and a leathern pipe fitted to its bottom. The river Ibrahim, the ancient
Adonis, which is two leagues to the Southward, has the only bridge to be seen,
that of Tripoli excepted, from thence to Antioch. It is of a single arch, fifty
feet wide, and upwards of thirty high, of a very light architecture, and
appears to have been a work of the Arabs.

CHAP. VIII. Pachalie of Acre.
TO the South of the pachalie of Tripoli, and on the same coast, is a third
pachalie; that, till now, has borne the name of the city of Said, its capital;
but may henceforward assume that of Acre, to which place the pacha has of late
years transferred his residence. This city, which is now the principal one in
the pachalie, is situated in a large plain, bounded on the South by Mount
Carmel; on the West, by the mountains of Galilee: and on the North, by another
mountain, called the ladder of Tire: such is the description given of it by
Josephus. It was formerly reckoned among the ancient cities of Phenicia. The
addition of St. John, seems to have been given it, on account of the hospital
knights of that order, who took refuge there after the ruin of Jerusalem.

Nothing is now to be seen of this ancient city, but the shapeless remains of
monuments erected in it by the Christians. In the Western part, are found some
ruins of a church, dedicated to St. Andrew. Three large windows, which time has
not yet destroyed, give us a very grand idea of this building.

The palace of the grand master of the order of St. John of Jerusalem, with the
whole extent of the hospital, serve at present for a habitation to the chief of
Acre, together with his family and part of his cavalry.

This edifice, which is almost entire, owes its preservation to the astonishing
thickness of its walls. It is particularly remarkable for two high towers, and
its subterranean apartments; which contained hand-mills that are still
sometimes used.

In one of these towers, is an immense hall; in the center of which, there is a
large fountain, ornamented with marble of every kind.

Opposite to the palace of the pacha, is a large square; in the Northern part
of which, arise the ruins of the church and monastery of St. Clara. It was in
this memorable asylum, that some virtuous virgins mutilated their visages, when
the city was sacked and taken by the Saracens, to secure themselves from the
brutality of these barbarians; who, finding them objects of horror, butchered
them without mercy.

There are here two Latin churches, in one of which public worship is performed
by the fathers of the Holy Land, who inhabit a very commodious hospital, which
stands close to it, and which is open at all times to travelers and devotees,
who are pious enough to go and visit the tombs in Galilee.

The streets of Acre are all so narrow, that when a camel goes along the
broadest of them, it is impossible for any other animal to pass at the same
time.

Cut stones only, and not bricks, are employed for constructing the houses. The
roofs, very different from ours, are made flat, in the form of a terrace, upon
which the inhabitants walk; and which brings to remembrance those mentioned by
Vitruvius. The construction is singular. When the walls of an edifice are
finished, and the upper story is covered with beams of greater or less
strength, cypress boards are then laid closely one against another, and nailed
down to them. This covering supports, in its turn, several joists, placed
transversely; over which are spread hay and chopped straw, mixed with lime and
small stones. The whole being made smooth by means of a mallet, a layer of
cinder is then thrown over this composition; afterward a second of lime and
sand; and lastly, a third, consisting of a kind of plaster, formed of lime,
ashes, and pounded cinders, which is smoothed with a roller, and to which a
luster and polish are given, by a certain kind of wooden instrument. This is
the usual method of constructing these terraces.

If this floor happens to crack by the excessive heat, the fissures are filled
up with a mixture of lime, ashes and oil; and this composition will resist the
longest rains, and at length become so hard, that water cannot penetrate it.
Roofs built in the form of a cupola, are covered or encrusted with a substance,
consisting of pounded flints and lime, which is applied with great care, in
order that it may acquire a luster.

In this city are two Bazars, or markets, always well supplied. One contains
provisions of every kind; and the other is furnished with an assortment of
cloths and stuffs for making dresses.

In the same spot, are also two public baths, ornamented with marble, and
pretty well constructed: there are here, likewise, several coffee-houses, which
give this place a lively and agreeable appearance.

The air of this city is unwholesome; and various diseases prevail in it every
year during the great heats. These, no doubt, are occasioned by the narrowness
of the streets, and some putrid marshes in the neighborhood. The best
precaution that Europeans can take, against the malignity of this air, is to
confine themselves to a moderate diet; and above all, to avoid night dews, and
not to rise till the sun has dissipated that collection of clouds and vapors,
with which the atmosphere is loaded every morning.

This city was raised to its present consequence, by a very extraordinary
character, Shaik Daher, who for many years usurped the government of it;
consenting, for form's sake, to be annually invested with it, by a bashaw from
the Port; but, in other respects, paid no regard to their authority. He
governed his people with great justice, and showed an extraordinary partiality
to the Christians; by which means, he drew a considerable number of them to
settle in his territories, where they were secure from those extortions
practiced on them by the neighboring pachas. By the following act of justice
and humanity, shown to some pilgrims who were shipwrecked on his coast, he
acquired the confidence of succeeding ones, that they preferred landing at
Acre, where they paid the customary dues of landing, to Yafa, which was before
the port where all pilgrims landed, in their passage from Europe to the Holy
Land. Two vessels filled with Greeks, French, and Armenians, to the number of
two hundred, were in their passage from Europe to Yafa, driven on shore by a
dreadful storm in the gulf of Acre. Though they had the good fortune to escape
the fury of the waves, they found themselves in a dangerous and disagreeable
situation on shore. Some of the neighboring peasants, a merciless and thieving
race, called Gorans, attacked them, and stripped them of their clothes, and
every thing they had saved from the wreck. The captains of the ships were no
more respected than the rest of the company; twelve of whom only having found
means to escape, arrived at Acra, during the time it was ravaged by the plague.

The governor informed of this massacre, dispatched in great haste a party of
soldiers, who found nothing on the shore but some mangled bodies. Their orders
were, to take all the Gorans without distinction, whether guilty or innocent.
Such of these assassins as they could find, were hung; and when the vengeance
of the princes were once satisfied, his compassion took pleasure in comforting
the unhappy travelers, whom he furnished with lodging, food, and clothing.
Fate, however, had not yet done persecuting them; for they were attacked by the
plague which spared only eight of them. Deeply affected by this new misfortune,
and, in order to secure them from every accident, the chief ordered twenty men
to escort them on horseback, to Jerusalem; and gave them, from his treasury, a
sum sufficient to maintain them for a considerable time. This was a noble and
generous action, which gained him the esteem and affection of his subjects. He
found also another recompense, in the profit he afterward gained from the
Armenians; for that nation, deeply impressed with the kindness shown by the
governor of Acre, to their eight citizens, when any of the inhabitants came on
a pilgrimage to Jerusalem, they stopped at Acre, in preference to Yafa, to pay
there the duty of landing. They did the same on their return; and the greatest
part of these pilgrims being rich merchants, increased the commerce of the
city, by purchasing and selling the various kinds of merchandise.

As soon as Daher Omar saw himself fixed in the government, like an intelligent
man well acquainted with the true source of opulence, he endeavored by every
method he could, to introduce commerce into it. The polite and affable manner
he behaved toward the European merchants, added to the strict justice which he
maintained in traffic, drew thither people from all parts of the world; and the
English, the French, and the Dutch, all wished to partake in the advantages
which the city of Acre held forth, by the abundance of its productions,
particularly its cotton.

Daher readily foresaw, that the number of European merchants would increase,
in proportion to the facility which they might find in vending the merchandise
they brought along with them. On this account, he diminished the custom-house
dues, and rendered his country as advantageous as convenient for the Turkish
and Arabian merchants, of the city of Damascus; who used before to supply
themselves with goods at the market of Said. These, almost immediately, began
to come to Acre, in numerous caravans, which made trade decrease in the
neighboring cities; and opened to Europe, an easy communication for exporting
all sorts of merchandise, such as drugs, and cloth of every kind, which are
furnished in great abundance, by the vast commerce of Damascus. In short, the
trade of the city of Acre, rose to so much importance and consideration, that
several princes of Europe, sent thither consuls, to protect and support such of
their subjects, as had established themselves here as merchants.

The French had a vice-consul here for a considerable time; but, on account of
some disputes with the merchants, it was found necessary to recall him, and the
duties of consul are now discharged by the merchants themselves, in rotation.

England also has a vice-consul here, who belongs to the consulship of Aleppo.
By letters patent from the Imperial internuncio, at Constantinople, and the
Venetian consul, resident at Cyprus, he is commissioned to protect at Acre, the
merchants belonging to both these nations. He watches also, over the interests
of Ragusa, for the consul at Cyprus.

All affairs respecting the Dutch trade, are managed by a particular consul,
dependant like the English vice-consul, on the consul-general of Aleppo.

The expense of freight for merchandise, exported from Acre to Europe, is
regulated by the usual rate at Cyprus; and this is followed through all the
rest of Syria.

Near the seashore, about two hundred and fifty paces from the city, is the
river Belus; "the bed of which is confined and narrow, and contains abundance
of glass particles mixed with its sand." Pliny, who gives us this information,
shows how that transparent matter was indebted for its origin to the oriental
shores. This valuable discovery being carried to perfection, raised man to the
heavens; brought to his eye remote objects, the immense distances of which he
can calculate and measure; submitted to his inspection, the planets and
celestial bodies; and permitted him, like the eagle, to approach the burning
rays of light, which he can divide and reunite at pleasure. It secures him
also from the injuries of the air, when, from the center of his habitation, he
can behold, through its transparent pores, the splendour of day in its full
glory.

The river Belus, also is celebrated by the historian Flavian, who says, "it is
worthy of admiration, both on account of the agreeable valley through which it
passes, and the sand found on its borders." When foreign vessels sail along
these coasts, they take on board some of this sand, to serve them as ballast;
and the Venetians carry away more of it for that purpose, than any other nation.

About eight leagues east of Acre, near Lake Tabaria, is a fountain of warm
mineral waters. For want of being cleaned, it is filled with a black mud, which
is a genuine Ethiops martial. Persons attacked by rheumatic complaints, find
great relief, and are frequently cured by baths of this mud.

Balbeck, celebrated by the Greeks and Latins, under the name of Heliopolis, or
the city of the sun, is situated at the foot of Anti-Lebanon, precisely on the
last rising ground, where the mountain terminates in the plain. What
principally attracts our attention here, is a large edifice, adjoining to the
city; which, by its lofty walls and rich columns, manifestly appears to be one
of those temples, which antiquity has left for our admiration. When we consider
the extraordinary magnificence of this temple, we cannot but be astonished at
the silence of the Greek and Roman authors respecting it. Wood, who has
carefully examined all the ancient writers, has found no mention of it, except
in a fragment of John of Antioch, who attributes the construction of this
edifice to Antoninus Pius. The inscriptions which remain corroborate this
opinion. We are ignorant of the state of this city, in remote antiquity; but it
is to be presumed, that its situation on the road from Tire to Palmyra, gave it
some part of the commerce of these opulent capitals. Under the Romans, in the
time of Augustus, it is mentioned as a garrison town. Its present state is
deplorable. The wretched government of the Turks had greatly impaired it, and
the earthquake of 1759, completed its destruction.

Said, the ancient Sidon, so celebrated in antiquity, and which was the late
residence of the pacha, is like all the Turkish towns, ill built, dirty, and
full of modern ruins. On the South side, on a small eminence, is a fort, which
a few cannon would easily destroy, being already half in ruins. This is a
considerable trading town, and the chief emporium of Damascus. The French, who
are the only Europeans to be found in it, have a consul, and five or six
commercial houses. The manufacture of cotton is the principal art of the
inhabitants; the number of whom, may be estimated at about five thousand.

Six leagues to the South of Said, following the coast, is the ancient Tire,
now dwindled to a village of fifty or sixty families. The vicissitudes of time,
or rather the barbarism of the Greeks of the Lower Empire, have effected this
annihilation of its ancient grandeur. Instead of that ancient commerce, so
active and so extensive, Tire reduced to a miserable village, has no other
trade than the exportation of a few sacks of corn, and raw cotton; nor any
merchant but a single Greek factor, in the service of the French at Said, who
scarcely makes sufficient profit to maintain his family.

CHAP. IX. Pachalie of Damascus.
THE pachalie of Damascus, the fourth and last of Syria, comprehends nearly the
whole Eastern part of that country. The first city that presents itself in this
pachalie, is Damascus. It is situated in a large plain, open to the South and
East, but shut in to the North and West, by mountains, which limit the view at
no great distance; but, in return, a number of rivulets arise from these
mountains, which render the territory of Damascus the best watered, and most
delicious province of all Syria; the Arabs speak of it with enthusiasm; and
think they can never sufficiently extol the freshness and verdure of its
orchards, the abundance and variety of its fruits, its numerous streams, and
the clearness of its rills and fountains. This is also the only part of Syria,
where there are detached pleasure-houses in the open country. No city affords
so many canals and fountains; each house has one; and all these waters are
furnished by three rivulets, or branches of the same river, which, after
fertilizing the gardens for a course of three leagues, flow into a hollow of
the desert, to the South-east, where they form a morass, called the morass of
the meadow.

With such a situation it cannot be disputed, that Damascus is one of the most
agreeable cities in Turkey; but it is still deficient in point of salubrity.
The inhabitants complain, that the white waters of the Barrada are cold and
hard; and it is observed, that the natives are subject to obstructions; that
the whiteness of their skin, is rather the paleness of sickness, than the
color of health; and that the too great use of fruit, particularly of
apricots, occasions there, every summer and autumn, intermittent fevers and
dysenteries.

This city is supposed to contain eighty thousand inhabitants. The greater part
of these are Arabs and Turks; the number of Christians are estimated at above
15000. The Turks never speak of the people of Damascus, without observing, they
are the most mischievous in the whole empire: the Arabs, by a play on words,
have made this proverb: shame, shoume. The man of Damascus, wicked: on the
contrary, they say of the people of Aleppo, Halabe, tehelibi; the Aleppo man, a
petit maitre. From prejudice, owing to the difference of religions, they also
add, that the Christians there are more vile and knavish than elsewhere. In
this they resemble the inhabitants of Cairo; like them they detest the Franks,
nor is it possible to appear at Damascus in a European dress.

This hatred which the people of Damascus have for Christians, arises from
their communication with Mecca. Their city, they look upon to be a holy place,
since it is one of the gates of the Caaba; for Damascus is the rendezvous for
all the pilgrims from the North of Asia, as Cairo is for those from Africa.
Their number every year, amounts from thirty to fifty thousand; many repair
hither four months, before the usual time; but the greatest number only at the
end of the Ramadan. Damascus then resembles an immense fair; nothing is to be
seen but strangers from all parts of Turkey, and even Persia; and every place
is full of camels, horses, mules, and even merchandise. At length, after some
days preparation, all this vast multitude set out confusedly on their march;
and, traveling by the confines of the desert, arrive in forty days at Mecca,
for the festival of the Bairam. As this caravan traverses the country of
several independent Arab tribes, it is necessary to make treaties with the
Bedouins, for a free passage, and take them for guides. Frequent disputes arise
on this subject, between the Shaiks, of which the pacha avails himself to make
a better bargain; but, in general, the preference is given to the tribe of
Sardia, which encamps to the Southward of Damascus, along the Hauran: the pacha
sends to the shaik, a mace, a tent, and a pellise, to signify he takes him as
chief conductor. From this moment, it is the shaik's business to furnish camels
at a stated price; these he hires from his tribe and his allies; the pacha is
responsible for no losses, which are all on the shaik's own account. On an
average, ten thousand camels perish yearly; which form a very advantageous
article of commerce for the Arabs.

It must not be imagined, that devotion is the sole motive of all these
expenses and fatigues. Pecuniary interest has a more considerable share in this
expedition. The caravan affords the means of engrossing every lucrative branch
of commerce; and almost all the pilgrims convert it into a matter of
speculation. On leaving their own country, they load themselves with
merchandise, which they sell on the road; the specie arising from this, added
to what they have brought with them, is conveyed to Mecca, where they exchange
it for all kinds of India goods. Sometimes the Arabs pillage the stragglers,
and carry off detached parties of the caravans. But, in general, the pilgrims
arrive safe, in which case their profits are very considerable. At all events,
they are recompensed in the veneration attached to the title of Hadji,
(pilgrim) and by the pleasure of boasting to their countrymen, of the wonders
of the Caabas, and Mount Ararat; of magnifying the prodigious crowds of
pilgrims, and the number of victims on the day of the Bairam; and, recounting
the dangers and fatigues they have undergone, the extraordinary figure of the
Bedouins, the desert without water, and the tomb of the prophet at Medina.
These wonderful tales produce their usual effect, that is, they excite the
admiration and enthusiasm of the audience; though, from the confession of
sincere pilgrims, nothing can be more wretched than this journey. Accordingly,
this transient admiration has not prevented a proverb, which does little honor
to these pious travelers. Distrust thy neighbor, says the Arab, if he has
made a Hadj; but if he has made two, make haste to leave thy house: and, in
fact, experience has proved, that the greater part of the devotees of Mecca,
are peculiarly insolent and treacherous, as if they wished to recompense
themselves for having been dupes, by becoming knaves.

By means of this caravan, Damascus is become the center of a very extensive
commerce. By Aleppo, the merchants of this city correspond with Armenia,
Anadolia, the Diarbekar, and even with Persia. They send caravans to Cairo;
which, following a route, frequented in the time of the patriarchs, take their
course by Tabaria, Nablous, and Gaza. In return, they receive the merchandise
of Constantinople, and Europe, by way of Said and Bairout. The
home-consumption, is balanced by silk and cotton stuffs, which are manufactured
here in great quantities, and are very well made; by the dried fruits of their
own growth, and sweetmeat cakes of roses, apricots, and peaches, of which
Turkey consumes to the amount of near a million of livres. The remainder, paid
for by the course of exchange, occasions a considerable circulation of money,
in custom-house duties, and the commission of the merchants. This commerce has
existed in these countries, from the most remote antiquity. It has flowed,
through different channels, according to the changes of the government, and
other circumstances; but it has every where left very apparent traces of the
opulence it produced.

This city is also in great reputation for its swordblades, and for all manner
of cutlery-ware, the water being very proper for tempering iron and steel.

Near Damascus, is a beautiful meadow of great extent; from the earth of which,
it is said, Adam was formed. There is also a grotto in it, and a Turkish
oratory, in which, St. Paul is said to have received his sight after his
vision. The place is likewise shown, where St. Paul was let down from the wall
in a basket.

Another curiosity in the city of Damascus is, a large coffee-house, capable of
containing between four and five hundred people, shaded with trees, in which is
a small island, encircled with a rapid stream of water. Here the Turks resort
every day in great numbers, to solace themselves upon the duans, they being
delighted with nothing so much, as the sight of water and verdure; and if, to
these, a beautiful face is added, the three together, according to a Turkish
proverb, will banish the most obstinate melancholy.

The duans, are broad seats, raised sixteen or eighteen inches above the floor,
which are covered with carpets, and furnished with cushions to lean on. In the
houses of people of rank, at Damascus, these apartments are fitted up in a most
expensive and luxurious style. In these, the Turks eat, drink, sleep, smoke,
receive visits, and perform their devotions; and, a stranger is seldom
permitted the sight of any others.

Among other things deserving of notice in this city, is the church of St. John
the Baptist, now converted into a mosque. This is a most spacious, lofty, and
beautiful building; but a particular description of it is difficult to be
obtained; a Christian being scarce allowed to set his foot in it. There is one
room in this church, in which the head of St. John the Baptist is kept,
esteemed so very sacred by the Mahometans, that it is penal even for a Turk to
go into this apartment. Maundrell relates, that he was told by a Turkish
nobleman, that they expected Our Savior would descend into this mosque, at the
day of judgment, as Mahomet would into that of Jerusalem.

No Frank is permitted to ride on horseback, when he goes to visit the gardens,
or other curiosities round the city; he must either walk on foot, or be mounted
on an ass; and for this purpose there are always asses, standing ready equipped
in the streets, to be hired. The rider has no occasion, when he is mounted, to
use either whip or spur, as the master of the ass, or his servant, follows
behind, and forces him along with a goad, so that he performs his stage in less
time than could be expected from so sluggish a creature.

The street called Strait, in the Acts of the Apostles, still retains its name
at Damascus; or at least, they show one, that they pretend to be the same,
which is about half a mile in length, but so narrow with the houses jutting
over, that its length and straitness is not to be discerned.

At a little distance from Damascus, is a high hill, on which, according to
tradition, Cain and Abel offered sacrifice; and where Cain afterward killed
his brother. A little further, is a Greek convent, called Sidonia, situated
upon a steep rock, on the side of a large valley; the ascent of which,
approaches so nearly to the perpendicular, that people are obliged to go up to
it by stairs cut in the rock. In this convent, founded by Justinian, and
remarkable for its excellent wine, are about twenty Greek monks, and twice the
number of nuns, who live together as in one family, without any separation.
Such a retirement, with good wine, agreeable company, and fine women, can be no
great mortification.

In this pachalie are also, celebrated remains of Palmyra, a city famous in the
third age of Rome, for the part it took in the differences between the
Parthians and the Romans; and its destruction under Aurelian. History has since
preserved the name of this great city; but it is merely the name, for the world
had very confused ideas of the real grandeur and power it had possessed. They
were scarcely even suspected to exist, till, toward the end of the last
century, some English merchants of Aleppo, tired with hearing the Bedouins talk
of the immense ruins to be found in the desert, resolved to ascertain the truth
of these extraordinary relations. Their narrative, published in the
Philosophical Transactions, met with many who refused belief; men could neither
conceive nor persuade themselves, that in a spot so remote from any habitable
place, such a magnificent city as their drawings described, could have
subsisted. But, since Dawkins published, in 1753, the plans and views he
himself had taken on the spot, in 1751, all doubts are at an end; and, it is
universally acknowledged, that antiquity has left nothing, either in Greece or
Italy, to be compared with the magnificence of the ruins of Palmyra.

It is scarcely possible to imagine any thing more striking, says Wood, than
the view of these ruins. So great a number of Corinthian pillars, with so
little wall, or solid building, afford a most romantic variety of prospect.

They are said to occupy an extent of more than 2600 yards, concealing a
multitude of edifices behind them. In this space, are sometimes found a palace,
of which nothing remains but the courts and walls; sometimes a temple, whose
peristyle is half thrown down; and now a portico, a gallery, or triumphal arch.
Here stand groups of columns, whose symmetry is destroyed by the fall of many
of them; there they may be seen, ranged in rows of such length, that, similar
to rows of trees, they deceive the sight, and assume the appearance of
continued walls. If, from this striking scene, the traveller casts his eyes
upon the ground, another, almost as varied, presents itself: on all sides he
beholds nothing but subverted shafts, some whole, others shattered to pieces,
or dislocated in their joints; and, on which side soever he looks, the earth is
strewed with vast stones, half buried, with broken entablatures, damaged
capitals, mutilated freezes, disfigured reliefs, effaced sculptures, violated
tombs, and altars defiled by dust.

We refer the reader to the plates of Mr. Wood, for a more particular
explanation of these ruins, and to make him sensible of the degree of
perfection, to which the arts had arrived in these remote ages. Architecture,
more especially, lavished her ornaments, and displayed her magnificence in the
temple of the sun, the tutelar deity of Palmyra. The square court which
surrounded it, was six hundred and seventy-nine feet each way, and a double
range of columns was continued all round the inside. In the middle of the
vacant space, the temple presents another of forty-seven feet, by one hundred
and twenty-four in depth. Around it runs a peristyle of one hundred and forty
columns; and, what is very extraordinary, the gate faces the setting, and not
the rising sun.

What artists esteem very singular is, that the front of this temple of the
sun, resembles the gallery of the Louvre, built by Perrault, long before the
existence of the drawings, which made us acquainted with it; the only
difference is, that the columns of the Louvre are double, whereas those of
Palmyra are detached.

Within the court of this same temple, the philosopher may contemplate a scene,
he will esteem still more interesting. Amid these hallowed ruins of the
magnificence of a powerful and polished people, are about thirty mud-walled
huts, which contain as many peasant families, who exhibit every external sign
of extreme poverty. So wretched are the present inhabitants of a place once so
renowned and populous. These Arabs only cultivate a few olive trees, and as
much corn as is necessary for their subsistence. All their riches consist in
some goats and sheep they feed in the desert. The English travelers, Wood and
Dawkins, inform us, that these peasants are healthy and well-shaped; and the
few distempers they are subject to, prove, that the air of Palmyra, merits the
eulogium bestowed on it by Longinus, in his epistle to Porphyry. It seldom
rains there, except at the equinoxes, which are accompanied by those hurricanes
of sand, so dangerous in the desert. The complexion of these Arabs, is very
swarthy, from the excessive heat; but this does not hinder the women from
having beautiful features. They are veiled; but are not so scrupulous of
showing their faces, as the Eastern women generally are; they dye the end of
their fingers red, their lips blue, and their eyebrows and eye-lashes black;
and wear very large gold or brass rings in their ears and noses.

The travelers we have quoted, have made very judicious remarks on the age
which produced so many monuments of industry and power, and the source of the
immense riches they indicate, but too long to be inserted here; and we must
again refer the curious reader to that work, to see in what manner they
distinguish two sorts of ruins at Palmyra; one of which must be attributed to
very remote ages; while the others, which are the magnificent monuments so
often mentioned, are the work of more modern times. They demonstrate with great
ingenuity, that Palmyra, situated three days journey from the Euphrates, was
indebted for its wealth and splendour, to the advantage of its position on one
of the great roads, by which the valuable commerce, that has at all times
subsisted between Europe and India, was then carried on; they have proved, in
short, that the Palmyrenes were at the height of their prosperity; when, become
a barrier between the Romans and the Parthians, they were politic enough to
maintain a neutrality in their disputes, and to render the luxury of those
powerful empires, subservient to their own opulence.

Leaving these valuable ruins, and returning to the habitable world, says
Volney, we first meet with Homs, the Emesus of the Greeks, situated on the
Eastern bank of the Orontes: this place, which was formerly a strong and
populous city, is, at present, only a large ruinous town, containing not more
than two thousand inhabitants, partly Greeks, and partly Mahometans.

Two days journey below Homs, is Hama, celebrated in Syria for its waterworks.
The wheels are, in fact, the largest in this country, being thirty-two feet in
diameter. Troughs are fastened to the circumference, and so disposed as to fall
into the river; and, when they reach the vertex of the wheel, discharge the
water into a reservoir, whence it is conveyed by conduits to the public and
private baths. The town is situated in a narrow valley, on the banks of the
Orontes, contains about four thousand inhabitants, and possesses some trade,
from its situation on the road from Aleppo to Tripoli. Further down the
Orontes, is Famia, formerly one of the most celebrated cities of Syria, under
the name of Apamea. The soil of the neighborhood, abounding in pasturage, fed
no less than thirty thousand mares, three hundred stallions, and five hundred
elephants; instead of which, the marches of Famia, at present, scarcely afford
a few buffaloes and sheep.

This is by far the most considerable pachalie in Syria; the pacha, besides an
unbounded authority, is conductor of the sacred caravan of Mecca, under the
highly respected title of Emir Hadj. The Mahometans consider this office as so
important, and entitled to such reverence, that the person of a pacha, who
acquits himself well of it, becomes inviolable, even by the sultan: it is no
longer permitted to sued his blood. But, the divan has invented a method of
satisfying its vengeance on those protected by this privilege, without
departing from the literal expression of the law, by ordering them to be
pounded in a mortar, or smothered in a sack; of which, there have been various
instances.

The tribute of the pacha to the sultan, is very trifling; five and forty
purses, or between two and three thousand pounds; but then he is saddled with
all the expenses of the Hadj; these are estimated at between three and four
hundred thousand pounds. They consist in provisions, and the hire of the camels
for the pilgrims. Besides this, one thousand eight hundred purses must be paid
to the Arab tribes, to secure a free passage. The pacha re-imburses himself, by
the miri, or duty upon lands. Besides his other emoluments, the pacha is heir
of all the pilgrims who die on the journey, and this is not the least of his
perquisites; it being invariably observed, that those are the richest of the
pilgrims. Besides all this, he has the profits he makes by lending money on
interest, to merchants and farmers, and taking from them whatever he thinks
proper, in the way of balse, or extortion.

The pachalie of Damascus, from its situation, is more than any other exposed
to the incursions of the Bedouin Arabs; yet, it is remarked, to be the least
ravaged of any in Syria. The reason assigned is, that instead of frequently
changing the pachas, as is practiced in the other governments, the Port
usually bestows this pachalie for life: in the present century it was held for
fifty years, by a rich family of Damascus. Asad, the last of them, held it
fifteen years; during which time, he did an infinite deal of good. His passion,
like that of all men in office throughout Turkey, was to amass money, but he
did not let it remain idle in his coffers; and, by a moderation unheard of in
this country, required no more interest for it than six per cent. the usual
interest being from twenty to forty. An anecdote is related of him, which will
give an idea of his character. Being one day in want of money, the informers,
by whom the pachas are constantly surrounded, advised him to levy a
contribution on the Christians, and on the manufacturers of stuffs. "How much
do you think they may produce," said Asad; "fifty or sixty purses," replied
they. "But," answered he, "these people are by no means rich, how will they
raise that sum?" "My Lord, they will sell their wives' jewels; and, besides,
they are Christian dogs." "Ill show you," replied the pacha, "that I am an
abler extortioner than you!" The same day he sent an order to the musti, to
wait upon him secretly, and at night. As soon as the musti arrived, Asad told
him, "he was informed, he had long led a very irregular life in private; that
he, though the head of the law, had indulged himself in drinking wine, and
eating pork, contrary to the precepts of the most pure book; assuring him, at
the same time, he was determined to inform against him, to the Musti of
Stamboul, (Constantinople) but that he wished to give him timely notice, that
he might not reproach him with perfidiousness. The musti, terrified at this
menace, conjured him to desist; and, as such offers are an open and allowed
traffic among the Turks, promised him a present of a thousand piastres. The
pacha rejected the offer; the musti doubled and trebled the sum, till, at
length, they strike a bargain for six thousand piastres, with a reciprocal
engagement to observe a profound silence. The next day, Asad sends for the
cadi, and addresses him in the same manner; tells him, he is informed of
several flagrant abuses in his administration; and that he is no stranger to a
certain affair, which may, perhaps, cost him his head. The cadi, confounded,
implores his clemency, negociates like the musti; accommodated the matter for a
like sum, and retires, congratulating himself that he has escaped even at that
price. He proceeded in like manner with the wali; the aga of the Janissaries;
and, after them, the wealthiest Turkish and Christian merchants. Each of these,
charged with offenses peculiar to their situations; and, above all, accused of
intrigues, were anxious to purchase pardon by contributions. When the sum total
was collected, the pacha, being again with his intimates, thus addressed them,
"Have you heard it reported at Damascus, that Asad has been guilty of
extortion?" No seignior. "By what means then have I found the two hundred
purses I now show you?" The informers began to exclaim in great admiration, and
enquire what method he had employed. "I have fleeced the rams," replied he,
"and skinned the lambs and the kids."

After fifteen years reign, the people of Damascus were deprived of this man,
by intrigues, the history of which, is thus related: About the year 1755, one
of the black eunuchs of the seraglio, making the pilgrimage of Mecca, took up
his quarters with Asad; but, not contented with the simple hospitality with
which he was entertained, he would not return by Damascus, but took the road to
Gaza. Hosein, who was then governor of that town, took care to give him a
sumptuous entertainment. The eunuch, on his return to Constantinople, did not
forget the treatment he had received from his two hosts; and, to show his
gratitude and resentment, determined to ruin Asad, and raise Hosein to his
dignity. His intrigues was so successful, that the following year, he obtained
for him the pachalie of Damascus. Asad thus deposed, retired with his household
into the desert, to avoid still greater disgrace. Hosein, conducted the caravan
agreeable to the duty of his station; but, on his return, having quarrelled
with the Arabs, concerning some payment they claimed, they attacked him,
defeated the escort, and entirely plundered the caravan in 1757. On the news of
this disaster, the whole empire was thrown into as much confusion, as could
have been occasioned by the loss of the most important battle. The families of
twenty thousand pilgrims, who had perished with thirst and hunger, or been
slain by the Arabs; the relations of a multitude of women, who had been carried
into slavery; the merchants interested in the plundered caravan, all demanded
vengeance on the cowardice of the Emir Hadj, but he concealed himself so well,
that it was impossible to surprise him; while he, from his retreat, acting in
concert with the eunuch his protector, undertook to exculpate himself. The
pachalie, however, remained vacant; Hosein, disgraced as he was, could not
resume his government. The Port, desiring to revenge the late affront, and
provide for the safety of the pilgrims in future, made choice of a singular
man, whose character and history deserves to be noticed. This man, named
Abd-allah, was born near Bagdad, in an obscure station. Entering very young
into the service of the pacha, he had passed the first years of his life in
camps and war, and been present, as a common soldier, in all the campaigns of
the Turks, against Kouli-khan; and the bravery and intelligence he displayed,
raised him, step by step, even to the pacha of Bagdad. Advanced to this eminent
post, he conducted himself with so much firmness and prudence, that he restored
peace to the country, from both foreign and domestic wars. The simple and
military life he continued to lead, requiring no great supplies of money, he
amassed none; but the great officers of the seraglio of Constantinople, who
derived no profits from his moderation, did not approve of this
disinterestedness, and waited only for a pretext to remove him.

This they soon found. Abd-allah had kept back the sum of about four thousand
pounds, arising from the estate of a merchant. Scarcely had the pacha received
it, before it was demanded of him. In vain did he represent, that he had used
it to pay some old arrears of the troops; in vain did he request time: the
vizir only pressed him the more closely; and, on a second refusal, dispatched a
black eunuch, secretly provided with a kat-sherif, to take off his head. The
eunuch arriving at Bagdad, feigned himself a sick person, traveling for his
health; and, as such, sent his respects to the pacha; observing the usual forms
of politeness, and requesting permission to pay him a visit. Abd-allah, well
acquainted with the practices of the divan, was distrustful of so much
complaisance, and suspected some secret mischief. His treasurer, not less
versed in such plots, and greatly attached to his person, confirmed him in
these suspicions; and, in order to discover the truth, proposed to go and
search the eunuch's baggage, while he and his retinue should be paying their
visit to the pacha. Abd-allah approved the expedient; and, at the hour
appointed, the treasurer repaired to the tent of the eunuch, and made so
careful a search, that he found the kat-sherif concealed in the lapelles of a
pelisse. Immediately, he flew to the pacha, and, sending for him into an
adjoining room, told him what he had discovered. Abd-allah, furnished with the
fatal writing, hid it in his bosom, and returned to the apartment; when,
resuming with an air of the greatest indifference, his conversation with the
eunuch: "The more I think of it," said he, "signior aga, the more I am
astonished at your journey into this country; Bagdad is so far from Stamboul,
we can boast so little of our air, that I can scarcely believe you have come
hither for no other purpose, but the re-establishment of your health." "It is
true," replied the aga; "I am also commissioned to demand of you, something on
account of the four thousand pounds you received." "We will say nothing of
that," answered the pacha; "but come," added he with an air of firmness,
"confess that you have likewise orders to bring with you my head. Observe what
I say, you know my character, and you know my word may be depended upon: I now
assure you that, if you make an open declaration of the truth, you shall depart
without the least injury." The eunuch now began a long defense, protesting that
he came with no such black intentions. "By my head," said Abd-allah, confess
the truth to me:" the eunuch still denied. "By your head," he still denied:
"take care, by the head of the sultan;" he still persisted. "Be it so," says
Abd-allah, "the matter is decided, thou have pronounced thy doom;" and drawing
forth the kat-sherif, Know you this paper? Thus you govern at Constantinople.
Yes, you are a troop of villains, who sport with the lives of whoever happen to
displease you; and shed, without remorse, the blood of the servants of the
sultan. The visir must have heads, he shall have one; off with the head of that
dog, and send it to Constantinople." The order was executed on the spot, and
the eunuch's retinue dismissed, departed with their master's head.

After this decisive stroke, Abd-allah might have availed himself of his
popularity to revolt; but he rather chose to retire among the Curds. Here the
pardon of the sultan was sent him, and an order, appointing him pacha of
Damascus. Wearied of his exile, and destitute of money, he accepted the
commission, and set out with one hundred men, who followed his fortune. On his
arrival at the frontiers of his new government, he learnt, that Asad was
encamped in the neighborhood; he had heard him spoken of as the greatest man
in Syria, and was desirous of seeing him. He, therefore, disguised himself;
and, accompanied only by six horsemen, repaired to his camp, and desired to
speak with him. He was introduced, as is usual in their camps, without much
ceremony; and, after the customary salutations, Asad enquired of him, whither
he was going, and whence he came? Abd-allah answered, he was one of six or
seven Curd horsemen, who were seeking employment; and hearing Satadji
(Abd-allah's other name) was appointed to the pachalie of Damascus, were going
to apply to him; but being informed on their way, that Asad was encamped in the
neighborhood, they had come to request of him provisions for themselves and
their horses. With pleasure, replied Asad, but do you know Satadji? Yes. What
sort of a man is he? Is he fond of money? No; Satadji cares very little for
money, or pelisses, or shawls, or pearls, or women; he is fond of nothing but
well-tempered arms, good horses, and war. He does justice, protects the widow
and the orphan, reads the Koran, and lives on butter and milk. Is he old? said
Asad. Fatigue has made him appear older than he is: he is covered with wounds;
he has received a blow with a sabre, which has made him lame with his left leg;
and another, which makes him lean his head on his right shoulder. In short,
said he, hastily rising, he is, in shape and features, exactly my picture. At
these words, Asad turned pale, and gave himself up for lost; but Abd-allah,
sitting down again, said to him, brother, fear nothing; I am not sent by a
troop of banditti; I come not to betray thee; on the contrary, if I can render
thee any service, command me, for we are both held in the same estimation with
our masters; they have recalled me, because they wish to chastise the Bedouins;
when they have gratified their revenge on them, they will again lay plots to
deprive me of my head. God is great; what he has decreed will come to pass.

With these sentiments, Abd-allah repaired to Damascus; where he restored good
order, put an end to the extortions of the soldiery, and conducted the caravan,
sabre in hand, without paying a piastre to the Arabs. During his
administration, which lasted two years, the country enjoyed the most perfect
tranquillity. The inhabitants of Damascus still say, that under his government
they slept in security with open doors. He himself, frequently disguised as one
of the poorest of the people, saw every thing with his own eyes. The acts of
justice he sometimes did, in consequence of his discoveries under these
disguises, produced a salutary circumspection. Some instances are still told by
the people with pleasure. It is said, for example, that being on his circuit at
Jerusalem, he had prohibited his soldiers from either taking, or ordering any
thing without paying. One day when he was going about in the disguise of a poor
man, with a little plate of lentiles in his hand, a soldier, who had a faggot
on his shoulders, would force him to carry it. After some resistance, he took
it on his back, while the Delibashe following him, drove him on with
imprecations. Another soldier, knowing the pacha, made a sign to his comrade,
who instantly took to flight, and escaped through the cross streets. After
proceeding a few paces, Abd-allah no longer hearing his man, turned round, and
vexed at missing his aim, threw his burden on the ground, saying, the rascally
knavish dog! he has both robbed me of my hire, and carried off my plate of
lentiles. The soldier did not long escape; a few days after, the pacha
surprising him in the act of robbing a poor woman's garden, and ill treating
her, ordered his head to be struck off on the spot.

As for himself, he was unable to ward off the destiny he had foreseen. He was
poisoned by his nephew. This he discovered before he died; and sending for his
murderer, Wretch that thou art, said he, the villains have seduced thee, thou
have poisoned me to profit by my spoils: it is in my power, before I die, to
blast thy hopes, and punish thy ingratitude; but I know the Turks, they will be
my avengers. In fact, Satadji had scarcely breathed his last, before a Capidji
produced an order to strangle the nephew, which was executed.

Of the tyrannical disposition of Osman Darouich, his successor, the following
is a striking instance. In the month of November, 1784, a village of Greek
Christians near Damascus, which had paid the miri, was called upon to pay it a
second time. The shaiks appealing to the register, refused to comply; but a
night or two after, a party of soldiers attacked the village, and slew one and
thirty persons. The wretched peasants in consternation, carried the heads to
Damascus, and demanded justice of the pacha. After hearing their complaints,
Osman told them, to leave the heads in the Greek church, while he made the
necessary inquiries. Three days elapsed, and the heads putrefying the
Christians wished to bury them; but to effect this, the pacha's permission was
necessary, for which they were under the necessity of paying forty purses, or
above two thousand pounds. With such tyranny and oppression in the officers of
the Grand Signior, both at Constantinople, and in the different pachalies, who
can but rejoice to see the downfall of the Turkish empire?

We shall, in our next chapter, take a view of the manners and customs of the
different nations, as they may more properly be termed, who inhabit these
several pachalies.

CHAP. X. Of the different Inhabitants of Syria.
SYRIA as well as Egypt, has undergone revolutions, which have confounded the
different races of its inhabitants. Within two thousand years, we may reckon
ten invasions, which have introduced into that country a succession of foreign
nations, so that the people of Syria, must be considered as a mixture of
inhabitants, and may be divided into three principal classes:

First, the posterity of the people conquered by the Arabs, that is, the Greeks
of the lower empire.

Secondly, the posterity of the Arabian conquerors.

Thirdly, the present ruling people, the Ottoman Turks.

To these people, who are the cultivators, and settled inhabitants of Syria,
must still be added, three other wandering tribes or pastors, viz. the
Turcomen, the Curds, and the Bedouin Arabs.

Such are the different races dispersed over this country. In this enumeration,
it is remarkable, that the ancient inhabitants have no remaining
representative; their distinguishing character is lost and confounded in that
of the Greeks, who, in fact, by a continued residence from the days of
Alexander, have had sufficient time entirely to take place of the ancient
people.

Syria has not, like Egypt, refused to adopt the foreign races. They all become
equally naturalized to the country. The features and complexion are governed
nearly by the same laws there, as in the South of Europe. There the inhabitants
of the Southern plains, are more swarthy than those of the Northern; and these
more so than the inhabitants of the mountains. In Lebanon, the complexion does
not differ from that in the middle provinces of France. The women of Damascus
and Tripoli, are greatly boasted for the fairness, and even regularity, of
their features; but we must take this praise on trust, since the veil they
perpetually wear, allows no person to make nice observations. In several
districts, the women are less scrupulous without being less chaste. In
Palestine, for example, the married women may be seen almost uncovered; but
want and fatigue, have robbed the countenance of all its charms; their eyes
alone, are almost every where beautiful; and the long drapery, which forms
their general dress, permits the body freely to display its shape: it is
sometimes without elegance, but its proportions, at least, are no ways injured.
I do not recollect, says Volney, having seen in Syria, nor even in Egypt, two
persons crooked or deformed. It is true, they are strangers to those tightlaced
waists, which, though so much admired among us, are in no estimation in the
East; and the young women, assisted by their mothers, very early study, even
superstitious receipts, to acquire an embonpoint.

The Syrians are, in general, of a middling stature, and are, as in all warm
countries, less corpulent than the inhabitants of the North. We find, however,
in the cities, some individuals, whose corpulency proves, that the influence of
diet, is able to counterbalance, in a certain degree, that of climate.

Syria has no disease peculiar to itself, but the pimple of Aleppo, which we
have noticed in speaking of that city. Other disorders are, dysenteries and
fevers, the consequence of the bad fruits which the people greedily devour. The
smallpox is sometimes very fatal; but the general and most frequent illness is
the cholic, the causes of which are very evident, when we consider that every
one eats to excess of un ripe fruit, raw vegetables, honey, cheese, strong oil,
sour milk, and ill-fermented bread. These are the usual food of all the
inhabitants; and the acid juices they contain, produce crudities, nausea, and
even vomitings of bile. Accordingly, the first prescription, in almost all
disorders, is an emetic; which method of treatment is only known to the
European physicians. Bleeding is neither necessary nor useful. In dangerous
cases, cream of tartar and tamarinds, have the most certain success.

Among the different inhabitants of Syria we have mentioned, some are
dispersed, indifferently, over every part of the country; others confine
themselves to particular spots, which it will be necessary to determine.

The Greeks, the Turks, and the Arabian peasants, belong to the former class,
with this difference, that the Turks reside only in the towns where they are in
possession of the military employments, and the offices of the magistracy, and
where they exercise the arts. The Arabs and Greeks inhabit the villages, and
form the class of husbandmen in the country, and the inferior people in the
towns. That part of the country which contains the most Greek villages, is the
pachalie of Damascus.

The Turcomen, the Curds, and the Bedouins, have no fixed habitations, but keep
perpetually wandering with their tents and herds, in limited districts, of
which they look upon themselves as the proprietors. The Turcoman hordes,
generally encamp on the plain of Antioch; the Curds, in the mountains between
Alexandretta and the Euphrates; and the Arabs spread over the whole frontier of
Syria, adjacent to their deserts.

The Turkmen, or Turcomen, are of those Tartar hordes, who, on the great
revolutions of the empire of the Califs, emigrated from the Eastward of the
Caspian sea, and spread themselves over the vast plains of America and
Asia-Minor. Their language is the same with that of the Turks, and their mode
of life nearly similar to that of the Bedouin Arabs. Each of their camps
acknowledges a chief, whose power is not determined by fixed laws, but governed
by custom and circumstances. It is rarely abused, because the society is
compact, and the nature of their situation maintains sufficient equality among
its members. Every man able to bear arms, is anxious to carry them, since on
his individual force, depend both his personal safety, and the respect paid him
by his companions. All their property consists in cattle, that is camels,
buffaloes, goats, and especially sheep. They live on milk, butter, and meat,
which are in great abundance among them; and the surplus of which they sell in
the towns, and the neighboring country. In return, they take arms, clothes,
money, and corn. Their women spin wool and make carpets; the use of which is
immemorial in these countries, and consequently indicates their manner of
living to have been always the same. As for the men, their whole occupation
consists in smoking, and looking after their flocks. Perpetually on horseback
with their lances on their shoulders, their crooked sabres by their sides, and
their pistols in their belts; they are expert horsemen, and indefatigable
soldiers. They have frequent differences with the Turks, who dread them; but as
they are divided among themselves, and form separate camps, they do not assume
that superiority, which their combined forces would ensure them. The pachalies
of Aleppo and Damascus, which are the only parts of Syria they frequent, may be
computed to contain about thirty thousand wandering Turkmen. A great number of
these tribes pass, in summer, into Armenia and Caramania, where they find grass
in greater abundance, and return to their former quarters in winter.

The Turkmen are reputed Mussulmen, and generally bear the distinguishing mark,
circumcision. But they trouble themselves very little about religion, and they
have neither the ceremonies, nor the fanaticism of sedentary nations. To
describe their manners accurately, it would be necessary to have lived among
them. They have the reputation of not being robbers like the Arabs, though they
are neither less generous, nor less hospitable; and, when we consider that they
live in plenty, without being rich, and that they are inured to war, and
hardened by fatigue and danger, we may presume, they are equally removed from
the ignorance and servility of the peasants, and the selfishness and corruption
of the inhabitants of towns.

The Curds are another national body; the divided tribes of which, are equally
dispersed over the Lower Asia, and have extended themselves pretty
considerably, especially within the last hundred years. These were the same
Curds who are mentioned by Xenophon, under the denomination of Card-uchi, and
who opposed the retreat of the ten thousand. This historian observes, that
though shut in on all sides by the Persian empire, they had constantly braved
the power of the Great king, and the arms of his Satraps. They have changed but
little in their modern state, and though in appearance, tributaries to the
Port, pay very little respect to the orders of the Grand Signior, or his
pachas. In their mountains, they are subject to a sort of foedal government;
each village has its chief, and the whole nation is divided into different and
independent factions. All their tribes united, are estimated to exceed one
hundred and forty thousand tents, that is one hundred and forty thousand armed
men. Like the Turkmen, these Curds are pastors and wanderers; but differ from
them in some particular customs. The Turkmen give their daughters a marriage
dower: the Curds receive a premium for theirs. The Turkmen pay no respect to
nobility, the Curds honor it above every thing The Turkmen do not steal: the
Curds are almost every where looked upon as plunderers; on which account, they
are much dreaded in the neighborhood of Aleppo and Antioch, where they fix
their tents. In this pachalie, and in that of Damascus, their number exceeds
twenty thousand. They are reputed Mahometans; but they never trouble themselves
about religious rites, or opinions. Several of them worship Shaitan, or Satan,
that is the genius who is the enemy of God.

Language is the principal indication of the consanguinity of nations. That of
the Curds is divided into three dialects. It has neither the aspirations, nor
the gutturals of the Arabic; nor does it resemble the Persian; so that it must
be an original language. Now, if we consider the antiquity of the people who
speak it; and that we know they are related to the Medes, Assyrians, Persians,
and even the Parthians, we may be allowed to conjecture, that a knowledge of
this tongue, might throw some light on the ancient history of these countries.

The third wandering people in Syria, are the Bedouin Arabs. In general, when
speaking of the Arabs, we shall distinguish whether they are cultivators, or
pastors; this difference in their mode of life, occasioning a great one in
their manners and genius. In the former case, the social state in which they
live resembles our own. In the second instance, their mode of existence is
neither that of polished nations, nor of savages. Such are the Bedouins, or
inhabitants of the vast deserts, which extend from the confines of Persia to
Morocco. Though divided into independent communities, or tribes, they may still
be considered as forming one nation. The resemblance of their language, is a
manifest token of this relation. In general, the Bedouins are small, meagre,
and tawny; more so, however, in the heart of the desert, than on the frontiers
of the cultivated country. In general, they do not exceed five feet two inches.
This difference of height can only be attributed to their food. It may likewise
be affirmed, that the lower class of Bedouins, live in a state of habitual
wretchedness and famine. It is an undoubted fact, that the quantity of food
usually consumed by the greatest part of them, does not exceed six ounces a
day. Six or seven dates soaked in melted butter, a little sweet milk or curds,
serve a man a whole day; and he esteems himself happy when he can add a small
quantity of coarse flour, or a little ball of rice. Meat is reserved for the
greatest festivals; and they never kill a kid, but for a marriage or a funeral.
A few wealthy and generous shaiks alone, can kill young camels, and eat baked
rice with their victuals. In times of dearth, the vulgar, half famished, do not
disdain the most wretched kinds of food; and eat locusts, rats, lizards, and
serpents, broiled on briars.

We have already said, the Bedouin Arabs are divided into tribes; each of which
appropriates itself a tract of land. If another tribe enters upon this
territory, they are treated as enemies, and a skirmish commences. This combat
is, however, decided by the first shock, and the vanquished take to flight. But
the slaughter made in these engagements, frequently sows the seeds of hatred,
which perpetuate these dissensions. It is an established law among them, that
the blood of every man who is slain, must be avenged by that of his murderer.
So nice are the Arabs on this point of honor, that if any one neglects to seek
his retaliation, he is disgraced for ever. These animofities are transmitted,
from father to children, and never cease, but by the extinction of one of the
families, unless they agree to sacrifice the criminal, or purchase the blood
for a stated price, in money, or flocks.

The government of these tribes is at once republican, aristocratical, and even
despotic, without exactly corresponding with any of its forms. It is
republican, as the people have a great influence in all affairs, and nothing
can be transacted without the consent of a majority. It is aristocratical,
because the families of the shaiks possess some of the prerogatives which every
where accompany power; and lastly, it is despotic, because the principal shaik
has an indefinite and almost absolute authority; which, when he happens to be a
man of credit and influence, he may even abuse; but the state of these tribes
confines even this abuse to very narrow limits; for, if a chief should commit
an act of injustice, if, for example, he should kill an Arab, it would be
almost impossible for him to escape punishment; the resentment of the injured
party would pay no respect to his dignity, the law of retaliation would be put
in force, and should he not pay the blood, he would be infallibly assassinated.
If he harasses his subjects by severity, they abandon him, and go over to
another tribe.

The principal shaik in every tribe, defrays the charges of all who arrive at,
or leave the camp. He receives the visits of the allies, and of every person
who has business with them. Adjoining to his tent is a large pavillion, for the
reception of all strangers and passengers. In these pavillions, are held
frequent assemblies of the shaiks, and principal men, to determine on
encampments and removals, on peace and war; on the difference with the Turkish
governors, and the villages; and the litigations and quarrels of individuals.
To this crowd which enters successively, he must give coffee, bread baked on
the ashes, rice, and sometimes roasted kid or camel; in a word, he must keep
open table; and it is the more important to him to be generous, as this
generosity is closely connected with matters of the greatest consequence. On
the exercise of this, depends his credit and his power. The famished Arab,
ranks the liberality which feeds him before every virtue. To provide for these
expenses, the shaik has nothing but his herds, a few spots of cultivated
ground, the profits of his plunder, and the tribute he levies on the high
roads; the total of which is very inconsiderable. We must not, therefore, when
we speak of the Bedouins, affix to the word Prince and Lord, the ideas they
usually convey: we should come nearer the truth, by comparing them to
substantial farmers, in mountainous countries, whose simplicity they resemble
in their dress, as well as in their domestic life and manners. A shaik, who has
the command of five hundred horse, does not disdain to saddle and bridle his
own, nor to give him barley and chopped straw. In his tent, his wife makes the
coffee, kneads the dough, and superintends the dressing of the victuals. His
daughters and kinswomen wash the linen, and go with pitchers on their heads,
and veils over their faces, to draw water from the fountain. These manners
agree precisely with the descriptions in Homer, and the history of Abraham in
Genesis.

The simplicity, or perhaps more properly, the poverty of the lower class of
the Bedouins, is proportionate to that of their chiefs. All the wealth of a
family consists of movables, of which the following is a pretty exact
inventory. A few male and female camels, some goats and poultry; a mare, and
her bridle and saddle; a tent, a lance sixteen feet long, a crooked sabre, a
rusty musket, a pipe, a portable mill, a pot for cooking a leathern bucket, a
small coffee-roaster, a mat, some clothes, a mantle of black wool, and a few
glass, or silver rings, which the women wear upon their legs and arms. If none
of these be wanting, their furniture is complete. But, what the poor man stands
most in need of, and what he takes most pleasure in, is his mare; for this
animal is his principal support. With his mare, the Bedouin makes his
excursions against hostile tribes, or seeks plunder in the country, and on the
highways. The mare is preferred to the horse, because she does not neigh, is
more docile, and yields milk; which, on occasion, satisfies the thirst, and
even the hunger of her master.

Thus, confined to the absolute necessities of life, the Arabs have as little
industry as their wants are few; all their arts consist in weaving their clumsy
tents, and making mats and butter. Their whole commerce only extends to
exchanging camels, kids, stallions, and milk; for arms, clothing, a little
rice, or corn, and money which they bury. They are totally ignorant of all
science, and have not even any idea of astronomy, geometry, or medicine. They
have not a single book, and nothing is so uncommon among the shaiks, as to know
how to read. All their literature consists in reciting tales and histories, in
the manner of the Arabian Nights Entertainments. They have a peculiar passion
for such stories; and employ, in them, almost all their leisure. In the
evening, they seat themselves on the ground, at the threshold of their tents,
or under cover, if it be cold; and there, ranged in a circle round a little
fire of dung, their pipes in their mouths, and their legs crossed, they sit
awhile in silent meditation; till, on a sudden, one of them breaks forth with,
Once upon a time -- and continues to recite the adventures of some young shaik,
and female Bedouin: he relates in what manner the youth got a secret glimpse of
his mistress; and how he became desperately enamoured of her; he minutely
describes the lovely fair, boasts her black eyes, as large and soft as those of
the gazalle; her languid and empassioned looks, her arched eyebrows,
resembling two bows of ebony; her waist strait, and supple as a lance; he
forgets not her steps, light as those of the young filley; nor her eye-lashes
blackened with kohl, nor her lips painted blue, nor her nails, tinged with the
golden colored henna, nor her breasts resembling two pomegranates, nor her
words, sweet as honey. He recounts the sufferings of the young lover, so wasted
with desire and passion, that his body no longer yields any shadow. The
Bedouins have likewise their lovesongs, which have more sentiment and nature in
them than those of the Turks.

The Arabs have often been reproached with a spirit of rapine, but, without
wishing to defend it, we may observe, that one circumstance has not been
sufficiently attended to; which is, that it only takes place toward reputed
enemies, and is consequently founded on the acknowledged laws of all nations.
Among themselves they are remarkable for a good faith, a disinterestedness, a
generosity which would do honor to the most civilized people. What is there
more noble, than that right of asylum so respected among all the tribes? A
stranger, nay, even an enemy touches the tent of the Bedouin, and from this
instant, his person becomes inviolable. It would be reckoned a disgraceful
meanness, an indelible shame, to satisfy even a just vengeance at the expense
of hospitality. Has the Bedouin consented to eat bread and salt with his guest?
nothing in the world can induce him to betray him. The power of the Sultan
himself, would not be able to force a refuge, from the protection of a tribe,
but by its total extermination. The Bedouin, so rapacious without his camp, has
no sooner set his foot within it, than he becomes liberal and generous. What
little he possesses, he is ever ready to divide. He has even the delicacy not
to wait till it is asked: when he takes his repast, he affects to seat himself
at the door of his tent, in order to invite the passengers; his generosity is
so sincere, that he does not look upon it as a merit, but merely as a duty. To
observe the manner in which the Arabs conduct themselves toward each other,
one would imagine that they possessed all their goods in common. Nevertheless,
they are no strangers to property; but it has none of that selfishness, which
the increase of the imaginary wants of luxury, has given it among polished
nations.

With respect to religion, the Bedouins, from policy, preserve the appearance
of Mahometanism; but so relaxed is their observance of its ceremonies, and so
little fervor has their devotion, that they are generally considered as
infidels who have neither law nor prophets. They even make no difficulty in
saying, that the religion of Mahomet was not made for them; "for," add they,
"how shall we make ablutions who have no water? How can we bestow alms who are
not rich? Why should we fast in the Ramadan, since the whole year with us is
one continual fast? and what necessity is there for us to make the pilgrimage
to Mecca, if God be present every where?" In short, every man acts and thinks
as he pleases, and the most perfect toleration is established among them.

Besides the Arabs of the above description, there are others who reside in the
cities of Syria and Palestine, and who are more polished than the rest of their
countrymen. Their manner of dressing and behaving in company, gives them a
greater resemblance to the Turks. These people generally carry on their
commercial affairs, with much uprightness and integrity, and submit to the
government under which they live, without forgetting they are sprung from
Ishmael, that the Arabs boasting they are descended from Ishmael, the son of
Abraham and Agar. They, accordingly show a wonderful affection for the
inhabitants of the desert, whom they alone consider as descended from noble and
illustrious blood. The greater part of those real Arabs, who are fixed in
cities, do not suffer their beards to grow till they are advanced in years; but
the other inhabitants of the desert, never cut theirs at all. They carry their
respect for the beard so far, that to touch it when they swear, is as solemn an
oath, as that of the ancient gods, when they swore by the river Styx. They take
very great care to keep it clean; and it may be easily conceived, they consider
it a great affront when any one pulls them by this venerable ornament.

Though the Bedouin Arabs are exceedingly poor, there are others who live under
tents, in valleys adjoining to the cities, whose flocks are more abundant, and
who are not that half starved race like the Bedouins, or those Arabs, who
wander more upon the extremities, and the most desert part of this province.

These are the Arabs Mariti seems to have in view, when he says, they are of a
middle stature, their complexion brown, and that they have always a grave and
melancholy air. Misfortunes give them no pain, and they derive no pleasure from
prosperity, because they receive with resignation both good and evil from the
hand of God. Equally insensible to the cries of their children, and to the
tears of their wives, their visages exhibit no kind of alteration whatever.
They seldom laugh, and never weep: to do either, in their opinion, shows great
weakness; and, on this account, they have very little esteem for a man who
weeps or laughs too much. It is necessary, therefore, for the Europeans to
affect great indifference when amongst them, and to imitate their serious and
melancholy behavior: with a little attention in this respect, their friendship
and esteem may easily be had.

These people derive their subsistence from flocks, from hunting, and from what
they acquire by plunder. The acknowledge no sovereigns, but the Emirs of their
tribes, who are their natural princes, and to whom they pay obedience. They
have also shaiks, who are persons of an advanced age, whom they often consult,
and whose advice they follow. As there are no fixed judges among the Arabs,
these shaiks supply the place, and from their determination there is no appeal.

Though polygamy is permitted to the Arabs, by the law of Mahomet, which they
follow, it is rare to see them have more wives than one.

The pleasure of smoking, so common even among the women, is also one of the
amusements of the Arabs, who may be seen sitting from morning to night with
their pipes in their mouths.

The dress of the Arabs, consists only of a white robe bound round with a broad
leathern girdle, which may be straitened or slackened at pleasure, by means of
strong buckles, or a large clasp, with a few smaller ones. Winter and summer,
they wear a large cloak, striped black and white, and made of the hair of
goats, or some other animal. In winter, they use it to secure themselves from
the cold and rain, and in summer to screen them from the heat of the sun. They
wear nothing on their heads but a kind of red cap, surrounded with a piece of
cloth of the same color, or intermixed sometimes with white, which forms all
its ornaments. Their Emirs, or princes, dress in the same manner, except, that
their cloaks are for the most part all black.

They wear slippers after the manner of the Turks; but they are generally in
half boots, in order that they may be ready at all times to mount on horseback.
Some Arabs who are employed in agriculture, instead of slippers, wear only two
soles of leather fastened under the foot, at the toe and heel, and forming a
kind of sandal. Their drawers are made of linen, and descend to the lower part
of the leg.

These Arabs have no habitations, but tents; they generally stop in valleys,
taking always the precaution to place some of their tents on a neighboring
hill, to prevent their being surprised by different tribes who are their
enemies. Besides this, being on the watch, they are able to fall on travelers
unexpectedly, whom they are contented to rob, without offering any personal
insult, provided no obstinate resistance is made.

The riches of these Arabs consist in cattle, which supply them with flesh,
milk, butter, and wool, the principal articles they have occasion for, as they
despise luxury of every kind.

What they value most, is their fine horses, and especially those that are
swift in running. They distinguish them into three races, and are very curious
in preserving their genealogy. Those of the two first races, are of a moderate
height, but exceedingly slender and swift; they never neigh, and eat only once
in the four and twenty hours. In the evening, which is the time they are fed, a
measure of barley is susspended from their necks in a bag. If they are
fatigued, they do not receive their allowance till an hour later: but they are
suffered to drink almost every moment; even when covered with dust, and in the
midst of their labor. When they arrive at their tents, they are unbridled, and
tied to a lance fixed in the ground, by means of a rope which passes round
their necks. If it be a mare, she is tied by the foot; but the saddles are
never taken from their backs, except when they are combed. The Arabs have a
greater number of mares than of horses, because they are better able to endure
fatigue, hunger, and thirst; and because they require much less care.

About the time when the horses cover, they suffer them to feed in the open
fields for the space of fifteen days, after which they carry witnesses with
them, to certify what breed the horse is. They do the same thing at the birth
of the foal; and mark upon a card, the month, day, and hour, together with the
origin of the animal, and the color of its hair. This card, called cogget, and
containing different attestations, is put into a small brass ball, and
suspended by a string from the colt's neck, where it remains during the whole
time of its life: in short, that happy day is celebrated by a festival they
give to their friends. The Arabs wait till their horses have attained the age
of three years, before they put a bit into their mouths; and suffer the fourth
year to elapse before they mount them. In this interval, they exercise them
continually as we do in Europe, by making them run round in a circle. At the
end of four years, they are shod and prepared for a particular kind of
coursing, which consists in setting off on full gallop, stopping short
suddenly, turning to the right and left, and retreating when the rider
discharges his lance. It is customary for the Arabs to attack their enemies
with great impetuosity, and then to fly back with the like speed. They,
therefore, instruct their horses to stoop a little, by leaning toward one
side, to enable the rider to recover his arms, without being obliged to
dismount. Whilst they are accustoming them to these different maneuvers, they
never make use of the whip, but employ spurs, with the points of which they
prick the sides of the horse, according as they judge it necessary. At the end
of five years, they cut their tails, in order that they may grow afterward,
according to their natural disposition. They keep their hoofs very short, but
make them advance a little beyond the shoe, which is formed of a piece of very
thin iron.

Arabian horses increase in strength, in proportion as they are exercised in
running, and it is very easy when they are stopped, to make them pursue such a
pace as one wishes. When galloping, they carry their heads high, but suffer
them to droop a little on an ordinary trot. If the rider should throw the
bridle loose upon their necks, they would make no motion; and he might continue
his journey in perfect safety, without taking it again into his hand. If he be
dismounted by any accident, the horse will not advance a step further, but
immediately stops till he gets up. The Arabs, properly speaking, do not make
use of a bridle, but of a halter; and, in order to remain firm in their seats,
because their saddles are high, they press their legs strongly against the
horse's sides. Their manner of sitting on horseback is perfectly careless; and,
in this respect, they do not display that gracefulness by which the Turks are
distinguished. They are, however, far from being bad horsemen; when they wish
to make their horses gallop, they bend their bodies a little, and lean
forwards, which is a sufficient signal for the animal to set out full speed.

When they mount their horses, they are almost always armed with lances, twelve
or fourteen feet in length, which they handle with great dexterity; but they
have a smaller kind for darting against the enemy, as they retain the former
always in their hands. They carry muskets likewise, but they are much terrified
when they engage with firearms, being so little accustomed to them; and, after
the first discharge, they become absolutely useless.

The features of the Arab women are remarkably beautiful, when young; but they
soon become disfigured, by certain black spots like patches, which they make in
their faces with a sharp-pointed iron. They mark with the same color their
lips and eyelashes, by mixing, with the paint employed for that purpose, a
certain substance which they call coliastri. According to the general custom of
the Levant, they dye their nails, and the palms of their hands, yellow.

Young girls make an opening near one of the nostrils, into which they put a
clove: this appears to them to be a peculiar beauty, which they consider as a
sign of virginity; though they continue to wear it even after they have had
children. There are some, who, instead of a clove, thrust through their
nostrils a silver ring, about an inch and an half in diameter; from the bottom
of which is suspended a piece of coral, or some small coin.

One difference is remarked, between the Arab men and women; which is, that the
latter, much less serious when young, become peevish and melancholy with age:
whilst the men acquire with years, an opener and freer air. This difference,
indeed, may be remarked among the people of every nation whatever: a desire of
pleasing, and of being loved, is the first sentiment that arises in the mind of
a woman; and it grows and increases as she approaches toward maturity; but, as
love accompanies beauty only, and as beauty disappears with youth, it is not
astonishing that a woman should become morose as she advances in life. Having
lost the power of charming, she is no longer followed; and this neglect she is
by no means able to support. With men, the case is quite different, being
formed for accomplishing great things, they seem to abandon their nature, when
they suffer themselves to be overcome by love.

The Arab women wear only a plain robe, after the Turkish manner, and scarcely
ever cover their heads. Their cloaks resemble those of the men, but there are
only few who use drawers, according to the custom of the polished people of the
East. They ornament their hair, with strings of small glass beads, of different
colors; on their legs and arms they wear bracelets of the same, and have rings
made of metal on their fingers.

The principal occupation of the Arab women, is to take care of the tents in
which they lodge, to provide water, to prepare food, to milk their flocks, and
to make butter and cheese. They likewise manufacture the cloth necessary for
covering their tents.

As there are no longer any physicians among the Arabs, the care of the sick is
committed entirely into the hands of women. Among other diseases, they cure the
dropsy so perfectly, that the patient is never afterward subject to it. They
are acquainted with the virtues of herbs, and employ them with great success.
The Arabs almost always use scarification in their cures, and especially for
pains. On the least sensation, they apply a red hot iron to the part affected,
and are freed from their complaint by this violent remedy. This is the reason
why so many of the Arabs may be seen with scars on different parts of their
bodies.

The Arabs make very little use of bread. Their usual food is roots, honey,
milk, butter, mutton, and the flesh of their camels; and birds which they may
catch alive; because it is an article of the Mohammedan law, to kill those
animals which they eat, and to extract their blood. They consume a great deal
of rice, particularly in their pilau. For seasoning the greater part of their
dishes, they employ sour and curdled milk, which they mix with leaven.

The Arabians have another kind of food, which appears to us still more
singular. This food is the flesh of locusts, which they collect in the season,
when they pass through their country; and having taken off their heads, put
them into leather bags, with a certain quantity of salt. When they eat them,
they cut them into slices as we do sausages.

Amongst the various beverages of the Arabs, water holds the first rank. They
make such a continual use of coffee, that they can drink it like the Turks
almost at every hour of the day; but in small quantities, and without sugar.
They compose another kind of drink with roots, and the juice of the sugarcane,
and of grapes mixed with water. They have also a third, made with an infusion
of barley, which has a great resemblance with our barley.

Hospitality is so much honored among all the Arabs, that, without regard to
religion or country they will receive in their tent every traveller who applies
to them, and take the same care of his servant and his horse. After making him
sit down on a mat, commodiously spread on the ground, they present him with a
pipe, and coffee; and every now and then ask him how he does. They then prepare
something for him to eat, and offer him their dishes, with that simplicity
which is so common among them; and announces by their countenances, the great
happiness they experience in being able to do him any service. If he wishes to
pass the night in their habitation, they arrange the same mat in the form of a
bed; and place under one end of it his stone, or a saddle to serve him for a
pillow. Should the traveller at his departure offer his host a piece of money,
because he appears to be poor, it would be accepted with gratitude; but if he
gave nothing, the Arab would testify no dissatisfaction whatever. It may not
here be improper, to describe the manner of eating among the Arab lords, which
is a little different from that of the Turks.

After the floor is covered with different pieces of tapestry, a long table,
raised about three or four inches from the ground, and which is only two feet
in breadth, is placed in the middle of the apartment, without a cloth spread
over it, and without any ornament. Several dishes filled with pilau, or rice
baked, without sauce, and a sheep roasted whole, with its belly stuffed,
compose the first course.

If the number of persons at table should amount to thirty, a second sheep is
added. This principal course is followed by several dishes, containing boiled
greens and pulse, with meat seasoned in various ways; and then comes the last
course, which consists of small basins of milk, rendered sour by means of
leaven. In such repasts as these they never employ knives, forks, plates,
towels, or glasses.

When the dishes are ranged in order, the guests, having washed their hands and
pulled off their slippers, approach the table with their chief, who invokes the
benediction of heaven on the festival. Each then sits down on the floor with
his legs crossed, and a domestic spreads over their knees a long cloth, which
serves the whole company. They then begin to eat without any further compliment.

The Europeans, accustomed to ceremony, and above all to cleanliness, would not
find themselves. very comfortable at such tables. Their delicate stomachs would
be apt to become squeamish, when they saw each guest put his hand into the
dishes, touch all the ragouts with it, and, filling it with a mixture of flesh
and pilau, form it into small balls, and then press the whole into his mouth.

With regard to their beverage, which is always water, it is supplied by the
nearest domestic, and is drank from a cup made of baked earth, or a cocoanut,
and scarcely ever from glasses.

They remain a very short time at table, and rise all together to thank God for
their good appetite. After again washing their hands, they retire to another
hall, where some fruits are prepared, which form part of the desert. In the use
of these sweet things, they are very moderate, which are carried away almost as
soon as they are served up. Coffee and pipes are brought in the last place,
with which they regale themselves, sitting in a circle.

The remains of their table are placed before their attendants, and from them
are carried to the inferior servants. But will the reader be able to guess for
whom the scraps left by all these wretches are designed? Will it be believed in
those countries of Europe, which make it their boast to pay the most flattering
attention to the fair sex; where they are treated with all the respect due to
queens; where, when the table is loaded with the most delicate viands, and the
choicest dainties, nothing appears good but what is presented by their fair
hands; and where the master himself will not venture to touch the smallest
article without their permission -- that, among these barbarous people, what
has escaped the teeth of the filthiest slave, is carried to the women, and even
to the mistress of the house? These women drink coffee, and smoke in the same
manner as the men.

The Arabs we have now been describing, passed from the deserts of Arabia, to
Syria and Palestine, in the sixth century; and since that period, they have
still more or less preserved their footing in these countries. All the
inhabitants of the coasts, or of the interior parts, who speak the Arabic
language only, are comprehended under their name. They are not, however, all
descendants of the first migration, properly speaking: they are a mixture of
all nations and religions.

CHAP. X. Of the Druses, and Mutuales.
THE country of Castravent, a part of Mount Lebanon, is inhabited, in
preference to any other spot, by the Druses. The religion of these people, is
one of the most modern in the East, since it is not older than 1030. The
principles of this religion, are almost entirely unknown: their sacred books
presenting nothing but a series of errors and obscurities. Their religion,
however, seems to be a mixture of Mahometanism, and Christianity. They pray
indifferently in the Greek churches, and the Turkish mosques.

Their language is that of the Arabs, which is the only one familiar to the
different people of Syria.

The Druses are a robust, well-made people, and of a noble aspect, for which
they are in part indebted to their education. -- They are accustomed from their
infancy, to hardships and fatigue.

When mothers lay their children in the cradle, instead of putting their pillow
under their head, as is customary among us, they put it under their reins, so
that the head remains in a hanging position. Wrapping up the legs afterward
with bandages, they bring the two calves together, taking care to extend their
toes outward; and this gives them, when old, that majestic carriage by which
they are distinguished.

In their disposition, they are naturally faithful and sincere. They are fond
of the Europeans, to whom they perform every duty that humanity requires, and
on every occasion protect and defend them, as far as lies in their power. As
they have very great aversion to usury, they cannot endure the roguery of the
Turks, or the avarice of the Hebrews.

The Druses have particular princes, called Emirs, who are seven in number; and
who, in conjunction, all govern the same country. One of them has the title of
Grand Emir, and possesses the supreme authority, being president of the
council. The city of Bareith, is the capital where the Emirs reside. The wives
of these princes also enjoy a share in the government, and continue to command
after their husbands' death; but when they have children old enough to succeed
their fathers, they resign into their hands the reins of administration.

Though the Druses are considered as independent on the Grand Signior, they pay
annually a small tribute to the Ottoman court; and this is the only shadow of
authority that the Port still retains over these people, jealous of their
independance.

Their dress consists of a very short tunic, which scarcely reaches to their
knees, made of goats hair and wool, and striped with different colors. Over
this they tie several bands of stuff, disposed in the form of rays, amongst
which are some of gold and silver tissue. This kind of ornament, which they
wear before and behind, terminates toward the reins: the sleeves of their
tunic, reach no further than their elbow. Under this upper garment, they have a
pretty long robe of Turkish cloth, the sleeves of which extend to the wrist:
their drawers are of the same stuff, but much shorter and narrower than those
worn in other parts of the Levant. They use white shirts, which, in general,
are not cut after the Ottoman manner. The girdle with which they bind both
these articles of dress close to the body, passes above the reins, and is
composed of ten or twelve pieces of stuff or cloth; and they wrap up their
heads in beautiful bands of several colors, which form their turbans. Their
slippers also differ from those of other people in the East, and have some
resemblance to our shoes, except, that the leather of which they are made is
red, DRUSES.
or yellow morocco; that they fasten the straps with thongs of the same,
instead of buckles; and that the upper-leather rises a great way up the leg.

The form and color of their clothes have such a conformity, that the Druses
seem all to wear a military uniform: their princes, however, dress in a
different manner, and in a great measure copy the Turks. The dress also of
their priests, has no relation with that in common use; they are distinguished
by black, brown, and sometimes white clothes; they carry no arms, and their
turbans are white and exceedingly high.

One might almost say, that the arms of the Druses form a part of their dress;
for they never lay them aside either in the time of peace, or of war. They
consist of a pair of pistols, with a poniard, which they suspend from the fore
part of their girdle; an axe, a large flat bottle filled with powder, a fuzee,
and a cartouch box, which hangs behind, containing twenty-four rounds of shot.
They have very few horses, because they would be of no use among their
mountains, in which they keep themselves fortified.

The dress of their women, is much the same as that of the Turkish women,
except that they wear on their heads a plate of silver, made in the form of a
cone, and about a palm in breadth. Above it they fix a long veil, which
descends half way down the body, and which seems to add to their beauty and
grace. When they have occasion to go abroad, they cover their face with it.

A thin delicate figure, so much admired in Europe, is not held in the same
estimation by the Druses. These rude people prefer those of a larger size; and,
as the desire of pleasing is natural to all the women of the earth; whilst the
European ladies endeavor, by vigorous abstinence, to render their persons
genteel, the female Druses strive to acquire, by high living, that plump and
jolly appearance, which amongst them constitutes beauty.

The Mutuales, are a people dispersed in great numbers all over Syria; and are
named thus from Mutual, a celebrated captain, who destroyed the ancient
religion of the Persians, in order to substitute Mahometanism in its stead. The
Mutuales, therefore, are Mahometans, but schismatics.

They differ from the ancient believers in only one point, which is, the
succession of the doctors. Whilst the latter called Sinnins, or Legietes,
reckon as immediate successors of the prophet, Abubaker, Osman, and Omar; the
Mutuales acknowledge none but Ali. This point was contested between both
parties, by force of arms; and torrents of blood were shed in the dispute.
Hussan and Hussein, brothers and successors of Ali, perished by the hands of
the Sinnins; and Mutual, who inhabited their domains, adopted also their
madness and prejudice. And such is the blindness of fanaticism, that the
Mutuales think they perform an action agreeable to heaven, when they sacrifice
a Sinnin.

These Sinnins are not the only persons whom the Mutuales consider as impure.
All religions, without distinction, appear to them worthy of the same contempt.
They must be extremely hungry before they can be induced to eat with a
Christian.

Should an European, by chance put his lips to any of their cups, they
immediately break it to pieces, by dashing it on the ground; and, if the vase
be of metal, they plunge it several times into boiling water, invoking the name
of God, and that of his prophet.

When they purchase any provisions in the Christian, or Mohammedan markets, they
dip them three or four times into the mud, for the purpose, as they say, of
purifying them.

The Mutuales are above the middle stature; have robust constitutions, and are
indefatigable in war. In dress and manners, they bear a great resemblance to
the Arabs.

There is, perhaps, no country in the world, where the women are held in less
consideration than among these people. A Mutuale priest leads his wife to a
friend, as he would lead his horse; and, when in want of money, he lets her out
for a month, or half a year. No disputes, respecting the children, ever result
from this traffic; they must be maintained by the person who borrows the woman;
because, the produce of a field belongs always to him who has sown it; and, if
any altercation arises between the parties, they trust to the honesty of the
woman to settle them. The Mutuales do not think they offend God by this
conduct: when reproached for it, they reply, that every one has a right to
dispose of his property as he pleases.

CHAP. XI. Palestine.
PALESTINE is bounded on the North by Said, or Sidon; on the South, by the
Dead Sea; on the West, by the Mediterranean; and on the East, by the river
Jordan, and the Lake of Tiberias. In length it is about a hundred and seventy
miles; but its breadth varies much, being in some places fifty-eight miles, and
in others, only twenty-two.

It comprehends the ancient country of Canaan, conquered by Joshua, the
conductor of the people of God, after the death of Moses. It was called also
the Promised Land, because it had been promised by God, many centuries before,
to Abraham, and his descendants.

After the return of the Jews from the Babylonish captivity, this country was
divided into three parts; called Judaea, Samaria, and Galilee. Judaea is the
most Southern part, and Galilee the most Northern; on which account, Samaria,
called at present the Napulosa, remained in the middle, and was, as it were,
the center of all Palestine.

It is still considered to be divided into the same three parts. The capital of
Judaea is Jerusalem; that of Galilee, the small city of Nazareth; and that of
Samaria, the city of Napulosa.

Palestine, is known also by The Holy Land, because our Savior was born and
resided here, till the period when he ascended into Heaven. The scriptures
describe this country as exceedingly fertile, and abounding with productions of
every kind. In Deuteronomy, it is said, "For the Lord thy God brings thee
into a good land, a land of brooks of water, of fountains, and depths that
spring out of the valleys and hills." And in another place, to show its
richness and fertility, it is said to be, "A land flowing with milk and honey."

The great population of Palestine, is an evident proof of the fertility of its
soil. In the time of David, there were eleven hundred thousand combatants in
the kingdom of Israel; and four hundred and seventy thousand in the tribe of
Judah alone. Some writers conclude, therefore, that its inhabitants, including
women and children, might amount in all to eight millions of people.

The land of Canaan, contained a prodigious number of cities and villages, as
may be seen in the fifteenth chapter of Joshua; where we are told, that a
hundred and twelve walled cities fell to the lot of the tribe of Judah alone.
Of all its ancient cities, however, a few only remain; the rest being either
destroyed, or their names given to paltry villages, now almost in ruins.

The population of this country, is also greatly diminished; but, at present,
no certain calculation can be given of it; as the number of its inhabitants
continually varies, on account of the Bedouin Arabs, who always come here at
certain periods.

If the country has lost its ancient splendour, by the destruction of its
cities, and the decrease of its population, it still retains its natural
advantages, being beautifully variegated with mountains, hills, and delightful
plains.

Its climate is exceeding good. It seldom rains here; but this deficiency is
supplied by most abundant dews. The cold is never excessive; and, if the summer
heats are great, they are mitigated by a periodical breeze, which renders them
supportable.

Palestine abounds with almost every thing that is useful or necessary for the
life of man. It produces wheat, barley, pulse of all kinds, fruits, wine, and
oil, in such plenty; that though a part only of the country is cultivated,
great quantities of these articles are distributed in the neighboring
provinces of Syria, and even transported to Europe, particularly wheat, barley,
and pulse.

With regard to domestic and wild animals, it produces various kinds, many of
which are not known in Europe. Cotton grows here in great perfection,
particularly in Samaria and Galilee. Among its productions, may be reckoned
also silk, tobacco, drugs, and aromatic herbs.

The mountainous country toward Jerusalem, is more barren than any other part,
but there is no reason to suppose it has always been in the same condition. The
cause of its being at present neglected, is the want of population; the
inhabitants having abandoned the mountains, and retired to the plains, where
agriculture is attended with less labor, and where they find more conveniences
for their cattle.

Even in Galilee and Samaria, there are many parts still uncultivated; but as
they abound with grass, they afford pasture to the cattle, which form the whole
riches of the Arabs.

This province, according to some writers, is a district independent of every
pachalie. Sometimes it has governors of its own, who reside either at Gaza or
Jerusalem; but at present, Jerusalem is subordinate to the Pacha of Damascus,
who appoints a deputy called a Motsallam; and the rest of the province is
divided into three apanages, viz. Yafa, Loudd, and Gaza. The former has been
given to the Sultana mother, and the two latter to the Captain Pacha, as a
recompense for past services. These three districts have, therefore, now
separate governors. We shall first, however, treat of the ancient capital of
the province, Jerusalem.

The approach to this city, says Volney, presents a striking example of the
vicissitude of human affairs. When we behold its walls levelled, its ditches
filled up, and all its buildings embarrassed with ruins; we scarcely can
believe we view that celebrated metropolis, which formerly withstood the
efforts of the most powerful empires. Still more are we astonished at its
ancient greatness, when we consider its situation, amid a rugged soil,
destitute of water, and surrounded by dry channels of torrents and steep
heights. Remote from every great road, it seems neither to have been calculated
for a considerable mart of commerce, nor the center of a great consumption. It
overcame, however, every obstacle, and may be adduced as a proof what popular
opinions may effect in the hands of an able legislature, or when favored by
happy circumstances. The same opinions still preserve to this city its feeble
existence. The renown of its miracles perpetuated in the East, invites and
retains a certain number of inhabitants within its walls. Mahometans,
Christians, and Jews, without distinction of sects, all make it a point of
honor to see, or to have seen, what they denominated the noble and holy city.
To judge from the respect the inhabitants possess, for the sacred places it
contains, we should be ready to imagine there is not in the world a more devout
people; but this has not prevented them from acquiring, and well deserving, the
reputation of the vilest people of Syria; not excepting even those of Damascus.
Their number is supposed to amount to twelve or fourteen thousand.

This city is, at present, about three miles in circumference; its situation is
different from what it was at the time of our Savior. Mount Calvary, upon
which is built the church of the Holy Sepulcher, stood formerly without the
walls; being appropriated THE HOLY SEPULCHER.
to the execution of malefactors, and, of course, considered as a polluted
spot; but since our Savior's suffering upon this mount, it has been so
reverenced, and resorted to by Christians, as to have drawn the city round
about it; and is, at present, the center of Jerusalem. On the contrary, a great
part of Mount Sion now stands without the walls.

The church of the Holy Sepulcher, is the most magnificent, and the only
remarkable building in Jerusalem, and that which pilgrims chiefly come to
visit. It is a large structure, with a round nave, having no light but what
comes through the top, like the rotunda at Rome. The dome is covered on the
outside with lead, and within with cedar-wood. The opening of the dome is
closed with a net of wire, to prevent birds from flying into the church. In the
middle of the nave, and directly under the opening of the dome, is the Holy
Sepulcher, which is in a chapel, whose door is three feet high, and two broad.
It is so small, that it will hold but three persons on their knees at a time.
On the right hand, at the entrance, is the place where the body of our Savior
was laid. The table he was laid on, is two feet and a half high, from the
pavement; and is covered with white marble, as the pilgrims who came to visit
the tomb, were continually carrying away small pieces of the stone.

This chapel is cut out of the rock; and there three holes in the roof, to let
out the smoke of the lamps, which are forty-four in number, and always kept
lighted. Before the gate of the sepulcher, is a silver lamp, so large, that two
men cannot fathom it. The Turks have had a mind several times, to carry off
this lamp, and send it to Mecca.

If any one be desirous to know how a person feels himself, the first time he
kneels before the Sepulcher of our Lord, for my own part, says Le Brun, I can
only answer, that I never felt myself so much affected in my life. A Monk, who
visited the sacred tomb with me, and who had never before been at Jerusalem,
was so agitated, and shed so many tears, on kneeling before the sepulcher of
our Lord, that it was full two hours before he could be brought to himself
again. I will not, from thence conclude, says the above writer, that this was
indisputably the sepulcher of our Savior. But as no serious person can
approach this spot, without being prepossessed with such an idea, and
meditating upon the sufferings of him who died for the sins of mankind, his
soul must necessarily be very deeply affected. And though we live in an age, in
which such numbers seem to glory in their infidelity, conceiving this to be a
distinguishing characteristic from the vulgar, and the criterion of a fine
genius; yet I am firmly of opinion, the most professed Atheist, with all his
affected stupidity, could not forbear feeling the same emotions with myself
upon such an occasion.

On Good Friday, the passion of our Savior is solemnized in this church. All
the most material circumstances of this great event are then represented; such
as nailing him to the cross, crowning him with thorns, and then taking the body
down, and wrapping it in a sheet. The Monks have first a sermon, and then every
one takes a lighted taper in his hand, with crucifixes, and other utensils to
begin the procession. One of these crucifixes is as big as life, exceedingly
well done, and is crowned with thorns, and besmeared with blood. They visit
first the pillar of flagellation; next the prison; afterward the altar of the
division of Christ's garments; then they advance to the chapel of derision, and
from thence to Mount Calvary, leaving their shoes at the bottom of the stairs.
Here are two altars; one where our Savior was supposed to be nailed on the
cross, and another where it was erected, and where they set up the crucified
image. Near this spot, is the memorable cleft in the rock, which was said to
have been made by an earthquake, when our Savior suffered.

There are seven gates to this city; one of which, called the Golden gate, has
been long blocked up by the Turks; from a prediction, that the Christians will
again enter Jerusalem by this gate, and get possession of the city. The Turks
use still farther precaution, in shutting every Friday, during their time of
prayer, all the other gates; it having been further predicted, that the
Christians would enter Jerusalem on the Turkish sabbath, and during the time of
service.

A great number of Jews repair to this city, as they grow old, in order to end
their days here, and be interred in the valley of Jehosaphat. It being a
received notion among them, that those who are buried in this vale, will appear
first at the great day of judgment, which they suppose will take place on this
spot.

As for the mosque in this city, which the Turks affirm to have been the temple
of Solomon, no Christian is permitted to enter it; so very rigid are they in
this respect, that should any Christian be even seen in the court that
surrounds the mosque, he must either turn Mohammedan, or be burnt alive.

When the pilgrims arrive near the gates of Jerusalem, the fathers of the Latin
convent send their interpreter, to invite them to their cloisters, where they
are handsomely entertained, their feet washed, and an apartment assigned them;
after which they give each pilgrim a wax torch, and go in procession round the
cloisters, singing Te Deum, for their safe arrival in the Holy city.

Every pilgrim pays the governor an entrance fee of ten piastres; he likewise
collects a considerable revenue from the exportation of certain singular
articles from Jerusalem, such as beads, relics, sanctuaries, crosses, passions,
agnus dei's, scapularies, etc. of which near three hundred chests are sent off
annually. The fabrication of these utensils of piety, procures subsistence for
the greatest part of the Christian and Mohammedan families of Jerusalem, and its
neighborhood; men, women, and children are employed in carving, and turning
wood and coral, and in embroidering in silk, with pearls, and gold and silver
thread. The convent of the Holy Land alone, lays out annually, to the amount of
fifty thousand piastres in these wares; and those of the Greeks, Armenians, and
Copts, taken together, pay a still larger sum. This sort of commerce is the
more profitable to the manufacturers, is their goods cost them little, and
their price is enhanced by superstition. These commodities exported to Greece,
Italy, and Portugal, and particularly to Spain, produce very considerable
returns, either in the form of alms, or of payments. To this the convents join
another not less important article of traffic, the visits of the pilgrims.
There was a time when the ministers of religion taught, that it was
indispensibly necessary to salvation; and this pious zeal pervading all Europe,
gave rise to the Crusades. Since their unfortunate issue, the zeal of the
European pilgrims has diminished, and is now reduced to a few Italian, Spanish,
and German monks; but the case is different with the Orientals. Faithful to the
spirit of past times, they continued to consider the journey to Jerusalem, as a
work of the greatest merit. Their priests and monks, who find their advantage
in this fervor, study to promote it. The Greeks especially, declare, that the
pilgrimage confers plenary indulgence, not only for the past but for the
future; and that it not only absolves from the neglect of fasting, and the
non-observance of festivals, but even from the most heinous offenses. Such
great encouragements are not without effect; and every year, a crowd of
pilgrims of both sexes, and all ages, set out from the Morea, Archipelago,
Constantinople, Natolia, Armenia, Syria, and Egypt, the number of whom, in
1784, amounted to two thousand. The monks, who find by their register, that
formerly ten or twelve thousand annually made this pilgrimage, never cease
exclaiming, that religion rapidly decays, and that the zeal of the faithful is
nearly extinguished. It must be confessed, however, that this zeal is rather
expensive, since the most moderate pilgrimage never costs less than near two
hundred pounds, and from that sum to between two and three thousand.

These pilgrims, as we have already observed, disembark at Yafa. They arrive in
November, and repair without delay to Jerusalem, where they remain until after
the festival of Easter. They are lodged confusedly, by whole families, in the
cells of the convents of their respective communions. On Palm Sunday, they go
to purify themselves in the Jordan. The reader must consult particular
relations of this pilgrimage, to form an idea of the tumultuous march of this
fanatic multitude into the plain of Jericho; the indecent and superstitious
zeal with which they throw themselves, men, women, and children, naked into the
Jordan; the fatigue they undergo before they reach the borders of the Dead Sea;
the melancholy inspired by the sight of the gloomy rocks of that country, the
most savage in nature; their return and visitation of the holy places; and the
ceremony of the new fire, which descends from heaven on the holy Saturday,
brought by an angel. The Orientals still believe in this miracle, though the
Franks acknowledge that the priests retire from the sacristy, and effect what
is done by very natural means.

Easter over, each returns to his own country, proud of being able to rival the
Mohammedan in the title o^ pilgrim; nay, many of them, in order to distinguish
themselves as such, imprint on their hands, wrists, or arms, figures of the
cross or sphere, with the cipher of Jesus and Mary. This painful, and sometimes
dangerous operation, is performed with needles, and the perforations filled
with gunpowder, or powder of antimony, and is never to be effaced. The
Mahometans have the same practice, which is also to be found among the Indians,
and other savages, (called at Otahcite Tattooing) as it was likewise among
several ancient nations, with whom it had a connection with religion, which it
still retains wherever it prevails. So much devotion does not, however, exempt
these pilgrims from the proverbial censure thrown upon the Hadjis; since, the
Christians say likewise, beware of the pilgrims of Jerusalem.

We may well suppose so great a multitude, residing at Jerusalem for five or
six months, must leave behind them considerable sums; and reckoning only
fifteen hundred persons, at one hundred pistoles each, we shall find they
cannot expend less than between sixty and seventy thousand pounds. Part of this
money is paid to the inhabitants and merchants for necessaries, and these omit
no opportunity of imposing upon strangers. Water, in 1784, cost ten-pence a
jug. Another part goes to the governor and his subalterns, and the remainder is
the profit of the convents.

Of the places round Jerusalem, there are only two which merit attention. The
first is Raha, the ancient Jericho; situated six leagues to the North-east of
Jerusalem, in a plain six or seven leagues long, by three wide; around which
are a number of barren mountains that render it extremely hot. Here, formerly,
was cultivated the balm of Mecca. At present there is not a plant of it
remaining; but another species is to be found at Raha, called Zakkown,
celebrated also for healing wounds, and which the Arabs sell very dear: this is
the sole commerce of Raha, which is no more than a ruinous village. It was on
the summit of one of the mountains surrounding this plain, that the devil took
our Savior, when he showed him all the kingdoms of the world.

The second is Bait-ell-ham, or Bethlehem, so celebrated in the history of
Christianity. This village, situated two leagues South-east of Jerusalem, is
seated on an eminence, in a country full of hills and valleys, and might be
rendered very agreeable. The soil is the best in all these districts; but, as
is the case every where else, cultivation is wanting. Near Bethlehem is a
valley, where it is supposed the angels appeared to the shepherds, and
proclaimed the birth of Christ. The fountains, pools, and gardens, which were
said to have been the delight of Solomon, are also still remaining. They
reckon, about six hundred men capable of bearing arms upon occasion.

In this neighborhood are some soap manufactories, and a very ancient
glass-house, the only one in Syria. They make there a great quantity of
colored rings, bracelets for the wrists and legs, and for the arms above the
elbows; besides a variety of other trinkets which are sent even to
Constantinople. The rings are often more than an inch in diameter; they are
passed on the arms of children; and it often, happens, that the arm growing
bigger than the ring, a ridge, of flesh is formed above and below, so that the
ring is buried in a deep hollow, and cannot be got off, and this is considered
as a beauty.

Gaza, which was the occasional residence of the pacha, and is now that of the
Aga, is no more than a defenseless village, peopled at most by two thousand
inhabitants. The situation of Gaza, by fitting it for the medium of
communication between Syria and Egypt, has rendered it at all times a town of
some importance. The ruins of white marble, sometimes found there, prove it was
formerly the abode of luxury and opulence. The black soil of the surrounding
country is extremely fertile; and the gardens, watered by the limpid streams,
produce, without art, pomegranates, oranges, exquisite dates, and ranunculus
roots, in great request even at Constantinople. It has, however, shared in the
general destruction; and, notwithstanding its proud title of the capital of
Palestine, says Volney, who includes Jerusalem, in the province of Syria, it is
now a town of small account.

The manufacture of cottons, is the principal support of the inhabitants, who
keep about five hundred looms employed. There are also two or three soap
manufactories. The article of ashes, was formerly a considerable commerce. The
Bedouins, who procured these ashes, by simply burning the plants of the desert,
sold them at a reasonable price; but since the Aga has monopolized this
commodity, the Arabs, compelled to part with it at his price, are no longer
anxious to collect it; and the inhabitants, constrained to purchase at his
pleasure, neglect making soap.

A branch of commerce, still more advantageous to the people of Gaza, is
furnishing provisions for the caravans, which pass and re-pass between Syria
and Egypt. They also purchase the plunder from the Bedouins, an article which
would be of prodigious wealth to them, were these accidents more frequent. It
is impossible to ascertain the profits they made by the plunder of the great
caravan in 1757. Two thirds of upwards of twenty thousand camel loads, of which
the caravan of pilgrims was composed, were brought to Gaza. The ignorant and
famished Bedouins, who knew no value in the finest stuffs, but as they served
to cover them, sold the fine Cachmire shawls, callicoes, muslins, Persian
silks, coffee, and gums, for a few piastres. We may judge, from the following
story, of the ignorance and simplicity of these inhabitants of the deserts. A
Bedouin of Anaza, having found among the booty, several bags of fine pearls,
took them for rice, and had them boiled to eat them; but seeing that they did
not soften, was on the point of throwing them away, when an inhabitant of Gaza
gave him in exchange for them, a red bonnet of Faz. A similar accident happened
at the time of the pillage of the caravan in 1779; and in 1784, the caravan of
Barbary, consisting of upwards of three thousand camels, was likewise pillaged,
and the quantity of coffee dispersed by the Bedouins throughout Palestine was
so great, as to cause the price of that article to fall suddenly to one half of
what it was before; and it would have fallen still more, had not the governor
prohibited the sale of it, in order to compel the Bedouins to deliver it all
into his hands. A monopoly of this sort, in the affair of 1779, produced him
more than eighty thousand piastres.

In the deserts of this province, are the two mountains Sinai and Horeb, so
frequently mentioned in the scriptures. At the foot of the former, is a convent
of Monks. The Greeks have so much faith in the relics of St. Catharine, which
they say is deposited there, that they doubt of their salvation, if they have
not visited them at least once in their lives. They repair thither even as far
as from the Morea, and Constantinople. The rendezvous is at Cairo, where the
Monks of Mount Sinai have correspondents, who treat with the Arabs for a
convoy. The ordinary price is six pounds two shillings and sixpence each
passenger, exclusive of provisions. On their arrival at the convent, the Greeks
perform their devotions, visit the church, kiss the relics and images, mount on
their knees more than one hundred steps of the hill of Moses; and conclude by
making an offering, the value of which is not fixed, but rarely amounts to
fifty pataques.

Except at these visitations, which take place once a year, this convent is the
most desert and savage abode in nature. The adjacent country is nothing but a
pile of rugged and naked rocks. Mount Sinai, at the foot of which it is seated,
is a peak of granite, which seems to overwhelm it. The house is a sort of
square prison, whose losty walls have only a window, which, though very high,
serves likewise by way of door; for to enter this convent, the traveller must
go into a basket, which the Monks leave suspended at the window, and
occasionally hoist up with ropes. This precaution arises from their fear of the
Arabs, who might force the convent, if the usual entrance was by a door: they
never open the only one there is, except on a visit from the bishop; at all
other times it is kept closely shut. This visitation should take place every
two or three years; but as it necessarily occasions a considerable contribution
from the Arabs, the Monks evade it. They do not, however, so easily escape the
daily distribution of a certain quantity of provisions; and the quarrels which
arise on this subject, frequently draw on them a shower of stones, and even
musket shot from the discontented Bedouins. They never stir into the country;
they have by dint of labor, made a garden on the rocks, with earth they have
brought thither, which serves them to walk in. They cultivate excellent fruit
there, such as grapes, figs, and especially pears, of which they make presents;
and which are highly esteemed at Cairo, no such fruit being there to be met
with. Their domestic life is the same with that of the Greeks and Maronites of
Lebanon; that is, it is entirely devoted to useful works, or to religious
duties. But the Monks of Lebanon enjoy the inestimable advantage of liberty and
security, which is not possessed by those of Sinai. In other respects, this
confined and melancholy state of existence is, that of all the Monks in the
country of the Turks. Every where their convents are prisons, with no other
light than a window, by which they receive their victuals; and every where are
they built in dismal places, destitute of whatever can give pleasure, and where
nothing is to be found but rocks and stones, without either grass or moss, and
yet they are full of Monks. There are fifty at Mount Sinai, five and twenty at
Mar Saba, and upwards of three hundred in the two deserts of Egypt. I, one day,
says Volney, enquired the reason of this, in a conversation with one of the
superiors, and asked him, "What could induce men to engage in a mode of life so
truly miserable?" "What," says he, "are not you a Christian?" Is not this the
path which leads to heaven? -- "But," replied I, "we may also receive salvation
without renouncing the world; (and between ourselves, father), I do not
perceive that the Monks, though they are pious, possess that ancient fervor,
which, throughout life, kept its eyes fixed on the hour of death!" "It is
true," said he, "we have no longer the austerity of the ancient Anchorites;
and, in reality, this is one reason why our convents are so full. You, who come
from a country where men live in security and abundance, may consider our life
as an insupportable denial, and our retreat from the world as a sacrifice. But
in the situation of this country, perhaps, the case is different. What can we
do? Turn merchants! We should then be overwhelmed with the cares of business
and our families; and after having worked hard for thirty years, comes the aga,
the pacha, or the cadi; we are brought to trial without the shadow of a crime;
witnesses are suborned to accuse us; we are bastinadoed, plundered, and turned
into the world as naked as the first day we entered it. As for the peasant, his
case is still worse; the aga oppresses him, the soldier pillages him, and the
Arabs rob him. Shall we become soldiers? The profession is laborious and
dangerous, and how it will end is not very certain. It may seem hard, perhaps,
to shut ourselves up in a convent; but, at least, we live there in peace; and,
though in a state of habitual abstinence and poverty, we perhaps possess and
enjoy more than we should, if we had continued in the world. Observe the
situation of the peasants, and look at ours. We possess every thing they have,
and even what they have not; we are better clad, and better fed; we drink wine
and coffee: and who are our Monks but the children of peasants?

I own I was astonished, says Volney, at so much frankness and just reasoning;
but I felt more forcibly than ever, that the human heart is moved by the same
springs in every situation. The desire of happiness is every where the motive,
whether sought in hope, or in actual enjoyment; and it always expects to gain
most in the part which it adopts; The discourse of this Monk, may suggest how
far the spirit of retirement is connected with the state of any government;
from what causes it originates, is predominant, and declines.

JOPPA and a TURKISH BOAT.


Yafa, the ancient Joppa, situated in this province where the pilgrims
disembark. As a seaport and a place of strength, Yafa is nothing; but it is
capable of becoming one of the most important on the coast, on account of two
springs of fresh water which are within its walls, on the sea shore. It is held
by another aga, who pays for it one hundred and twenty purses to the Sultana.
For this he receives the whole miri, and poll-tax of the town, with some
adjacent villages; but the chief part of his revenue arises from the
custom-house, as he receives all the duties on imports and exports. These are
pretty considerable, as it is at Yafa that the rice of Damietta is landed for
Jerusalem, and the merchandise of a small French factory at Ramla. It is the
port likewise, for the pilgrims of the Morea and Constantinople; each of whom
pay him fourteen crowns on his landing, and the same sum when he returns. The
convent in this city, is said to be built on the spot, where stood the house of
Simon the tanner, mentioned in the Acts of the Apostles. It was there where St.
Peter lodged, when he raised Tabitha from the dead; and where he saw a vessel
let down from heaven, that was full of unclean beasts. It was here likewise,
that Jonah took shipping to fly from the presence of God, when he commanded him
to preach repentance to the Ninevites. This place has also been rendered famous
in the fables of antiquity; it being handed down to us, that here Andromeda was
fastened to a rock, in order to be devoured by the sea monsters, from which she
was delivered by Perseus, who had fallen in love with her.

Three leagues to the East of Yafa, is the village of Loudd, where the other
aga resides. A place lately ravaged by fire and sword, says Volney, would have
precisely the appearance of this village. From the huts of the inhabitants, to
the palace of the aga, is one continued heap of rubbish and ruins. The poor
Christians who dwell here, show with great veneration the ruins of the church
of St. Peter, and make strangers sit on a column; which, as they say, that
Saint once rested on. They point out the place where he preached, where he
prayed, etc. The whole country is full of such traditions. It is impossible to
stir a step without being shown the traces of some apostle, some martyr, or
some virgin; but what credit can be due to these traditions?

The manners and customs of the inhabitants of Palestine, differ little from
those of Syria. The women in the villages, are not so strict in covering
themselves with a veil when they go abroad, as they are in other parts of Asia.
That simplicity of life which prevailed among the patriarchs, is a good deal
more preserved amongst the country people in this province, than in Syria.

Whilst I was in one of the villages of this province, says Mariti, a young
Arab woman, at whose wedding I had been present a day or two before, came to
the well to draw water. She was accompanied by some other women, who were
singing a song allusive to her marriage; and who, every now and then, sent
forth certain tremulous sounds, which had no meaning, but were only expressions
of joy.

At a distance, appeared several men, who every now and then discharged muskets
and pistols, in compliment to the new married husband, who was on horseback;
and who, instead of following his wife, proceeded with his company to a
different quarter.

His wife, who was a beautiful young woman, was dressed in a robe with very
long sleeves, which hung down to the ground; and which, as well as the rest of
the robe, were striped with various lively colors. This was the distinguishing
mark of a new married person. When she arrived at the well, she filled her
vessel, after which the rest of the women did the same. This custom, of women
going to draw water, for the use of their families, is often mentioned in the
scriptures. We are told in Genesis, that when the servant of Abraham was going
to Mesopotamia, to seek a wife for Isaac, he made his camels kneel down,
without the city of Nahor, by a well, at the time of the evening, when the
women went out to draw water.

The vessels which the women of Palestine use for drawing water, are a kind of
narrow mouthed pitchers, with two handles, capable of containing between five
and six quarts.

When the women go to a stream with these vessels, they fill them by dipping
them into it; but, if they go to a well, which may happen to be deep, they
carry with them a leathern bag, folded up under their arm, with which they draw
up the water.

When they have filled their pitchers, they put them upon their head, placing a
handkerchief, folded up in the form of a knot, below them; and, so dexterous
are they in carrying these vessels, that some of them to show their skill, hold
them in an inclined position, and at the same time employ themselves in
spinning, or lead their children along with them by the hand.

CHAP. XIII. A Review of the Present State of Syria and Egypt, with occasional
Remarks on the Turkish Empire in general.
With respect to the Government.
THE Turkish government in Syria, says Savary, is pure military despotism. That
is, the bulk of the inhabitants are subject to the caprices of a faction of
armed men, who dispose of every thing according to their interest, or fancy. To
form a proper conception of the spirit with which this faction governs, we must
consider the title by which the Turks claim possession of the country.

When the Ottomans, under Sultan Selim, took Syria from the Mamlukes, they
considered it as a possession acquired by the law of arms and war. Now,
according to this law, among barbarous nations, the vanquished is wholly at the
discretion of the victor, and becomes his slave; his life and property belong
to his conqueror, who may dispose of every thing; and what he leaves his
captive, he leaves him as a favor.

Such was the law among the Greeks and Romans, and among all those societies of
robbers, whom we have honored with the name of conquerors. Such, at all times,
was that of the Tartars, from whom the Turks derive their origin. In the plains
of Tartary, the hordes divided by interest, were no other than bands of
robbers, armed for attack and defense; and, to seize as fair booty whatever
they might covet. Now in an army, laws are but the orders of the chief; these
orders are absolute, and suffer no delay; they must proceed from one will, and
from a single head: hence, a supreme authority in him who commands, and a
passive submission in him who obeys. But, in the transmission of these orders,
as the instrument in his turn becomes an agent; the consequence of this is,
that there is a spirit at once imperious and servile, which is precisely that
of the Turkish conquerors, Proud after victory, the meanest of the Ottomans
treated the most illustrious of the vanquished, with the lofty superiority of a
master; and this spirit diffusing itself through every rank, we may judge of
the distance, from whence the supreme chief looks down upon the crowd of slaves
beneath him. These sentiments cannot be better pourtrayed, than in the
formulary of the titles assumed in their public acts; "I, says the Sultan, in
their treaties, who am, by the infinite grace of the great and omnipotent
Creator, emperor of emperors; a refuge for sovereigns, distributor of crowns to
the kings of the earth, servant of the two thrice-sacred cities Mecca and
Medina, governor of the holy city of Jerusalem, master of Europe, Asia, and
Africa; lord of the two seas, of Damascus, the odor of Paradise; of Bagdad,
the seat of the califs; and of a multitude of countries, islands, straits,
nations, generations, and of so many victorious armies, which repose beneath
the shade of our Sublime Port; I, in short, the shadow of God on earth, etc."

From such exalted grandeur, how must the Sultan look down on the rest of
mankind? In what light must he view that earth he possesses, and distributes as
a domain, of which he is the sovereign master? What must the people he has
subdued appear, but slaves devoted to his service? This empire may be compared
to a plantation in one of our sugar islands; where a multitude of slaves
labor, to supply the luxury of one great proprietor, under the inspection of a
few servants, who take good care of themselves. There is no difference, except
that the dominions of the Sultan being too vast for a single administration, he
is obliged to divide it into smaller plantations, and separate governments,
administered after the same manner as the united empire. Such are the provinces
under the government of the pachas. These provinces again being too extensive,
the pachas have had recourse to further subdivisions; and hence, that series of
subalterns, which step by step descends to the lowest employments. Thus power,
being absolute and arbitrary, in the monarch, is transmitted absolute and
arbitrary to all his sub-delegates. It is still the Sutan who dictates, and
commands, under the varied names of Pacha, Moisallam, Kaiem-Ma^am, and Aga; nor
is there one in this descending scale, even to the Delibashe, who does not
represent, him. It is curious to hear, with what insolence the lowest of these
soldiers, giving his orders in a village, pronounces: It is the will of the
Sultan, it is the Sultan's pleasure.

In each government, the pacha being the image of the sultan, is like him, an
absolute despot, The main object of so much authority is to collect the
tribute. This duty fulfilled, says Savary, no other is required of him; the
means, are at his discretion; and such is the nature of his situation, that he
cannot be delicate in his choice of them; for the place he holds, depends on
the favor of the Visir, or some other great officer; and this can be only
obtained and secured, by bidding higher than his competitors. He must,
therefore, raise money to pay the tribute, and indemnify himself for all he has
paid, support his dignity, and make provision in case of accident. The
established mode of collecting the miri (land tax) and the customs, is to
appoint one or more principal farmers, for the current year; who, in order to
facilitate the collection, divide it into lesser farms, which are again
subdivided, even to the smallest villages. The pacha lets these employments to
the best bidder. The farmers, who, on their side, have no object in taking them
but gain, strain every nerve to augment their receipt. Hence, those extortions
to which they are the more easily inclined, as they are sure of being supported
by authority. The consequence is, that the people being denied the fruit of
their labor, restrain their industry to the supply of their necessary wants.
Thus, the arbitrary power of the sultan, transmitted to the pacha and his
sub-delegates, becomes the main spring of a tyranny, which circulates through
every class; whilst its effects, by a reciprocal re-action, are every where
fatal to agriculture, arts, commerce, population; in short, to every thing that
constitutes the power of the state; or, which is the same thing, the power of
the Sultan himself.

This arbitrary power of the pacha, occasions abuses likewise in the army.
Perpetually urged by the want of money, he retrenches as far as possible, the
usual military establishments. He diminishes the number of his troops; lessens
their pay, winks at their disorders, and discipline no longer exists.

The emirs and pachas, all imitate the Sultan; all regard the country they
govern, as their private property, and their subjects as their domestics; while
they, in their turn, see in their superiors only tyrannical masters. It is a
truth worthy of remark, that the greater part of the African and Asiatic
States, especially since the days of Mahomet, have been governed on these
principles; and that no part of the world has exhibited so many commotions and
revolutions. May it not, therefore, be concluded, that arbitrary power is no
less fatal to the military strength, than the finance of a nation.

The pacha, as being the image of the Sultan, is the head of all the police. He
possesses the most absolute power of life and death; and this he exercises
without any formality, or giving time for an appeal. When he meets with a
criminal, he orders him to be seized; and the executioner, by whom he is
attended, strangles him, or strikes off his head upon the spot; nay, sometimes
the pacha himself does not disdain this office. The pachas frequently stroll
about disguised, and woe to the man whom they surprise in a fault. As they
cannot be present every where, they commit this duty to a deputy, called the
Wali, who patroles night and day; keeps a watchful eye on the seditious;
apprehends robbers; and, like the pacha, judges and condemns without appeal.
This officer has a multitude of spies, who are most of them thieves; and by
their means, he knows every thing that passes.

He likewise presides over the police of the markets; there he inspects their
weights and measures; and, on this head, his punishment is severe. For any, the
smallest deficiency in the weight of bread, meat, or confectionary, he will
inflict five hundred strokes of the bastinado, and sometimes cause the offender
to be put to death, Examples of such punishment are not unfrequent in the great
cities, yet there is no country where false weights are more common; all the
dealer has to do, is to keep a sharp look out for the passing of the wali. When
they appear, the deficient weights are secreted. The dealers also bargain with
the servants who precede him; and, for a certain sum, can insure impunity.

The office of the wali, by no means extends to those objects of utility, which
are under the regulation of the police in European cities. No attention is paid
either to cleanliness, or salubrity. The streets are never paved, swept, or
watered, either in Syria, or Egypt. They are narrow and winding, and, in
general, encumbered with rubbish. Travelers are above all, shocked with the
sight of a multitude of hideous dogs, which have no owner. They form a sort of
independent body, subsisting on public arms. They are quartered in districts;
and should one of them happen to pass his limits, a combat ensues, which is
extremely troublesome to passengers. The Turks do not kill these dogs, though
they avoid touching them as unclean. They pretend, they ensure the safety of
the cities by night; but this is more owing to the wali and the gates, with
which every street is secured.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Administration of Justice.
THE administration of justice, in civil suits, is the only species of
authority, which the sultans have withheld from the pachas. All the magistrates
of the empire, depend on one principal chief, who resides at Constantinople.
This grand cadi names the judges of the capital cities, such as Aleppo,
Damascus, Jerusalem, etc. These judges again name others within their
jurisdiction. But all these employments, RUINS of BALBECK.
like those of the government, are fold to the best bidder, and farmed from
year to year.

The tribunal whence these cadi's issue their decisions, is called the Mahkama,
or place of judgment. In an empty mean apartment, the cadi is seated on a mat,
or wretched carpet. On each side are his clerks and some domestics. The door is
open to every one; the parties appear; and there, without interpreters,
advocates, or attorneys, each pleads his own cause. Squatted on the ground,
they state the facts, discuss, reply, contest, and argue again in their turns.
Sometimes the debates are violent; but the cries of the clerks, and the staff
of the cadi, soon restore order and silence. Gravely smoking his pipe, and
twisting the end of his beard, this judge listens, interrogates, and concludes
by pronouncing a sentence, which, at most, allows but two months delay. The
parties are seldom satisfied; they retire, however, with respect, and pay a
fee, estimated at one-tenth of the property litigated, without murmuring at the
decision, as it is invariably dictated by the infallible Alcoran.

It must be owned, this simplicity of justice, which does not consume the
property in litigation, or compel the absence of the pleader from his place of
residence, are two very great advantages; but, on the other hand, they are
counter-balanced by abuses. Daily experience, says Volney, proves there is no
country where justice is more corrupt than in Egypt and Syria, and no doubt in
all the rest of the empire. The parties may bargain for their cause with the
cadi, as they would for any common commodity. Corruption is habitual and
general; and how should it be otherwise, where integrity may be ruinous, and
injustice lucrative; and where each cadi, deciding without appeal, fears
neither a reversion of his sentence, nor punishment for his partiality.

Such is the state of jurisprudence, throughout the Turkish empire. There
exists no public and acknowledged code, where individuals may instruct
themselves in their respective rights; the judgments being, in general, founded
on unwritten customs, or the frequently contradictory decisions of the doctors.

CHAP. XV. Of the Influence of Religion.
IN vain do the Mahometans boast, that the koran contains the seeds, and even
the perfection, of all political and legislative knowledge. Whoever reads this
revered book, must be obliged to confess, that it contains nothing which
constitutes a legislative code. The only laws we find in it, may be reduced to
four or five ordinances, relative to polygamy, divorces, slavery, and the order
of succession; and even these are so contradictory, that they are not to be
reconciled. The rest is merely a chaos of unmeaning phrases, an emphatical
declaration on the attributes of God; or a collection of puerile tales, and
ridiculous fables, so flat and fastidious, that no man can read it to the end.
Mahomet did not wish to enlighten men, but to rule over them; he sought not
disciples, but subjects; and obedience, not reasoning, is required from them.
All the legislators of antiquity, have, in vain, exhausted their genius, to
explain the relations of man in society; Mahomet, more able, or more profound
than they, resolves all into a few phrases. It is certain, that of all the men
who have ever attempted to give laws to nations, none was ever so ignorant as
Mahomet; nor was a composition produced to the world, so truly wretched as his
book. Of this, the transactions of the last twelve hundred years in Asia, are a
proof; the convulsions of the governments, and the ignorance of the people, in
this quarter of the globe, having originated more or less in the koran, and its
morality.

The koran, however, is not without its sublimity. I think the ideas conveyed
by Mahomet's vision, such as deserve the notice of the world. This vision,
seems to be a copy of St. Paul's trance; wherein he was, in a few hours, taken
up into the third heaven, and shown all the glories of the godhead. So boasted
the impostor Mahomet. He pretended, that the angel Gabriel took him out of his
bed one night, and carried him up in a cloud to the empyreum, and showed him
the seventeen heavens; and to increase the supposed miracle, he declared, that
in his flight from his room, a small vessel of water was overthrown, and that
the angel had returned him to his bed before all the water had run out. This
story, I say, serves to give us some idea of Omnipotence, either in lengthening
out a few moments of time to that age, required for such a passage, (...)

from earth to heaven; or giving such rapidity to his flight, that the time of
his going and returning, was but a few moments. "A thousand years," says the
Psalmist, "are in thy sight, O God, but as one day? -- Seeing it is past as a
watch in the night!"

The people of Syria, we have said, are, in general, Mahometans or Christians.
This difference of worship, is productive of the most disagreeable effects in
their civil state. Faithful to the spirit of the koran, the Turks treat the
Christians with a severity, which displays itself in various forms. A Christian
cannot strike a Mohammedan, without risk of his life; but, if a Mohammedan kills
a Christian, he escapes for a stipulated price. Christians must not mount on
horseback in the towns; they are prohibited the use of yellow slippers, white
shawls, and every sort of green color. Red for the feet, and blue for their
dress, are the colors assigned them. When they travel, they are perpetually
stopped at different places, to pay tolls, from which the Mussulmen are exempt:
in judicial proceedings, the oath of two Christians is only reckoned for one;
and such is the partiality of the cadi's, that they alone are subject to the
capitation; the ticket of which bears these memorable words; Djazz elras, i. e.
(redemption) from cutting off the head; a dear proof of the title by which they
are governed.

These distinctions, so well calculated to ferment hatred and dissensions, are
disseminated among the people. The meanest Mohammedan will neither accept, from
a Christian, nor return the salute of, "Health to you;" the usual salutation is
only Good morning, or Good evening, and sometimes with Impious infidel, or dog.
The Mahometans even affect to mortify them, by practicing before them the
ceremonies of their worship. At noon, at three o'clock, and at sunset, as soon
as the criers, from the tops of the minarets announce the time of prayer, they
appear at the doors of their houses; where, after making their ablution, they
gravely spread a mat or carpet, and turning themselves toward Mecca, cross
their arms upon their breasts, stretch them toward their knees, and begin nine
prostrations, down to the ground, reciting the preface to the koran. In
conversation, they frequently make a breach, by their profession of faith,
"There is but one God, and Mahomet is his prophet." They talk precipitately of
their religion, and consider themselves as the only faithful of God. To confute
them, the Christians in their turn, affect great devotion; and hence, that
ostentation of piety, which forms one of the principal characteristics of the
Orientals.

CHAP. XVI. State of the Peasants, and of Agriculture.
IN Syria, and even throughout the Turkish empire, the peasants, like the other
inhabitants, are deemed slaves of the Sultan; but this term, only conveys the
meaning of our word, subjects. Though master of their lives and properties, the
Sultan does not sell them, nor does he limit them to a certain spot. If he
bestows an appanage on some grandee, it is not said, as in Russia and Poland,
that he gives him five hundred, or a thousand peasants; in a word, the
peasants, though oppressed by the tyranny of the government, are not degraded
by the servitude of foedality.

When Sultan Selim conquered Syria, in order to render the collection of the
revenue more easy, he established a single territorial tribute, called the
miri. This tribute, at the time it was fixed, was very trifling, it amounted
to, scarce nothing. Sultan Selim, notwithstanding the ferocity of his
character, seems to have understood the importance of favoring the husbandman.
That this tax might be regularly collected, he gave orders to prepare a
register, in which the contingent of each village should be set down. In short,
this miri was fixed at an invariable rate, never to be augmented nor
diminished. Not daring to violate the law established by the Sultan, respecting
the immutability of the impost, the pachas have introduced a multitude of
charges, which produces all the effects of an augmentation.

Thus, having the greatest part of the lands at their disposal, they clog their
concessions with burdensome conditions, by exacting the half, and sometimes
two-thirds of the crop; or by monopolizing the feed of the cattle, which the
cultivators are under the necessity of purchasing from them at their own price.
The harvest over, they cavil about losses, and pretended robberies; and, as
they have the power in their hands, they carry off what they think proper. If
the season fails, they still exact the same sum; and, to pay themselves, expose
every thing the poor peasant has to sale. Happily, his person, at least,
remains free; for the Turks are ignorant of the refinement of imprisoning, for
debt, the man who has no longer any property.

To these constant oppressions are added a thousand accidental extortions.
Sometimes the whole village is laid under contribution, for some real or
imaginary offense; and sometimes a service of a new kind is introduced. A
present is exacted on the accession of each governor; a contribution of grass
is demanded for his horses, and barley and straw for his cavaliers; they must
provide likewise, for all the soldiers, who pass or carry orders; and the
governors take care to multiply these commissions, which are a saving to them,
but inevitable ruin to the peasants. The villages tremble at every Lawend who
appears; he is a real robber, under the name of a soldier; he enters as a
conqueror, and commands like a monster: dogs, rabble; says he, bring me bread,
coffee, tobacco; I must have; I must have meat. If he casts his eyes on any
poultry, he kills them; and when he takes his departure, adding insult to
tyranny, he demands what is called, the hire of his grinders. In vain do the
peasants exclaim against this injustice; the sabre imposes silence. What is the
consequence of all these depredations? The poorer class of inhabitants ruined,
become a burden to the village, or fly into the cities; but the miri is
unalterable, and the sum to be levied, must be found somewhere; consequently,
their portion falls on the remaining inhabitants, whose burden, though at
first light, now becomes insupportable.

The same method is adopted, with respect to the capitation of the Christians.
Its amount having been estimated at the time they were first numbered, it must
always produce the same, though those who pay should be less numerous. Hence,
it happens, that this capitation is sometimes carried from three, five, and
eleven piastres, at which it was first rated, to five and thirty, and forty;
which absolutely impoverishes those on whom it is raised, and obliges them to
leave the country. These burdens are, more especially, oppressive in those
countries, bestowed as an appanage; and, likewise, in those exposed to the
ravages of the Arabs.

In the former, the Titulary, greedy to augment his revenue, delegates full
power to his lessee, to augment the taxes, who is well seconded by the avidity
of his subalterns. These men, refining on the arts of wringing money from the
people, have contrived to impose duties on every commodity brought to market on
entries, on the conveyance of goods, and even on the burden of an ass. With
respect to the Bedouins, if they are at war, they pillage as enemies; if at
peace, they devour every thing as guests: hence, the proverb, Avoid the
Bedouin, whether friend or enemy. When the peasants are in want of money to
purchase grain, cattle, etc. they can find none, but by mortgaging the whole,
or part of their future crop, at a most exorbitant rate of interest, amounting
sometimes to thirty and forty per cent.

From all these causes, the art of cultivation is in the most deplorable state;
the husbandman is destitute of instruments, or has bad ones; his plough is
frequently no more than the branch of a tree, cut below a bifurcation, and used
without wheels. The ground is tilled by asses and cows, rarely by oxen, which
would bespeak too much riches; beef is, therefore, very scarce in Syria and
Egypt, besides being lean and bad, like all the meat of hot countries. In the
districts exposed to the Arabs, as in Palestine, the countryman must sow with
his musket in his hand. Scarcely does the corn turn yellow, before it is reaped
and concealed in subterraneous caverns. As little as possible is kept for feed,
because they sow no more than is barely necessary for subsistence; in short,
their whole industry is confined to a supply of their immediate wants; and, to
procure a little bread, a few onions, a wretched blue shirt, and a bit of
woollen, much labor is not necessary.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Artisans, Traders, and Commerce.
THAT class of men, which give value to raw materials, by manufacturing them,
is not so ill treated in Syria, as the class which produces them; the reason of
which is, that the property of the artisans, and traders is more concealed from
the scrutinizing eye of government, than that of the peasants. This is one of
the principal causes of the populousness of the towns in Syria, and all over
Turkey. While, in other countries, the cities are, in some measure, the
overflow of the country; here they are the effect of its desertion. The
peasants expelled from their villages, fly into them for refuge, and find there
tranquillity, and even a degree of ease and plenty.

The pachas are particularly attentive to this last article, as on it depends
their personal safety. They, therefore, take care to keep provisions cheap, in
all the considerable towns, especially in that where they reside. In case of a
failure in the harvest, they prohibit the exportation of grain, and oblige
every person to sell it at a fixed price, under pain of death.

Commerce, in Syria, is still in that state of infancy, which characterises
barbarous ages, and uncivilized countries. Along the whole coast, there is not
a harbor capable of admitting a vessel of four hundred tons, nor are the roads
secured by forts. In the interior parts of the country, there are neither great
roads nor canals, nor even bridges over the greatest part of the rivers and
torrents, however necessary they may be in winter. Between town and town, there
are neither posts nor public conveyance. The only convenience of this kind, is
the Tartar courier, who comes from Constantinople to Damascus, by way of
Aleppo. This courier has no relays but in the large towns, which are at great
distances from each other; but, in case of need, he may dismount the first
horseman he meets. He leads with him, according to the custom of the Tartars, a
second horse in hand, and has frequently a companion, for fear of accidents.
The communication between one city and another, is kept up by carriers, who
have no fixed time of departure. This arises from the absolute necessity of
forming troops, or caravans, as no one travels alone, from the insecurity of
the roads.

It is remarkable, that there are no wagons or carts to be seen in Syria.
Every thing is carried on the backs of mules, asses, or camels; all which
animals are excellent here. The two former are employed in the mountains; and
nothing can equal their address, in climbing and sliding over the slopes of the
craggy rocks. The camel is more used in the plains, because he consumes less,
and carries more. His usual burden, is about seven hundred and fifty pounds.
His food is every thing his master chooses to give him; straw, brambles, pounded
dates, beans, barley, etc. With a single pound of food, and as much water in a
day, he will travel for weeks together. In the whole way from Cairo to Suez,
which is a journey of forty, or forty-six hours, they neither eat nor drink;
but these fastings repeated, exhaust them as well as other animals. Their
breath then becomes foetid. Their ordinary pace is very slow, not exceeding two
miles, or two miles and a quarter, an hour. It is needless to press them, they
will go no quicker; but, by allowing them rest, they will travel fifteen or
eighteen hours in a day.

There are no inns any where; but, as in other parts of Turkey, and likewise in
Spain, the cities, and commonly the villages, have their khan, which serves as
an asylum for travelers. These houses of reception, are always built without
the precincts of the towns. The lodgings in them are cells, where nothing is to
be found but bare walls, dust, and sometimes scorpions. A mat, and the key of
the chamber, is all that the keeper of the khan furnishes. The traveller must,
therefore, carry with him his bed, his kitchen utensils, and even his
provisions. The baggage of a man, who wishes to be completely provided,
consists in a carpet, a mattrass, a blanket, two saucepans, with lids,
contained within each other; two dishes, two plates, and a coffee-pot; a small
wooden box for salt and pepper; six coffee cups, without handles, in a leathern
box; a round leathern table, which he suspends from the saddle of his horse;
small leathern pouches, or bags for oil; melted butter, water, and, if a
Christian, brandy; a pipe, a tinder-box, a cup of cocoa-nut, some rice, dried
raisins, dates, Cyprus cheese; and, above all, coffee berries, with a roaster,
and wooden mortar to pound them.

Our European merchants, not being contented with such simple accommodations,
their journeys are very expensive and less frequent; but, the richest natives,
make no difficulty of passing their lives traveling in this manner, between
Bagdad, Bassora, Cairo, and Constantinople. Traveling is their education, and
their science. To say of any man he is a merchant, is to pronounce him a
traveller. They find in it, the advantage of purchasing their goods at the
first hand, procuring them at a cheaper rate, ensuring their safety, by
escorting them themselves; preventing many accidents, and obtaining some
abatement of the numerous tolls. They learn, besides, to understand weights and
measures; the extreme diversity of which, renders theirs a very complicated
profession. Each town has its peculiar weight, which, under the same
denomination, differs from that of another.

Coin is more fixed; a person may travel over the whole empire, from Choczim,
on the borders of Russia, to Syene, adjoining to Nubia, without experiencing
any change in its denomination or value. The most simple of their coins is the
Para; called also, a Medin, a Fadda, a Kata, or a Mesria. It is the size of an
English silver threepence; and is worth something more than an halfpenny.
After the para, follow successively, pieces of five, ten, and twenty paras;
then the Zolate, or Islote, worth thirty paras. The piastre of the Lion, which
is the coin most generally used in commerce, is worth about forty paras, or two
shillings and a penny, English. Lastly, there is the piastre of the dog, which
is sixty paras.

All these coins are silver, but with such a mixture of alloy, that the piastre
of the dog is as large as an English crown, though intrinsically worth only
three shillings and sixpence. They bear no image, because of the prohibition of
the prophet, but only the cipher of the Sultan on one side, and on the other
these words: Sultan of the two continents, Lord of the two seas, the Sultan,
son of the Sultan -- struck at Stamboul (Constantiple) or at Maor, Cairo; the
only two cities in the Turkish empire, where there is a mint.

The gold coins are the sequin, called Dahab, or picca of gold, and sometimes
Zahr-Mahaboub, or well-beloved flower. It is worth three piastres, or forty
paras each. There is likewise a sequin, but very rare to be met with, called
Fondoucli, worth one hundred and seventy paras. Besides these coins, which are
those of the whole Turkish empire, some of the European specie are very
current, such as the German dollars, and Venetian sequins. The Venetian sequins
are in great request, from the fineness of their standard, and their being worn
as trinkets by the women. Some of them wear two or three hundred, hung near the
forehead, at the edge of the head-dress.

The effect of this luxury, is the withdrawing considerable sums from
circulation, which remain dead; besides, when any of these pieces return into
common use, it becomes necessary to weigh them. The practice of weighing money,
is general in Syria, in Egypt, and all over Turkey. No piece, however effaced,
is refused there; the merchant draws out his scales and weights, as in the days
of Abraham, when he went to purchase his sepulcher.

Almost the whole commerce of Syria, is in the hands of the Franks, Greeks, and
Armenians: formerly it was engrossed by the Jews. The Mahometans have little to
do with it; not that they are prevented by the prejudices of their religion, or
by indolence, as some writers have asserted, but by obstacles thrown in their
way by their own government. The Port, instead of giving a decided preference
to Turkish subjects, finds it more lucrative to sell their rights and industry
to foreigners. Some European states have, by treaties, obtained a diminution of
custom-house duties, to three per cent. while the merchandise of the subjects
of the Sultan, pays strictly ten, or when favored, seven per cent. Besides
this, when the duties are once paid in any port, the Frank is not liable to pay
a second time in another. But the case is different with the Turkish subject.
The Franks too, having found it convenient to employ Latin Christians, as
agents, have procured them a participation of their privileges, and they are no
longer subject to the power of the pachas, or amenable to Turkish justice. They
cannot be plundered, and whoever has a commercial process with them, must plead
before the European consul. With such disadvantages, it is not surprising the
Mahometans should relinquish commerce to their rivals. These agents of the
Franks, are known in the Levant, under the name of Baratary Drogmans; i. e.
privileged interpreters. The Barat, or privilege, is a patent of which the
Sultan makes a present to the ambassadors residing at the Port. Formerly,
these ambassadors made presents of them to particular persons in each factory;
but, within the last twenty years, they have been made to understand it is more
lucrative to sell them. The present price of them, is about two hundred and
fifty pounds. Each ambassador has fifty given him, which are renewed on the
death of the possessor, and form a very pretty perquisite.

France has the greatest trade to Syria, of any European nation. The factories,
or as they are called, echelles, of the French, are seven in number. Aleppo,
Scandaroon, Satakia, Tripoli, Said, Acre, and Ramla. The sum of their imposts,
amounts to about 250,000l. All this commerce passes through the single channel
of Marseilles; and even the natives of Turkey are prohibited from carrying on
their commerce, except through the medium of these factors. Considered
relatively to the Turkish empire, it may be affirmed, this commerce is more
detrimental than advantageous. For the articles exported, being all raw
materials, the empire deprives itself of the advantages to be derived from the
labor of its subjects. On the other hand, the commodities imported, being
articles of pure luxury, only serve to increase the dissipation of the rich;
whilst, perhaps, they aggravate the wretched condition of the people, and the
class of cultivators.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the Arts, Sciences, and Ignorance of the People.
THE arts, and trades in Syria, afford matter for much consideration. In the
first place, the religion of Mahomet having prohibited all kinds of images and
figures, there, of course, exists neither painting, sculpture, or engraving,
nor any of the numerous professions dependent on them. Secondly, a multitude of
our trades are rendered unnecessary, from the small quantity of furniture used
by the Orientals. The whole inventory of a wealthy family, consists in a carpet
for the feet, in mats, cushions, matrasses, some small cotton cloths, copper
and wooden platters for the table, a few stewing pans, a mortar, a portable
mill, a little porcelain, and some plates of copper, tinned. All our apparatus
of tapestry, and paper hangings, bedsteads, chairs, stools, glasses, desks,
bureaus, closets; our beaufets, with their plate, and table services; all our
cabinet and upholstery work, are luxuries totally unknown to them; so that
nothing is so simple as a Turkish removal. Their clothing is not more
complicated, though more expensive. They are strangers to the hats, perukes,
hair-dressing, buttons, buckles, stocks, laced ruffles, and all that
superfluity with which we are surrounded. Cotton or silk shirts, which even the
pachas do not count by dozens, and which have neither ruffles nor waistbands,
nor plaited collars; an enormous pair of breeches, which serve also by way of
stockings; a handkerchief on the head, another round the waist, with three
large folds of cloth, compose the whole wardrobe of the Orientals. Their only
articles of luxury are goldsmith's work, and which is confined to women's
trinkets, saucers for coffee, wrought like lace, the ornaments of their
harness, their pipes, which are very beautiful; and the silk stuffs of Aleppo
and Damascus. In passing through the streets of the towns, we meet with nothing
but beaters of cotton, on tenters, retailers of stuffs and mercery, barbers,
tinners, locksmiths, sadlers, and especially sellers of little loaves,
hardware, grain, dates, and sweetmeats.

In the villages, the inhabitants limited to mere necessaries, have no arts,
but those, without which they cannot subsist; every one endeavors to supply
his own wants, that he may not be obliged to share what he has with others.
Each family manufactures the coarse cottons with which they are clothed. Every
house has its portable mill, with which the women grind the barley, or dourra,
for their subsistence. The flour from these mills is coarse; and their little
round loaves ill leavened, and badly baked; but they preserve life, and that is
all which is required. In the mountains, they do not preserve their vines, and
they no where engraft trees; every thing, in short, reminds us of the
simplicity of ancient times. When the reason of this want of industry is asked,
the answer is uniformly the same. "It is good enough. It is sufficient: To what
purpose would it be to do more?" They are right; since they would not be
permitted to reap the benefit of their labors.

The state of the arts in these countries, is highly interesting, as preserving
the discoveries in almost every respect of ancient times. For example, the
stuffs of Aleppo are not an Arabian invention. The dies they have, are properly
those of Tire. The manner by which the ancients secured the harness of their
horses, against the stroke of the sabre, is, undoubtedly, the same now used at
Aleppo and Damascus, for the head-stalls of their bridles. The small silver
plates with which the leather is lined, hold together without nails, and are so
jointed, that, without depriving the leather of its pliancy, there remains no
interstice for the edge of the weapon.

The cement they make use of, is, no doubt, that of the Greeks and Romans. To
make it properly, they only use the lime when boiling, and mix with it
one-third of sand, and another of ashes and pounded brick-dust. With this
composition they form wells, cisterns, and vaults, which the water cannot pass
through. The use of this cement, has been lately introduced at Paris, but it is
of great antiquity in the East.

We may affirm the same of the manner of working the iron mines in Lebanon, on
account of its simplicity. It is the method now employed in the Pyrenees, and
known under the name of the Catalonian forge. The furnace consists in a kind of
chimney, formed in the side of a deep declivity. The funnel is filled with
wood, which is set fire to. The bellows is applied to the inferior mouth, and
the iron ore poured in from above; the metal falls to the bottom, and is taken
out by the same mouth at which the fire is lighted. Even their ingenious wooden
sliding locks, with which they barricade their streets, may be traced back to
the time of Solomon, who mentions them in his song.

To their music, we must not ascribe so high an antiquity. It does not appear
to have an earlier origin, than the age of califs; yet, as its principles were
borrowed from the Greeks, it might afford matter of curious observation, to
adepts in that science. Cairo is, perhaps, the only place in Syria, or in
Egypt, where there are a few shaiks, who understand the principles of the art.
They have collections of airs, which are not noted in our manner, but written
in characters, all the names of which are Persian. They have no music but
vocal; for they neither know nor esteem instrumental. They are strangers,
likewise, to any other accompaniment than the unison, and the continued base of
the monochord. Their airs, in point of character and execution, resemble
nothing we have heard in Europe, except the seguidillas of the Spaniards. They
have divisions more labored, even than those of the Italians, and cadences,
and inflexions of tones, impossible to be imitated by European throats. Their
performance is accompanied with sighs and gestures, which paint the passions in
a more lively manner, than we should venture to allow. To behold an Arab with
his head inclined, his hand applied to his ear, his eyebrows knit, his eyes
languishing; to hear his plaintive tones, his lengthened notes, his sighs and
sobs, it is almost impossible to refrain from tears: and, indeed, they must
certainly find a pleasure in shedding them, since among all their songs, they
constantly prefer those which excite them most; as among all accomplishments,
singing is, that which they most admire.

Dancing, which with us, says Volney, holds an equal rank with music, is far
from being held in the same estimation with the Arabs. This art, among them, is
branded with a kind of shame; a man cannot practice it without dishonor, and
the exercise of it is only permitted to women. This judgment will appear to us
severe, but it must be considered, that in the Eastern world, dancing is not an
imitation of war, as among the Greeks, nor a combination of graceful attitudes
and movements, as with us; but a licentious imitation of the utmost wantonness
of love. This is the species of dance, which, brought from Carthage to Rome,
announced the decline of her republican manners; and which since, revived in
Spain by the Arabs, still subsists there, under the title of Fandango.
Notwithstanding the freedom of our manners, it would be difficult, without
wounding the ear, accurately to describe it; it will be sufficient to say, that
the female dancer, with her arms extended, and an empassioned air, singing, and
accompanying her song with castanets, which she holds between her fingers,
executes, without changing her place, all those motions of the body, which
passion itself carefully conceals under the veil of night. Such is their
licentiousness, that none but prostitutes venture to dance in public.

The intimate connection between the arts and sciences, leaves no room to doubt,
that the latter are still more neglected. The barbarism of Syria and Egypt, is
complete. In vain have some writers denied this assertion, and talked of
colleges, places of education, and books. These words, in Turkey, convey not
the same idea as with us. The age of the califs, is past among the Arabs, and
yet to begin among the Turks. These two nations have, at present, neither
geometricians, astronomers, musicians, nor physicians. Where should physicians
be formed, since there are no establishments of the kind; and anatomy is
repugnant to the prejudices of their religion? Astronomy, indeed, they
practice; but, by astronomy, they understand only the decree of fate, by the
motions of the stars, and not the profound science of calculating their
revolutions. The Monks of Mar-Hanna, who are possessed of books, and maintain a
correspondence with Rome, are not less ignorant than the rest. Never, says
Volney, before my arrival, had they heard that the earth turned round the sun;
and the zealots, finding it contradicted in the holy bible, were for treating
me as a heretic.

In examining the causes of the general ignorance of the Orientals, we shall
find the scarcity of books one of the principal. There are but two libraries in
Syria, that of the Monks of Mar-Hanna, and that of Acre, both of which are very
inconsiderable; one of them not exceeding three hundred volumes. The other is
to be found in the form of government. Under the administration of the Turks,
there is no prospect of obtaining rank or fortune, through the channels of the
sciences. For this reason, the Orientals are ignorant from the same principle,
that makes them poor. They may apply with justice to science, what they say of
the arts, "What good purpose will it answer to do more?"

CHAP XIX. The Manners and Character of the Inhabitants of Syria.
OF all subjects of observation to a traveller, the moral character of the
inhabitants of a country is certainly the most important. To succeed in such an
enquiry, we must live in the country, learn the language, and adopt the customs
of the inhabitants; conditions seldom complied with by travelers; and which
when they are, still leave numerous difficulties to surmount; for we are not
only to combat the prejudices we may meet with in our way, but to overcome our
own.

When a European arrives in Syria, or in any part of the Eastern world, what
appears most extraordinary to him, in the exterior of the inhabitants, is the
almost total opposition of their manners to his own. The most striking
contrasts may be seen between the people of Asia, and those of Europe. We wear
short and close dresses; theirs are long and ample. We suffer our hair to grow,
and shave the beard; they let their beard grow, and shave the head. With us, to
uncover the head is a mark of respect; with them, a naked head is a sign of
folly. We salute in an inclined posture; they in an upright one. We pass our
lives erect; they almost always seated. They sit and eat on the ground; we on
raised seats. With respect to language likewise; their manner of writing is
contrary to ours; and most of our masculine nouns, are feminine with them.

Another distinguishing characteristic, is that religious exterior in the
countenances, conversation, and gestures of the inhabitants of Turkey. In their
streets every one appears with his string of beads. There is still another
characteristic in the exterior of the Orientals, which attracts the attention
of an observer; that is, their grave and phlegmatic air. Instead of the open
and cheerful countenance, which we either naturally possess or assume, their
behavior is serious, austere, and melancholy: they rarely laugh, and the
gaiety of the French appears to them a fit of delirium. When they speak, it is
with deliberation, without gestures, and without passion; they listen without
interruption; they are silent for whole days together, and by no means pique
themselves on supporting conversation. If they walk, it is always leisurely and
on business; they have no idea of our troublesome activity, and walking
backward and forward for amusement. Continually seated, they pass whole days
musing, with their legs crossed, their pipes in their mouths, and almost
without changing their attitude.

As to the sedentary life of the natives, what motives has a man to bestir
himself, in a country where the police has never thought either of laying out
walks, or encouraging plantations; where there is no safety without the towns,
nor pleasure within the precincts; where every thing, in short, invites us to
stay at home?

The comparison of our civil and domestic state, with that of the Orientals,
will furnish still further reasons for that phlegm, which constitutes their
general character. One of the chief sources of gaiety with us, is the social
intercourse of the table, and the use of wine. The Orientals, are almost
strangers to this double enjoyment. Another source of enjoyment with Europeans,
is the free intercourse between the two sexes, which prevailed more
particularly in France. In Asia, on the contrary, women are rigorously excluded
the society of men. Every body must be strangers to them; and they must be
suffered to pass along the streets, as if there were something contagious in
their nature. In fact, Mahomet, passionately fond as he was of women, has not
done them the honor of treating them in his koran, as belonging to the human
species; and it is even a sort of problem with the Mahometans, whether women
have any souls. The government is still more unjust toward them; for it denies
them the possession of any landed property, and so completely deprives them of
every kind of personal liberty, as to leave them dependant all their lives on
their male relations.

This situation of the women, among the Orientals, occasions a great contrast
between their manners and ours. Such is their delicacy on this head, that, as
we have observed before, they never speak of them. When we give them some
account of European manners, it is impossible to express their astonishment.
They are unable to conceive how our women go with their faces uncovered, when
in their country, an uplifted veil, is the mark of a prostitute, or a signal
for a love adventure. They have no idea how it is possible to see them, talk
with them, or touch them without emotion; or be alone without proceeding to the
last extremities.

What we are able to learn of the domestic life of husbands, who have several
wives, is neither calculated to make their lot envied, nor to give a high idea
of this part of Mahomet's legislation. Their house is a perpetual scene of
tumult and contention. The four legal married women complain, that their slaves
are preferred to them; and the slaves, that they are abandoned to the jealousy
of their mistresses. If one wife obtains a trinket, a token of favor, or
permission to go to the bath, all the others require the same, and league
together in the common cause. To restore peace, the polygamist is obliged to
assume the tone of a despot; and from that moment, he meets with nothing but
the sentiments of slaves, the appearance of fondness, yet real hatred. In vain
does each of these women protest she loves him more than the rest; in vain do
they fly on entering his apartments to present him his pipe and slippers, to
prepare his dinner' or to serve him with coffee; in vain, while he is
effeminately stretched on his carpet, do they chase away the flies which
incommode him; all these attentions and caresses, have no other object than to
procure an addition to their trinkets, and movables; that if he should
repudiate them, they may be able to tempt another husband, or find resource in
what becomes their only property. They are merely courtezans, who think of
nothing but to strip their lover before he quits them; and this lover, long
since deprived of desires, and teazed by feigned fondness, is far from enjoying
an enviable situation. The contempt the Turks entertain for their women, arises
from this concurrence of circumstances, and is evidently the effect of their
own customs. How should women retain that exclusive love, which renders them
most estimable, when so many share in the affections of their husbands? Or how
should they possess that modesty which constitutes their greatest virtue, when
the most shocking scenes of debauchery are daily practiced before their eyes?
How, in short, should they be endowed with the manners requisite to make them
amiable, when no care whatever is taken of their education?

After what we have said of the manners of the Orientals, we shall be no longer
surprised, that their whole character partakes of the monotony of their private
life, and of the state of society in which they live. Even in the cities, where
we see most activity, as at Aleppo, Damascus, and Cairo, all their amusements
consist in going to the bath, or meeting together in coffee-houses, resembling
ours only in name. There, in a large room, filled with smoke, seated on ragged
mats, the wealthier class of people pass whole days in smoking their pipes,
talking of business in concise phrases, uttered at long intervals, and
frequently in saying nothing.

Of all the different species of public exhibitions, the only one they know,
and which is common at Cairo alone, is that of strollers, who show feats of
strength like our rope-dancers, and tricks of slight-of-hand like our jugglers.
We there see some of them eating flints, others breathing flames; some cutting
their arms, or perforating their noses, without receiving any hurt; and others
devouring serpents. The people, from whom they carefully conceal the secrets of
their art, entertain a sort of veneration for them, and call these
extraordinary performances by a name, which signifies prodigy or miracle. This
propensity of believing the most extraordinary feats or tales, is a remarkable
feature in the character of the Orientals. They admit, without hesitation, or
the least shadow of doubt, the most wonderful things that can be told them;
and, if we regard the tales current among them, as many prodigies happen every
day, as have been ascribed to the age of the Genii and fairies; the reason of
which, no doubt is, that being ignorant of the ordinary course of physical and
moral causes, they know not the limits between probability and impossibility.
Besides having been accustomed, from their earliest youth, to believe the
extravagant fables of the koran, they are entirely destitute of any standard of
analogy, to distinguish truth from falsehood. Their credulity, therefore, arises
from ignorance, and the nature of their government. To this credulity, their
extravagance of imagination, is, in a great measure, to be attributed; but,
though deprived of this source, their works would still possess many brilliant
ornaments.

In general, the Orientals are remarkable for a clear conception, an easy
expression, a propriety of language in the things they are acquainted with, and
a passionate and nervous style. They have particularly a taste for moral
sentences, and their proverbs show they can unite justness of observation, and
profundity of thought, with an ingenuity of force and expression.

Their conversation appears at first, to have a sort of coldness, but when we
are more accustomed to it, we find ourselves greatly attached to them. Such is
the good opinion with which those who have had most communication with them
have been impressed, that the greater part of our travelers and merchants
allow, that they find them a people of a more humane and generous character,
and possessing more simplicity, and more refined and open manners, than even
the inhabitants of European countries; as if the Asiatics, having been polished
long before us, still preserved the traces of their early improvement.

CHAP. XX. Of the Religion and Funerals of the Ancient Egyptians.
RELIGION and man were born together. Before he was blessed with revelation,
objects which astonished, from which he received the greatest benefits, or
dreaded most, by turns attracted veneration. To rivers, seas, storms, and the
sun, he addressed his prayers, and erected altars. The less he knew of the
phenomena of nature, the more he believed in hidden powers. All nations have
adored, under different names, invisible spirits, either praying for
protection, or deprecating wrath. Men, enlightened by sublime philosophy only,
can behold him who presides over the universe, or suppose a plurality of gods
absurd.

Never were any people so superstitious as the Egyptians. They had a great
number of gods of different orders and degrees. Among the rest, two were
universally adored, Osiris, and Isis; which are supposed to have been
symbolical of the sun and moon. Besides these deities, the Egyptians worshipped
a great number of beasts, as the ox, the dog, the wolf, the hawk, the
crocodile, the ibis, the cat, etc. Many of these beasts were the objects of
superstition, only to some particular cities; and, whilst the people of one
city worshipped one species of animals as gods, those of an adjoining one held
them in abomination. This was the origin of the continual wars between
different cities; and, is said to have taken its rise from the false policy of
one of their sovereigns; who, in order to prevent conspiring against the state,
devised this means of engaging them in religious contests.

It was death for any person to kill one of these animals wilfully; and a
punishment was even decreed against him, who should have killed an ibis, or a
cat, though unintentionally. As a proof of this, Diodorus Siculus relates an
incident he was witness to, during his stay in Egypt. A Roman had
inadvertently, and without design, killed a cat; the exasperated populace ran
to his house, and neither the authority of the king, who sent his guard, nor
the terror of the Roman name, could rescue the unfortunate criminal. Such was
the reverence the Egyptians had for these animals, that, in an extreme famine,
they chose rather to eat one another, than feed on their imaginary deities.

Of all these animals, the bull Apis was the most famous. Magnificent temples
were erected to him; extraordinary honors were paid him while he lived; and
still greater after his death. Egypt then went into a general mourning. His
obsequies were solemnized with such a pomp, as is scarce credible. In the reign
of Ptolemy Logus, the bull Apis dying of old age, the funeral pomp, besides the
ordinary expenses, amounted to twelve thousand pounds.

It is pretty evident, that the golden calf, set up by the Israelites near
Mount Sinai, was owing to their abode in Egypt, and an imitation of the god
Apis, as well as those which were afterward set up by Jeroboam, (who had
resided long in Egypt) in the two extremities of the kingdom of Israel.

The Egyptians, not satisfied with offering incense to animals, carried their
folly to such excess, as to ascribe a divinity to the pulse and roots of their
gardens. For this they have been ingeniously reproached by the Roman satyrist,
in one of his inimitable satires. It is astonishing to see a nation, which
boasted its superiority above all others, in wisdom and learning, abandon
itself to the most gross and ridiculous superstition. Indeed, to read of
animals and vile insects, honored with religious worship, placed in temples,
and maintained with great care, and at an extravagant expense; to read that
those who killed them, were punished with death; and, that these animals were
embalmed and solemnly deposited in tombs, assigned them by the public; to hear,
in short, that this extravagance was carried to such lengths, that leeks and
onions were acknowledged as deities, and depended upon for succor and
protection, are excesses, which we at this distance of time can scarce credit;
and yet they have the evidence of all antiquity. You enter, says Lucian, into a
magnificent temple, every part of which glitters with gold and silver. You
there look attentively for a god, and are cheated with a stork, an ape, or a
cat; a just emblem, adds that writer, of too many palaces, the masters of
which, are far from being the brightest ornaments of them.

Several reasons are assigned for the worship paid to animals by the Egyptians.
The first is drawn from fabulous history. It is pretended, that the gods, when
mankind rebelled against them, sled into Egypt, and concealed themselves under
the forms of different animals; and that these gave rise to the worship
afterward paid to these animals.

The second is taken from the benefit these animals procure to mankind: oxen by
their labor; sheep by their wool and milk; dogs by their service in hunting
and guarding houses; whence the god Anubis was represented with a dog's head.
The Ibis, a bird resembling a stork, was worshipped, because he put to flight
the winged serpents, with which Egypt would otherwise have been grievously
infected; the crocodile, an amphibious creature, of surprising strength and
size, was worshipped, because he defended Egypt from the incursion of the wild
Arabs; the ichneumon was adored, because he prevented the too great increase of
the crocodiles, which might have proved destructive to Egypt. This little
animal does this service to the country two ways. First, he watches the time
when the crocodile is absent, and breaks his eggs, but does not eat them.
Secondly, when the crocodile sleeps on the banks of the Nile, which he always
does with his mouth open, this small animal lying concealed in the mud, leaps
at once into his mouth, gets down his entrails and gnaws them, then piercing
his belly, the skin of which is very tender he escapes in safety; and thus, by
his address and subtilty, becomes victorious over so terrible an animal.

Philosophers, since the establishment of christianity, not satisfied with
these reasons, have asserted, that the worship which the Egyptians paid to
animals, was not offered to the animals themselves, but to the gods of whom
they were the symbols. Plutarch, in his famous treatise on Isis and Osiris, the
two most famous deities of the Egyptians, says, that philosophers honor the
image of God, wherever they find it, even in inanimate beings, consequently
much more in those which have life. We are, therefore, to approve not the
worship of these animals, but those who, by their means, ascend to the deity;
they are to be considered as so many mirrors which nature holds forth, and in
which the Supreme Being displays himself in a wonderful manner. Should men,
therefore, for the embellishment of statues, collect together all the gold and
precious stones in the world, the worship must not be referred to the statues;
for the deity does not visit in colors artfully disposed, nor in frail matter,
destitute of sense and motion. Plutarch further adds, in the same treatise,
that as the sun, moon, heaven, earth, and sea, are common to all men, but have
different names, according to the difference of nations and languages; in like
manner, though there is but one Deity or providence, which governs the
universe, men give him different names, and pay him different honors,
according to the laws and customs of their country.

The pyramids were erected as so many sacred monuments, destined to transmit in
future times the memory of great princes: they were likewise considered as the
mansions, where the body was to remain during a long succession of ages;
different in this respect from houses which were called inns, and where men
were to abide only as travelers, during the course of a life too short to
engage their affections.

When any person of a family died, all the kindred and friends quitted their
usual habits, and went into mourning. They refrained also from baths, wine, and
luxuries of every kind. This mourning lasted forty or seventy days, according
to the quality of the person.

Bodies were embalmed three ways. The most magnificent was bestowed on persons
of rank, the expense of which amounted to a talent of silver, or about a
hundred and twenty pounds.

Many hands were employed in this operation. Some drew the brain through the
nostrils, by an instrument made for the purpose. Others emptied the bowels and
intestines, by a hole cut in the side with an Egyptian stone, which was very
sharp; after which, the cavities were filled up with perfumes, and various
odoriferous drugs. As this evacuation (which was necessarily attended with some
dissection) seemed cruel and inhuman, the persons employed in it, fled as soon
as the operation was over, and were pursued with stones from the standers by.
But those who embalmed the body were honorably treated. They filled it with
myrrh, cinnamon, and all sorts of spices. After a certain time, the body was
swathed in lawn fillets, glued together with a very thin gauze, and then
crusted over with the most exquisite perfumes. By this means, the entire figure
of the body, the lineaments of the face, and the hair on the lids and eyebrows
were preserved in their natural perfections. The body thus embalmed, was
delivered up to he relations, who put it in a kind of open chest, fitted
exactly to the size, and placed it upright against the wall, either in
sepulchers, if they had any, or in their houses. These embalmed bodies, are
what are now called mummies, which are still brought from Egypt, and to be seen
in the cabinets of the curious. This shows the care that the Egyptians took of
their dead. Children, by seeing the bodies of their ancestors thus preserved,
recalled to mind those virtues for which the public had honored them.

It was a consolation among the heathens, to leave a good name behind them; and
they imagined this the only human blessing, of which death could not deprive
them. But the Egyptians would not suffer praises to be bestowed
indiscriminately on all deceased persons. This honor was to be obtained only
from the public voice. The assembly of the judges, met on the other side of the
lake, which they crossed in a boat. He who sat at the helm, was called Charon,
in the Egyptian language; and, this first gave the hint to Orpheus, who had
been in Egypt, to invent the fiction of Charon's boat. As soon as a man was
dead, he was brought to his trial. The public accuser was heard. If he proved,
that the deceased had lived a bad life, his memory was condemned, and he was
deprived of burial. The people were affected with laws, which extended beyond
the grave; and every one struck with the disgrace inflicted on the dead person,
was afraid to reflect dishonor on his own memory, and that of his family. But
if the deceased was not convicted of any crime, he was interred in an
honorable manner.

When, therefore, a favorable judgment was pronounced, the next thing was to
proceed to the ceremony of interment. In his panegyric, no mention was made of
his name, because every Egyptian was deemed noble. No praises were considered
as just or true, but such as related to the personal merit of the deceased. He
was applauded for having received an excellent education in his early years;
and, in a more advanced age, for having exercised gentleness, moderation, and
all other virtues, which constitute the good man. Then all the people shouted,
and bestowed the highest eulogiums on the deceased, as one, who would be for
ever received into the society of the virtuous, in the kingdom of Pluto.

MAP of EGYPT, with the Course of the RIVER NILE.
map of Egypt

CHAP. I. A Description of Egypt, from Volney, Savary, Norden, and Tott.
Country, Climate, etc.
EGYPT is bounded on the North, by the Mediterranean; on the South, by a chain
of mountains, separating it from Nubia; on the East, by the Red Sea, and the
isthmus of Suez; and its Western limits are the deserts of Lybia; in the midst
of which stood the temple of Jupiter Ammon. Its greatest length is about two
hundred and twenty-five leagues, extending from Syene, which is situated under
the tropic of Cancer, to Cape Buelos, which is the most projecting land of the
Delta, and almost terminates the thirty-second degree of North latitude.

The broadest part is from Alexandria to Damietta; and from thence it grows
gradually narrower and narrower, till it approaches Nubia, where it is enclosed
between two chains of mountains, having the Nile and a plain between them, not
above half a day's journey over.

It is divided into upper and lower; the former is a long valley beginning at
Syene, and ending at Grand Cairo. Two ridges of mountains, taking their
departure from the last cataract, form the lofty outlines of upper Egypt: their
parallel direction is from North to South, till they reach Grand Cairo; where,
separating to the right and left, the one stretches toward Mount Colzowm, and
the other terminates in sand-banks near Alexandria. In this celebrated valley,
man first sought and first beheld the light of science, whose radiance
diffusing itself over Greece, has successively enlightened the rest of the
world. This valley, though still as fruitful as in the happy days of Thebes, is
much less cultivated; its famous cities are laid level with the dust; and laws
and arts trodden under foot by ignorance and despotism.

Lower Egypt, includes all the country lying between Grand Cairo, the
Mediterranean, the Isthmus of Suez, and Lybia. This immense plain, contains
slips of land, well cultivated, on the borders of the canals; and in its
center, that triangular island to which the Greeks gave the name of Delta,
formed by the two branches of the Nile, which divide at Batriel-Balkara (the
cow's belly) and empty themselves into the sea; below Damietta and Rosetta.
This island, the most fruitful on the earth, has lost much of its extent, since
the time when Canopus and Pelusium were its limits. Most of the canals, which
with their streams brought fertility, are dried up; and the earth ceasing to be
watered, and continually exposed to the burning heats of the sun, is become a
barren sand. Those that remain bear little resemblance to their ancient state,
and no longer communicate with the lake Menzala, except a very little while,
during the time of the inundation; but they are dry all the rest of the year.

This country was called Misraim, by the Hebrews and Arabs, who supposed the
first sovereign was Misraim, the son of Cham and grandson of Noah. It was also
called Coptus, from Coptus, the capital city of upper Egypt; and the natives
were called Copts, as the Christians in Egypt are to this day, and esteemed the
real descendants of the ancient Egyptians.

The climate of Egypt is esteemed extremely hot. The height of the sun, which,
in summer, nearly approaches the zenith, is doubtless a primary cause of this
heat; but when we consider, that in other countries under the same latitude,
the heat is less we may conclude, there exists a secondary one; and this,
perhaps, is the country being so little elevated above the level of the sea. On
this account, two seasons only should be distinguished in Egypt, the spring and
summer; that is to say, the cool and the hot season. The latter continues from
March to November; and even from the end of February, the sun is not
supportable, for a European, at nine o'clock in the morning. During the whole
of this season, the air is inflamed, the sky sparkling, and the heat oppressive
to all who are unaccustomed to it. The body sweats profusely, under the
lightest dress, and in a state of the most profound repose. And this
perspiration becomes so necessary, that the flightest suppression of it is a
serious malady. The departure of the sun, tempers, in some degree, these heats.
The vapors from the earth, soaked by the Nile, and those brought by the West,
and North-west winds, absorbing the fire dispersed throughout the atmosphere,
produce an equal freshness, and piercing cold, if we may credit the natives and
some European merchants; but the Egyptians, almost naked, and accustomed to
perspire, shiver at the least coolness. The thermometer, which at the lowest,
in the month of February, stands at the eighth or ninth degree of Reaumur's
scale above the freezing point, enables us to determine with certainty; and we
may pronounce, that snow and hail are phenomena, which no Egyptian has seen in
fifty years. As for our merchants, their sensibility is owing to their improper
use of furs, which is carried so far, that in winter they have frequently two
or three coverings of foxes-skins; and even in summer, retain the ermine, or
petit-gris: in excuse for this, they plead the chilliness they experience in
the shade, as an indispensable reason; and, in fact, the Northerly and Westerly
currents of air, which almost continually prevail, cause a very great coolness
out of the sun; but the reason is, that the pelise is the lace of Turkey, and
their favorite luxury; it is the sign of opulence and the etiquette of
dignity; and the investiture of important offices, is always accompanied with
the present of a pelise.

It might naturally be imagined that Egypt, from these heats, and its wet and
marshy condition for three months, must be an unhealthy country; but experience
proves the fallacy of this supposition; the vapors of the stagnant waters, so
fatal in Cyprus and Alexandretta, have not the same effect in Egypt. This
appears to be owing to the natural dryness of the air, to the proximity of the
deserts, which incessantly draw off the humidity, and the perpetual currents of
air which meet with no obstacles. This aridity is such, that raw meat, exposed
even in summer, to the North wind, does not putrisy, but dries up, and becomes
hard as wood. In the deserts, dead carcases are found dried in this manner,
which are so light, that a person may easily lift, with one hand, the entire
body of a camel. It must be remarked, however, that the air near the sea, is
infinitely less dry, than higher up the country: thus, at Alexandria and
Rosetta, iron cannot be exposed twenty-four hours to the air, without rusting.

The air of Egypt, besides possessing this drying quality, appears strongly
impregnated with salts, the proofs of which are every where apparent. The
stones are corroded by natrum; and in moist places, long crystallizations of it
are to be found, which might be taken for saltpeter.

It is no doubt this property of the air and the earth, which added to the
heat, gives vegetation an activity, scarce credible in our cold climates.
Wherever plants have water, the rapidity of their growth is prodigious.
Whoever has traveled to Cairo, or Rosetta, knows that the species of gourd,
called kara, will, in twenty-four hours, send out shoots near four inches long;
but this soil appears unfavourable to all exotics. Foreign plants degenerate
there rapidly; the truth of which is confirmed by daily experience. The
merchants are obliged every year, to renew their seeds, and send to Malta for
their cauliflowers, beetroot, and carrots; which, when sown, succeed very well
at first; but if the seed produced from them be afterward sown, the plants run
up tall and weak. The same happens to apricots, pears, and peaches, when
transported to Rosetta.

Were heat the principle of diseases, upper Egypt would not be habitable; but
it only seems to occasion a burning fever, to which the inhabitants are
subject, and which they cure by regimen, drinking much water, and bathing in
the river: in other respects, they are strong and healthy. Old men are
numerous, and many ride on horseback at eighty. The food they eat in the hot
season, much contributes to the preservation of their health; it is chiefly
vegetables, pulse, and milk. They bathe frequently, eat little, seldom drink
fermented liquors, and mix much lemon juice in their food. This abstinence,
preserves vigor to a very advanced age.

The North wind, in summer, continually blows, and finding no obstacle
throughout all Egypt, where the mountains are not high, it drives the vapors
of the marshes and lakes toward Abysinia, and incessantly changes the
atmosphere. Perhaps, the balsamic emanations of orange flowers, roses, the
Arabian jasmine, and odorous plants, contribute to the salubrity of the air.
The waters of the Nile, also ligther and softer, and more agreeable to the
taste, than any other, greatly influence the health of the inhabitants. All
antiquity acknowledges their excellence; and the people certainly drink them
with a kind of avidity, without being ever injured by the quantity. The
Egyptians, says Aristides, are the only people who preserve the water of the
Nile, in sealed vases, and drink it when it is old, with the same pleasure as
we do old wine. Being lightly impregnated with nitre, they are only a gentle
aperient to those who take them to excess. I will not, says Savary, with many
writers, make believe, they render the women prolific, and give strength and
plumpness to the men; the faithful historian ought to stop where the mavelous
begins, and relate only what he can warrant.

In lower Egypt, the neighborhood of the sea, the large lakes and the
abundance of the waters moderate the sun's heat, and preserve a delightful
temperature. Strabo and Diodorus Siculus, who long lived here, did not think
the country unhealthy.

They have praised its fruitful soil, its grateful productions, its stately
monuments, and its great population; without mentioning the dreadful maladies
of which the moderns have made it the seat. Herodolus positively says, "The
Egyptians are the most healthy people on earth; which advantage they owe to the
salubrity of the air, and the temperature of the climate, which seldom varies;
for most of the diseases of man, ought to be attributed to the rapid
vicissitudes of seasons," To some moderns, who have never seen this fine
kingdom, and especially to M. Paw, it was reserved to teach us a contrary
doctrine. He pretends, that at present, "this country is become, by the
negligence of the Turks and Arabs, the cradle of the pestilence; that another
epidemical disease, equally dreadful, appears here occasionally, brought to
Cairo, by the caravans of Nubia; that the culture of rice engenders numerous
maladies; that the want of rain and thunder, occasions the air of the Thebais,
to acquire a violence that ferments the humors of the body, etc." These
assertions have an air of probability, which might impose on people who have
not lived in Egypt; but M. Paw, has ventured opinions in his closet, without,
the guidance of experience. Had he lived in this country, facts would have
demonstrated the contrary.

In valleys, enclosed by high mountains, where the atmosphere is not
continually renewed by a current of air, the culture of rice is unwholesome,
and the husbandman often pays with his life, the rich harvest which the earth
yields. But it is not the case near Damietta and Rosetta. The plains are nearly
on a level with the sea; neither hill nor height impede the refreshing breezes
of the North, which drives the clouds and exhalations of the flooded fields
southward, continually purifies the atmosphere, and preserves the health of the
people. Whether this, or any other be the cause, the husbandmen who cultivate
the rice, are not more subject to diseases, than those of the Thebais, who do
not. I passed, says Savary, the whole year amid rice-fields, which I every day
went to see watered, without feeling the least inconveniences. An old surgeon,
a native of Nice, and who had practiced thirty years at Damietta, has
repeatedly confirmed what I have advanced, on the healthiness of the country.
The greatest torments to the inhabitants, are the gnats and musquitoes, which,
rising by millions out of the marshes, swarm in the air and the houses. The
handkerchief must be held in the hand all day. It is the first thing a visitor
receives, and, at night, it is necessary to sleep under musquiteros.

The Southerly winds are known in Egypt, by the general name of winds of fifty
days, not that they blow fifty days from the South without intermission; but,
because they prevail more frequently in the fifty days preceding, and following
the equinox. Travelers have mentioned them under the denomination of poisonous
winds; or more correctly, hot winds of the desert. Such, in fact, is their
quality, and their heat so excessive, that it is difficult to form an idea of
its violence, without having experienced it; but it may be compared to the heat
of a large oven, at the moment of drawing out of the bread. When these winds
begin to blow, the atmosphere assumes an alarming aspect. The sky, at other
times so clear in this climate, becomes dark and hoary; the sun loses its
splendour, and appears of a violet color. The air is not cloudy, but gray and
thick; and is, in fact, filled with an extremely subtle dust, which penetrates
every where. This wind, always light and rapid, is not at first remarkably hot;
but it increases in heat, in proportion to its continuance. All animals soon
discover it by the change it produces in them. The lungs, which a too refined
air no longer expands, are contracted, and become painful. Respiration is short
and difficult; the skin is parched and dry, and the body consumed by an
internal heat. In vain is recourse had to large draughts of water; nothing can
restore perspiration. In vain is coolness sought for in those bodies, in which
it is usual to find it. Marble, iron, water, though the sun no longer appears,
are hot. The streets are deserted, and a dead silence reigns every where. The
inhabitants of towns and villages, shut themselves up in their houses; and
those of the desert, in their tents, or in wells dug in the earth, where they
wait the termination of this destructive heat. It usually lasts three days, but
if it exceeds that time, it becomes insupportable. Woe to the traveller whom
this wind surprises far from shelter. The danger is most imminent, when it
blows in squalls, for then the rapidity of the wind increases the heat to such
a degree, as to cause sudden death. This wind is especially destructive to
persons of a plethoric habit; and those, in whom fatigue has destroyed the tone
of the muscles and vessels. The corpse remains a long time warm, swells, turns
blue, and is easily separated; all which are signs of that putrid fermentation,
which takes place when the humors become stagnant. These accidents are to be
avoided, by stopping the nose and mouth with handkerchiefs; an efficacious
method, likewise, is that practiced by the camels, which bury their noses in
the sand, and keep them there till the squall is over.

Another quality of this wind, is its extreme aridity; which is such, that
water sprinkled on the floor, evaporates in a few minutes; by its extreme
dryness, it withers and strips all the plants, and by exhaling too suddenly,
the emanations from animal bodies, crisps the skin, closes the pores, and
causes that feverish heat which is the inseparable attendant of obstructed
perspiration.

These hot winds are not peculiar to Egypt; they blow likewise in Syria; more
frequently, however, near the sea, and in the desert, than in the mountains.
Nieubuhr met with them in Arabia, at Bombay, and in the Diarbekir: they are
also known in Persia, in the rest of Africa, and even in Spain; every where
their effects are similar, but their direction varies according to the
situation of the country. In Egypt, the most violent proceed from the
South-South-West; at Mecca from the East; at Surat from the North; at Bassora
from the North-West; from the West at Bagdad; and in Syria from the South-East.
These varieties, which seem embarrassing at first sight, on reflection, furnish
the means of solving the enigma. We find on examination, that these winds
always proceed from desert continents; and, in fact, it is natural that the air
which covers the immense plains of Lybia and Arabia, meeting there neither with
rivulets, nor lakes, nor forests, but scorched by the rays of a burning sun and
the reflection of the sand, should acquire a prodigious degree of heat and
aridity. It is so true, that these qualities are owing to the action of the sun
upon the sands; that these same winds produce not the same effects at every
season. In Egypt, for example, the Southerly winds in December and January, are
very cold; and, the reason is, that the sun having reached the Southern tropic,
no longer burns up the Northern parts of Africa; and that Abysinia, which is
extremely mountainous, is covered with snow. From a similar reason, the South
wind has much less effect in Cyprus; where it arrives cooled by the vapors of
the Mediterranean. In fact, this subject offers a multitude of problems,
calculated to excite the curiosity of the naturalist. In Italy they are called
the Sirroc winds.

To describe Egypt in a few words, let the reader imagine, on one side, a
narrow sea and rocks; (the Red Sea) on the other immense plains of sand; and in
the middle, a river flowing through a valley of one hundred and fifty leagues
in length, and from three to seven wide; which, at the distance of thirty
leagues from the sea, separates into two arms; the branches of which wander
over a soil free from obstacle, and almost without declivity.

The prevailing taste for natural history, now, to the honor of the present
age, become so general, demands, doubtless, some details on the nature of the
soil, and the minerals of this extensive country. But the manner of traveling
here, is ill adapted to promote such researches. It is not the same in this
country as in Europe; travels there, are agreeable excursions; in Egypt, they
are dangerous and difficult undertakings, especially for Europeans; whom the
superstitious natives believe to be sorcerers, who are come to discover by
magic, those treasures which the geniis have concealed under the ruins. This
ridiculous, but deep-rooted opinion, added to perpetual wars and disturbances,
deprives the traveller of security, and prevents every discovery. No one dares
even to walk alone in the fields; nor can he procure any person to accompany
him. The basis of all Egypt, is a continued bed of calcareous stone, of a
whitish hue, and somewhat soft, containing shells analogous to those found in
the neighboring seas. Marble, likewise, is found at the foot of the mountains,
bordering on the Red Sea. Copper is the only metal of this country, mentioned
by the ancients. On the road to Suez, is the greatest quantity of what are
called Egyptian flints, or pebbles; there, likewise, those stones have been
found, which, from their form, were taken for petrified wood.

The two lakes of Natron, situated to the West of the Delta, are more
interesting objects. Their bed is a sort of natural trench, three or four
leagues long, by a quarter wide, the bottom of which is solid and stony. It is
dry for nine months in the year; but in winter, there oozes from the earth, a
water of a reddish violet color, which fills the lake to the height of five or
six feet; the return of the great heats, causing this to evaporate, there
remains a bed of salt two feet thick, and very hard, which is broken with bars
of iron. Thirty thousand quintals are produced from them every year. This
phenomenon, which indicates a soil impregnated with salt, is common throughout
all Egypt. Even when the gardens are overflowed, for the sake of watering them,
the surface of the ground, after the evaporation of the water, appears glazed
over with salt.

In the midst of these minerals of various qualities, in the midst of that fine
and reddish colored sand, peculiar to Africa, the earth of the valley through
which the Nile flows, discovers properties which prove it of a distinct class.
Its blackish color, its clayey cementing quality, demonstrate its foreign
origin; and, in fact, it is brought by the river from the heart of Abysinia.
Without this fat and light mud, Egypt never could have produced any thing; that
alone seems to contain the seeds of vegetation and fecundity: and these again
are owing to the river, by which it is deposited.

If we consider Egypt, in relation to what constitutes the real power of a
state, says Tott, the politician will, perhaps, look with a kind of contempt on
this great metropolis of the world; this nurse of every science and every art,
now become a province of the feeblest of empires. But the political philosopher
will consider it in a light more worthy of his attention, should he discover in
the climate, production and population of Egypt, the means by which it has been
rendered so celebrated. Those advantages, which ages cannot destroy, and which
have resisted the greatest revolutions, will appear to him preferable to such
as, like chemical compositions, are to be decomposed by the contrary process to
that by which they are produced.

Such have been, no doubt, those kingdoms, the memory of which has been
preserved by history, though geography can scarcely point out the situation of
their capitals. We shall perceive, that in Egypt the greatest kings endeavored
to acquire fame, by labors useful for the cultivation of the country; with
these they appeased that thirst for glory, which, among other monarchs, was
perpetually productive of violence and rapine.

If so prodigious a lake as that of Maeris, may be supposed to have been formed
by the hands of men; the utility of this immense reservoir, would be the
greatest monument of their beneficence; but should its extent and depth, leave
some doubt as to its origin, none can be entertained with regard to the canals
of Joseph, or Trajan, or that of Alexandria, or those of the Delta: they are
visibly, works of human industry.

The facility with which the country is watered, leaves no part of it
uncultivated; and the richness of the soil, by multiplying the harvest,
maintains and animates population. There is no country, in which it is more
remarkable than in Egypt, Delta, the provinces of the East and West, and all
those on each side of the Nile, quite up to the tropic, are populous to an
amazing degree. It is said, there are more than nine thousand villages, and
twelve hundred towns in Egypt. It is very certain, they are so near to each
other, that I have reckoned, says Tott, forty-two within sight, the farthest of
which was not two leagues off.

Wherever the inundation can reach, habitations are erected on little hills,
raised for that purpose, and which are contrived to take up as little room as
possible, that they may save all the ground they can for cultivation.

The villages are always surrounded by an infinite number of pointed turrets,
to invite thither the pigeons, in order to collect their dung. Every village
has, likewise, a small wood of palm trees near it, the property of which is
common; these supply the inhabitants with dates for their consumption, and
leaves for the fabrication of baskets, mats, and other things of that kind.
Little causeways raised in like manner, above the inundation, preserve a
communication during the time it lasts.

CHAP. II. Of the River Nile.
EGYPT has but one river, and on which its whole physical and political
existence depends. It is the Nile that provides for the necessaries of animal
life; the want of which is, so frequently and so distressfully, experienced in
warm climates. The Nile alone, without the aid of rain, every where supplies
vegetation with moisture; the earth, during the three months inundation,
imbibing a sufficient quantity of water for the rest of the year. Were it not
for this overflowing, only a very small part of the country could be
cultivated, and even that would require prodigious labor; it is with reason,
therefore, it has been styled the source of plenty, happiness, and even of life
itself. Had Albuquerque been able to execute his project, of turning its course
into the Red Sea; this country, now so rich and fertile, would have become a
savage desert, surrounded by solitudes.

It is with reason, that the Egyptians have always professed a religious
veneration for the Nile; but a European must be pardoned, if, on hearing them
boast its beauty, he smiles at their ignorance. Never will these troubled and
muddy waters, have for him the charm of transparent fountains, and limpid
streams; never, except from some extraordinary excitement, will a swarthy
Egyptian woman, dripping from these yellow and muddy waters, remind him of the
bathing Naiads. For six months of the year, the water of the Nile is so thick,
that it must have time to settle before it can be drank; and, during the three
months which precede the inundation, reduced to an inconsiderable depth, it
grows heated, becomes green, foetid, and full of worms; and, it is necessary to
have recourse to that which has been before drawn and preserved in cisterns. At
all times, people of delicacy take care to perfume it, and cool it by
evaporation.

Earthen vessels, unglazed, are kept carefully in every apartment, from whence
the water continually transpires; this transpiration produces the more
coolness, in proportion as it is more considerable; for this reason, these
vessels are often suspended in passages, where are currents of air, and under
the shade of trees. In several parts of Syria, they drink the water which has
transpired; in Egypt, they drink that which remains; besides, in no country is
so much water used. The first thing that an Egyptian does on entering his
house, is to lay hold of the pitcher of water, and take a hearty draught of it,
and thanks to their perpetual perspiration, they feel no inconvenience from the
practice.

This river, says Tott, the sources of which are not known, receiving all the
streams with which Abyssinia and Ethiopia are abundantly watered, descends into
Egypt, which it crosses from South to North, to about four leagues below Cairo;
where, dividing itself into two branches, it forms the island, so celebrated
and well known by the name of Delta: it is said, he adds, that a traveller of
the name of Bruce, has pretended to have discovered the source of the Nile. I
saw at Cairo, the servant who was his guide, and the companion of his journey,
who assured me, he had no knowledge of any such discovery. It may, perhaps, be
objected, that a learned man like Bruce, was not obliged to give an account of
his discoveries to his valet; but, in a desert, remarks Tott, the pride of
celebrity vanishes. The master and servant disappear, and become only two men,
necessitated to assist their mutual wants; the only superiority is possessed by
the strongest; and the servant I have mentioned, born in the country, would
certainly have corroborated Bruce's assertions, in a discovery merely
typographical.

That the Nile rises in Ethiopia, admits not of a doubt; but, whether Bruce, or
the Portugeuse jesuits of the last century, have been able to ascertain that
particular fountain, which is indisputably the head, seems not so very clear.
It does not appear, that any of these travelers have traced its course, step
by step, from its source to its mouth. Savary says, the Abysinians, who bring
gold dust to Grand Cairo, are unanimous in asserting, that this river, taking
its rise in Ethiopia, divides into two branches; one of which, known by the
name of Asserac, or the blue river, joins the Niger; and, traversing Africa
from East to West, falls into the Atlantic ocean: and that, the (...) North,
discharges itself into the Mediterranean This, we believe, is denied by Bruce;
but of this matter we shall treat more fully, when we speak of Abysinia, where
its source undoubtedly is.

The periodical inundation of this river, in a country where it scarcely ever
rains, and which the heat of the climate, and the very nature of the soil, seem
to have devoted to perpetual drought and sterility, is a most surprising
phenomenon, and which, more particularly deserves to be noticed.

The increase of the Nile begins early in June, but is not much perceived till
the summer solstice; when the waters become troubled, are of a reddish
tincture, and are thought unwholesome. They must be purified before they are
drank, which is done by mixing bitter almonds, pounded to dust, in a jar full
of water, and kept turning with the arm for some minutes; it is then left to
settle, and in five or six hours, the heterogeneous particles subside to the
bottom of the vessel, and the water becomes limpid and excellent. The Egyptians
attribute this fermentation of the Nile, to the dew, which then falls in
abundance. Many historians have seriously affirmed, it contributed to the
inundations. It is much more natural to think, that the river overflowing in
Abysinia and Ethiopia, brings down a great quantity of sand, and millions of
the eggs of insects; which, hatching about the time of the solstice, produce
the fermentation of the waters, and that reddish tincture which renders them
unhealthy.

The Nile continues increasing till near the end of August, and often even in
September. The progress of the inundation, is observed at the Nilometer; and
public criers distributed in each quarter of Grand Cairo, the capital, every
day make known to the people, the rising of the waters, till they are come to
the height proper for opening the canal, by which they are conveyed to the
middle of the city, and the cisterns. The Nilometer, is situated at the
Southern point of the Island of Raouda; it is a column erected in the center of
a low chamber, the bottom of which is on a level with the bed of the Nile.

As Egypt pays no tribute to the Grand Signior, if the waters do not rise to
sixteen cubits; the Egyptians often disguise the truth, and do not proclaim
they have risen to that height till they have surpassed it. When they are under
sixteen cubits, a famine is dreaded; the years of abundance, are those between
eighteen and twenty-two cubits. When the waters exceed this, they lay too long
on the ground, and prevent its being sown; on the contrary, inundations below
the medium, often leave the high lands fruitless.

The river, at this time, spreading itself over the country, on each side of
its bed for several leagues, appears like a sea; whatever parts lay so remote,
as to be out of the reach of the inundation, are watered by canals; so much is
expended in its course, that it has been conjectured, not a tenth part of the
water reaches the sea.

The appearance which Egypt presents at this season of the year, must be very
singular and curious, to one who ascends a high building, and discovers a vast
expanse of water all around, with towns and villages rising out of the flood;
here and there a causeway, and numberless groves and fruit trees, whose tops
only are visible. When the waters retire, they leave a vast quantity of fish on
the land; and, at the same time, what is much more valuable, a slime, which
acts as manure, and fertilizes the fields. By this annual addition of soil,
Egypt has been very much raised and enlarged in the course of years, and many
places are now inland, which were formerly close to the sea, such particularly,
is Damietta; and, as the mud of the Nile extends for some leagues into the sea,
and accumulates every year, this country, by little and little, annually
increases.

The day of proclamation for opening the canals, is a day of rejoicing, and a
solemn feast among the Egyptians. The pacha and his whole court descend from
the castle, and go in pomp to Fostat; where the canal begins that runs through
Grand Cairo. He places himself under a magnificent pavillion erected there. The
boys, with their musicians playing before him, and their mamluks following, are
his attendants. The chief priests ride horses richly caparisoned; and all the
inhabitants, on horseback, on foot, and in boats, hasten to be present at this
ceremony. More than three hundred thousand people assemble on land and water.
The boats, most of them painted and carved, have canopies and streamers of
various colors. Those of the women, are known by their elegance, richness, and
the gilt columns that support the canopy, and particularly by the blinds let
down before the windows. The people all remain silent, till the moment the
pacha gives the signal, and then, instantly shouts of joy rend the air; the
trumpets sound their flourishes, and the kettle-drums, and other instruments,
reverberate on all sides. Certain men throw down the statue of clay, which was
placed on the mound, which statue is called, The betrothed, and is the remains
of an ancient rite among the Egyptians, who consecrated a virgin to the Nile;
and whom, in times of dearth, they sometimes threw into the waters. The mound,
or dam, is presently destroyed; and the waters no longer meeting an obstacle,
flow toward Grand Cairo. The pacha throws gold and silver coins into the
stream, which good swimmers immediately dive for, and bring up. The inhabitants
appear intoxicated with joy; they congratulate, and pay compliments to each
other all day; and songs of thanksgiving are every where heard. A number of
female dancers assemble on the banks of the Khalig, (canal) and regale the
spectators with their lascivious dances. All is mirth and good cheer, and the
very poor themselves feast. This universal rejoicing is not surprising: the
fate of the country depends on the inundation, and when it arrives, all behold
the hopes of harvest, the picture of plenty, and anticipate the promised good
with transport.

The evenings present a spectacle still more agreeable. All the great squares
of the city are floated; and the families assemble in boats, adorned with
tapestry, rich cushions, and every convenience luxurious ease can wish. The
streets, mosques, and minarets, are illuminated: they row from square to
square, taking with them fruits and refreshments. This most numerous assembly,
is usually at Lesbehia, which is the largest square in the city, and near half
a league in circumference; it forms an immense basin, surrounded by the palaces
of the beys, which are embellished with various colored lights. Many thousands
of boats, to the masts of which lamps are suspended, produce an ever-varying
illumination. The clear and starry heavens, which there are seldom obscured by
mists, and the profusion of atrificial lights on the waters, give all the
brilliancy of day, to the sweet refreshing coolness of night. Imagine, says
Savary, the pleasure with which the people, who have been scorched twelve hours
by a sun so ardent, come and breathe the cool air of these lakes: seldom are
the charms of this nocturnal seen disturbed by impetuous winds; they fall at
sunset, and gentler airs agitate the atmosphere. The charms of female society,
are, however, here procured with difficulty. Men associate only with men, and
women with women.

The lamps are obliged to be always kept lighted; this is a precaution
necessary for the public safety, which the Oualli, who goes from place to
place, takes care to see punctually observed. If this officer, who superintends
the police, finds a boat without light, he is justified in beheading all the
persons on board; and, unless a suitable present restrains the arms of the
executioners who accompany him, he instantly and rigorously executes the
sentence.

All the descriptions of Egypt have hitherto agreed to consider the mud, which
the water acquires during its increase, and at length deposits on the inundated
lands, as a manure by which they are fertilized. No vegetative quality,
however, is discoverable, in analizing it, before its union with the sand;
which, together with the clay, composes the soil of Egypt.

The Nile, notwithstanding the agitation of its waters, is so easy to confine,
that many fields lower than the surface of the river, are preserved during its
increase, from an inundation destructive to their productions, merely by a dam
of moistened earth, not more than eight or ten inches in thickness.

This method, which costs the cultivator but little trouble, is made use of to
preserve the Delta, when it is threatened by the flood. This island, which
annually produces three harvests, is continually watered by machines,
constructed on the Nile, and on the canals cut through the island, but it
rarely is in danger of being overflowed; and this rich part of Egypt, which
extends to the sea, would be still less affected by the swelling of the river,
did not the wind, blowing a long time in one quarter, raise the waters of the
Mediterranean toward the South.

It was without doubt, to provide against those years, when the Nile does not
overflow a great part of the country, that the ancient sovereigns of Egypt cut
so many canals; the principal of which are still kept in order, but the greater
part neglected, and consequently one half of Egypt is deprived of cultivation.
Those which convey the water to Cairo, to the province of Fayoom, and to
Alexandria, are most attended to by government. An officer is appointed to
watch this last, and hinder the Arabs of Bachria, who receive the superfluous
waters of this canal, from turning them off before Alexandria be provided; or
opening it before the time fixed, which would hinder the increase of the Nile.
That which conveys the water into the province of Fayoom, is watched in like
manner, and cannot be opened before that of Cairo, (which is called the canal
of Trajan) be filled.

A number of other canals, only taken care of by those who derive advantage
from them, issue from that arm of the Nile which runs to Damietta, and
fertilize the province of Sharkia; which, making part of the isthmus of Suez,
is the most considerable of Egypt, and the most capable of a great increase of
cultivation. The plains of Gaza, which lie beyond, and are possessed by the
Arabs, would not be less fertile, if the spirit of devastation did not destroy,
even the spontaneous productions. Many other canals run through the isle of
Delta, some of which are navigable, and render its culture equal to that of a
well-managed kitchen-garden.

It may not be amiss to observe here, that the Delta, more elevated than the
rest of Egypt, is bounded toward the sea, by a forest of palm trees; the land
of which is much higher than the highest rising of the waters; and this
topographical remark, according to Volney, is sufficient to destroy the system
of the formation of the Delta, by sediment. A country, which rises higher than
the highest inundations, can never owe to them its origin. Such sediment can
only occasion, says Tott, the division of the two branches of the Nile. Very
respectable authorities have labored to prove, that the Delta has been formed
from the sediment of the Nile; particularly some of the first writers of
antiquity, who are not so apt to err as the moderns.

The degrees of inundation are not the same through all Egypt. On the contrary,
a gradual diminution obtains, as the river approaches the sea. At Syene, the
overflow is more considerable by one sixth, than at Grand Cairo; and when the
depth of water, at this latter city, is twenty-seven feet, it is scarcely four
at Rosetta and Damietta. The reason of this is, that, besides the quantity of
water absorbed by the grounds, as it flows, the river confined in one single
bed, and within a narrow valley, rises higher in the upper country; but when it
has passed Grand Cairo, being no longer obstructed by the mountains, and
separating into a thousand branches, it necessarily loses in depth what it
acquires in surface.

This river runs a course of fifteen hundred miles, from South to North; and,
dividing as we have before observed, a little below Cairo, into two branches,
falls into the Mediterranean, at about one hundred miles distant from each
other.

From these two principal branches, says Rooke, go several others, intersecting
the country that lies between; and this bounteous river, after scattering
plenty over the land, during a course of many hundred miles, empties itself
into the sea by seven mouths. The two most considerable, are those of Damietta
and Rosetta, the former was the Ostium Pathmeticum of the ancients; the latter,
the Ostium Bolbitinum.

At Grand Cairo, it does not appear that the Nile is much broader than the
Thames is at London, and in many parts near this city it is even fordable. In
the upper parts of this river, are seven cataracts, where the Nile falls from a
very great height, with a prodigious roaring; but, in lower Egypt, the stream
glides along gently, and passengers are seldom obstructed on it by storms.

The banks of this river, as well as those of all the canals, are crowded with
vast numbers of peasants, continually employed in watering the country, either
by their own labor, or the management of those animals which relieve it. An
infinite number of draw-wells, worked with a wheel, are contrived for this
purpose; the waters, which are raised, are poured into a channel, and
distributed among the grounds, at a distance from the river, by various canals;
which the industry and activity of the cultivator, prepare with intelligence
and economy. Women, occupied with the care of their families, are seen carrying
home water, in jars, upon their heads; others wash their linen, bleach that
which is newly made, spread it out, and give themselves up to that cheerfulness
and gaiety so natural to them, on every occasion; making the air resound with
their shrill voices, the ulululatus of the Romans. The barges, which pass from
one city to another, the boats employed in the conveyance of commodities, and
the navigation which commerce maintains, add to the variety and motion of the
scene.

This navigation, is principally remarkable for the agility of the watermen,
and the manner in which they convey the pottery-ware, made in higher Egypt. It
will be necessary, before this is explained, to observe, that the earthen pans,
made to preserve water, ought to be bigger, the farther those, for whose use
they are intended, dwell from the river; and as the inhabitants of lower Egypt,
reside at the greater distance, the potters, who dwell in the higher, contrive
the rafts accordingly by which they convey their wares. The largest jars,
fastened by their handles, form the first row of the raft; the middle sized are
placed next, and the least uppermost; the proprietor contrives for himself a
convenient station, and, furnished with a long pole, commits himself to the
course of the waters, without fearing to run a-ground on a soft clay, which can
do no damage.

CHAP. III. Of the Agriculture, and Manner of raising Seed.
AGRICULTURE was honorable among the ancient Egyptians, which they had
rendered most flourishing throughout their empire; witness their immense
labors for distributing the waters over the lands. There are still eighty
canals, like rivers; several of which are twenty, thirty, and forty leagues in
length; receiving and distributing the inundation over the country. Except six,
the others are almost filled up and dry, when the Nile is low. The grand lakes
of Maeris, Behira, and Mareotis, were vast reservoirs, to contain the
superabundant waters, and afterward to disperse them in the plains. They were
raised over the high lands, by chain buckets; the invention of which is due to
the Egyptians. One ox can turn them, and water a vast field. These machines
gave Archimedes the idea of his ingenious screw, which is still in use. Besides
these reservoirs, all the towns, at a little distance from the Nile, are
surrounded by spacious ponds, for the convenience of the inhabitants, and of
agriculture. The remains we find of large mounds, were to contain the river;
they also stopped the torrents of sand.

Twelve hundred years has this country been subject to a people, who have
suffered these great works to perish. The limits of cultivated Egypt yearly
decrease, and sterile lands every where accumulate. Population has equally
suffered: ancient Egypt supplied food to eight millions of inhabitants: at
present, the estimate is not one half.

The lands all belong to the chiefs, which they sell to individuals. When the
proprietor dies, it descends to the son, but he is obliged to purchase his
father's inheritance; nor is he certain of obtaining it; the highest bidder
becomes the proprietor. Who will improve lands, which he cannot transmit to his
successor? The farmer wanting only a livelihood, leaves part of his grounds
untilled. The labors of agriculture are very light to what they are in other
countries. The ox having made a slight furrow, the field is hoed and levelled
like a garden; and, when sowed, slightly harrowed, and here ends the labor of
the husbandman, till harvest, which is abundant in the extreme, and never fails
but with the inundation. The corn and barley, ripe, are reaped, and laid on the
floor; and the farmer, seated in a cart with cutting wheels, and drawn by oxen
blindfolded, drives over the straw which it chops. The corn, winnowed, is
yellow, large, and of exceeding good quality. The Egyptians eat red, half-baked
bread; bad, because, instead of wind and water-mills, they use a hand-mill, and
do not sufficiently sift the flour. A French baker, made bread as white as
snow, says Savary, and excellently tasted, with this same wheat.

Rice requires a little more care; the field must be inundated, well cleared,
and watered every day, which is done by chain-buckets. It is cut in five
months, and the product is usually eighty bushels for one. Besides these
grains, Egypt produces abundance of doura, or Indian millet; flax, formerly so
famous, hemp, carthamus, or bastard saffron; and multitudes of exquisite
melons, and other vegetables, which the people eat during the heats.

Seed-time differs according to the province, and the height of the ground.
Near Syene, wheat and barley are sown in October, and reaped in January. About
Girja the harvest month is February; and in March, round Grand Cairo: such is
the general progress of the harvest through the Said. There are many
exceptions, according as the lands are, high or low, more or less distant from
the river. They sow and reap all the year in Egypt, wherever they can obtain
the water of the Nile. The land is never fallow, and yields three harvests
annually; there the traveller incessantly beholds the charming prospect of
flowers, fruits, corn and spring. Summer and Autumn at once present their
treasures. Descending from the cataracts, at the beginning of January, the wheat
is seen almost ripe; farther on it is in ear; and still farther the fields are
green. Lucern is mowed three times, between November and March, and is the only
hay there is in Egypt, and is used chiefly to fodder cattle. Horses, asses,
mules and camels graze in the meadows, during winter; and they eat chopped
straw, barley and beans; which kind of food gives health, strength and mettle.
The Arabs accustom their horses to great abstinence, water them only once a
day. and feed them with a little barley and milk.

The Egyptians, who seldom cultivate the olive, buy their oil in Crete and
Syria; but as the love of illumination has descended to them, from their
forefathers, they extract oil from various plants; the commonest is the produce
of the sesamum; they call it lamp oil. They also extract it from the seed of
the carthamus, from flax, popies, and lettuce. The oil of the carthamus is
eaten by the common people.

Their manner of raising bees is not a little extraordinary, and bespeaks great
ingenuity. Upper Egypt, preserving its verdure only four or five months, the
flowers and harvests being seen no longer, the people of Lower Egypt profit
from this circumstance, by assembling on board large boats, the bees of
different villages. Each proprietor confides his hives, with his own mark, to
the boatman; who, when loaded, gently proceeds up the river, and stops at every
place where he finds verdure and flowers. The bees swarm from their cells at
break of day, and collect their nectar, returning, several times, loaded with
booty; and in the evening re-enter their hives, without ever mistaking their
abode. Thus, sojourning three months on the Nile, the bees, having extracted
the perfumes of the orange flowers of the Said, the essence of the roses of
Fayoum, the sweets of the Arabian jasmin, and of every flower, are brought back
to their homes, where they find new riches. The proprietors pay the boatmen, on
their return, according to the number of hives they have taken, from one end of
Egypt to the other.

Having now given a general view of the face of the country, climate and
productions, we proceed to treat of the different cities, beginning first with
those in Lower Egypt.

CHAP. IV. Of the Cities, Grand Cairo, etc.
THE cities in Egypt are all situated on the Nile, or the great canals; the
houses are built of brick, several stories high, and in a taste similar to that
in vogue, two or three hundred years ago, in the great cities of Europe. The
palm trees, which surround the Egyptian cities, and the vessels which line the
banks of the Nile, or the canals on which they are built, add to the beauty of
their situation.

It is by uniting agriculture with commerce, that all the cities of Egypt
incite, encourage, and profit by the industry which encircles them; but the
advantages which Grand Cairo enjoys, are not confined to the interests of Egypt
alone; its commerce embraces both the hemispheres; and its streets are
continually crowded with camels, which bring the merchandise of Egypt, and the
Indies; and piled with bales of goods, from Madras and Marseilles; so that
Grand Cairo appears to be the center of the world.

This city, called by the Arabs Missir, is situated on the right side of the
Nile; about half a league from the river. It is adjoining to the mountains of
Arabia; at the western angle of these mountains, the castle of Old Cairo is
built. Boulac, the port of Old Cairo, forms the suburbs; and if the number of
their inhabitants are added to that of the city, we shall find assembled here,
not less than seven hundred thousand persons; a proof of the great number of
the inhabitants in Egypt.

In the fifteenth century Grand Cairo was one of the richest, and most
flourishing cities in the world; the emporium of Europe and Asia, and traded
from the straits of Gibraltar, to the furthest limits of India. The discovery
of the Cape of Good Hope, and the Ottoman conquest, have deprived it of great
part of its opulence and splendour; yet, its admirable situation, and the
fertility of Egypt, are advantages so great, that, in a space of three leagues,
it still contains an infinity of people, and immense riches.

The extent of Grand Cairo, along the principal canal, from North to South, is
one league and a half; and three quarters of a league in breadth, from East to
West. Its whole circumference is best seen from a mount overlooking the city,
by which it is half encircled, like an immense crescent. The streets are so
narrow and winding, some scarce admitting two persons to walk a breast, that it
is impossible to follow their direction, amidst the multitudes of houses, which
stand crouding on each other; vast vacancies only can be distinguished; and
there are squares, which become ponds, in the time of inundation, and gardens
the rest of the year. They are rowed over in September, and covered with
flowers and verdures, in April.

The principal street in the city is called the Khaliz, or canal, being under
water nine months in the year; it is, in many places, paved with marble; and,
during the other three months, people walk along it, as they do in the other
streets. This street, or canal, is said to have been dry by order of one of the
Pharaoh's. Previous to the inundation of the Nile, it is dammed up; and, when
the river has risen to a certain height, broken down; on which the water
instantly flows into the city; and, by lesser canals, is communicated to the
reservoirs, gardens, and adjacent country. All the cities of Egypt have canals
to convey the waters of the Nile to them. This river rises to its greatest
height about August. In October it begins to decrease. The criers then go about
the city, to acquaint the inhabitants that the water-carrier can get no more
water from the canal; as it is then no longer fit to be drank, and becomes
stagnant, from all kinds of nastiness being thrown into it. After it has ceased
entirely to flow, the stench is intolerable.

When the water is to be drained from the canal, it is divided, in several
places, by the means of small dykes: above which they throw the water on both
sides, and cause it to run off by degrees. This is generally done in May. They
afterward shovel up the mud; and, loading their asses with it, carry it into
the fields. If this was not repeated every year, the canal, in a short time,
would be so full of mud, that the houses would be under water, during the time
of the inundation.

From what has been said, it is evident, that in those towns, which are at any
distance from the Nile, the inhabitants have but very indifferent water, for
drinking, the greatest part of the year; it being only such as is preserved in
their ponds and reservoirs, or what is brought to them by the Arabs, in
goat skins, which is very indifferent.

Next to the Khaliz is the Bazar street; where, on market-days, there is such a
concourse of people collected, that it is almost impossible to pass along. This
is a very long and spacious street; at one end of it is a Bezistan, where may
be seen shops as magnificent as any in Constantinople; at the other end is the
slave-market.

Grand Cairo contains near three hundred mosques; most of them with minarets.
These give an agreeable variety to a city, which, from the flatness of its
roofs, appears uniform. Public cryers, at appointed hours, as in all towns of
Turkey, call the people to prayers, from these minarets: about eight hundred
voices are heard, at the same moment, from all quarters of the city, calling
man to the performance of his duty to God. The Turks abhor the noise of bells,
and say it offends the ears, is unmeaning, and proper only for beasts of
burden. They derive this opinion from Mahomet, who, like a great politician,
desirous that all his institutions should have one tendency, and willing to
captivate both the senses and understanding, rejected the trumpet of the Jews,
and the rattle of the Oriental Christians. He knew the human voice would make a
greater impression on the mind of man, than the grating sound of insensible
brass; and produced a holy summons, sent by heaven, conformable to his views.

The circuit of this city, says Rooke, is seven miles; the houses extremely
high, and the streets very narrow, not being wider than our alleys in London,
and are always full of people, most of them being mounted; the Turks of fashion
on horseback; Christians and Plebeians on jackasses. To the extreme height of
the houses, they add every other contrivance possible, to exclude the sun;
placing over, from the top of the houses on one side of the street, to those of
the other, canvas strained on frames; whereby the streets are very much
darkened, and the sun totally excluded; one advantage in this hot country; but
then, on the other hand, the air is, by that means, rendered close and
soffocating.

The castle of Cairo stands on a steep rock, and is surrounded by thick walls,
on which are strong towers. It was a place of great force before the invention
of gunpowder; but, being commanded by the neighboring mountains, it would not
now stand the fire of a battery erected there, two hours. It is more than a
quarter of a league in circumference.

This castle includes the palaces of the Sultan of Egypt, now almost buried
under their own ruins; domes overthrown, heaps of rubbish, gilding, and
pictures, the colors of which have defied corroding time; stately marble
columns still standing, but, in general, without capitals: such are the tokens
of its former magnificence. In one of the halls of these ruinous buildings, the
rich carpet is fabricated, which the Emir Hadji bears every year to Mecca, to
cover the Caaba, or temple of Abraham,

The pachas inhabit a large building, containing nothing remarkable, the
windows of which look toward the square Caramaydan. The hall of audience,
where the divan assembles three times a week, is nearly as long, but not so
wide, as Westminster hall; and is stained by the blood of the beys, massacred,
some years ago, by order of the Port. These are, however, at present, the
sovereigns of Egypt; for the Grand Signior's representative is a phantom, with
which they sport: they keep him to serve their own purposes; then dismiss him
with shame. He cannot leave his palace, in which he is a prisoner, without
their permission. Thus humbled is the Ottoman pride, thus feeble, and thus
reduced is that empire, which threatened to enslave Europe.

The mint is near Caramaydan, where a prodigious quantity of medins and sequins
are struck, with the die of the bey who governs the city. The sequins, worth
about six shillings and threepence, are made of the gold-dust supplied by the
caravans of Abysinia; which, the master of the mint declared, annually brought
near one hundred and seventy thousand pounds sterling.

Enriched and occupied with the commerce of Egypt by the Nile, of Europe by the
Mediterranean, and of Yemen and the Indies by the Red Sea, the luxury which
follows this extensive commerce is increased to such a degree, that gold is
esteemed common, nor can the richest manufactures of India give satisfaction.

Joseph's, well is among the things, the most curious, the castle contains. It
is sunk in the rock, two hundred and twenty feet deep, and forty-two in
circumference. It includes two excavations, not perpendicular to each other. A
staircase, the descent of which is exceedingly gentle, is carried round; the
partition which separates the staircase from the well, is part of the rock,
left only six inches thick, with windows cut at intervals, to give light; but
as they are small, and some of them low, it is necessary to descend by the
light of candles.

There is a reservoir, and a level space, at that part of the well where it
takes a new direction; and oxen, which turn a machine that draws water from the
bottom of the well. Other oxen, from above, raise it out of this reservoir, by
a simple machine. This water comes from the Nile, and as it has been filtrated
through sand, impregnated with salt and nitre, is brackish.

Thirty columns of red granite, being ruins of the palace of Salah Eddin, are
still standing: the shaft of each is forty-five feet high, and a single stone.
The variations in their dimensions, and the ornaments sculptured round the
capitals, bespeak their having been from more ancient monuments. Some distance
from these beautiful columns is a delightful balcony, or pavillion, standing in
the highest part of the citadel, the prospect from which is most extensive. The
whole of Grand Cairo, with its multitudinous mosques and minarets, is seen at a
view. Toward Boulac, fruitful fields, and rich harvests, interspersed with
groves of date-trees; on the South-west, Fostat, or Old Cairo, and the plains
of Said beyond; which, when inundated by the Nile, contain hamlets scattered up
and down like islands. The landscape is terminated by the pyramids, which, like
painted mountains, appear lost in the clouds. The eye is never wearied with
objects so various and grand; the fresh air breathed in this elevated
situation, and the coolness it imparts, is an additional pleasure. Seated in
this delightful pavillion, how many agreeable thoughts rise in the mind; yet
how suddenly are these sweet meditations disturbed by gloomy melancholy! Here,
in the rich fields, arts and sciences once flourished, where now an ignorant
and barbarous people trample them under foot. Tyranny, with its iron scepter,
is become the scourge of the first of countries, in which the miseries of men
seem to increase, in proportion to the efforts of nature to render them happy!

When we hear of Grand Cairo, says Volney, in his description of this city, we
are led to imagine it must be a capital, like those of Europe; but if we
reflect that our cities have only begun to be rendered convenient and elegant,
within these last hundred years, we shall easily believe, that in a country
where nothing has been improved since the tenth century, they must partake of
the common barbarism; and, indeed, we shall find that Cairo contains none of
those public, or private edifices, those regular squares, or well built
streets, in which the architect displays his genius. Its environs are full of
hills of dust, formed by the rubbish every day accumulating; whilst the
multitude of tombs, and the stench of the common sewers, are offensive to the
smell and sight. Within the walls the streets are winding and narrow; and, as
they are not paved, the crowds of men, camels, asses and dogs, which press
against each other, raise a very disagreeable dust; individuals often water
their doors, and to this dust succeeds mud and pestiferous exhalations.
Contrary to the general custom of the East, the houses have two or three
stories; over which is a terrace of stone, or tile. All these houses have the
air of prisons; for they have no light from the street. The rooms within are
ill contrived. Among the great, however, are to be found some ornaments, as
well as conveniences; their vast halls, especially, in which water spouts up
into marble basins, are peculiarly well adapted to the climate. The paved
floor, inlaid with marble and colored earthen ware, is covered with mats and
mattrasses; and over all is spread a rich carpet, on which every one fits
cross-legged. Around the wall is a sort of sopha, with cushions to support the
back and elbows; and above, at the height of seven or eight feet, a range of
shelves, decked out with China and Japanese porcelain. The walls, naked in
other respects, are chequered with sentences extracted from the koran, and
painted foliages and flowers, with which also the porticos of the beys are
covered; the windows have neither glass, nor moving sashes, but only an open
lattice-work, which frequently costs more than our glazing. The light enters
from the inner courts, from whence the sycamores reflect a verdure, pleasing to
the eye. An opening to the North, or at the top of the ceiling, admits a fresh
breeze, while, by a whimsical contradiction, they wrap themselves up in warm
woollen cloths and furs. The rich pretend, by this means, to escape diseases;
but the common people, with their blue shirts, and hard mats, are less liable
to take cold, and enjoy better health.

Among the singularities which appear most extraordinary to a stranger at
Cairo, may be mentioned the great number of ugly dogs, which roam about the
streets; and the kites, which skim over the houses, with frequent and doleful
cries. The mussulmen kill neither of these, though they are equally held to be
unclean; on the contrary, they often throw them the fragment of their tables;
and devotees here, as in the other parts of the Turkish dominions, endow
charitable foundations of bread and water for the dogs. These animals have
besides, the resource of the common sewers; which, however, does not prevent
them from suffering by hunger and thirst; but it is very astonishing, that
these extremities never occasion madness. Prosper Alpinus has already made this
remark, in his treatise on the physic of the Egyptians. Canine madness is
equally unknown in Syria; the name of the malady, however, is to be found in
the Arabic language, and is not borrowed from any foreign tongue.

Among other things worthy of notice in Grand Cairo, we must not omit the ovens
for hatching chickens. It seems incredible, that they should be able to hatch
chickens without the hen's sitting upon the eggs; and still more improbable,
that they should afterward sell these chichens by the bushel, and yet both of
these are done. The eggs are laid in ovens, which they can heat to such a
temperature, as to be like the natural heat of the hens; by this means, the
chickens when hatched, are as strong and well fledged, as those produced in the
common way, These ovens are built in a low place, and almost under ground. They
are made of earth, in a circular form, and the earth is covered with flax and
cow's hair, on which the eggs are laid. There are twelve of these ovens placed
in two rows, one over the other, with a passage between. The eggs, to the
number of eight or nine thousand in each oven, are arranged in heaps in the
lower story, and a fire of dried cow dung kindled in the upper row, morning and
evening, an hour each. This repeated for eight days, and the building being
sufficiently heated, the fire is put out, every aperture closed, and a part of
the eggs heaped below, are carried above. The superintendant occasionally
examines, if it be necessary to increase or diminish the heat. On the
nineteenth day, the chickens begin to move in their shells, nibble with their
beaks on the twentieth, endeavoring to break their prison, and are usually
completely hatched on the twenty-first: then do these eggs, apparently
lifeless, begin to move, and roll about the floor, and thousands of little
various colored chickens to run and hop round the apartment. This sight is
truly diverting. They are carried in panniers, and cried about the streets on
the morrow, each house stocking itself at a halfpenny a piece. Various authors
have said, these fowls are not so good as those hatched by the hen, but they
are mistaken, says Savary; for a French cook, whom he saw at Grand Cairo,
bought them every year, and when well well fed, they became excellent poultry.

There are only four months in the year proper for this operation, on account
of the great heats; these are from December to April, and in that time it is
computed, there are above three hundred thousand chickens hatched in this
manner. This commerce is carried on by the Copts; the great art seems to be in
giving the ovens a proper degree of heat, as too much, or too little, will
destroy the embryo.

Boulac, only half a league from Grand Cairo, and making part of its suburbs,
is the port where all the merchandise, from Damietta and Alexandria, is landed.
This suburb, situated on the Eastern bank of the Nile, is two miles long, but
narrow. It contains superb public baths, and vast okals. These are square
buildings, including a large court with a portico, over which is a winding
gallery: the ground-floor is divided into spacious magazines, and the rooms
above have neither furniture nor ornaments. Here strangers live and deposit
their wares; and these okals, having only one gate, like that of a citadel, are
secure in time of revolt, from all insult. These are the only inns in Egypt,
and strangers are obliged to find their own furniture and food; for, in this
country, money cannot procure dinners ready dressed.

In front of the houses at Boulac, are seen thousands of vessels, of various
forms and sizes, at anchor. Some large and strong, carrying two masts, are
trading barks; these usually have a large cabin for passengers: others, light
and without decks, are only to ferry people from one side of the river to the
other. A third sort, are pleasure-boats, artfully carved and painted,
containing charming cabins, carpeted over, and affording shelter from the sun's
heat. Here, reclined at ease, on cushions, the wealthy go to breathe that fresh
and cooling air, which is continually active upon the Nile; and here admire the
variegated landscapes which its ever-verdant banks present. When the wind is
favorable, the sail is hoisted, and these light boats seem to fly over the
surface of the water.

Half a league from Boulac, is the old castle of Hellai. Here the beys,
accompanied by their stately train, go to receive the new pacha, and conduct
him in pomp to the prison, from which they have just expelled his predecessor.
Round this castle are spacious enclosures, where the orange, citron, and
pomegranate, planted without order, grow exceedingly high and tufted: their
twining branches form charming arbours, over which the sycamore and palm extend
their dark-green foliage, and among them rivulets meander, and the clustering
rose and bazil bloom. It is impossible to describe the delight of breathing the
fresh air, beneath these enchanting shades; under a climate so continually
possessing the burning heat of the dog days; this pleasure only can be felt.
The odor of the orange flower, and the aromatic emanations of balsamic plants,
gently renovate the senses, and infuse the most agreeable sensations. It is
dangerous for a European to frequent these groves, being peopled by concubines,
whom the jealous Turks, if they slip, never pardon. Abandoned to the delights
of contemplation, and indulging those delicious sensations the time and place
inspired, says Savary, I once, incautiously, proceeded toward the thickest
part of one of them; when a terrifying voice suddenly exclaimed -- Where are
you going? Stand, or you are dead. -- It was a slave who guarded the entrance
of the grove, that no rash curiosity might disturb the females who reposed on
the verdant banks. I instantly turned about, happy in not having been known to
be a European. I afterward understood, the beys go there sometimes with their
harem, and that any over iniquisitive stranger, who should wander there at such
a time, would risk the immediate loss of his head.

While describing the environs of Grand Cairo, we ought not to forget the
ancient Heliopolis, formerly famous for cultivating the higher branches of
science, and for the grandeur of its building. Strabo tells us, it was built on
a long slip of earth, raised by men, to secure it from inundation; and the
place he describes, is covered with ruins, two leagues North-east of Cairo.

Heliopolis, possessed a temple of the sun; where, in a particular enclosure,
the sacred ox was fed. This ox, was adored here by the name of Mnevis, as he
was at Memphis, by that of Apis. The credulous people supposed it a god; the
priests, an animal, most useful to agriculture^ in a country, where he assists
in tillage, and afterward in watering the earth, during six months of the
year. When the waters of the Nile are low, oxen are employed to turn machines,
with chain-buckets, which raise the water into reservoirs, whence it is
dispersed over the grounds; for which reason, this animal is preserved at its
birth, and it is forbidden to kill a calf in Egypt.

The temple of the sun was not the only one at Heliopolis; there was another,
built in the old Egyptian style, with sphynx avenues, and stately obelisks
before the principal entrance. Nothing could have a finer effect, than the
colossal figures of marble, and high pillars of a single stone, which were in
front of the vestibule of Egyptian temples. These temples were ruins, in the
time of Augustus. Two, of the four obelisks, which Sochis had erected in that
city, were carried to Rome; a third was destroyed by the Arabs; and the fourth
remains on its pedestal. It is a single stone, brought from the Thebais,
perfectly polished, sixty-eight feet high above the base, and about six feet
and a half square. The obelisk is in good preservation. This, and one sphynx of
yellowish marble, thrown in the dust, are the only remains of Heliopolis.

There was formerly a college of priests here, where, for more than a thousand
years, they had made astronomical observations; and, by their labors,
calculated the solar year of 365 days, and some minutes; which alone, will
prove the extent of their knowledge in this science. It was many years
afterward, before the people of Europe could exactly determine the solar year;
and Julius Coesar, wishing to reform the Roman calendar, was obliged to employ
an astronomer of Alexandria.

At Heliopolis, Herodotus was chiefly instructed in the sciences, and Egyptian
mysteries; which were those profound branches of knowledge, they thought proper
to conceal from the people, under the veil of religion; and, by writing them in
hieroglyphics. Enlightened by what he learnt from them, this father of history,
was crowned at the Olympic games; and the nine books he composed, deemed worthy
of the nine muses, whose names they bore. And yet, how many people, remarks
Savary, who have not read him at all, or not enough, have dared to criticize,
or call him fabulous. For my own part, says the above writer, suspending his
judgment on the remainder of his history, I can only estimate the worth of what
he says concerning Egypt; and, with the utmost satisfaction I can truly say, I
have found the manners and customs of this country, such as he describes them;
except with some slight modifications, as a change of government and religion,
must necessarily have introduced. As to the monuments he has described, what
remains, proves he has not exaggerated, and demonstrates the possibility of
what is no more. Justice demands this homage, in favor of an historian, who,
like Homer, was the painter of nations.

Heliopolis has not only the glory of having instructed Herodotus, but also of
having taught philosophy to Plato; who, from the sublimity of his doctrine, has
obtained the epithet of Divine. In this city, Eudoxus remained thirteen years,
and became one of the most famous astronomers of his time. What now remains of
all her monuments, and of all her sciences? A barbarous Persian has overthrown
her temples; a fanatic Arab burnt her books; and one solitary obelisk,
overlooking her ruins, says to passengers, THIS ONCE WAS HELIOPOLIS.

Herodotus, and some other writers after him, relate some particulars
concerning the Phoenix, and the temple of the sun; which, if true, would be
very wonderful. Of this kind of birds, according to the opinions of the
ancients, there is never but one at a time in the world. He is brought forth in
Arabia, is about the size of an eagle, and lives between five and six hundred
years. His head is adorned with a shining and most beautiful crest; the
feathers of his neck are of a gold color, and the rest are purple; his tail is
white, intermixed with red, and his eyes sparkling like stars. When he finds
his end approaching, he builds a nest with wood, and aromatic spices, and then
dies. From his bones and marrow a worm is produced, out of which another
phoenix is formed. His first care, is to solemnize his parent's obsequies; for
this purpose, he makes up a ball in the shape of an egg, with abundance of
perfumes, as large as he can carry; a hole is then made in it, into which he
puts his parent's body, and closes it up carefully with myrrh, and other
perfumes. After this, he takes up the precious load, and flying to the altar of
the sun, in the city of Heliopolis, he there burns it.

Herodotus and Tacitus dispute the truth of the circumstances, as here related;
but suppose it to be true in general. Pliny, on the contrary, looks upon the
whole to be fabulous; and this is the opinion of most modern authors* This
ancient tradition, has introduced into most languages, the custom of giving
the appellation of phoenix, to whatever is singular and uncommon. Rara avis in
terris, says Juvenal, a rare bird, when speaking of the difficulty to find an
accomplished woman in the world. Seneca makes the same remark, respecting a
good man.

At a little distance from Heliopolis, is the small village of Mataree, so
called, because it has a fresh water spring; and what is remarkable, the only
one in Egypt. Tradition has rendered it famous, as being the place to which the
holy family came, when they fled from Herod: and that the blessed virgin bathed
the child Jesus in this fountain. In this village was an enclosure, where slips
of the balsam shrub brought from Mecca, was cultivated; and which the Eastern
women made use of, to give a freshness to the complexion, and to fortify the
stomach. This precious plant is lost to Egypt; where the pachas, for it was a
pacha who brought it from Mecca, do not stay long enough to think of any thing,
but the interest of the present moment.

Giza, supposed by many writers, to be the ancient site of the Memphis, is
situated opposite to Grand Cairo, on the other side of the Nile, and is the
village where the French merchants have their country houses. The beautiful
island of Raouda, and its odoriferous bowers, the Mekias, against which the
waves beat with violence, old Cairo, and its surrounding gardens, with a
multitude of boats, which are continually crossing the river, are seen from the
principal houses: extensive and verdant prospects, variegated with houses,
mosques, or more distant minarets, charm the eye, inducing the spectators to
sit hours contemplating these smiling objects; while the fresh air, which
follows the course of the Nile in currents, comes, re-animates the senses, and
gives the soul that energy, which is necessary to taste the beautiful and the
sublime. To Giza, therefore, fatigued by business, or suffocated by the heats
of Grand Cairo, the French come to repose; at Giza they recover their health,
and in pure and cooling air, breathe life in the aromatic exhalations of plants
and flowers.

At some farther distance from Grand Cairo, on a canal running into the lake
Bourlos, is the village of Tanta, where there is a considerable annual fair, to
which the inhabitants of upper and lower Egypt come in crowds, to exchange
their native produces for India stuffs, Moka coffee, and French cloths. It
continues a week; and desire of gain brings some of the Egyptians, while love
of pleasure causes many more to come to it. Ten thousand boats are upon the
canal at this season, all carrying abundance of provisions; where are good
cheer, music, and rejoicing. There are nearly as many tents pitched on shore,
to which the most famous courtezans of Egypt fail not to come. They likewise go
on board the boats, where they display their talents for dancing, singing, and
gallantry. Many glass lamps are nightly lighted; the repetition of which,
reflects innumerable stars in the waters. The tents have the same, and this
wonderful illumination, for the extent of a league, produces on the grass, and
the crystal streams, charming effects. These fairs, much frequented, are not
uncommon. They are the remains of the ancient pilgrimages of the Egyptians, to
Canopus, Sais, and Bubustus.

The three other cities we propose to notice, are Alexandria, Rosetta, and
Damietta.

The city of Alexandria, founded by Alexander the Great, and afterward so much
admired and adorned by the Romans, the residence of Cleopatra, and refuge of
Anthony, once famous for its magnificence, luxury, and learning, is now become
an undistinguishable heap of ruins; baths, palaces, porticos, and
amphitheatres, lie promiscuously jumbled together. The savage race of the
Saracens, when they took it, has reduced it to this miserable state; but a
circumstance more to be lamented than any other, was the destruction of the
famous Ptolemean library, containing one hundred thousand volumes. On taking
the city, the general sent to the caliph, to know his orders respecting these
books; who returned for answer, by all means to burn them; for if they were
agreeable to the Alcoran, they were superfluous, and if contrary to it,
impious; accordingly, the Mussulmen applied them to the purpose of heating
their baths, and it was six months before they were consumed.

The name of this city, says Volney, speaking of Alexandria, which recalls to
memory the genius of one of the most wonderful of men; the name of the country
which reminds us of so many great events; the picturesque appearance of the
place itself; the spreading palm trees; the terraced houses, which seem to have
no roof; the lofty slender minarets; every thing announces to the traveller who
has just entered Egypt, that he is in another world; a variety of novel objects
present themselves to every sense; he hears a language, whose barbarous sounds,
and sharp and guttural accents, offend his ear; he sees dresses of the most
unusual and whimsical kind, and figures of the strangest appearance. Instead of
our naked faces, our heads swelled out with hair, our triangular head-dresses,
and our short and close habits, he views with astonishment, tanned visages,
with beards and mustachios, bundles of stuff, rolled up in folds, on their bald
heads; long garments, which, reaching from the neck to the heels, serve rather
to veil, than clothe the body; pipes of six feet long, with which every one is
provided; hideous camels, which carry water in leathern pouches; and saddled
and bridled asses, which lightly trip along with their riders in flippers: he
observes their markets ill supplied with dates, and round flat little loaves; a
filthy drove of half-starved dogs roaming through the streets, and a kind of
wandering phantoms; which, under a single piece of drapery, discover nothing
human, but two eyes, which show they are women.

Amid this crowd of unusual objects, his mind is incapable of reflection; nor
is it until he has reached his place of residence, so desirable after a long
voyage, that, after becoming more calm, he reflects on the narrow, ill-paved
streets, the low houses, which, though not calculated to admit much light, are
still more obscured by lattice-work, the meagre and swarthy inhabitants, who
walk barefooted, without other clothing than a blue shirt, fastened with a
leathern girdle, or a red handkerchief; while the universal air of misery, so
manifest in all he meets, and the mystery which reigns around their houses,
point out to him the rapacity of oppression, and the distrust attendant upon
slavery.

But his whole attention is soon attracted by those vast ruins, which appear on
the land side of the city. In our countries ruins are an object of curiosity.
Scarcely can we discover, in unfrequented places, some ancient castle, whose
decay announces rather the desertion of its master, than the wretchedness of
the neighborhood. In Alexandria, on the contrary, we no sooner leave the New
Town, than we are astonished at the sight of an immense extent of ground,
overspread with ruins. In a walk of two hours we follow a double line of walls
and turrets, which form the circumference of ancient Alexandria. The earth is
covered with the remains of lofty buildings destroyed; whole fronts crumbled
down, roofs fallen in, battlements decayed, and the stones corroded, and
disfigured by saltpeter. The traveller passes over a vast plain, furrowed with
trenches, pierced with wells, divided by walls in ruins, covered over with
ancient columns and modern tombs, amid palm trees and nopals, (the cochineal);
and where no living creature is to be met with, but owls, bats, and jackalls.

Modern Alexandria is a place of small extent, scarcely containing six thousand
inhabitants, but exceedingly commercial; which advantage it owes to its
situation. Ancient Alexandria contained three hundred thousand free inhabitants
in the time of Augustus; a double number of slaves may, at least, be added; and
the amount will be nine hundred thousand. How prodigious the difference!

The canal of Faoua, the only one which still runs to Alexandria, and without
which it could no longer be a town, since it has not a drop of soft water, is
half filled up with mud and sand. Under the government of the Romans, and even
of the Arabs, it was navigable all the year; and its banks were shaded by
date-trees, covered by vines, and ornamented with pleasure-houses. The stream
only flows now about the end of August, leaving scarce time to fill the
reservoirs; the lands are become deserts, and the groves and gardens have
disappeared.

Yet are not all the tokens of ancient magnificence effaced: the cisterns,
built under all parts of the city, are almost entire. Toward the eastern part
of the palace are two marble obelisks, vulgarly called Cleopatra's needles,
containing numerous hieroglyphics: one is thrown down, broken, and covered with
sand; the other still rests on its pedestal; each, cut from one single stone,
is about sixty feet high, and seven feet square, at the base.

Nothing can equal the majesty of a column of red granite, standing near the
southern gate of this city, commonly known by the name of Pompey's pillar, and
which is the most striking object now extant. The whole column is a hundred and
fourteen feet high, and still preserves a perfect polish. The circumference of
the base is about sixty feet. The shaft and the upper stories of the base are
one single block of ninety feet long, and nine in diameter.

At a distance this column is seen predominant over the city, and at sea serves
as a signal for mariners. When near, it excites astonishment, mingled with awe;
the spectator is never weary of admiring the beauty of the capital, the length
of the shaft, or the grand simplicity of the pedestal.

We must not omit mentioning the manner by which some English masters of ships
contrived to get to the top of it; they flew a kite over the pillar, in such a
direction, that when the string was loosed, to let it fall, and the kite came
to the ground, the string lay across the top of the pillar, by means of which
they passed ropes over; and, making shrouds, the same as to the mast of a ship,
they went up triumphantly, drinking a bowl of punch on the summit, and
discovering that there had formerly been a pedestrian statue on it, a piece of
the foot remaining.

Travelers, and men of literature, have made many fruitless attempts, to
discover to what prince it was dedicated. The most intelligent have thought it
could not be in honor of Pompey; since Strabo, and Diodorus Siculus, have not
mentioned it; they therefore remained in doubt from which, says Savary,
Abulseda might have relieved them. He calls it the column of Severus, and
history informs us, this Emperor visited, and deserved well of its inhabitants.
This column was a mark of their gratitude; the Greek inscription, half effaced,
but visible on the western side, when the sun shines on it, was no doubt
legible in the time of Abulfeda, and contained the name of Severus. Neither is
this the sole monument erected to him, by the gratitude of the people of
Alexandria. In the midst of the ruins of Antinoe, built by Adrian, is a
magnificent column, the inscription on which still subsists, dedicated to
Alexander Severus.

In its modern state, Alexandria is the emporium of a considerable commerce. It
is the harbor for all commodities, exported from Egypt to the Mediterranean,
except the rice of Damietta. The Europeans have establishments here, where
factors dispose of our merchandise. Vessels are constantly to be met with from
Marseilles, Leghorn, Venice, Ragusa, and the dominions of the Grand Signior;
but it is dangerous to winter here. The new port, the only harbor for
Europeans, is clogged up with sand; so that in stormy weather ships are liable
to bulge: and the bottom being also rocky, the cables soon chase and part, one
vessel then driving against a second, and that against a third, they are
perhaps all lost. Of this there was a fatal instance, sixteen or eighteen years
ago, when sixty-two vessels were dashed to pieces on the mole, in a gale of
wind from the North-west.

The old port is not subject to this inconvenience; but the Turks admit no
ships into it, except those of Mussulmen. It will perhaps be asked why they do
not repair the new port? The answer is, in Turkey they destroy every thing, and
repair nothing. The old harbor will be destroyed likewise, as the ballast of
vessels has been continually thrown into it, for these last two hundred years.

At the extremity of one of the arms of the new port stood the famous Pharos,
reckoned one of the wonders of the world; and which has nothing now to
represent it, but a Turkish fort, built on the same spot, and probably out of
its ruins.

In time of war Alexandria is of no importance; no fortification is to be seen;
even the Pharos, with its lofty turrets, cannot be defended. A single Russian
or Maltese frigate, would suffice to lay it in ashes; but the conquest would be
of no value. A foreign power could not maintain itself there, as the country is
without water. This must be brought from the Nile by the kalidj, or canal of
twelve leagues; which supply of water would undoubtedly be cut off, were a
foreign power to take possession of Alexandria.

It is the canal alone that connects Alexandria with Egypt; for, from its
situation without the Delta, and the nature of the soil, it really belongs to
the deserts of Africa, and we do not enter Egypt until we arrive at Rosetta;
there the sands, peculiar to Africa, end: and a black, fat, and loamy soil, the
distinguishing characteristic of Egypt, begins. There also, for the first, we
behold the waters of the celebrated Nile, which, rolling between two steep
banks, considerably resemble the Seine, between Auteuil and Passy. The woods of
palm trees on each side, the orchards, watered by its streams, the lemon, the
orange, the banana, the peach, and other trees, by their perpetual verdure,
render Rosetta astonishingly delightful.

Historians tell us, that Alexander's body was embalmed in this city, in a
coffin of gold, which, as may be easily supposed, was taken away, and it was
put into one of glass; being preserved therein so late as to the time of
Augustus, who took a view of it in that state, adorned it with a gold crown,
and wept over it.

Rosetta, says Savary, is one of the pleasantest towns in Egypt. It spreads
along the western bank of the Nile; and is nearly a league in length, and
one-fourth in width. No remarkable square is seen here; no street perfectly
strait; but the houses, built with terraces, standing asunder, and kept in good
repair, have a pleasing air of neatness and elegance. The only remarkable
public edifices are the mosques; the lofty minarets of which are built in a
light, bold style; and produce a picturesque effect, in a town where all the
roofs are flat, by throwing variety into the picture. Most of the houses have a
prospect of the Nile and the Delta; a truly magnificent one! Vessels and boats,
some rowing, some under sail, continually cover the river; while the tumult of
the port, the mirth of the mariners, and their noisy music, present a scene
ever moving, ever alive. The Delta, that immense garden, where the exhaustless
earth is never weary of producing, affords an eternal view of harvests,
vegetables, flowers, and fruits, in succession; the abundant variety of which,
at once, gladdens the eye and the heart. Various species of cucumbers,
delicious melons, the fig, the orange, the banana, the pomegranate, all grow
here, all have an exquisite flavor.

North of the city are gardens, where citron, orange, date, and sycamore trees,
are promiscuously planted; and the arbours they form, impenetrable to the sun's
rays, by the mingling of the trees, together with the flowers scattered among
them, render these groves most enchanting.

When the atmosphere is all on fire, when the big moisture courses down every
member, when gasping man pants after cool air, with what ecstacy does he go and
respire under these bowers, and beside the rivulet, by which they are watered!
There the Turk, with his long jassmine pipe, wrought with amber, imagines
himself transported into the garden of delight, which Mahomet promised:
thoughtless in tranquil apathy, he smokes the sun down, void of desire, void of
ambition. His calm passions never cast one curious look toward futurity;
content with what he possesses, he neither invents, nor brings the inventions
of others to perfection; his life to us seems a slumber, ours to him one
continued state of intoxication. While we are ever pursuing happiness, which
continually eludes our grasps, he peaceably enjoys the good which nature gives,
without troubling himself concerning the morrow.

Here, in these gardens, the young Georgians, sold into slavery by barbarous
parents, quit, with the veil which covers them, that decency they observe in
public. Freed here from all constraint, they cause lascivious dances to be
performed in their presence; sing tender songs, and relate tales and romances,
which present an undisguised picture of their manners, and pleasures. Born in a
temperate clime, they receive from nature a soul of energy, and tumultuous
passions; brought afterward into Egypt, the fire of the atmosphere, the
perfume of the orange-flower, and the emanations of aromatic plants,
voluptuously invade every sense; then does one sole care employ, one sole
desire torment them; one only predominant want is felt; the violence of which
is increased by the restraint under which they are kept.

Rosetta, says Savary, may well excite the curiosity of a European, who sees so
many new objects, that he imagines himself transported into another world; men
and nature, all he beholds is changed. A dead silence reigns throughout the
city, uninterrupted by the noise of carriages; camels are the carriers here;
nothing alters or disturbs the grave walk of the inhabitants; their long
garments float down to their heels; the head is loaded with a heavy turban, or
encircled with a shawl; they cut their hair off, and let their beards grow.
Sashes are common to both sexes; the citizen is armed with a knife, the soldier
with a sabre, and two pistols. The women of low rank, whose clothing consists
of an ample blue shift, and long drawers, cover their faces with a bit of
cloth, having holes opposite the eyes; the rich wear a large white veil, with a
black silk mantle, enveloping the body, like a domino. A stranger scarcely
dares look at them; to speak would be a crime; but these masks are liberal of
their signs and oglings; and, as this is the only language they are permitted
to use in public, it is more expressive, more copious, and in much higher
perfection than in Europe; every thing is said, and wonderfully well
understood, without opening the lips.

The country is as different from the neighborhood of Paris, says Savary, and
we may add of London, as is Rosetta from a town in France, or in England. An
immense flat, without hill or mountain, intersected by innumerable canals;
cornfieldsd, branching sycamores, whose unperishable wood preserves the
mud-wall hut, into which the husbandman retires duding winter, for he sleeps
under the shade in summer; date-trees in clusters, or scattered over the plain,
the profuse fruit of which is nutritive, sweet and salutary; the cassia with
fertile branches, decked in yellow flowers, and bearing a pod well known in
pharmacy; orange and citron trees, unmutilated by the pruning knife, whose
projecting odoriferous boughs form arbours impenetrable by the sun's rays; such
are the objects of the Delta, and such its principal trees and shrubs. Winter
does not rob them of their foliage; they are apparelled all the year, as if
every month was May.

The rice-ground round Rosetta is known by the name Sultani, and is
appropriated to the use and consumption of Constantinople. As soon as the rice
is down, the stubble is torn up, the land slightly dressed, and barley is sown,
which presently ripens. Those who prefer a crop of hay inundate the field, and
sow it with lucern, which grows so fast, that in twenty days it is a foot and a
half high, and so thick that its surface appears one solid verdure. It is three
times cut before the season of transplanting the rice; thus the same field will
either yield two crops of grain; one of rice and the other of barley; or four
crops, one of rice and three of hay. This fecundity is, however, peculiar to
the Delta; when the land lying lower than in the Thebais may be watered, all
the year, by means of the canals and machines.

The principal wealth of this city flows from commerce. The transportation of
foreign merchandise to Cairo, and of the productions of Egypt to the port of
Alexandria, gives employment to a great number of mariners; their vessels are
called scherms, a light kind of boats with lateen sails, and which having no
decks are very hazardous; a gust of wind coming unexpectedly, turns them on
their side, and they founder. The word scherm, in Arabic, expresses the
swiftness with which these small vessels skim the waves. The Bogaz, for so they
call the bar at the mouth of the Nile, and which is another Arabic word,
descriptive of the agitation of the waves, is a dangerous shoal for these light
boats. The waters here drive and struggle to find a passage into the sea; and,
when the wind freshens, the waves running mountains high, form whirlpools,
which engulph vessels. The Bogaz is shallow; and, in the extent of a league,
there is seldom more than a passage of some few fathoms for the vessels, which
is continually changing.

The bar of the Nile is totally closed, two months in the year, and the
commerce of Alexandria interrupted; but were it to become totally impassable,
and were all the shipping of Egypt to be swallowed up, the Ottoman government
would not remove one foot of earth, from the canal of Faoua, to render it
navigable. Committed to their care every thing perishes, nothing is repaired.

Damietta, larger and not less agreeable than Rosetta, forms a semicircle on
the eastern shore of the Nile, two leagues and a half from its mouth. Standing
at one end of this crescent, the eye surveys its whole extent. It contains
about eighty thousand inhabitants, has several squares, one of which is called
Menshia. Bazars, filled with merchandise, okals or khans, as spacious as those
of Cairo, under the porticos of which are Indian stuffs, silks from Mount
Lebanon, sal ammoniac, and quantities of rice bespeak it a commercial place.
The houses, especially those near the river, are very high; most of them have
pleasant saloons, built on the terraces; in which charming places, open to
every wind, the Turk, indolently seated on his sopha, passes his life in
smoking, viewing the sea, bounded by the horizon, the grand lake lying on the
other side, and the Nile running between the two, which traverses a rich
country. Various grand mosques, with high minarets, ornament the city. The
public baths, faced with marble, are similar to those of Grand Cairo; the linen
is clean, and the water very pure.

Multitudes of boats, and small vessels, incessantly fill the port of Damietta.
The scherms serve to load and unload the ships that anchor in the road; others
are coasting pilot-boats. The finest rice of Egypt is cultivated in the
neighboring plains; and its annual exportation amounts to between two and
three hundred thousand pounds. There are likewise cloths, sal ammoniac, wheat,
etc. Laws, ruinous to the country, prohibit the exportation of the latter; but
they are evaded, and it is passed as rice. The Christians of Aleppo and
Damascus, for many ages established here, carry on the principal trade: they
are suffered to grow rich by Turkish indolence, which contents itself with
occasional extortions. Exportation of rice is forbidden; but by arrangements
advantageous to the receiver of the customs, the people of Provence annually
load several ships. The Bogaz prevents them from entering the Nile, and their
cargoes are brought by boats, which practice is productive of innumerable
vexations and abuses. The rice of the best quality, which departs in the
evening for the ship, seldom arrives there, but an inferior sort is
substituted, during the night. The captains of Marseilles, aware of these
tricks, but unable to prevent them, endeavor to repel fraud by fraud, and
traffic becomes a kind of mutual robbery. The thing most disadvantageous to the
commerce of Damietta is, its defective harbors; the road, where vessels lie,
being exposed, every gale that rises the captains are obliged to slip their
cables, and take refuge at Cyprus, or keep the open sea. By cutting a canal of
half a league only, it would be easy to give ships free entrance into the Nile,
which is deep; and this small expense would render Damietta a fine harbor.

The flip of land where this city is built, is only from two to six miles wide.
Rivulets intersect it in every direction, and render it the most fruitful part
of Egypt. The rice, in common years, yields eighty bushels for one; and other
products are in the same proportion. Here nature, eminently and profusely
displaying her riches and pomp, presents, the year round, flowers, fruits and
harvests. She withers not in winter, and fades not in summer. She is neither
scorched nor frozen. The thermometer only varies from the 29th above freezing,
to the 24th. This happy temperature Damietta owes to the vast quantities of
water by which it is surrounded. The thermometer rises twelve degrees higher at
Grand Cairo. Verdure is no where so fresh. Trees no where so loaded with fruit.
The banks, among the rice-fields, bear several species of reeds, some of which
grow very high; among them is the calamus in abundance, with which the
Orientals write. Its small stalk bears long narrow leaves, gracefully pendent
and pliant branches, bedecked with white flowers. Here may be seen the papyrus,
in quantities, the paper of the ancient Egyptians. The present scarcity of the
papyrus, in Egypt, is owing to the avidity of the publicans, who will only
suffer it to grow in a few places, that they may raise the price. Of this
Strabo complains; and the evil, it seems, still continues. Savary observes it
is only to be seen round Damietta, and the lake Menzala; and that most
travelers, who have been there, have not mentioned it; some, less circumspect,
have denied its existence, and propagated sables on the subject. This
triangular rush, eight or nine feet high, and an inch thick, bears a lanigerous
tuft. The lotus also here raises its proud stalk above the water, and appears
the king of aquatic plants. The inland ponds and canals abound with this
stately flower, which yields a most agreeable odor.

Damietta has many villages in its environs; most of them have manufactories,
where the finest Egyptian cloth is made, particularly napkins; much in request:
at the ends of which is silk fringe. They are brought to table, especially, on
visits of ceremony; the slave presents one to wipe the mouth after drinking
sherbet, or eating confectionary, served on a silver plate. Round these
villages usually are small woods, where the trees, planted promiscuously, have
an uncommon, and picturesque effect.

A mile South-west of the town is an orange-grove, to which the inhabitants
resort, where the walks are made straight; and this is the only place where art
has any way aided nature; no where else are the trees planted in rows. No words
can express the pleasure of breathing the cool, and perfumed air of these
delightful shades. The unmutilated trees are above thirty feet high, and their
intermingled branches, and thick foliage, all in bloom, from top to bottom,
wholly exclude the sun's rays. Each orange-tree is a vast nosegay, the flowers
of which almost conceal the leaves, forming together the most beautiful canopy,
ever beheld. There is a small rivulet beside each row, and twice a day a
reservoir is opened, by which the trees are watered. It is intoxication of
pleasure to walk here at noon; and never, says Savary, did I so foricbly feel
all the delicious enjoyments, that odours and aromatics can inspire.

At one end of this walk is a canal full of the papyrus. Entering, on the left,
stands the gardener's hut, and a grove of citron and palm trees, planted so
near each other as scarce to grant admission. This place, enclosed by ditches
and pallisadoes, is the asylum of mystery, where the handsomest of the Turkish
women occasionally come to breathe, say they, balsamic sweetness beneath these
shades.

We shall conclude this account of Damietta with a tale related by Savary, to
prove that incidents, similar to those of the times of Jacob, are still renewed
in Egypt. A farmer, near Damascus, reduced to such distress as to be obliged to
part with his implements of husbandry, led by the invisible hand of Providence,
as formerly Tobias was by the angel, while he bargained for corn, lately
arrived from Damietta. He heard speak of the success of Mourad Bey, who had
entered Grand Cairo victorious, and in triumph. The shape, character and origin
of the warrior were described, and how he had risen from slavery to supreme
power. The astonished farmer found the description accorded with a son, who had
been stolen from him at twelve years old; hope palpitated in his heart; he
hastened home with his provisions, told his family what he had heard, and
determined immediately to depart for Egypt. His weeping wife and sons offered
up prayers for his safe return. Going to the port of Alexandretta, he embarked
there, and came to Damietta. One continued fear tormented him; his son,
forsaking the religion of his ancestors, had embraced Mahometanism; and now,
surrounded as he was with splendour, would he acknowledge his parents? The
thought lay heavy on his heart; yet the wish to snatch his family from all the
horrors of famine, the hope of finding a long lamented son, gave him fortitude.
He continued his journey, came to the capital, repaired to the palace of
Mourad, applied to the officers of the prince, and most ardently solicited
admission. His dress and appearance bespoke poverty and misfortunes, and were
poor recommendations; but his great age, so respectable in the East, pleaded in
his behalf. One of the attendants went to the bey, and told him an aged man,
apparently miserable, requested an audience. Let him enter, replied Mourad, and
the farmer proceeded, with trembling steps, over the rich carpet, which
bespread the hall of the divan, and approached the bey, who reclined on a sopha
embroidered with silk and gold. Crowding sensations deprived him of the use of
speech; at last, after attentively looking, the voice of nature vanquishing
fear, he fell; and, embracing his knees, exclaimed, You are my son! The bey
raised him, endeavored to recollect, and, after finding him to be his father,
made him sit down by his side, and caressed him most affectionately. The first
gush of nature over, the fire described in what deplorable state he had left
his mother, and brethren, whom the prince proposed to send for, and, with them,
divide his riches and power; if they would embrace Islanism. This the generous
Christian had foreseen; and, fearing youth might be dazzled, took not one of
his sons with him. He therefore firmly rejected Mourad's offer, and even
remonstrated with him, on his own change of religion. The bey finding his
father determined, and that his family's distress demanded immediate succor,
sent him back to Syria, with a large sum of money, and a vessel loaded with
corn. The happy husbandman immedidiately returned to the plains of Damascus,
where his arrival banished misery and tears from his homely roof, and brought
joy, ease and festivity. -- This history greatly resembles that of Joseph; and
would more, perhaps, did we know every incident attending it.

INTERVIEW between PRINCE MOURAD and his FATHER.


CHAP. V. Of the different Inhabitants.
AMID those revolutions which all nations have experienced, there are few
countries which have preserved their original, and primitive inhabitants pure,
and unmixed. The same desire which leads individuals to encroach on each
other's property, has excited nations one against another; the consequence of
which has been, to introduce into states a foreign conqueror, who has despoiled
the vanquished nation of the domain, granted them by nature.

Such has been the case with Egypt: deprived three-and-twenty centuries ago, of
her natural proprietors, she has seen her fertile fields, successively, a prey
to the Persians, the Macedonians, the Romans, the Greeks, the Arabs, the
Georgians, and, at length, the race of Tartars, distinguished by the name of
Ottoman Turks. Among so many nations, several of them have left vestiges of
their transient possession: but as they have been blended in succession, they
have been so consounded, as to render it very difficult to discriminate their
respective characters.

The real native Egyptians, according to Savary, are the Copts; called so from
Cophtos, once a famous city in the Thebais; or from cobtos, cut; because they
have always preserved the use of circumcision. These only are the descendants
of the ancient Egyptians; and who, more than two hundred years, subjected by
foreign powers, have lost the genius and science of their forefathers; though
they have preserved their customs, and the ancient vulgar tongue.

The knowledge transmitted from father to son, of all arable lands, their value
and extent, occasions them to be chosen clerks to the beys; and, that they may
conceal their accounts from these lords, most of them are written in Coptic.
They do not, however, perfectly understand the language; but, as their missals,
and the various other works they possess, have an Arabic language, their
ancient language is not lost; and in some future time it may, perhaps, supply
the learned with means of dispelling the obscurity of the first ages, and
removing the veil from mysterious hieroglyphics.

The Copts embraced Christianity at its birth; and Amrou, having conquered
Egypt, permitted them the free exercise of the Christian religion; since when
they have even had churches, priests, bishops, and a patriarch, whose residence
is at Grand Cairo. Numerous superstitious practices, received from their
ancestors, are mingled in their worship; but they are mild, humane and
hospitable. Paternal tenderness and filial love constitute their domestic
happiness, where every tie of blood is cherished and honored. Inland trade,
the art of hatching eggs and raising bees, are almost the whole of their
knowledge. They often enrich themselves by the administrations entrusted to
them; but they seldom enjoy tranquillity, the fruits of their labors. The bey,
who beholds them opulent, often strips them of their riches, without mercy.
Such oppressions do not excite revolt; their want of energy keeps them
enchained in poverty and subjection, which they support without murmuring.

After the Copts, the Arabs are the most ancient people of Egypt, where they
twice have reigned. Their first dominion was in the remote ages of antiquity.
The second began in the seventh, and ended in the twelfth century. Two-thirds
of the present inhabitants are Arabs; the manners of whom differ according to
their mode of life. Those who become husbandmen are governed by their foreign
masters, and present a striking example to philosophers, of the influence of
laws over men. Beneath a tyrannical government, they have lost that good faith,
which characterizes their nation. They take part in their master's quarrels.
Villages arm against villages, and towns against towns; and, during the
revolutions, continually reviving at Grand Cairo, the country presents a
frightful scene of carnage and horror. It is these degenerate Arabs, who render
the navigation of the Nile exceedingly dangerous, attack boats in the dark,
massacre passengers, seize their effects, and commit every kind of outrage.

Another division of the Arabs, who may be called husbandmen, are governed by
their sheiks, who possess various principalities in the Thebais. Now, as
heretofore, they are the judge, the pontiff, and the sovereign of their people;
yet governing more like fathers of families, than kings. These venerable
patriarchs usually take their meals at the doors of their houses, or tents,
inviting all comers: rising from table they cry aloud, Whoever is hungry, let
him in the name of God, come and eat, which is not a barren form; any man,
whoever he may be, has a right to sit down, and feed on what he finds.

These Arabs are the best of people; ignorant of the vices of polished nations,
incapable of disguise, they know neither falsehood nor knavery. Haughty and
generous, they repel insult by arms, and never employ treachery; hospitality is
sacred among them, their houses and tents are open to travelers of all
religions, and their guests are treated with as much respect, and affection as
their own kindred. Of their honesty some idea may be formed, by the following
fact, says Savary, to which I was a witness. An Arab sheik had long annually
come to the district of the French, where he took up goods on credit, of a
merchant; still coming the following year, at the same time, bringing the
money, and taking fresh merchandise. Sickness one year prevented him from
coming himself, at the usual time; but he sent his son, with the money, and
continued a trade, equally honorable to both nations.

A third species of Arabs is comprised under the general name of Bedouai; of
whom we have already given some account. They are divided into tribes, meddle
not with agriculture, and feed on barley, dates, and the flesh and milk of
their herds, which they drive into the valleys, where they find water and
pasturage. Masters of the deserts, they are the enemies of all caravans, attack
them wherever they can find them, and force them either to fight, or pay
tribute. If the resistance be too powerful, they retreat without fear of
pursuit; if they conquer, they pillage every one, divide the spoil, but never,
as we have before remarked, kill any one, unless to revenge the death of their
companions.

After the miseries M. de S. Germain underwent, crossing Suez, he came expiring
to the tent of a Bedouin, to whose generous care he owed his life; and who
conducted him to Cairo, as soon as his health was recovered. M. Pages fled over
the sands of Arabia Deserta, with seven Arabs; he had lost his water and
provisions, and, falling from his camel, was in danger of being sacrificed to
the resentment of an insulted tribe. One of his companions allighted, and, at
the risk of his life, took him up behind him, till they came to a place of
safety. The whole provision of the Arabs, during the journey, was a barley cake
a day, and that not a large one. This they divided into eight portions; and the
one they gave the stranger was always twice as much as their own.

Of the misfortunes attending M. de S. Germain, Volney has given a more
particular relation. The caravan he accompanied, it appears, was composed of
English officers and passengers, who had landed from two vessels at Suez, in
their way to Europe by Cairo. The Bedouin Arabs of Tor, informed that their
passengers were richly laden, resolved to plunder them, and attacked them five
leagues from Suez. The Europeans, stripped stark naked, and dispersed by fear,
separated into two parties. Some returned to Suez; the remainder, to the number
of seven, thinking they could reach Cairo, pushed forward into the desert.
Fatigue, thirst, hunger, and the heat of the sun, destroyed them, one after the
other. M. de S. Germain alone survived all these horrors. During three days,
and two nights, he wandered in this bare and sandy desert, frozen at night by
the North wind, (for it was in the month of January) and burnt by the sun
during the day, without any other shade but a single bush, into which he thrust
his head among the thorns; or any other drink but his own urine. At length, on
the third day, perceiving the water of Berket-el-Hadj, he strove to make toward
it; but he had already fallen three times, from weakness, and would have
remained where he last fell, but for an Arab, mounted on a camel, who saw him
at a great distance. This charitable man conveyed him to his dwelling, and took
care of him for three days, with the utmost humanity. At the expiration of that
time he was conveyed to Cairo, where he arrived in a most deplorable condition.
His body was one entire wound, his breath cadaverous, and he had scarcely a
spark of life remaining. By dint of great care and attention, he was at last
restored to health. Much was said, at the time, of the barbarity of the Arabs,
who notwithstanding killed no one. At present, says Volney, we may venture to
blame the imprudence of the Europeans, who conducted themselves like madmen
throughout the whole affair. So great was the discord among them, and they had
carried their negligence so far, as not to have a single pistol fit for use.
All their arms were at the bottom of their chests. Besides, it appears that the
Arabs did not act merely from their usual motives; well-informed persons
assert, that the affair was transacted at Constantinople, by the English East
India Company's Agents; who saw, with a jealous eye, individuals entering into
a competition with them for the traffic of Bengal; and what has passed in the
course of enquiries into the event, has proved the truth of the assertion.

An excessive love of liberty occasions them to prefer the dreary wilderness,
where they lived independent, to the rich plains of Egypt, where they must live
as slaves. Government has several times offered them lands, which they have
constantly refused; and this independent spirit, so well pourtrayed in the
sacred scriptures, they have inviolably preserved from the time of Ishmael,
their father. Liberty has so many charms, that, to obtain it, they firmly
support hunger, thirst, and the scorching sun. Sometimes humbled, but never
enslaved, they have braved all the powers of the earth; and shook off the
chain, in which other nations have alternately been bound. The Romans, masters
of the world, lost the armies they sent to conquer their country. The
Egyptians, Persians and Ottomans, never could subdue them. Thus this proud
people is the sole nation, which has preserved that haughtiness of character,
generosity, and inviolable fidelity, which so highly honor humanity. Deceit
and perjury they know not. Ignorant of, though not despising, science; sound
reason, uprightness and elevation of soul, distinguish them from all the
Orientals. These are the Arabs which the genius of a single man united, to the
destruction of the thrones, the conquering of kingdoms, and the imposing of
laws on two-thirds of the earth. Their conquests are lost, but their character,
religion, and manners are preserved.

Except the Copts and Arabs, the Mograbians, or Western Mahometans, are the
most numerous inhabitants of Egypt; they devote themselves, some to trade, and
some to arms. Their nation ought not to be judged by the individuals of Grand
Cairo: those who become soldiers are adventurers, most of them guilty of
crimes, and banished from their country by the fear of justice. These
merciless, faithless, lawless soldiers, abandon themselves to every excess, and
always sell themselves to that Bey, who is the best bidder.

The number of real Turks here, is not great, exclusive of the Janissaries and
Assabs; who, abusing their power, pillage the Egyptians, and foreigners, and
employ every means to amass great riches. Like the Mograbians, they are neither
disciplined, understand the art of gunnery, nor would it be possible for them
to oppose the military science of Europeans.

The Syrian Christians, Greeks, and Jews, addict themselves entirely to
commerce, exchange, and the mechanic arts. Their ductile cunning, promotes them
occasionally to be commissioners of the customs, and receivers of the revenue
in Egypt; but their honesty may not be depended on, and their arts should
always be watched. Having obtained power, they employ it to oppress European
merchants, invent exactions, and shackle their commerce. Many of them are
goldsmiths, and work in gold, silver, and jewelry, with tolerable skill.
Their performances in fillagree are valuable. Several of them have established
manufactories of light stuffs, made from Bengal cotton, and the silk of Syria,
which are purchased by the natives. Though well woven, these stuffs fail in the
dye, the color being neither so vivid, nor so unfading as those of India,
which must be attributed to the ignorance of the artists; for Egypt produces
excellent indigo, carthamus, and various dies. Their linen cloths have the same
defect. Egyptian flax, formerly so renowned for its excellence, is still the
same; but, the spinners are so bad, that their linen is very coarse.

The amount of these inhabitants, so different in their manners, religion, and
nations, is near four millions; these are governed and kept in order, by eight
thousand Mamluks. A matter not surprising, if we recollect, that under
Augustus, three cohorts, amounting to about three thousand men, were sufficient
to guard the Thebais, or Upper Egypt; as Strabo informs us, who, was an ocular
witness of the fact.

CHAP. VI. Of their Character, Private Life, Food, Occupations, Amusements.
LIFE, in the capital of Egypt, says Savary, is rather passive, than active.
Nine months in the year, the body is oppressed by heat; and the soul, in a
state of apathy, sighs after calm tranquillity. Inaction, under a temperate
clime, is painful; here repose is enjoyment. The most frequent salutation at
meeting, or parting, is, peace be with you. Effeminate indolence is born with
the Egyptian, grows with his growth, and descends with him to the grave. It is
the vice of the climate; it influences his inclinations, and governs his
actions. The sofa, therefore, is the most luxurious piece of furniture in an
apartment. Their gardens have charming arbours, but no walks. The European,
born under a varying sky, is active, impatient, and agitated, like the
atmosphere in which he lives; while the Egyptian, feeling the same heat, and
the same sensation, two thirds of the year, is idle, solemn, and patient.

He rises with the sun to enjoy the morning air; purifies himself, and repeats
the appointed prayer. His pipe and coffee are brought him, and be reclines at
his ease on his sofa. Slaves, with their arms crossed, remain silent at the
farther end of the chamber, with their eyes fixed on him, seeking to anticipate
his wants. His children standing in his presence, unless he permits them to be
seated, preserve every appearance of tenderness and respect: he gravely
caresses them, gives them his blessing, and sends them back to the harem.

Breakfast ended, he transacts the business of his trade, or office; and as to
disputes, they are few, among a people where the name of attorney is unknown;
and where each man is his own pleader.

When visitors come, they are received without many compliments, but in an
endearing manner. His equals are seated cross-legged, beside him; his inferiors
kneel, and fit upon their hams. People of distinction, are placed on a raised
sofa. This is nearly the general custom throughout Turkey, and seems to be the
custom, not only of the present, but of ancient times. Thus, according to
Virgil, Aeneas in the palace of Dido, had the place of honor; while, seated on
a raised bed, he related to the queen, the burning of Troy. When every person
is seated, the slaves bring pipes and coffee, and set the perfume brasier in
the middle of the chamber, and afterward present sweetmeats and sherbet.

The tobacco, smoaked in Egypt, is brought from Syria, in leaf, and cut by them
into long filaments; it is not so acrid as that of America; and, to render it
more agreeable, they mix with it the odorous wood of aloes. Their pipes are
usually of jasmin, the end garnished with amber, and often enriched with
precious stones: they are very long; the vapor imbibed, is therefore very
mild. The Orientals pretend, it agreeably irritates the palate, while it
gratifies the smell. Some of their pipes are fifteen feet long.

When the visit is almost ended, a slave, bearing a silver plate, in which
essences are burning, goes round to the company; and each, in turn, perfumes
his beard, and sprinkles rose water on his head and hands. Thus, the ancient
custom of perfuming the head and beard; as sung by the royal prophet, "Like the
precious ointment upon the head, that ran down upon the beard, even upon
Aaron's beard," is still continued. Anacreon, the father of the festive ode,
and the poet of the graces, incessantly repeats, "I delight to sprinkle my body
with precious perfumes, and crown my head with roses."

About noon, the table is prepared, and the viands brought in a large tray of
tinned copper; and though in no great variety, yet always in great plenty. In
the center, is a mountain of rice cooked with poultry, and highly seasoned with
spice and saffron. Round this are hashed meats, pigeons, stuffed cucumbers,
delicious melons and fruits. The roast meats are cut small, laid over with the
fat of the animal, seasoned with salt, spitted, and done on the coals; they are
tender and succulent. The guests seat themselves on a carpet, round the table;
a slave brings water in one hand, and a basin in the other, to wash. This is an
indispensable ceremony, where each person puts his hand in the dish, and where
the use of forks is unknown; it is repeated when the meal is ended. These
customs of the East, appear to be very ancient.

Menelaus, and the beauteous Helen, having loaded Telemachus, and Pisistratus,
with gifts, gave them a hospitable banquet.

And now when through the royal dome they passed,
High on a throne the king each stranger placed.
A golden ewer, the attendant damsel brings,
Replete with water, from the crystal springs.
With copious streams, the shining vase supplies,
A silver laver of capacious size.
They wash. The tables in fair order spread,
The glittering cannisters are crowned with bread!
Viands of various kinds, allure the taste
Of choicest sort, and savor rich repast!
ODYS. XV. The manner, in which the son of Thetis received the Greek deputies,
very much resembles that in which the Egyptians treat their guests.

After dinner, the Egyptians retire to the harem, where they flumber some
hours, amidst their wives and children. A commodious and agreeable place of
repose is extreme luxury to them. Thus, Mahomet, who neglected nothing that
might seduce, tells his followers, that the inhabitants of Paradise enjoy the
sweets of repose, and have a place most delightful to sleep in at neon.

The poor having neither sofa nor harem, lie down on the mat on which they have
dined. Thus, Jesus Christ, at the last supper, suffered his beloved disciple to
repose his head upon his bosom.

It is customary in the evening to go on the water, or breathe the fresh air of
the banks of the Nile, beneath the orange and sycamore-trees. An hour after
sunset, supper is served up, consisting of rice, poultry, vegetables, and
fruits, which are very salutary during the heats: the stomach requires these,
and would reject more solid food. Moderation in eating, is the virtue of the
climate.

Such is the ordinary life of the Egyptians. Our shows, plays, and pleasures
are to them unknown; a monotony, which, to an European would be death, is
delight to an Egyptian. Their days are past in repeating the same thing, in
following the same customs, without a wish or thought beyond. The lower class
of people, however, are very fond of listening to the tales and tricks of
conjurors.

Among the other diversions, by which the jugglers delude the common people out
of their money, is that of leading about dancing camels. These animals are
taught to dance when young, by being brought upon a heated floor, which gives
them a good deal of pain, and causes them to lift up their legs as if they were
dancing, while they keep beating time with a drum; and this practice they
continue for about half a year; after which time, when the camel hears the
noise of a drum, he strikes into a dance. The fortune tellers, have likewise a
trick of breeding up little birds, which, when any person applies to them to
have his fortune told, bring him a scrip of paper, in which his future destiny
is written.

The Egyptians, as their name imports, had their origin in this country. They
are called by the Turks, Zinganees, from Zinganeus, their leader; who, with a
great many Egyptians, retired into the deserts, when sultan Selim took Egypt
from the Mamluks; where they increased to so formidable a number, making
incursions, from time to time, in the plain, that the Turks were glad to enter
into a treaty with them; by which it was agreed, they should lay down their
arms, and be allowed the same privileges as other subjects, in exercising any
trade, or means of livelihood. But the Zinganees, having been accustomed to a
vagabond wandering life, and lost all ideas of religion, were averse to change
their mode of living, and still continued to follow their former course of
rapine and plunder. And the Turks, finding they could not be reclaimed, were
obliged to banish them the country; of course, a power was given to any person
to kill a Zinganee; or make a slave of him, if discovered in the country after
a limited time. This law was so well enforced, that a Zinganee was not to be
seen in Egypt for many years after. They had agreed to disperse themselves, in
small parties, all over the world; and, being natives of Egypt, a country where
the occult sciences, or black art, as it was called, had, in the opinion of
credulous people, risen to great perfection, they thought they could not pitch
upon a more effectual means of gaining subsistence; and, at the same time,
indulge their wandering way of life, than by setting up for fortune tellers.

Egypt, however, as well as Italy, says Savary, has her improvisatore, called
Almai, or learned; which title they obtain, by being more educated than other
women. They form a class very famous in the country; to be admitted into which,
it is necessary to possess a fine voice, eloquence, the rules of grammar, and
be able to compose and sing extempore verses, adapted to the occasion.

ALMAI, or EGYPTIAN DANCING GIRLS.


The almai, know all new songs by rote; their memory is stored with the best
tales; they are present at all festivals, and are the chief ornament of
banquets. They place them in a raised orchestra, or pulpit, where they sing
during the feast; after which, they descend, and form dances, which no w^y
resembles ours. They are pantomimes, that represent the common incidents of
life. Love is their usual subject. The suppleness of their dancers' bodies, is
inconceivable; and the flexibility of their features, which take impressions of
the parts they play at will, is astonishing. The indecency of their attitudes
is often excessive; each look, each gesture, speaks; and, in a manner so
forcible, as not possibly to be misunderstood. They throw aside modesty with
their veils When they begin to dance, a long and very light silk robe floats on
the ground, negligently girded by a sash: long black hair, perfumed, and in
tresses, descends over their shoulders; the shift, transparent as gauze,
scarcely conceals the skin: as the act on proceeds, the various forms and
contours that the body can assume, seem progressive; the sound of musica
instruments regulates their steps Words adap^^d to such like scenes inflame
them still more, until they appear intoxicated, and become frantic bacc^ants.
Forgetting all reserve, they then abandon themselves to the disorder of their
senses; while an indelicate people, who wish nothing should be left to the
imagination, redouble their applauses.

[ See the plate, which exhibits a view of the pyramids.]

These almai, are admitted into all harems; where they teach the women the new
airs, recount amorous tales, and recite poems in their presence, which are
interesting, by being pictures of their own manners. They teach them the
mysteries of their art, and instruct them in lascivious dances. The minds of
these women are cultivated, their conversation is agreeable, they speak their
language with purity; and habitually addicting themselves to poetry, learn the
most winning and sonorous modes of expression. Their recital is very graceful;
when they sing, nature is their only guide. Some of their airs are light and
gay; but their excellence is mostly seen in the pathetic. When they rehearse a
tale, in the manner of the ancient tragic ballad, by dwelling upon affecting
and plaintive tones, they inspire melancholy; which insensibly augments, till
it melts into tears. The very Turks, enemies as they are to the arts, pass
whole nights in listening to them. Two people sing together occasionally; but,
like their orchestra, they are always in unison. Accompaniments in music, are
only for enlightened nations; who, while melody charms the ear, wish to have
the mind employed by a just and inventive modulation.

The Israelites, to whom Egyptian manners, by long dwelling in Egypt, were
become natural, had also their almai. At Jerusalem, as at Cairo, they gave the
women lessons. St. Mark, relates a fact, which proves the power of the Oriental
dance over the heart of man. He tells us, that Herod was so pleased with his
daughter's dancing on some great festival, as to bid her ask any favor of him
she thought proper, and that he would grant it; upon which, at the desire of
her mother, she requested the head of John the Baptist, which was immediately
brought her in a charger.

The almai, are present at marriage ceremonies, and precede the bride, playing
on instruments. They also accompany funerals, at which they sing dirges, utter
groans and lamentations, and imitate every mark of grief and despair. Their
price is high, and they seldom attend any but wealthy people, and men of high
rank.

I was invited, says Savary, to a splendid supper, given by a rich Venetian
merchant, to the receiver-general of the finances of Egypt. The almai sung
various airs, during the banquet; and afterward the praises of the principal
guests. The most pleasing part of this performance, was an ingenious allegory,
in which Cupid was the supposed interlocutor. There was a play after supper,
and handfuls of sequins were sent to the singers. This festival, brought them
at least fifty guineas: they are not, however, always so well paid.

The common people have always their almai, who are a second order of these
women, imitators of the first; but have neither their elegance, grace, or
knowledge. They are seen every where; the public squares and walks, round Grand
Cairo, abound with them; the populace require ideas to be conveyed with still
less disguise; decency will not permit the licentiousness of their motions, and
postures to be described; of which no idea can be formed but by seeing them.
The Indian Bayadieres, are exemplarily modest, when compared to the dancing
girls of the Egyptians. This is the principle diversion of these people, and
one in which they take great delight.

Rooke, describing a magnificent fete, given by one of the richest merchants in
Cairo, in celebration of his son's return from India, and to which he was
invited to partake, says, his company was very numerous, consisting of three or
four hundred Turks, who were all sitting on sofa's and benches, smoking their
long pipes; the room in which they were assembled, was a spacious and lofty
hall; in the center of which was a band of music, composed of five Turkish
instruments, and some vocal performers; as there were no ladies in the
assembly, it was not the most lively party in the world; but, being new to me,
was for that reason entertaining.

Being a stranger, I was a kind of sight to them, and they asked me numberless
questions; at the same time being extremely civil, and several of them as a
compliment, taking their pipes out of their mouths, and offering them to me to
smoke; although the indelicacy of this custom was somewhat disgusting, yet, in
conformity to their manners, I took their pipes, smoked two or three whiffs and
returned them. They look upon it as the most civil thing they can do, to a
stranger, or visitor, to offer him the dish of coffee they themselves are
sipping, or the pipe they are smoking, which it would be the height of ill
manners in any one to refuse. Our supper was served at twelve o'clock, and
consisted of sweetmeats, pastry, and sherbets, served on silver waiters, placed
on the carpet, around which we formed ourselves in different parties, of five
or six in each: we did not continue long at table, and immediately; as our
repast was finished, the company broke up.

Among other amusements, in which the people of Grand Cairo take great delight,
are the tricks of apes; great numbers of which are seen in the streets. They
are brought by the Arabs from Mecca, who teach them different anticks for
diversion. The Arabs being naturally inclined to buffoonery, their genius bears
no small resemblance to the instinct of apes, and affords much amusement to
those who accompany their caravans. Among other droll stories of the cunning
and sagacity of these animals, the following is related from Le Brun.

An ape, kept by one of the Arabs, used to remain in the kitchen while the
victuals were dressing, to prevent the hawks from stealing any thing away.
Hawks are very numerous in these countries, and collect together on the tops of
houses, in order to snatch up whatever they see within their reach. The
chimnies being very low, and very wide, enables them to dive down, and carry
off any provisions that may be lying on the hearth. It happened one day that
this Arab, having put a piece of meat into the pot, went out, and not returning
again soon, it boiled over, and the meat remained uncovered. A hawk, who was on
the look out, upon the top of the chimney, perceiving this, was very desirous
of the meat; and flying down, ventured to seize upon it, and carried it up the
chimney. The ape, who saw himself tricked, cast a very sorrowful look up the
chimney; and, foreseeing the ill usage he should meet with from his master,
endeavored to avoid the storm by an artifice of his own. He argued, therefore,
with himself in this manner: "The hawk that has done me this injury, after he
has devoured his prey, will, no doubt, return to see if there be any thing more
left for him." And the fire being out, he clapped himself in the pot, and
turning his bare buttocks upwards, thought the hawk might take him for another
piece of flesh. In short, the hawk being returned, and looking from the top of
the chimney, stooped down on what he saw in the pot; and the ape, who was on
the catch, turning himself round very dexterously, seized on the falcon,
chopped off his head, and put him into the pot. The Arab, on returning home,
went to look at the meat he had put on the fire; and, perceiving the
metamorphosis, looked very angrily on the ape. But this creature making a leap,
took the hawk out of the pot, clapped himself into it, in the same posture he
had done at first, and showed by several gestures, that the hawk had taken away
the meat, and the manner in which he surprised him, and put him into the pot.
From this one instance, it is easy to conceive how many stories of the like
nature, these creatures would furnish, and to which the Italian proverb is very
applicable: si non e vero, e ben trovato; i. e. if not true, it is wellinvented.

Having now described the mode of life that the men lead, we will endeavor to
give a general idea of female manners in this country. In Europe, women act
parts of great consequence, and often reign sovereigns on the world's vast
theater. How different in Egypt, where they are bowed down by the fetters of
slavery, condemned to servitude, and have no influence in public affairs. The
Egyptians never even mention their wives in conversation; or, if obliged to
speak of them, they say the mother of such a person, the mistress of the house,
etc. Good manners will not permit the visitor to ask; How does your wife do,
Sir? But in imitation of their reserve, it is necessary to say, How does the
mother of such a person do? And even this they think an insult, unless asked by
a kinsman, or an intimate friend.

Subject to the immutable laws by which custom governs the East, the women do
not associate with men; not even at table, where the union of sexes produces
mirth and wit, and makes food sweet. When the great dine with one of their
wives, she is previously informed, prepares the apartment accordingly, perfumes
it with precious essences, procures the most delicate viands, and receives her
lord with the utmost attention and respect. Among the common people, the women
usually stand or sit in the corner of the room, while the husband dines; often
hold the basin for him to wash, and serve him at table. Customs like these,
which the Europeans rightly call barbarous, and exclaim against, appear so
natural here, that they do not suspect it can be otherwise elsewhere. Such is
the power of habit over man. What has been for ages, he supposes, a law of
nature.

I lately dined with an Italian, says Savary, who had married an Egyptian
woman, and having lived there long, assumed their habits. His wife and
sister-in-law stood in my presence; and it was with difficulty I prevailed on
them to sit at table with us, where they were extremely timid and disconcerted.

The women in Egypt overlook their household, and do not think themselves
debased, by preparing themselves their own food, and that of their husbands.
Former customs still subsisting, render their cares duties. Thus, Sarah
hastened to bake cakes upon the hearth, when angels visited Abraham, who
performed the rights of hospitality. Sarah likewise, who prepared the dinner
for Abraham and his guests, sat not at table, but remained in her tent.

Though thus employed, the Egyptian women have much leisure, which they spend
among their slaves; embroidering sashes, making veils, tracing designs to
decorate their sofas, and in spinning. Such Homer painted the women of his
time. Labor has also its relaxations; pleasure is not banished the harem.
Cheerful and passionate songs are accompanied by the slaves, with the tambour
de basque and with castanets. Sometimes the almai come to enliven the scene
with their dances, and affecting recitals, and by relating amorous romances;
and, at the close of the day, there is an amorous repast, in which exquisite
fruits and perfumes are served with profusion. Thus do they endeavor to charm
away the dullness of captivity.

Not that they are wholly prisoners; once or twice a week they are permitted to
go to the bath, and visit female relations and friends. To bewail the dead, is
likewise a duty they are allowed to perform. I have often seen distracted
mothers round Cairo, says Savary, reciting funeral hymns, over the tombs they
had bestrewed with odoriferous plants. Thus, Hecuba and Andromache lamented
over the body of Hector; and thus, Fatima and Sophia wept over Mahomet. We will
here insert the complaint of Fatima, the daughther of Mahomet; that of
Andromache, may be seen in the twenty-fourth book of Homer's Iliad.

FATIMA.
"Oh my father! Minister of the most high! Prophet of the God of mercy! Have
thou left us and art gone? With thee divine revelation is departed also! The
angel Gabriel has taken his flight, he has flown to the higher heavens! Hear my
last prayer, thou Power supreme; hasten to unite my soul to his; let me behold
his face; deprive me not of the fruit of his righteousness, nor of his
intercession at the day of judgment!

Then, taking a little of the dust from the coffin, and putting it to her face,
she adds,

"Who, having smelt the dust of his tomb, can ever find odor in the most
exquisite perfumes? Alas! every agreeable sensation is extinct in my heart! The
clouds of sorrow envelop me, and will change the brightness of day, to the
darkness of night!"

This custom was not unknown to the Romans; they had their funeral urns strewed
with cypress. How charmingly does the elegant Horace shed flowers over that of
Quinctilius! How affecting, how passionate, is the ode he addresses to Virgil,
on the death of their common friend! Among European nations, where ties of
kindred are much relaxed, they rid themselves as much as possible, of the
religious duties which ancient piety paid the dead; but the reason why we die
unregretted is, because we have had the misfortune to live unbeloved.

The Egyptian women receive each others visits very affectionately; when a lady
enters the harem, the mistress rises, takes her hand, presses it to her bosom,
kisses her, and makes her sit down by her side; a slave hastens to take her
black mantle; she is entreated to be at ease, quits her veil and her outward
garment, and discovers a floating robe, tied round the waist with a sash, which
perfectly displays her shape. She then receives compliments according to their
manners. "Why, my mother, or my sister, have you been so long absent? We sighed
to see you! Your presence is an honor to our house; it is the happiness of our
lives!" Such titles as madam, miss, mistress, are unknown in Egypt. A mother,
advanced in years, is called mother; when young, sister; and if a girl,
daughter of the house.

Slaves present coffee, sherbet, and confectionary; they laugh, talk, and play;
a large dish is placed on the sofa, on which are oranges, pomegranates,
bananas, and excellent melons. Water, and rose water, mixed, are brought in an
ewer, and with them a silver basin to wash the hands, and loud glee and
conversation season the repast. The chamber is perfumed by wood of aloes in a
brazier; and the slaves afterward dance to the sound of cymbals, with whom the
mistresses often mingle. At parting, they several times repeat, God keep you in
health! Heaven grant you a numerous offspring! Heaven preserve your children;
the delight and glory of your family! These wishes, very ancient in the East,
are found often in the holy scriptures.

While a visitor is in the harem, the husband must not enter; it is the asylum
of hospitality, and cannot be violated without fatal consequences; a cherished
right which the Egyptian women carefully maintain, being interested in its
preservation. A lover, disguised like a woman, may be introduced into the
forbidden place, and it is necessary he should remain undiscovered; death would
otherwise be his reward. In this country, where the passions are excited by the
climate, and the difficulty of gratifying them, love often produces tragical
events.

The Turkish women go guarded by their eunuchs, upon the water also, and enjoy
the charming prospects of the banks of the Nile. Their cabins are pleasant,
richly embellished, and the boats well carved and painted. They are known by
the blinds over the windows, and the music by which they are accompanied.

When they cannot go abroad, they endeavor to be merry in their prisons.
Toward sunset, they repair to the terrace, and take the fresh air among the
flowers, which are there carefully reared. Here they often bathe; and thus at
once, enjoy the cool, limpid water, the perfume of odoriferous plants, the
balmy air, and the starry host which shines in the firmament. Thus bathed
Bathsheba, when David beheld her from the roof of his palace.

The Turks oblige the public criers to swear, they will shut their eyes, when
they call the people to prayer, that their wives may not be seen from the high
minarets. Another more certain precaution they take is, to choose the blind to
perform this pious function.

Such is the usual life of the Egyptian women. Their duties are, to educate
their children, of which we shall treat hereafter, to take care of their
household, and live retired within their family: their pleasure is to visit,
give feasts, in which they often yield to excessive mirth, and licentiousness;
go on the water, take the air in orange-groves, and listen to the almai.

The hot baths, known in the remotest ages, and celebrated by Homer, have
preserved all their alurements and salubrity. The baths have been already
described, in our account of Turkey; of the manner of bathing in Egypt, it may
not be amiss to add some further particulars.

The bathers are not, as in this country, imprisoned in a kind of tub, where
the body cannot rest at its ease; but reclining on a spread sheet, and the head
supported on a small pillow; they freely take what posture they please, while
clouds of odoriferous vapors envelop and penetrate every pore.

Having reposed thus some time, a gentle moisture diffuses itself over the
body; a servant then comes, gently presses, and turns the bather; and when the
limbs are flexible, makes the joints crack without trouble; then touches
lightly, and seems to knead the body, without giving the slightest sensation of
pain.

This done, he puts on a stuff glove, and continues rubbing, and freeing the
skin of the patient, which is quite wet, from every kind of scaly obstruction,
and all those imperceptible particles that clog the pores, till it becomes as
smooth as satin; he then conducts the bather into a cabinet, and pours a
lather of perfumed soap on his head, and retires.

The ancients honored their guests still more; and treated them after a most
voluptuous manner. Whilst Telemachus was at the court of Nestor, "The beauteous
Polycaste, youngest of the daughters of the king of Pylos, led the son of
Ulysses to the bath, washed him with her own hands; and, having rubbed his body
with precious ointments, clothed him in rich garments, and a shining mantle."
Nor were Pisistratus and Telemachus, worse treated in the palace of Menelaus;
the beauties of which having admired, "they were conducted to marble basins, in
which the baths were prepared; where beauteous slaves washed them, rubbed them
with odorous oils, and clothed them in fine garments, and magnificent furred
robes."

The room into which the bather retires, has two water-cocks, one for cold, the
other for hot water; and he washes himself. The attendant presently returns,
with a depilatory pomatum, which instantly eradicates hair, wherever applied.
It is in general use, both with men and women in Egypt.

Being well washed and purified, the bather is wrapped up in hot linen, and
follows his guide through various windings, which lead to the outward
apartment; while this insensible transition, from heat to cold, prevents all
inconvenience. Being come to the alcove, a bed is ready prepared, on which the
person no sooner lies down, than a boy comes, and begins to press with his
delicate hands, all parts of the body, in order to dry them perfectly: the
linen is once more changed; and the boy gently rubs the callous skin of the
feet with pumice stone, and then brings a pipe, and Moka coffee.

Coming from a bath filled with hot vapor, in which excessive perspiration
bedewed every limb, into a spacious apartment, and the open air, the lungs
expand and respire pleasure. Well kneaded, and, as it were, regenerated the
blood circulates freely, the body feels a voluptuous ease, a flexibility till
then unknown, and a lightness, as if relieved from some enormous weight; and
the man almost fancies himself newborn, and first beginning to live. A
consciousness of existence, diffuses itself to the very extremities; and, while
thus yielding to the most delightful sensations, ideas of the most pleasing
kind, pervade and fill the soul; the imagination wanders through worlds, which
itself embellishes, every where drawing pictures of happiness and delight. If
life be only a succession of ideas, the vigor, the rapidity, with which the
memory then retraces all the knowledge of the man, would lead us to believe,
that the two hours of delicious calm, which succeed bathing, are an age.

These are the baths, the use of which was so strongly recommended by the
ancients, and the pleasures of which the Egyptians still enjoy. Here they
prevent or exterminate rheumatisms, catarrhs, and those diseases of the skin,
which want of perspiration occasions. Here they find a radical cure for that
disease, which attacks the powers of generation, and the remedies for which are
so dangerous in Europe. Here they rid themselves of those uncomfortable
sensations, so common among other nations, who have not the same regard to
cleanliness. Tournfort, who had taken the vapor bath at Constantinople, where
they are much less careful than at Grand Cairo, thinks they injure the lungs;
but longer experience would have convinced him of his error. There are no
people who practice this bathing more than the Egyptians; nor any to whom such
diseases are less known. They are almost wholly unacquainted with pulmonic
complaints.

The women are passionately fond of these baths, where they go at least once a
week, taking with them slaves accustomed to the office. More sensual than men,
after the usual process, they wash the body, and particularly the head with
rose water. Then their attendants braid their long black hair, with which,
instead of powder and pomatum, they mingle precious essences. They then blacken
the rim of the eyelid, arch the brows with cohel (tin burnt with gall nuts)
and stain the nails of their hands and feet, of a golden yellow, with henna.
Their linen, and their robes having been past through the sweet vapor of aloes
wood, and their dressing ended, they remain in the outward apartment, and pass
the day in feasting; while singing girls come and dance, and sing soothing
airs, or recount amorous adventures.

The days of bathing, are festive days among the Egyptian women; they deck
themselves magnificently; and, under the long veil of mantle, which hide them
from the public eye, wear the richest stuffs. They undress themselves in
presence of each other, and their vanity extends to their very drawers; which,
in winter, are made of stuffs, inwove with silk and gold; and, in summer, of
worked muslin. Ruffles and lace, are unknown to them; but their shifts are made
of cotton and silk, as light and transparent as gauze. Rich sashes of
cassimere, bind up their floating robes. The wool of cassimere, is the finest
in the world, surpassing silk itself. The sashes made from it, cost about five
and twenty pounds each; they are usually embroidered at the ends; and, though
three French else long, and one wide, may be drawn through a ring. Two
crescents of fine pearls, sparkle amid the black hair that shades their
temples; while diamonds enrich the Indian handkerchief, with which they bind
their brows. Such are the Georgians and Circassians, whom the Turks purchase
for their wives. They are neat to excess, and walk in an atmosphere of
perfumes; and, though their luxury is hidden from the public, it surpasses that
of the European women.

That we may finish the portrait of the Egyptian ladies, we will relate from
Savary, a love-adventure, which happened when he was at Rosetta. Facts are
better than arguments, to show the manners of a people. Hassan, an old jealous
Turk, had married a Georgian girl of sixteen, and appointed guards t^ watch
her. But what guards are so vigilant as love? This wealthy lord, had a
magnificent garden near Rosetta, whither he permitted the youthful Jemily, his
wife, to go and take the evening air. Slaves of both sexes always attended her.
The men watched the walls, and stood sentinel at the gates; the women waited on
her within, where she languidly strayed among bowers. As she was gravely
walking, one evening, by the river side, veiled, and surrounded by her slaves,
to go to her garden, she perceived a European, who lately had arrived at
Rosetta. The colors of youth were vivid on his cheeks, which were not yet
tanned by the sun, and drew her attention. She passed slowly, and let her fan
fall, that she might have a pretense to stop a moment. Her eyes met his, and
the look went to her heart; the air, the shape, the features of the stranger,
were imprinted in her memory; and, the impossibility of speaking to, and the
dread of seeing him no more, gave her a painful sense of slavery. Scarcely had
she arrived among the arbours of her garden, before she escaped from the crowd;
and, taking one of the women aside, in whom she had most confidence, said,
Did thou perceive the young stranger? Did thou behold his bright eyes, and
how he looked upon me? O, my friend! My dear Zetfa! Go find him, and tell him
to walk among the orange groves to morrow evening, where the wall is lowest.
Say, I wish to see him, and speak to him; only bid him shun the watchful eyes
of my pityless keepers.

This message was punctually delivered, and the European, unguardedly promised;
which promise, the sight of approaching danger made him break. The slave went a
second time, and asked him why he had not kept his word. His excuses were
various, and he fixed a distant time. Reflection again vanquished passion, and
he went not to the rendezvous. Zetfa returned once more. The youth, seduced by
her discourse, swore, that on the morrow, he would be under the arbor, an hour
after sunset. The hour of appointment came, and a third time, the beauteous
Jemily, saw herself deceived. Zetfa returned to the European, reproached him
for his perfidy, and the imprudent youth once more promised; but, left to
himself, the dread of an ignominious death, made him again violate his words.
Patience itself has a period; that of Jemily, was long: for nine months she
solicited a man, whom she had seen but an instant. One evening, after shedding
tears of bitterness, forgetting herself in the grove, and thinking only of her
lover, Hassan, tired of waiting, treated her harshly. The charm was broken, and
she retired furious to her apartment. Go once more, said she, to the perfidious
European, and bear him these my last words -- I saw you, stranger, I thought
you had sensibility, and my heart panted to be yours. Nine months you have
deceived me; perjury to you is sport. But, beware, your life is in my hands,
and I am determined. Hassan, will go tomorrow to Faoua, and he will not return
till late. Either come in the evening and receive your pardon, or a slave shall
bring me your head. Jemily, swears by the prophet, if longer neglected, to be
revenged.

Zetfa faithfully reported these words, and the European hesitated no longer.
At the appointed hour, he came to the wall, which separated him from the
beauteous Georgian. His heart palpitates, he leaps the wall, and enters into
the garden. Two women, on seeing him, rise and appear terrified, while he stood
motionless. The one was Jemily herself, who held out her hand, and gave him
courage. He approached, bowed profoundly, and was kindly raised; a signal was
given, and the slave disappeared. Stranger, said Jemily, why have you deceived
me so long, you love me not? Forgive me, beauteous Jemily; it was my fears
detained me, but I am come to repair my wrongs, and throw myself at your feet.
She seemed as if she would have continued her reproaches, but taking him by the
hand, which trembled in her own, she led him to an orange-grove.

CHAP. VII. Of the Marriages, Education, and Paternal Authority.
MARRIAGE, among Christians, is a holy rite, and indissoluble. Laws, in certain
cases, suspend, but seldom annihilate its effects. Oriental manners, so
different from Europeans, have obliged legislators to render wedlock less
permanent. The female relations, make matches for the young men. They meet most
of the maidens of the city at the bath, whom they perfectly describe; and the
choice made, the alliance is mentioned to the father of the female, the portion
specified; and, if he consents, they make him presents. The procession, which
is the commencement of the marriage-ceremony, usually begins in the evening;
dancers go before the bride, with their feet tied to stilts, and carrying
balancing poles; numerous slaves display the effects, furniture, and jewels,
destined to her use; troops of dancing girls, keep time with their instruments;
matrons richly clothed, walk with a grave pace, and the young bride appears
under a magnificent canopy, borne by four slaves, sustained by her mother and
sisters, and entirely covered by a veil, embroidered with gold, pearls, and
diamonds. A long file of flambeaux illumine the procession; and the almai, in
chorus, occasionally sing verses in praise of the bride and bridegroom. I have
twenty times beheld such pompous processions, in the streets of Cairo, where
the longest route is always chosen; they being vain of displaying their whole
splendour on these occasions.

When come to the house of her husband, the women go on the first floor, whence
they perceive, through the blinds of a gallery, all that passes below. The men,
who are assembled in the hall, do not mix with them, but pass part of the night
in banqueting, and hearing music. The almai descend, throw off their veils,
and display their agility and address; exhibiting to the sound of music,
pantomimes, in which they represent the combats of Hymen, the struggles of the
bride, and the artifices of love. Having ended, the almai, in chorus, chaunt
the epithalamium. During the ceremony, the bride passes several times before
the bridegroom, and always in different dresses, to display her wealth and
elegance. The guests having retired, the husband enters the nuptial chamber;
the veil is removed, and, for the first time, he beholds his wife.

Such are the ceremonies of marriage among the Egyptians, which the rich and
poor scrupulously observe. The daughter of the mechanic, is, in like manner,
conducted to her spouse; the only difference consists in the surrounding
paraphernalia. Instead of slambeaux, they burn fir, in braziers carried on
poles; and the stilt dancers, and tambours de basque, supply the want of almai,
and musicians. The poor man's daughter, wanting attendants and canopies,
borrows a veil, and marches to the sound of cymbals, or bits of metal, which
her indigent followers strike in time, without tune.

Nearly the same ceremonies are observed by the Copts; but they have a custom
of betrothing young girls, only six or seven years old, which is done by
putting a ring on the finger. They often obtain permission, from her friends,
to educate her, till she arrives at puberty. Divorces, bathing, and marriage
processions, are also practiced by the schismatic christians; only they can
have but one wife at a time.

The first care of an Egyptian lady is to educate her children; and a numerous
posterity is their most fervent wish. This is even the prayer of the poor, who
earns his bread by the sweat of his brow; and did not adoption alleviate grief,
when nature is unkind, a barren woman would be inconsolable. The mother daily
suckles her child, whose infant smiles, added to frequent pregnancy,
recompenses all the cares and pains they create. Milk diseases, and those
maladies which dry up the juices of the youthful wife, who sends her offspring
to be nurtured by a stranger, are here unknown. That mothers should suckle
their young, is a law as ancient as the world; it is expressly ordered by
Mahomet. "Let mothers suckle their children full two years, if the child does
not quit the breast; but she shall be permitted to wean it with the consent of
her husband." Ulysses, in the Elysian fields, beholds his mother, his tender
mother, there, who had sed him with her milk, and nurtured him in infancy.

When obliged by circumstances to take a nurse, they do not treat her as a
stranger; she becomes one of the family, and passes her days amidst the
children she has suckled, by whom she is cherished and honored as a second
mother.

The harem, is the cradle and school of infancy. The newborn feeble infant is
not there swaddled, and filleted up in a swathe, the source of a thousand
diseases. Laid naked on a mat, exposed in a vast chamber to the pure air, he
breathes freely; and, with his delicate limbs, sprawls at pleasure. The new
element in which he is to live, is not entered with pain and tears. Daily
bathed beneath his mother's eye, he grows apace; free to act, he tries his
coming powers, rolls, crawls, rises; and, should he fall, cannot much hurt
himself, on the carpet, or mat, which covers the floor.

He is not banished his father's house, when seven years old, and sent to
college, with the loss of health and innocence; he does not, it is true,
acquire much learning; he, perhaps, can only read and write; but, he is
healthy, robust, fears God, respects old age, has filial piety, and delights in
hospitality; which virtues, continually practiced in his family, remain deeply
engraven in his heart.

The daughter's education is the same. Whalebone and busks, which martyr
European girls, they know not; they run naked, or covered only with a shift,
till six years old; and the dress they afterward wear, confines none of their
limbs, but suffers the body to take its true form; and nothing is more uncommon
than ricketty children, and crooked people.

History places the infancy of human nature in the East; here paternal
authority began, and here its rights are still preserved. A father enjoys all
the titles nature bestows. Each family forms a small state, of which the father
is king; the members of it, attached to him by the ties of blood, acknowledge
and submit to his power. The children, educated in the women's apartment, do
not come into the hall; especially when strangers are there. Young people are
silent in this hall; if men grown, they are allowed to join the conversation:
but, when the sheik, i. e. head of the family, speaks, they cease and
attentively listen; if he enters an assembly, all rise; they give him way in
public, and every where show him esteem and respect. In the time of Herodotus,
these manners subsisted in Egypt; and the despotism under which it groans,
serves to preserve them. A numerous posterity, often resides under the same
roof; the children, and grandchildren, come and pay their common father a
daily tribute of veneration and love: the pleasure of being loved and
respected, in proportion as age increases, makes him forget he grows old; the
content of his heart sparkles in his eyes, and security smooths the wrinkles of
his forehead; he is cheerful and jocular; and, while his youthful descendants
wear the most modest garments, he is decked in the gayest colors Happy, in the
bosom of his family, when on the borders of the grave, he perceives not the
approach of death; and reclines to everlasting rest, amidst the embraces of his
children. Long do they mourn his loss, and each week strew his tomb with
flowers. The Egyptians have lost the art of embalming, but not the feelings
which gave it birth.

Among polished nations, the silver-haired fire is often obliged to be silent,
in the presence of haughty youth; or assume the manners of a boy, to become
supportable. In proportion, as the burden of life is felt, and its pleasures
diminish, he beholds himself an encumbrance to those who, but for him, had
never been. They refuse him consolation when he needs it most; and the cold
hand of age withers his faculties, which the kindly flame of filial love warms
not. In such nations, the grey-haired feeling father dies, long before he is
carried to the grave. I was impelled, says Savary, to draw this parallel, by
the affecting scenes I here each day witness; where the reverend patriarch,
with his beard floating on his breast, smiles in frigid age on his
grandchildren, who approach him with their caresses. He beholds four
generations, eager to pay him all filial duty; his heart expands, and he
delights in life to its last moment. These people have, in ignorance, preserved
the simplicity of ancient manners; they know not our arts and sciences, but the
sweetest sensations of nature, not taught by book, they know, enjoy, and revere.

END OF VOL. XIV.

